






















































Hansard: April 08, 1983


699 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 8, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and to the members of the 
House a group of Girl Guides from the no. 1 company at the St. Mary’s Anglican Church. I introduce 
them on behalf of my colleague, the member for Regina Centre, Mr. Shillington, who was not able to be 
here at this time. The group is eight or nine in number. They are accompanied by Sylvia Panchuk, who 
is one of the guide leaders. They propose to be with us during the question period and then to have a tour 
of the building. I look forward to an opportunity to meet with them at 10:30. I’m sure all hon. members 
will wish to join with me in welcoming them to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Funding for Saskatchewan Association of Non-Governmental Social Service Agencies 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is addressed to the Minister of Social Services. I would 
like the minister to confirm or deny for me the statement that I have been hearing that the SAGSSA 
organization, or the Saskatchewan Association of Non-Governmental Social Service Agencies, have had 
their funding cut as of yesterday, from 108,000 last year to 13,000 this year. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, in reply to the member’s question, it is true that the funding 
mechanism to the association of SANGSSA (Saskatchewan Association of Non-Governmental Social 
Service Agencies) has been changed. I would like to point out to this Assembly, and to the people of this 
province, that the funding that was set up out for SANGSSA (Saskatchewan Association of 
Non-Governmental Social Service Agencies) was most unusual in that their membership did not pay one 
cent to belong to the organization. The organization received its total amount of dollars from the 
government. And I guess one of the questions that it brings to my mind is: who was it accountable to? 
The government? Or the membership that it supposedly represents, who has no financial responsibility 
to the association whatsoever? 
 
The funding approach has been reorganized, and we believe that in the reorganization — and there is a 
phasing-out period of three months for the association — we have also recognized the funding of dollars 
tot he member organizations to belong to SANGSSA (Saskatchewan Association of Non-Governmental 
Social Service Agencies) if they choose to. And we will recognize it in that manner. Ultimately, it can 
only strengthen the relationship between the membership and between SANGSSA (Saskatchewan 
Association of Non-Government al Social Service Agencies), and that is the ultimate objective. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
April 8, 1983 
 

700 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the minister. On the night of the budget last 
week, the president of the SANGSSA (Saskatchewan Association of Non-Governmental Social Service 
Agencies) organization was quoted as saying: 
 

Most of the 200 non-governmental organizations in Saskatchewan received the bulk of their 
operating money from Social Services, community services branch, which has had the budget cut 
of at least $809,000,’ Kathy Wasmann said. ‘These cuts have been camouflaged in the shifting of 
department moneys in the dismantling of Northern Saskatchewan and the creation of a new 
Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat,’ Wasmann said. 

 
Will the minister not admit that the reason this group is being cut, having their budget slashed, done 
away with, is because of the position they took in criticizing this government, and it is not a notice to all 
NGOs in the province that if you criticize this government, a week later you have your funding cut. Is 
that not true? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, the member’s question really doesn’t make any sense, particularly 
when he specifically relates to the president of SANGSSA (Saskatchewan Association of 
Non-Government al Social Service Agencies), who also operates a transition home. There’s been no cut 
there. They are going to receive, in fact, a 7 per cent increase within the guide-lines. Now, how you can 
suggest for a moment that the changing the funding mechanism has to do with what the organization 
itself is saying just indicates to me how narrow your scope of thinking really is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — You know, there’s some advantages to being a new government. It gives you an 
opportunity to sit down and to look at what is there, to evaluate, to re-evaluate, and to determine where 
one is going in the future. And I suggest that had not been done too often in the last 11 years. The 
membership of SANGSSA (Saskatchewan Association of Non-Governmental Social Service Agencies) 
— and I want to remind you that only approximately half of the membership that SANGSSA 
(Saskatchewan Association of Non-Government al Social Service Agencies) claims to have, belong to 
Social Services. I don’t know where the other 50 per cent come from, of those agencies, but they do not 
directly get funding from the Department of Social Services. 
 
We have concluded that in order to have the accountability, and through that organization must work for 
it. But the membership must determine the role and the objectives, and they can only do that if there is 
some financial responsibility and accountability. It has nothing to do with whatever you have dreamt up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister of Social Services. I think that she 
may convince her colleagues in this House that that is the case, but she’ll have a much more difficult 
time convincing the non-governmental organizations that that is the reason why the group that has 
represented them to the government . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! The member is stating his opinion but is not asking a question. This is question 
period and I would ask you to get directly to your question. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, in prefacing my question, I was replying to  



 
April 8, 1983 

 

 
701 

opinions from the Minister of Social Services, and my question to her is whether or not the cutting of 
funding from $108,000 to 13 is not an attack on a group who represented over a hundred NGOs in this 
province to obtain money from your department, and is it not true that you are attempting to do away 
with that lobby simply by cutting funding to the main group who has been lobbying you? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, Mr. Speaker, that is not true. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister. Is it true that the Regent Court 
Tenants’ Association were given notice yesterday that their funding has been terminated completely? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Perhaps the member from Quill Lake 
would like to answer the question. Mr. Speaker, it is true that there has been some modifications within 
the NGO sector and the funding within the Department of Social Services. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Tory cuts. Tory cut-backs. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I swear you guys would have made better dressmakers than opposition — cut, cut. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — If you would be patient and wait for my reply to the budget debate today, you will 
find that along with Regent Court tenant, they’ve been asked to amalgamate, and the service taken over 
with another group that has had its funding doubled. 
 

Mediation Diversion Program 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to direct a question to the Attorney-General, the 
Minister of Justice, I believe, or some time in the future, and that’s in respect to the slashing and the 
elimination of the mediation diversion program. In view of the fact that the program was completely 
discontinued, or at least the funding was, can the Attorney-General explain why his department referred 
10 cases to the mediation diversion program on March 20, the day of the budget, when obviously the 
decision had already been made to eliminate the funds for the program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I can simply indicate to the hon. member that because of the rather tight 
security on the budget, for obvious reasons, no departments knew exactly what final decisions were to 
be made until the time of the budget and, as a consequence, the announcement was made in the budget. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A supplementary question to the Attorney-General. As the Attorney-General will be 
aware, and the comments of the executive director of the John Howard mediation diversion program, 
that at the time that the announcement of the slash of the budget, the elimination of the budget, that there 
were 39 open cases on file in Regina, and just about equally the same number in Moose Jaw. Why 
wouldn’t the Attorney-General at least allow this organization to have enough sufficient funding to deal 
with the cases that were already in progress, and will he consider that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I would be prepared to take a look at it. I’m not so sure that the  



 
April 8, 1983 
 

702 
 

problem is as severe as the hon. member indicates. I think that the mediation diversion program was an 
experimental program started approximately in 1976. At the time of the commencement of the 
mediation diversion project, there was ample evidence to show that the John Howard Society was 
advised that they would have to arrange their own funding to continue the project, and that reminder was 
given by the opposition, the former government. And, Mr. Speaker, in 1979, 1980, 1981, the reminders 
were given too. It was continued as an experimental project in two cities, Regina and Moose Jaw, and I 
think the hon. members opposite should be reminded, Mr. Speaker, that in fact, the previous government 
never took it out of the experimental stage because it had the same reservations that others did, including 
the federal government as to the cost-effectiveness of the program. 
 
There seems little doubt that the cost of the program cost considerably more than going through the 
normal court process, that it was not cheaper, notwithstanding the allegations of the members opposite. 
I’m frankly a little bit surprised that with the evidence before the previous government, that it did not 
make the decision either to expand it province-wide at a much higher cost, or make the difficult decision 
to bell the cat. In fact, a responsible government would have done that, and a responsible government 
has done that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Supplemental, Mr. Speaker. I take it the Attorney-General has indicated that he made a 
review of the cost-effectiveness of the program. I would like to ask him whether he found that the 
cost-effectiveness of the mediation diversion program was more effective than sending people to jail, 
and the cost. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I’m a little reluctant, Mr. Speaker, to give a full lecture on the criminal law or 
criminal sentencing to the hon. member opposite. Some of us have had some legal experience and are 
somewhat familiar with the sentencing and, in fact, most, most first offenders of relatively minor 
offences which would be within the purview of the mediation diversion in fact receive what are called 
absolute discharges or conditional discharges under the court system and in fact didn’t go to jail, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Some did. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I suggest that in all likelihood they were not within the purview of the mediation 
diversion, and I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member is showing a surprising lack of 
understanding of the criminal sentencing process. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A question, Mr. Speaker, I want to refer the Attorney-General to a release here, ‘Jail 
Population at Record Levels.’ It indicates that there are 18 per cent increase in the number of inmates in 
the provincial correctional centres at the end of January, compared to 1982. I would like to ask the 
Attorney-General: could he detail the program which he indicated that he was looking at that would, in 
fact, replace the John Howard type of program and reduce the number of inmates in our jails? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure that the member is articulating the opposition’s 
policy about releasing inmates from the jails merely to reduce inmate population. I think that has some 
obvious inherent dangers, Mr. Speaker, and I’m not a  



 
April 8, 1983 

 

 
703 

subscriber to the blanket release of prisoners as the hon. member is. There’s no doubt the question of 
sentencing alternatives is one of ongoing review by the government, Mr. Speaker. There are many areas 
that have to be looked at. 
 
One of the major increases, as a matter of fact, in the number of inmates in correctional centres result 
from drunk and impaired driving. I think, Mr. Speaker, that we have to address very seriously alternate 
penalties. Certainly the consideration of the white paper on The Vehicles Act is one area in that, and 
there’s no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that we will have to look at many other areas, and we will have to review 
that from time to time as the effectiveness of programs wanes. 
 
Secondly, we have to address very seriously, and my officials have started to address for the first time, 
Mr. Speaker, alternative sentencing for the native population, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately, under the 
existing system which we inherited from the previous government it has become a right of passage for 
many of our native youths to go to correctional centres. That is obviously not a desirable approach, nor 
do I suspect any members support a system that allows that to happen. The answers are not going to be 
easy. We are going to have to experiment, Mr. Speaker, for the first time we are addressing that 
problem. We don’t have the answers yet. I suspect we will never have the final answers to the problems, 
Mr. Speaker, but at least we are addressing the very serious problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

First Ministers’ Conference on Native Rights 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct my question to the Attorney-General concerning last 
month’s first minister’s conference on native rights. At that conference your government, along with the 
governments of most of the provinces, agreed to introduce a resolution in the legislatures confirming the 
agreement reached by the provinces, the federal government and Canada’s native leaders. 
 
My question is, Mr. Speaker: when can we expect to see this important resolution introduced here in the 
Saskatchewan legislature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I don’t want to give a dissertation on the rules as to debating that during the formal 
budget debate. Mr. Speaker, I can leave that for others to brief the hon. member. 
 
However, the commitment that I made publicly is that this very important resolution would be 
introduced, and I’m hopeful that it will be passed, certainly well within the deadline, which was the end 
of 1983. It is our full intention to do that, and we will introduce the resolution at a very appropriate time. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I assume that the aim of the government and the minister is 
to achieve unanimous approval for this important resolution prior to its introduction in the House. 
Because of that desire then, and because of the basic question of native rights that should go beyond 
partisan politics, would you agree to discuss the working of this important resolution with the 
opposition, in advance of its introduction in the House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I would certainly be prepared to discuss it with the official opposition. I sympathize 
with what the hon. member said: that it should be a non- 



 
April 8, 1983 
 

704 
 

partisan statement. I hope that the opposition would give the commitment as well that they will approach 
it on that basis and realize that constitutional change should be drafted within the framework of the 
intent of the change, and that it does not become a major policy statement or a general nebulous 
statement — that in fact we do make the constitutional changes agreed upon by the first ministers. If that 
framework exists from all parties, I’m more than pleased to discuss it prior to presentation to the 
Assembly. 
 

Sale of Drag-Line by SPC 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation. Some days ago, I raised with him the question of the sale of a drag-line to Manalta 
Coal Ltd. And asked him at that time whether or not to his knowledge the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation or some other agency of the Government of Saskatchewan had guaranteed the debts of 
Manalta in connection with the purchase of the drag-line. The minister undertook to ascertain the 
information and I ask him today whether or not SPC or some other agency of the Government of 
Saskatchewan has guaranteed the debt of Manalta. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I had been 
holding back. I did have the information, but I was awaiting the final result as far as the sale of the note, 
to be able to give you the whole answer. But however on the drag-line itself, the potash corporation . . . 
or the power corporation has backed the note along with a guarantee from the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. The minister has told us that the Government of 
Saskatchewan and SPC has guaranteed Manalta’s debt. Is this a general policy of guarantees, Mr. 
Minister, or is this guarantee available only to business associates of the government opposite? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, we did it so that we could obtain the lowest possible rate of 
interest and we have nothing to lose if they go into default. We will get everything back that we had 
done in the first place. And we have not given anything away except get a better rate for the note that we 
have . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we appreciate the minister’s opinion, but as to facts, is it not 
true that Manalta has bought a drag-line, has paid none of its own money, has borrowed the money from 
somebody else, and the Government of Saskatchewan has guaranteed the debt, so that Manalta has taken 
absolutely no risk in the purchase of a drag-line and the Government of Saskatchewan has taken all the 
risk? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, that is totally inaccurate. In the deal that we have made with 
Manalta, we are going to be saving $500,000 a year in the amount of the coal that we’re buying from 
them, and over a period of time that adds up to $13 million that the people of the province will have 
saved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s opinions are interesting, but aren’t these the facts: 
one, you sold a drag-line; two, that Manalta put up no money; three, Manalta borrowed the money; and 
four, you guaranteed Manalta’s debt? Is that not true? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, and number five, we have saved $13 million. 



 
April 8, 1983 

 

 
705 

I’m not sure how Manalta is getting their money. All I know is that we, as a corporation, are getting a 
loan for $45 million at the lowest possible rate, that we’ll get paid back — we’ll have it for a dollar after 
our time of the agreement. If the agreement goes into default we get the mines, we get the drag-line and 
everything back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Ministerial Staffs 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the minister of industry and commerce. And 
I have, Mr. Minister, a document, which I think is available to our cabinet ministers generally and to 
other people in the government, simply giving the name of ministers and their staffs about the 
government. It’s dates March 21st and . . . I give, for example, the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. 
Mr. McLeod’s name is listed and his executive assistants and staff are listed as a Mr. Jerry White, EA; 
and a Mr. Dan Stephens, special assistant; Mr. Gordon Sonmore, executive assistant, DT and RR; Mr. 
Pat Jarrett, executive assistant, constituency. 
 
I direct this question to the minister of industry and commerce, and his list reads as follows: Dorothy 
Sollosy, EA, communications; Margo Fries, EA, SGI and constituency; Ron Dedman, EA, CIC and SGI; 
H. Rick Parken, EA, Sedco and I&C; and Al Nicholson, special assistant, Canadian Pioneer 
Management. Would the minister advise me what Mr. Al Nicholson, special assistant for Canadian 
Pioneer Management does, and what is he paid? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not what he does, it’s what he did. He’s been terminated for 
some time, and he was on board early on a per diem when I needed him for certain functions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. Well known that the Lyon government had very 
close links with Great-West Life, and they used to exchange staff on a regular basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I believe that the hon. member is on his feet to ask a question, and I 
don’t believe that what the Lyon government is doing has any concern here in this House, and I would 
ask the member to stay with the subject here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the minister of industry and commerce. In 
view of the fact that the Manitoba government, the previous Manitoba government, adopted a practice of 
recruiting staff from the Great-West Life, are you now adopting a practice of recruiting staff from 
Pioneer Life, and exchanging staff and hiring their staff on a per diem basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Mr. Speaker, we hope to have many ties with Saskatchewan business people. 
They are the backbone of this province — they and the farmers of this country — but, Mr. Speaker, to 
answer his question: Mr. Nicholson, as I said earlier, was on contract to me to assist my department in 
organization, and I make no apologies for that. He did an excellent job. He was there when I needed him 
for part-time. His contract has been terminated. I can’t remember if you asked the terms of the contract. 
I don’t have them in front of me, but I would hope that we could use many people from the business 
sector to assist this government where we might need them and use them on consultant basis or in 
contractual basis, because I believe that most of them, and many  



 
April 8, 1983 
 

706 
 

of them are very competent people. And I would say that this government would make no apologies for 
that at all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION 
 

Leaves of Absence for MLAs 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would move, by leave of the Legislative Assembly, seconded by 
the Minister of Health: 
 

That leave of absences be granted to the hon. members from Athabasca, Redberry, Saskatoon 
Nutana from April 11th to April 15th, 1983, to attend on behalf of this Assembly the Second 
Commonwealth Conference of Delegated Legislative Committees. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE (BUDGET DEBATE) 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Andrew that the 
Assembly resolve itself into the committee of finance and the amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Shillington. 
 
Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, for 19 years the people of this province and of this country have suffered 
under the expansionist, under the interventionist policies of a Liberal government in Ottawa. And I was 
very pleased to hear yesterday that the results of the latest poll, national poll, indicate that 50 per cent of 
the people of Canada would choose a Progressive Conservative government in the future. And so I’m 
very happy to hear . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dirks: — . . . I’m very happy to hear, Mr. Speaker, that the next budget which the people of Canada 
will have will be a Progressive Conservative budget, not a Trudeau Liberal budget. 
 
And for the last 11 years, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province have suffered under the socialist, 
under the interventionist, under the big-government budgets of the socialists here in this province, the 
New Democratic Party. And so, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province, the people of Regina 
Rosemont, are asking me, and are asking all of us in this Assembly: are we going to suffer again with 
another expansionist, interventionist, socialist budget? And I am happy to tell the people of this province 
today that the budget that is before us is not a Liberal budget, it’s not a socialist budget, it is a 
Progressive Conservative budget. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that this will be the  



 
April 8, 1983 

 

 
707 

first of, undoubtedly, a long, unbroken line of Progressive Conservative budgets. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, the days of socialism in this province are fading into the distant past — a 
past better forgotten than remembered — but unfortunately the scars and the wounds of socialism 
remain with us today. And I ask you, Mr. Speaker, what is this legacy of socialism that is still with us? 
The legacy of socialism, Mr. Speaker, is as follows: it’s a legacy of a million children who had to turn 
their back on this province in search of jobs and in search of income, in search of a future somewhere 
else. That is the legacy of socialism. It is a legacy of an ever-growing government bureaucracy which 
was fuelled, Mr. Speaker, by the egomania of the socialist political masters whose guiding dictum for 
this province was, ‘Bigger government is better government.’ 
 
The socialist legacy was 1 million acres of farmland turned over to the government, not turned over to 
the farmers of this province. The socialist legacy was an economic climate, Mr. Speaker, which dulled 
the spirit of entrepreneurship, which stifled private enterprise, which drove business away. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is a black legacy, a shameful legacy in my estimation, a harmful legacy, and I am happy that 
that legacy will not be repeated under this administration. 
 
So bankrupt was the former administration, Mr. Speaker, that they did not even have the good common 
sense to put away some funds during those heady days in the 1970s when the economy was booming for 
the rainy days that have come upon the economic scene world-wide and here in Canada. No, Mr. 
Speaker, the socialist budgets of the past decade were a disgraceful litany of spending binge after 
spending binge. And I am happy, therefore, to say, Mr. Speaker, that the Progressive Conservative 
budget that we have in front of us is therefore a welcome sight. It is water in a dry land finally, Mr. 
Speaker. And if I might indulge us all, Mr. Speaker, in this springtime era that we have come into, this 
budget is a spring flower bursting with the blue and orange hues of Progressive Conservative idealism, 
of Progressive Conservative policies, and of Progressive Conservative action. 
 
Consider with me, Mr. Speaker, if you will, what it is that sets this budget apart from the budgets of the 
past 10 or 11 years. In the first place, Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative budget demonstrates 
that this government, the government of Grant Devine, not only speaks about fiscal prudence, not only 
talks about the wise expenditure of tax dollars, not only talks about running a tight, lean ship, about 
controlling the growth of government — we not only talk, Mr. Speaker, but we deliver, we take action, 
and not the kind of action of the former administration. And I want to tell the people of this province and 
the people of this Assembly, under the Leader of the Opposition, the member from Regina Elphinstone, 
the Government of Saskatchewan grew from 18,647 civil servants in 1971 to 29,860 civil servants in 
1982 — from 18,000 to 30,000 civil servants in 10 years. That Mr. Speaker, is an increase of sixty-six 
and two-thirds per cent in 10 years. In 10 years our government, in the province of Saskatchewan, grew 
by 66 per cent? Did we increase from approximately one million to one, million, six hundred thousand 
in the last 10 years? We did not, Mr. Speaker; we certainly did not. 
 
Well, why then, did this socialist government increase the size of the civil service by approximately 
12,000? I’ll tell you why, Mr. Speaker. Because the former government and the members of the 
opposition today are convinced that more government, that  



 
April 8, 1983 
 

708 
 

bigger government, that larger government is the solution to all of society’s ills: more crown 
corporations, more control, more regulation, more intervention, more direction. 
 
It is, of course, a sad delusion, a dream world, shattered of course, on April 26th, 1982, and we would 
naturally expect that that is what would happen. It would be shattered, for the people of this province 
had the good common sense to realize that the Liberal government in Ottawa, and the former NDP 
government here in this province, when they provided big government for this province, they did not 
provide good government, for more government and bigger government and larger government does not 
ipso facto produce good government for the people of this province. And I suspect that if you were to 
conduct a census of all of the residents of Saskatchewan, they would raise their voices in one unanimous 
cry that would roll across the plains and valleys of this fair province and reach into this building and into 
this Assembly and cry to each one of us — enough is enough, stop the growth of government. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that we have done. That we have done. The size of the civil service here in 
Saskatchewan now stands at 28,310 positions. That is a reduction, Mr. Speaker, of 1,550 from the 
number of positions under the NDP administration, a reduction of 5 per cent, Mr. Speaker, and I want to 
stress that the quality of service in Saskatchewan has not been reduced one iota with the reduction of the 
size of government . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It has been increased. Consider, if you will, some 
statistics from the Department of Health. 
 
In the last year the prescription drug plan: a 9 per cent increase in prescription claims processed per 
employee in 1982-83 over 1981-82, and a further 10 per cent increase in efficiency is projected for the 
next year; a 5 per cent increase in claims processed per employee in the medial care insurance 
commission, and a 7.4 per cent, million saving due to a more thorough assessment processing in 
reviewing claims. And I could list many more examples of increased productivity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what about the overall growth in government expenditures? Does this budget reveal an 
increase on the order of 16 per cent which is what the NDP administration in Manitoba has just brought 
down? Does it indicate an increase in the order of, say, 12 per cent, or 10 per cent, or perhaps just 8 per 
cent? No, Mr. Speaker, the magnitude of increase in government spending here in Saskatchewan in 
1983-84 is in the order of less than 7 per cent. Mr. Speaker, it took a Progressive Conservative 
government to get spending under control in this province. 
 
And I want to tell you something, Mr. Speaker. I want the people of this province to understand this very 
clearly. A socialist government, an NDP government, a government led by the Leader of the Opposition, 
or any other self-appointed messiah who’s waiting in the wings, will never, ever, be able to bring 
government spending under control. These are the hard cold facts about the NDP party in Saskatchewan. 
And we shouldn’t be surprised by this revelation. Call them what you want: the old CCF; call it 
democratic socialism; the NDP — it’s all the same. Big government is their panacea. But unfortunately, 
more often than not, big government and the ever-escalating costs of big government are not a panacea. 
They are, rather, a menace, a millstone about the neck of society. Take a look at what has happened in 
France. The socialist government there has so destroyed the economic climate in France, that today the 
people of France cannot travel outside of their own country and take more than a few hundred dollars 
with them. 
 
Look at the NDP in Manitoba. Their spending increased in the order of 16 per cent, their 



 
April 8, 1983 

 

 
709 

deficit in the order of almost $600 million. Big government is indeed the sad legacy of the NDP in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Fortunately, Mr. Speaker, with the dawning of the Devine years here in Saskatchewan, with the advent 
of the Progressive Conservative government, this malignancy of big government has finally been 
arrested. 
 
This budget, Mr. Speaker, is an example of what the Progressive Conservative government will do. It is 
an example of a government that cares about the economic dreams of people, which attempts to shelter 
them from the economic calamities that they may experience; a budget which attempts to assist their 
level of disposable income, which provides effective health care, which provides them with the 
opportunities for further education in the future. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the NDP, in their fanatical drive to regain power, are fond of attempting to paint the 
Progressive Conservative Party as a bunch of fanatic, uncaring, right-wing ideologues whose mania for 
free enterprise blinds them to the real needs of people. I’m sure the member for Regina Centre would 
love to caricature the Devine government as a crowd of hot-headed capitalists who rape the resources of 
the land, and who sell out to the multinationals, who discriminate against minorities, and who ignore the 
downtrodden, all in the name of their sacred password: profit. 
 
Well, Mr. Leader of the Opposition and Mr. Member from Regina Centre, you know and I know that 
that kind of trick just doesn’t work. For you see, an uncaring government doesn’t provide mortgage 
assistance to people when they really need it. But come to think of it, I don’t ever recall the NDP coming 
to the aid of 30,000 Saskatchewan residents hard hit by high interest rates. 
 
An Hon. Member: — 39,000. 
 
Mr. Dirks: — 39,000, pardon me. And an uncaring government doesn’t lower the taxes for its citizens 
so that they can have more disposable income. But come to think of it, I don’t ever recall the NDP doing 
away with the gas tax when they were in power and had the opportunity to do so. In fact, they increased 
the gas tax. 
 
And an uncaring government doesn’t provide low-interest loans to young farmers to start family farms. 
But come to think of it, I don’t recall the NDP ever helping hundreds and hundreds of farmers to buy 
their own family farm. 
 
And an uncaring government doesn’t canvass the province to ascertain the water needs of 
Saskatchewan’s communities, and doesn’t establish a crown corporation to help meet the water needs of 
such communities. But come to think of it, I don’t recall the NDP ever talking too much about the water 
needs of the communities of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an uncaring government doesn’t increase the overall Health budget, the Education budget, 
the Social Service budget by 10 per cent; it doesn’t increase the spaces in technical schools by 60 per 
cent; it doesn’t provide a $2.7 million opportunity for youth summer employment. Mr. Speaker, the truth 
is that this new Progressive Conservative government has done all of these things, and it has done more, 
in this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on April 26, 1982, and not that long ago in P.A.-Duck Lake, the people of Saskatchewan 
indicated very clearly that they did not, and they do not, buy the myth  



 
April 8, 1983 
 

710 
 

that this Progressive Conservative government is uncaring, heartless, cruel, as the opposition would 
suggest. And I’m not surprised that they haven’t bought this myth, because the policies and programs of 
this government have indeed been a resounding success. Now, the members of the opposition can call it 
what they want; call it Reaganomics; call it Devine-omics; call it even Dirks-omics, if you want to. Call 
it what you will; it will make no difference. The fact of the matter is this is a Progressive Conservative 
budget, a budget which demonstrates fiscal prudence, which attempts as much as possible to shield those 
citizens that need help from the ravages of unfortunate economic or social conditions. It’s a budget 
which chooses to deficit finance instead of placing onerous tax burdens on the people of Saskatchewan. 
For this reason, Mr. Speaker, I am indeed pleased to be able to support this budget, to speak against the 
amendment, and to urge all hon. members to do the same. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a pleasure to enter into the budget debate 
today. I would not be totally honest if I did not add it is also with some disbelief and some regret: 
disbelief and regret in the misleading criticisms from the opposition, and that leads to regret. 
 
This is also the first time that I have had a chance to publicly welcome and congratulate the member 
from P.A.-Duck Lake. Today, I take that opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the Minister of Finance, the member for Kindersley. His ability to accept 
some of the past, to recognize the problems of the present, and to plan for the future, are all indicated in 
that budget. Perhaps the many statements that have been made through the various outlets of the media 
have said it best, and I would like to take some time, and I know some of them have been stated, but 
they probably deserve restating. 
 
One had said: 
 

In drafting his first full-fledged budget, the finance minister appears to have come up with a 
rational blueprint for the province’s economy. 
 

Another one went on to say, ‘The emphasis on job creation is essential and welcome.’ 
 
Another one, an economist from the University of Regina, said: 
 

Overall, it is a sensible budget. There are certain things that are interesting in this budget. One is 
the emphasis on the economic development. Another one is in the way which they have used the 
heritage fund. That is the thing that impresses me about this. I would rather suspect if it had been 
an NDP budget, that heritage fund would have been kept with the crown corporations, used to 
promote their activity, and here we are seeing the heritage fund being used for other kinds of 
capital projects, to support research and development and to support expansion of agriculture and 
the assistance in agriculture. 
 

Another one said of this government in the budget: 
 

In the area of health and social services, the government has demonstrated it 



 
April 8, 1983 

 

 
711 

is capable of taking a moderate approach. There is a very substantial increase in the amount of 
funds being allocated to education, but at the same time, given the employment situation, given 
the fact that the highest rate of unemployment is amongst our young people, who don’t have any 
skills at all, the education element in the budget makes a lot of sense. 
 

Mr. Speaker, those perhaps say it all. For the majority of people in my constituency, the budget is a fair 
one. Our constituency is city boundaries only, but we do not live in isolation of the rural areas that 
surround us. The recognition of agriculture in the budget is welcomed in Swift Current. We are a trading 
centre for the South-west, and the nine-point job creation program gives us optimism for our future. It is 
also welcoming news to the business community of Swift Current. 
 
We also welcome, Mr. Speaker, the news of expansion of our technical training system. Many of our 
young residents in the past have been forced into leaving our province and going west when seeking 
post-secondary training. The future indeed does look bright for us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today, in keeping with the tradition, the majority of my remarks will be on the Department 
of Social Services. But before I address in that particular area, I would like to briefly comment on one 
aspect of the government reorganization, and as it relates to my department. 
 
Now before stating the positive side of this move, let me first deal with the criticisms that have been put 
forth by the former minister of social services, the member from Shaunavon. The first criticism that he 
had to say was: 
 

This move reflects very poorly on the minister and the department. They can’t handle it. It shows 
a lack of confidence in the minister. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest to this Assembly that the attack on the personality and the attack on the civil 
servants and their function, as opposed to the issue, is cheap, petty and the crassest of politics, that the 
member for Shaunavon has lowered himself to and cannot take the time to sit in the House and hear it. 
 
These comments, Mr. Speaker, reveal a basic insecurity, and I must admit, if I had less than 50 per cent 
of the vote out of his constituency that he has, I too might be insecure. 
 
There is also more than a hint of arrogance on his part. Perhaps that is why these changes, as necessary 
and as obvious as they were, were not made while he was minister of social services. The desire to 
protect one’s own territory took precedence over efficiency and the needs of the people. 
 
Our Premier has clearly outlined the objectives of the reorganization, and I am confident these 
objectives will be realized. There will be improved productivity and overall effectiveness. There will be 
greater accountability and better public access, and it will take time, but planning for long-term, 
permanent solutions is this government’s goal which was quick-fix band-aid approach. The need for 
better co-ordination and joint planning by hospitals, nursing homes and community-based programs 
such as home care was a long-standing one. The urgency of this need intensified in the face of an 
expanding elderly population and growing pressures on the public. 



 
April 8, 1983 
 

712 
 

Mr. Speaker, over the year in the many meetings with boards from level 3, level 4, users of the home 
care districts, it became obvious as to the level of frustration that those in the community were feeling 
when it came to dealing with the health issues for the elderly. Their main concern was: how can we 
better a system that is so large, so immense and so costly, so that the direct service becomes much easier 
for the person to have access to? That was their main concern. 
 
The bottom line on the transfer of corrections, Mr. Speaker, is that it makes sense to consolidate under 
one department all the resources required to discharge our province’s responsibilities in the justice field. 
Having corrections in Social Services separated the custodial function from the rest of the justice service 
delivery system. The result was fragmentation and a disjointed approach to the administration of justice. 
 
Some criticism by the Leader of the Opposition has been raised on corrections going out of Social 
Services. His concern has been the rehabilitation function will be lost and the community-based 
programs will be no more. Mr. Speaker, I suggest today that that is totally unfounded. There is only one 
other province now in the whole of Canada and one territory that has corrections under social services. 
And yet all the other provinces that have a department of justice or an attorney-general, have the 
rehabilitative in the community-based programs. 
 
I am told as to some of the history of corrections in Social Services that they have more or less had their 
bags since 1973, when it was suggested that perhaps there was a better way of doing things. I can only 
speculate and make some assumptions as to why it didn’t happen. Perhaps the minister of social services 
at that time was more concerned with the quantity of employees and the quantity of dollars as opposed 
to the quality of the minister himself. 
 
I also have the suspicion that perhaps the attorney-general at that time, because corrections at the best of 
times is never a popular program, did not want to have the unpopular aspect of any department. Mr. 
Speaker, we have a minister responsible for the Department of Justice that is willing to accept the 
unpopular and to make them work. 
 
I have to admit it is not without some regret that I see these programs leave my department, mainly for 
the reason of the associations that I have been able to make over this past year, with the home care 
association, with the individual boards themselves, the members that make up those boards and of 
course with the nursing home, the level 3 and with SASH (Saskatchewan Association of Special-Care 
Homes), the association that represents the nursing homes. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, I am convinced the people of this province will be the winners in the 
long run, and that should be every government’s primary goal. If it isn’t, they don’t deserve to be in 
government. I am confident that the Minister of Health recognizes the social aspect of long-term care, 
and what’s more, Mr. Speaker, they will find him a person who listens and that is somewhat different 
than what was with the past administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am looking forward to having some extra time to spend on some very important program 
areas in the department which have been badly neglected in the past, such as: social assistance, services 
to the handicapped, and our community grants program. The former government’s approach was to 
allow Social Services to  



 
April 8, 1983 

 

 
713 

develop every which way with little attention paid to factors which should always be considered when 
the public funds are involved. In order to avoid the difficult task of setting priorities, and the even more 
difficult one of evaluation, decisions were often made on the basis of political expediency. A change in 
government, Mr. Speaker, signals a reassessment of priorities and directions, and we have not shirked 
that responsibility but rather have faced the issues squarely and honestly. The task is an onerous one and 
it has been complicated by the need for economic restraint. In the final analysis, however, we produced a 
budget which ensures the continuation of essential programs and services. A solid foundation has also 
been laid upon which to build a social service system which will be more effective, more accountable, 
and hopefully more responsive to changing social and economic conditions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my department’s ’83-84 budget will provide for the maintenance and strengthening of 
direct, preventive, and essential services. Our objective is to achieve a balance between the need to 
preserve and strengthen the safety net aspect of our programs with the limited resources available. The 
economic realities which dictate that funding for all public programs is restricted and in hard times is 
reconciled against the need to protect services which are essential to the well-being of individuals and 
communities. 
 
Support to low-income families under the family income plan will be increased by 7 per cent effective 
April 1. Provision has also been made for a 7 per cent increase in funds to the foster parent program. 
Services to the handicapped will be maintained and improved. Our budget provides an increase of 6.5 
per cent in moneys available to the sheltered workshop and activity centres, but an overall increase, Mr. 
Speaker, a 16.4 per cent. New activity centre spaces will be added in those areas of the province where 
the greatest need exists. In addition, Mr. Speaker, Cosmopolitan Activity Centre in Saskatoon, which 
acts as the provincial resource centre for mentally handicapped persons, will receive the last half of this 
government’s $400,000 commitment to their relocation and renovation project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the early childhood intervention programs will receive an 8.3 per cent increase. This 
increase will also recognize the greater travel costs that are associated with rural families, as compared 
to the urbans. 
 
Funding for the supportive living projects will rise by 7 per cent. Mr. Speaker, there is a growing 
urgency to address the needs of mentally handicapped adults, in terms of residential resources and 
especially employment opportunities. Our budget will allow for a limited expansion of residential 
facilities. Kindersley will receive a group home this year and Saskatoon will be expanded in 
co-operation with Sask Housing. 
 
In the coming year, Mr. Speaker, my department’s employment support program will receive a new 
mandate. This mandate will include a greater emphasis on employment opportunities for people who 
face severe employment barriers, such as the mentally handicapped. We intend to establish clear terms 
for a partnership between government and the non-governmental organizations delivering these services. 
We will also explore ways to expand and enhance the opportunities for the private sector involvement. 
In consultation with the Saskatchewan Association for the Mentally Retarded, it is agreed that 
integration into the mainstream of life is a goal that, for far too long, has been put on the back burner. 
 
One of the major goals of the newly mandated program will be to reduce the  



 
April 8, 1983 
 

714 
 

dependency of handicapped and other disadvantaged persons on social assistance. We anticipate that the 
savings in human dignity, personal independency and productive capability will be among the foremost 
benefits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year the Saskatchewan Paraplegic Association and the Voice of the Handicapped will 
continue to receive government support: $65,000 to the Saskatchewan Paraplegic Association and 
approximately 81,000 to the Voice of the Handicapped in ‘83-84. Moreover, Mr. Speaker, special funds 
have also been set aside for pilot projects aimed at increasing employment opportunities for physically 
disabled persons. I will be initiating discussion with the Voice and with the Saskatchewan Paraplegic 
Association on this matter in the very near future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our budget includes $171.5 million for social assistance. This represents 21.1 per cent 
increase over last year. Mr. Speaker, in being realistic, we would have preferred a 21 decrease, but we 
are just that; we are realistic. There is nothing hidden in this budget. 
 
Also included in this year’s budget are funds for a 6.5 per cent increase in the pre-added allowance for 
social assistance recipients. This increased allowance, which covers food and clothing, recognizes the 
effects of inflation on these costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, given the rising welfare caseloads, my department will strengthen its auditing capacity in 
the social assistance program. By expanding the program’s audit capabilities, we will be in a better 
position to verify applications before payment is made, as opposed to after payment is made. 
 
There is no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that the rising welfare caseloads have placed severe pressure on my 
department’s overall budget. Social assistance provides for the most basic minimum necessities of life, 
and there is no question that these needs must be met. From the government’s point of view, however, it 
represents, to a large degree, a very uncontrollable expenditure. We cannot refuse anyone whose 
eligibility is established. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, there is no question that welfare coasts impact significantly on our 
ability to respond to needs in other areas. The department is addressing a dependency on social 
assistance for both a short-term and a long-term perspective. In the short term, our 1983-84 budget 
demonstrates an ongoing commitment to job creation, with an $8 million fund under the provincial 
JOBS program. Combined with the 2.5 million provided to the employment support program, we expect 
to create between 2,300 and 3,000 new jobs. 
 
Recognizing that many of the problems faced by social assistance clients are not linked exclusively to 
the tight job market, I had initiated a comprehensive review of the plan in December 1 of 1982. Mr. 
Speaker, the review will be completed by June of this year, and steps will be taken to improve the plans, 
overall administration, and alternatives will be considered to reduce the undue dependency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when one takes a look at the data that has been collected in the various briefs to date, it is 
absolutely amazing, the system and the bureaucratic system that has been created over the many years. 
We took a very brief look at the forms that an applicant in going to a regional office would have to fill 
out. And what we found was there was absolutely no consistency from region to region. We also found 
that there is 400 to 500 different kinds of forms. We also, when we looked at them, Mr. Speaker, 



 
April 8, 1983 

 

 
715 

found that 50 per cent of the workers’ time was spent on paperwork, and it was routine and repetitive — 
nothing on the rehabilitation end. Those are some of the issues, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we will be 
trying to address. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Department of Social Services cannot provide directly all the social services needed in 
this province over the years. And nor would we want to, because the social fabric, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
is made up of the local community from the grass roots up. Over the years, a partnership is developed 
for the provision of services to people who are disadvantaged, or may face crises situations. This 
partnership involves the department on one hand and the community-based agencies on the other, and to 
a very large degree, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a very large component of volunteers. 
 
This government is pleased to acknowledge its obligation to share in the delivery of these essential 
services. Unfortunately, the terms of this joint responsibility were never clearly spelled out in the past, 
and services were often developed in a haphazard manner. This made for considerable uncertainty on 
both sides, government on one hand, not always sure of what it was funding and why. I don’t think the 
past government ever asked why it was funding many of them. Community agencies, on the other hand, 
were very unsure of their funding source and possible support for any new initiatives. While the 
consequences of this approach, Mr. Deputy Speaker, many have been tolerable for the previous 
government, it is not to this one. 
 
Last April this government promised to place greater emphasis on accountability. Just as the more 
stringent accountability standards are expected within government, so are non-government agencies 
which receive the public funds expected to increase their accountability both in terms of quantity and the 
quality of services provided. Mr. Speaker, we also made a commitment in looking at public funds to try 
and ensure that those who needed it the most were going to receive it. 
 
An important component in all of this is the need for agencies to work together to identify ways to 
ensure that all of the resources available in any one community are utilized and co-ordinated to the 
greatest extent possible. There is no doubt that most services can be more effectively and efficiently 
provided at the local level. Nor is there any question that community-based agencies are in a better 
position to identify and meet many of these needs than is the government. The changes being made are 
intended to strengthen the community service grant program, as well as to rationalize it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, 5.3 million has been allocated in 1983-84 for grants to community agencies. This 
is in addition to the 5.4 million for groups providing services to the handicapped. Agencies providing the 
direct preventive and essential services will receive an average increase of 7 per cent, and some of this 
will be included in transition houses for women and children, the crises services including the sexual 
assault centre, the preventive services such as the Big Sisters and the Big Brothers association. The 
family workers program will also see a 7 per cent increase, the youth programs operated by the John 
Howard Society, and also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the family service bureaus. Our budget, Mr. Speaker, 
also includes approximately half-a-million dollars for agencies providing trustee services for 
low-income families, including social assistance recipients. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the high teen-age birth rate in Saskatchewan continues to be of a serious concern, 
not only to us as a government but to the people in general. This matter is taking on a new dimension 
because of the increasing number of single teen- 



 
April 8, 1983 
 

716 
 

age mothers, approximately 85 per cent, who are choosing to keep their children. In recognition of the 
special problems and the needs of these young, single-parent families, my department will expand in 
1983-84 its teen parent program. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, under this program, which has been in operation on a pilot-project basis in 
Saskatoon and Regina since 1981, workers made weekly home visits to the young mothers. In addition 
to helping mothers develop their parenting skills, counselling and a variety of support service related to 
education, employment and family relations were also provided. Our evaluation of these pilot projects 
suggests that tangible benefits are to be gained from this service. For example, in terms of education, 50 
per cent of the project mothers were continuing with their education at the time of evaluation, compared 
to 20 per cent of the non-project group. 
 
The interesting thing on the expansion, however, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is an important change in the way 
that the service is going to be delivered. Presently, all services are provided directly by government 
staff. The new program will see the development through long-established community agencies. In this 
way, the professional resources and the valuable community grass root contact which these agencies 
possess will be utilized in the delivery of this important service. The scope of the program will also be 
expanded to include children from birth to three years of age. Presently, the services were restricted 
under one year of age. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the major concerns of government has been the increasing numbers of 
single parents, mostly female, that are on social assistance, and while I recognize that there are no 
single, easy answers, the problem is severe enough that some new initiatives must be taken. 
 
This year we have taken the initiative to look at a program that has been in the Regina community for 
some time. It is the Contemporary Women’s Program, and their funding will be doubled this year. This 
agency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has an outstanding track record of commitment and success in dealing 
with single women. Fifty per cent of the women that have taken this program have either gone on to 
further their education or have moved into the work force. Mr. Speaker, we look forward to see the 
development of more spaces within that particular program. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the allegations of decreased funding for day care have been stated in this House by 
members on the opposite side all too often, and they are completely unfounded. The member from 
Shaunavon talks about a 43 per cent cut in one media, and then in the other media he talks about a 46 
per cent cut. The other day I heard the figure, 30 per cent cut. 
 
Comparisons between the 1982-83 budget with the 1983-84 budget are complicated, I admit, by the 
inclusion of the ‘83-84 of funds previously allocated under the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, even when these adjustments are made for the DNS funds, there is an increase 
of approximately 4.5 per cent in day care funding for 1983-84. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — All that despite the current 10 to 20 per cent vacancy rate in day care centres. We 
have provided for limited expansion of both centre spaces and family day care homes. But, given the 
trends towards vacancies, we intend to be very careful in terms of where those new spaces would be 
located. 
 
My department, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will continue to play a role in meeting the needs of seniors in this 
province. The senior citizen activity centre program, which includes  



 
April 8, 1983 

 

 
717 

centres, will be maintained. Our budget also includes funds for the expansion of the Seniors Assisting 
Seniors program which presently serves 12 communities on a pilot project basis. This program is being 
evaluated, and the expansion funds are available pending the outcome of the evaluation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year we will be looking at some changes on the Senior Citizens’ Provincial Council 
mandate, with a view to strengthening their advisory function and their grass roots connection. The 
possibilities of such changes have been discussed with the council, and further discussions will be taking 
place. 
 
Changes within my department are also being considered which will complement the changes being 
made to the council’s mandate, and I am confident, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the overall result will be 
an improved capacity to deal with senior issues. 
 
We are also committed, both financially and morally, to the support of the Senior Action Now group, 
and also the Senior Citizens Association of Saskatchewan, which represents a membership of 
approximately 22,000 people. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, has stated why he will not support this budget, and 
he used a quotation that said: 
 

The moral task of a government is how it treats those who are at the dawn of life — the children; 
and those who are at the twilight of life — the elderly; and those who are in the shadows of life 
— the sick, the needy, and the handicapped. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I find it absolutely insidious, and unbelievable, that the Leader of the Opposition actually 
believes what he said. He will not support it for those reasons. He firmly believes that while his 
government was in power, it was the only one that could ever pass a moral test. 
 
Now, I will agree, that the perception was left that, indeed, there was the holier-than-thou ring around 
the head, when it came to social policy and programs. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I emphasize the word, 
‘perception.’ The perception was there that they looked after the children, the elderly, the women, the 
sick, and the handicapped. The perception; more like masterful deception. Somebody else said they were 
masters at smoke and mirrors, not the reality, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Let us look at some home truths on 
the home front. For example, let’s look at the elderly and the sick. Three years preceding this 
government coming into power, over a three-year period of time, $1.8 million was allocated for nursing 
home beds, over a three-year period. The population was getting older, living longer, becoming frailer. 
The need was there. There was no doubt about that. 
 
In August 1982, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government allocated $6 million to nursing home beds, in 
August of 1982. Seven months later, the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Health, announced 
another 4 million into nursing home beds plus, Mr. Deputy Speaker, another 2 million to recognize the 
very special needs of the very frail, level 4, senior citizen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — What is the most interesting point in the whole matter, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 
perception. The lack of information that never went to the  



 
April 8, 1983 
 

718 
 

public, and let’s use . . . For example, in 1978, the letter from the government that was sent — a 
moratorium on nursing home beds. Tell me about the moral responsibility to the elderly, and the sick, 
when you put a moratorium on the number of beds. 
 
One year in office, we have a minister in charge of Sask Housing who has presented a new concept of 
enriched housing for our senior citizens, not creating another bureaucracy to do it, but by utilizing the 
programs and the services that are already in place. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a Minister of 
Health who has listened to the senior citizens of this province, and has brought in the beginning of foot 
care program for those people. Mr. Speaker, we have tried to strengthen the direct service element in this 
budget to those people that need it most. It doesn’t pass the moral test? My question is: whose morals? 
Morals that dictate — no encouragement, no optimism, only negative comments, doom and gloom. No 
optimism for people to assert their rights and accept their responsibility. I sat in this House the other day 
and I listened to the Leader of the Opposition tell me that women need protecting. He still doesn’t 
understand. I don’t want protection; just train me in how to protect myself. That’s all I ask for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, the comments from a person — no morals on accountability when 
dealing with big government. His moral is a big government is the keeper to control at will the needy, 
the sick and the handicapped. His morals — that at campaign time to harass the old in the nursing 
homes. I went through it at campaign time. Families phoning and saying, ‘Can’t something be done? 
They are scaring my mother, or my father, to death.’ I thought that would only happen, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in a general election. Then we went through a by-election in P.A.-Duck Lake. The same thing. 
They were in the nursing homes in Prince Albert threatening the elderly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget does pass the test on the economic side, the health side, and the 
education, and above all, it passes the moral test when it comes to the needy, the handicapped, the sick, 
the children and the elderly. And it is with that, Mr. Speaker, that I will be supporting the motion and the 
budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is indeed an honour and a pleasure for me today to 
participate in this budget debate, representing my constituency of Yorkton, in which is situated the best 
little city in Saskatchewan, which is the city of Yorkton. Yorkton lies in the parkland area, an area that 
was blessed with some of the finest farmland in this province, and this in turn has given our area an 
exceptional agricultural base, along with an industrial base which is anchored by two of the largest farm 
equipment manufacturing companies in the province and, for that matter, in western Canada. We also 
have a potash industry in the immediate area, which has made us one of the most prosperous areas in 
this province. And I’m also very proud, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of our constituents, a hard-working group 
of various ethnic backgrounds, who decided in essence that times were tough, but they kept a stiff upper 
lip and barrelled ahead in spite of the devastating frost that we experienced last August in that part of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wish to congratulate my colleague, the member from Kindersley, the Minister of 
Finance, for his common-sense budget that he presented to the people 



 
April 8, 1983 

 

 
719 

of Saskatchewan a week or so ago, a budget that brought relief to the hearts of the population of this 
province because they no doubt had a feeling that they would be hit with more tax increases, a practice 
that they had been accustomed to over the last 11 years of NDP rule. 
 
The fact that this government is extremely concerned about the job creation was indicated by his 
nine-point program which will have tremendous impact on reducing the number of people that are 
unemployed. We are completely aware of the hardships generated by the lack of work, and can readily 
sympathize with those who are forced into this undesirable situation. On the other hand though, we can 
be very, very thankful that our unemployment rate, seasonally adjusted, is at 7.6 per cent and not at the 
11.7 per cent or the 14.8 per cent or the 14.9 per cent that the provinces of Ontario, British Columbia 
and Quebec respectively are faced with. Who would ever believe that these industrialized provinces 
could be in poorer shape than good old Saskatchewan which is now in the hands of a common-sense 
government? 
 
On road tax cuts and financial assistance with regards to home-owners has assisted greatly in reducing 
the cost of living for the people of Saskatchewan, and no doubt was a benefit to those who found 
themselves unemployed. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wish to speak basically on the three departments that I am responsible for, 
namely: the Department of Labour, minister in charge of potash corporation, and the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation. But first of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to give my first impression of my 
first year in government, especially concerning the effectiveness of the NDP opposition. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, never in my born days have I seen such a pessimistic, negative group as our 
opposition members. The performance reminds me of the bleeding-heart sop opera: tune in again 
tomorrow, ladies and gentlemen at 2 p.m. for the next episode of ‘Bleeding Hearts,’ produced, directed 
and performed by the remains of a former NDP government. It seems to me that they enjoy misery and 
are suggesting that we all should share in that misery together. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to remind the members opposite that the populace on April 26th, 
1982, indicated in no uncertain terms that they had had enough of big government. They wanted it off 
their backs. They wanted government out of the pocket-books. And they wanted to be individuals again 
with the opportunity to build and be aggressive, to attain their goals without burdensome government 
interference. And if they didn’t get the message on April 26th, they should have got it on February 21st 
with the results of the Prince Albert-Duck Lake by-election. And I would like, at this time, as I have not 
had the opportunity, to congratulate Sid Dutchak on his resounding victory. And I know he will 
contribute much to this Assembly, his constituents and the Progressive Conservative Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — We are now in the process of reorganizing the Department of Labour under the 
able direction of my acting deputy minister, Mr. Peter Grady, who has an extremely relevant background 
in law, labour relations, business and public service. What we are aiming to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
to establish the department as a more streamlined and efficient administrative entity and also to make the 
department’s programs operate in a more effective and balanced fashion. Accordingly, the policy of the 
Department of Labour must be aimed towards the creation of an environment 



 
April 8, 1983 
 

720 
 

which will stimulate business activity as well as towards the protection of the working person. And that 
is precisely what the department is attempting to do in the spirit of the Saskatchewan: Open for business 
theme which I am confident will create significant opportunities for new growth and added employment. 
The statistics show us that we are on the right track. 
 
Needless to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a major thrust in my department is in the area of labour relations. 
There is a growing public conviction in this country that we can no longer afford the harmful and 
wasteful consequences of work stoppages and poor labour relations. We have learned that the economy 
can function smoothly only if our full potential is attained. We literally cannot afford to stop producing 
and risk losing our markets to our competitors. 
 
I have said this before and I think it bears repeating here: I believe that the key to the kind of labour 
relations system which most people want calls for a renewed commitment to the principle of 
labour-management co-operation. The role of government is to make sure we are operating under an 
even-handed legislative framework which enables both business and labour to achieve their goals, goals 
which, in a very fundamental sense, are always complementary and very often the same. 
 
There is no doubt that we have reached a stage where we can and must work together to reduce 
industrial unrest and adapt our collective bargaining system to the new demands of the current age of 
technology. The labour relations experts in my department understand all this quite clearly. And under 
the leadership of my director of labour relations, Mr. Garth Leask, who has a solid background and 
reputation in labour-management relations, they have been given the mandate to pursue the objective of 
equity and balance in the most practical of terms. 
 
The focus of the labour relations branch will be changing from one of simple, reactive service to one of 
new pro-active programming, designed to resolve potential labour-management disputes before they 
assume major proportions, or direct specifically towards improving the labour-management relationship. 
The staff will be using a variety of proven conciliation, mediation and arbitration techniques which will 
further these ends. At the same time, the labour relations board will be striving to ensure that the 
provisions of The Trade Union Act are applied in an effective manner, with sound, reasoned and modern 
policies, under the chairmanship of Dennis Ball, an experienced and respected labour lawyer. 
 
Another important program involved in the departmental reorganization is labour standards. It has been 
a priority to establish the program within a separate labour standards division, rather than to continue to 
combine it with the apprenticeship program. We have been told by employees, by unions and employers 
alike, that it was a mistake five years ago to merge the apprenticeship and labour standards functions. 
And these functions of standards and apprenticeship are not compatible in either principle or practice. 
 
The merger has created many operational difficulties: a decline in the level of service, poor public 
relations and low staff morale. The apprenticeship program has now been transferred to the Department 
of Advanced Education and Manpower, paving the way for the establishment of a new and separate 
labour standards division in the Department of Labour. And I am confident, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
this step will solve the problems which have developed, and will allow us to administer the labour 
standards program in a fair, reasonable and effective way. 



 
April 8, 1983 

 

 
721 

The occupational health and safety branch is also being reorganized to provide through action now 
lacking, increase efficiencies, and to correct confused reporting relationships. We are working towards 
the achievement . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . You see the results, Mr. Member. We are working 
towards the achievement of a more equitable labour-management perspective in the administration of 
occupational health and safety programs. 
 
We want to establish a communications thrust with business, under which the Department of Labour 
would provide as a service to industry the knowledge required to implement effective occupational 
health and safety programs. 
 
In addition, we are about to reorganize the occupational health council. In the past, the occupational 
health council was an effective, unused and otherwise dormant body. We propose to equip the 
occupational council to play a more useful role in advising the government in occupational health 
matters. The reorganization will recognize the separate identity to the safety services division to 
acknowledge the importance of gas, electrical, elevator, fire and boiler safety, and we are also working 
on uniform building standards to ensure that the disabled persons have reasonable access and the use of 
buildings and facilities throughout this province. 
 
I want you to know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that careful attention is also being paid to the other programs 
of the Department of Labour. The emerging issue relating to employee pensions ahs multi-billion-dollar 
implications for government. Therefore, the pensions branch will be given the mandate to undertake a 
program of pension policy analysis and development. Our research division is developing a streamlined 
information program which will provide a rational and credible labour relations data base for use during 
negotiations by management, labour, conciliators and arbitrators. The program will also serve the 
information needs of employers as well as investors who require a knowledge of wage structures and 
working conditions in the province. 
 
Finally, we have beefed up the workers’ advocate office to full strength, significantly reducing the 
backlog of case files, and are considering specific measures and changes which will better serve the 
clients’ needs. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are some of our plans for the Department of Labour in the coming year, and 
this has been a short and sketchy outline of our intentions, but I think it has been complete enough to 
point up the common theme. All the policies we intend to introduce will emphasize a suitable degree of 
balance between the interests of employees and the interests of employers. In taking this course we are 
not only being fair to both groups, but are maximizing the chances of creating a favourable labour 
environment in which to implement our proposals to develop the Saskatchewan economy. And in this 
way, the attainment of the government’s economic objectives will lead to new life and prosperity for 
employees, for employers, and for every citizen in this province. 
 
I also will expect to be placing before this Assembly some changes and amendments to The Trade 
Union Act, which will help both the employees to work in a more harmonious fashion with our 
employers. And, Mr. Speaker, I wish to advise this Assembly that we are operating our department on 
an open-door concept, and I am pleased to say that employees, union leaders, and employers have 
accepted this policy. 
 
I would like to speak briefly on the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. And it is very  



 
April 8, 1983 
 

722 
 

interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when the present government assumed responsibility for the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, the inventories in the system were at 1.1 million tonnes, which is 
very close to the maximum possible inventory. Our storage facilities were full to their maximum, as well 
as ore stockpiled on the ground. 
 
Obviously, the former government was not watching the international or domestic market trends, 
otherwise reductions in production would have been made. Because of the decision made by the former 
government, our government was faced with the very difficult decision to cut production, and therefore 
lay-offs had to take place. And as you are aware, Mr. Speaker, it is most important for international 
corporations, whether they are public or private, to be totally up to date on market trends as they affect 
our industry. And I am sure that it was only coincidental, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that an election was 
forthcoming. However, this did seem to cloud the thinking of the former government. 
 
I am pleased to report, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this government has taken positive steps to ensure that 
better marketing procedures are used by the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. And these steps 
include: the moving of the United States sales office from Atlanta, Georgia to Chicago, Illinois, which is 
right in the middle of our market area, the creation of employee sales incentive programs, rather than 
salaries. A salesman could sit in his office, draw his salary, and not sell one ounce of potash, in the 
previous system. The reorganization of the entire sales force also took place. And I am also pleased, Mr. 
Speaker, that because of the positive action that we have taken in the domestic market with our sales 
force and aggressive selling by Canpotex, our offshore market agency, our sales increased in both areas. 
Our offshore markets are up 14.9 per cent, and our domestic sales are up 28.4 per cent for the same 
period in 1982. And we believe that much of this can be contributed to our new and aggressive sales 
campaign. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition has indicated recently that our increase in offshore sales is attributable to 
arrangements made while PCS International was in place. In the one year that I have been responsible 
for PCS, I have not seen any firm orders that were generated by PCS International, and I challenge the 
hon. member to provide me with the copies of the so-called contracts or orders. 
 
As indicated in the recent throne speech, research and development — 38 per cent ahead of last year, 
same period . . . (inaudible) . . . Fifteen per cent ahead of Canpotex in the offshore over last year. As 
indicated, research and development will be a priority over the next several years. Many Saskatchewan 
people fail to realize that one of our most aggressive industries in this respect has been the mining 
industry, and more specifically, the potash industry. 
 
The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is a leader in research into new process mining and product 
technology, and this is reflected in the fact that PCS is also one of the top 10 research and development 
investors in the Canadian mineral sector. Research and development expenditures to date have 
concentrated on improving mining and processing techniques which are needed to ensure that the 
operating costs are kept at a minimum. A minimal operational cost is our main competitive advantage, 
and we must ensure we never lose this competitive edge. 
 
Continued work on research and development and improved technology is especially important because 
the advantages we enjoy as a low-cost producer are often more  



 
April 8, 1983 

 

 
723 

than offset by the transportation disadvantages we encounter as a land-locked producer. Potash is a 
low-value commodity, and Saskatchewan producers are land-locked and dependent on Canadian 
railroads to move product 2,500 kilometres to the U.S. Midwest and 1,850 kilometres out to Vancouver. 
Typically, about 40 per cent of the delivered price of potash from North America is represented by 
transportation costs. This percentage is even greater offshore, and we are only beginning to see the 
effects of U.S. rail deregulation for more flexible freight rates for both PCS and its competitors can be 
expected. 
 
The combination unit train and barge shipments put into effect in 1982 has enhanced our ability to 
compete with European and Israeli material coming up from Mississippi River from New Orleans at 
very competitive prices. And at the same time, our offshore marketing agency, Canpotex, is continuing 
to work with Saskatchewan producers in providing more competitive freight packages to major offshore 
customers. A recent example of these efforts is illustrated by the fact that Canpotex recently loaded the 
largest single potash shipment ever sent offshore, destined for China, with 68,000 tonnes of potash on it. 
 
It is clear that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan and the industry will need to support Canpotex in 
ensuring that their facilities in Vancouver are capable of handling larger and larger tonnages on a regular 
basis. 
 
PCS also recognizes that a sound market development program will be needed to ensure markets for 
expansions now under way. And this will be most important, of course, in developing these offshore 
markets where the need for potash is not well accepted. We have therefore pursued initiatives in markets 
such as China and the fruits of these efforts can be seen through the development of a new 
Canada-China agronomic development program. This program will be jointly funded by the 
Saskatchewan potash industry through Canpotex, the Saskatchewan government and the federal 
government. This is the first of many initiatives we hope to see the industry undertake in support of 
market development offshore. 
 
And in conclusion, let me say that we are confident that PCS can play a dynamic role as a member of the 
Saskatchewan potash industry and that there is room for a balanced private-public sector approach to 
this industry. We remain committed, however, to the belief that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
and the private sector can co-operate to the advantage of Saskatchewan. And I make specific reference 
here to offshore markets, market development and research and development initiatives. 
 
And while research will always remain competitive, areas such as mine safety which are of concern to 
the entire industry can be improved through shared technology. For this reason we have supported the 
concept of establishing a potash industry institute here in Saskatchewan which would act as a funding 
mechanism to the industry for carrying out such research and for funding market development initiatives 
which will be of benefit to the entire industry. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to discuss briefly also the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. In 
July of 1982 the corporation forecast a year-end deficit of $37.4 million. A very concentrated effort was 
made to reduce controllable operating expenses within the corporation and to critically examine capital 
programs. These efforts, together with a reduction in interest rates and the strengthening of the Canadian 
dollar were successful in bringing about a very substantial reduction in the 



 
April 8, 1983 
 

724 
 

year-end deficit. 
 
A hiring freeze, implemented in May 1982, has enabled SPC to reduce manpower in excess of 200 
employees through attrition. Recently the corporation has announced an early retirement incentive 
program targeted at staff 55 years of age and over with at least 20 years of service. This program will 
enable SPC to further reduce their staff and costs while at the same time providing advancement 
opportunities for younger, skilled employees in whom the corporation has a considerable investment in 
training and development. 
 
Generation expansion to meet the future needs of the province and to assure a secure supply to meet the 
future needs of the province, and to ensure a secure supply of electricity is being met through major 
project developments at Coronach and at Nipawin. At Coronach, a second 300 megawatt unit is nearing 
completion and is expected to be in commercial service by July 15, 1983. At Nipawin, the hydroelectric 
project which will add 252 megawatts of electrical capacity to the SPC system by 1986, is now under 
construction at a projected cost of $600 million, and this project will make a significant contribution to 
the provincial economy through direct employment, and will also contribute to the manufacturing, 
supply, and service sectors of our economy. On-site labour is expected to peak this year in excess of 
1,000 employees. 
 
The Saskatchewan Power Corporation has initiated a comprehensive natural gas distribution program, 
and in 1982 the program brought service to 2,736 residential customers in 30 communities and 79 farms. 
This year the corporation has committed $340 million to install natural gas service to farms and rural 
communities in accessible areas throughout the province. The program will begin immediately, and will 
take approximately seven to 10 years to complete. 
 
During 1983 the natural gas service will be extended to 23 communities and approximately 2,000 farm 
customers at a cost of $37 million, and this program will also make a major contribution to the economic 
well-being of this province and create between 300 and 400 jobs per year for the next seven to 10 years. 
The development of a fifth underground natural gas storage cavern has been undertaken here at Regina, 
and the cavern is expected to be completed in 1984 and will add 28.2 million cubic metres of usable gas 
storage to the system. 
 
In preparing to meet the challenges of the future, President E.B. Campbell recently announced a major 
reorganization in the senior management of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. The new organization 
reduces the number of positions reporting directly to the president from 13 to 5. This will improve the 
effectiveness of the senior executive group, and will help the corporation to achieve its major goal of 
increased efficiency and productivity so that a secure and reliable supply of gas and electricity is 
delivered to customers at the lowest possible cost. The corporation is also looking to modern technology 
to improve the efficiency of its operations. Construction of a new system control centre here at Regina 
began in 1982, and this $22.5 million project will control the provincial electrical and natural gas 
systems and provide computerized dispatch and monitoring. 
 
In closing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no doubt the budget presented by our Minister of Finance is 
zeroing in on job creation, and I’m pleased that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and the potash 
corporation is doing its part in providing jobs. 



 
April 8, 1983 

 

 
725 

Can you imagine, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what could be achieved in job creation if the hundreds of 
millions of dollars that were used to purchase potash mines and farmland, which did not create one extra 
job, was now sitting in our heritage fund? 
 
Needless to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be opposing the amendment and will be supporting the 
motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Young: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, with pleasure I rise to speak on behalf of the good people of 
Saskatoon Eastview. I’d like to congratulate the Minister of Labour on his very fine speech, and I’d like 
to certainly congratulate the Minister of Finance on his very honest, straightforward, and responsible 
budget. 
 
I think that it is of some note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that on this budget, unlike many budgets in the past, 
there were no budget leaks. The thing got through without any major leaks. I think that’s very, very 
important. Any leaks that did come out, Mr. Speaker, were shown to be erroneous, in the nature of 
speculation. I am wondering, at this time, how the Ombudsman feels about the budget and what sort of a 
reaction he has to his increased monetary sum that he will be obtaining. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We haven’t heard anything. 
 
Mr. Young: — Not a thing out of him, eh? Well, my goodness, it’s strange. But certainly that goes to 
show you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the very tight office that our Minister of Finance is running. 
 
I’m very pleased to see the first kick at a full budget come down with an increased spending in health, 
social services, and the skilled-training area of education, and job creation. Certainly I think, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that we might be able to recoin the slogan, ‘Don’t let them take it away.’ You’ll recall that 
that’s the one that the NDP used as a scare tactic for the old and the sick in effort to unfairly hold 
hostage some of their vote. Certainly I think that ‘Don’t let them take it away’ could now very well 
apply to the type of administration that we are coming forward with. 
 
I think that — although my speech, due to the time constraints, has to be somewhat short — it’s very 
much in order, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to make some comments with respect to the total negativism that 
has been coming for the eight members on the other side of the House. Certainly if you look for a 
moment, I think one of the very important issues that I would like to deal with in the short time I have is 
the Crow issue. 
 
The member form Quill Lakes really upsets me with the way he attempts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to warp 
our position on the Crow. We have always had a constant position on that subject matter. The farmer 
cannot afford to pay a nickel more for the improvement in our rail system. Our House unanimously 
passed a resolution. And the member, if he keeps continuing with his false rhetoric on the subject matter, 
I cannot see how he can perform in this House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, under that constant sort of betrayal 
of the truth. I don’t think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the member from Quill Lakes can last much longer 
on that line. Motor mouth, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Back to the Crow. I asked the three members opposite — I presume that the other five of them are 
air-fared out to British Columbia to do a little campaigning. But for the three of them left, I’d like to 
point out to them that the reason that we have Mr. Pepin . . .The  



 
April 8, 1983 
 

726 
 

reason that we have little Mr. Pepin coming out here to the West to tell us what we’re going to do with 
our rail system is because of the members opposite, and because of their colleagues and what they’ve 
done for western Canada. 
 
I think, in their very small heart of hearts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they know full well that if we had Mr. 
Don Mazankowski, the member of parliament from Vegreville, as our Minister of Transport, we would 
not have any problem with the Crow — if we had that man. They know it in their little hearts of hearts, 
and they know why we have little Mr. Pepin coming out here — because of them and their colleagues 
and the NDP motion which got rid of a western sympathetic government, of a government with a 
western Minister of Transport to be replaced with Pepin, Chretien, a mafia from down east, your bed 
partners. 
 
The member from Shaunavon . . . I put it to you that your relationship with the Liberals is incestuous. 
It’s incestuous. You’re not strange bedfellows. The Liberals, you’ve taught them now, are just the NDP 
in slow motion . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
The member from Shaunavon, as I understand it, will be the next speaker, and I’d appreciate him 
commenting on his feet with respect to the subject matter I’ve just dealt with. 
 
I think, getting on to the member in Shaunavon, he’s got a few problems. Lorne Nystrom was here at the 
back rail yesterday, kicking off, I presume, his leadership campaign for the member from Elphinstone’s 
seat. Mr. Lingenfelter kind of feels that he is the heir apparent. But for the member from Shaunavon, in 
the land of the blind it’s been said that the one-eyed man is king. I think that the one-eyed man is Mr. 
Nystrom. And I don’t think you, sir, are the heir apparent to the throne. But keep trying; it’s fund to 
watch. 
 
The clock is getting me. I have prepared here, Mr. Speaker, 10 more pages of speech. But under the 
circumstances — we have to vote at 12:30 — I think that it’s fair to let the member from Shaunavon 
have a few negative words. And I look forward to more negativism from the member from Shaunavon. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with a bit of anticipation that I rise to take part in the budget 
debate today. I have waited through a week of Tory back-slapping and revelry in a budget that I have a 
great deal of difficulty in recognizing what they are talking about. Because, this being my sixth budget 
in this House, I a little difficulty in understanding how that many people can applaud the worst budget 
that I have seen in this House, and talk about is greatness at a time when budget cuts are rampant, where 
programs are being slashed. And outside of this House there is very little cheering about the budget of 
1983-84 in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to refer first of all tot he budget and its impact in my area of the 
world, that being south-west Saskatchewan. And I want to relate to the members of the Assembly the 
disappointment that is down there in terms of the lack of highway construction, not only in my 
constituency, but throughout the south-west, where the Red Coat Trail the member from Weyburn 
mentions, where their advice that certain sections of highway be built was not recognized in the budget 
speech, but instead, political roads were built, not on the advice of the Red Coat Trail Association, but 
rather on the advice of the member from Weyburn. And I suppose that he will need  



 
April 8, 1983 

 

 
727 

all the help that he can muster in winning in the next election. So, politically, it’s not a bad move. 
Because having been in Weyburn a number of times, I realize that he will need a good number of roads 
built in that constituency in attempting to maintain it after the next election. 
 
There are other areas in south-west Saskatchewan which are equally hard hit. I think the ranchers at Val 
Marie and Killdeer are interested and saddened to know that the grasslands park is one step and one year 
further from fruition at this time because of the lack of funding by the minister in charge of tourism, who 
did not see in his power to get the money from the finance minister to go ahead with the surveys and the 
seismic work for gas and oil, which had to go ahead on that piece of property before the federal 
government and the provincial government can establish the grasslands park. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of the grasslands park, the federal government has made it well known 
that they have a large chunk of money to spend in Saskatchewan which would improve the state of 
affairs, create many, many jobs in south-west Saskatchewan, if the provincial government would go 
ahead and do the kind of exploration that they have an agreement and a commitment that they are to do. 
But instead we see backpedalling by the minister and by this government to the point that this program 
is now in jeopardy. Not only is the program in jeopardy, but the ranchers, the 40 or 50 who are affected, 
are left in limbo, and they too are not happy with this government’s performance today. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not that they are adamant — they are still willing, I suppose you could say, to 
give this government a chance. But they’re beginning to wonder more and more how a government after 
11 months can be apparently old and tired as this government has become in that short of time. But I 
think if you look at the economic problems that they have created and are now facing, it’s not hard to 
understand why in fact they’re becoming tired and old very, very quickly. 
 
There’s other areas that the farmers are disappointed in — the fact that the budget of the Minister of 
Agriculture was cut a good deal, the fact that that did not include a farm fuel rebate program. There is no 
massive irrigation program which had been promised at the time of the last election, and all they see is a 
mortgage interest rebate program for people who are able to get loans from the farm credit corporation. 
And they would have liked to think that it’s a farm purchase program, but I can guarantee them that the 
farmers know it isn’t a farm purchase program, but it’s an interest rebate program that the loans are 
given out, not by the provincial government but by the federal government. And what the Tories are 
attempting to do here is take credit for probably the only positive Liberal program that has come out of 
Ottawa. And I say that when they are tying their fate on Liberal programs it can tell you how bankrupt 
of ideas this government really is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan were, to say the least, disappointed in the budget. I think 
disappointed, first of all, because of the large deficit, the fact that we now owe over $500 million in one 
year, but also the fact that we have services cut, and I think that’s the more important issue. Had the 
budget been balanced, I think this government could have got the groups and people to accept the fact 
that their budgets had to be restrained. But social service groups in particular are saying, ‘Had the 
budget been balanced, we may have understood how our budget is being slashed.’ What they’re saying 
is, ‘Because there is a large deficit we had anticipated that our funding would remain intact.’ And I think 
that makes very logical sense to most people. It probably won’t for the members opposite, but you 
would think in running a large  



 
April 8, 1983 
 

728 
 

deficit, Mr. Speaker, that the funding for very basic groups would have been maintained. 
 
And this following the Trudeau government down the deficit path is a very, very interesting story. This 
year alone, if we want to add up the number of what the people of Saskatchewan are being asked to pay 
in terms of a debt by the federal and provincial government, if you do a little calculating you’ll find that 
the federal government borrowed over 30 billions of dollars on behalf of the people of Canada or about 
$1,500 per person here in Saskatchewan. Add that on to the 500 per person that was borrowed by the 
Devine government, and you’ll find that each individual person owes 2,000 more dollars today than they 
did last April 26th. For a family of five that adds up to a total bill of $10,000 in one year. I think what 
the people of Saskatchewan are saying is not whether we can get rid of this government after four years 
— I think they have accepted that — but whether we can afford the bill of $40,000 per family that will 
be built up by the time four years rolls around. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members talk about gloom and doom. But, I think, if they watch the Liberal 
government in Ottawa there’s a fair bit of doom and gloom about that government as well, and very 
appropriately so. And I’m warning the members, if they continue to follow the Trudeau trail, if they 
attempt to follow the Trudeau trail of deficits, what I’m pointing out is that they too will have a great 
deal of doom and gloom to live with as they are turfed out after their first year in office, similar to what 
happened in 1934 after a short stint in government then. And it took the people 50 years to forget about 
that. In fact, a full generation had to go by, where they weren’t anyone who could remember it before 
they were allowed the privilege of entering this building and forming the government. It’s been a long, 
long time. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting how history does repeat itself. We are seeing again today the 
results of a right-wing radical government here in Saskatchewan. I listed a number of cut-backs in 
question period today, and I’ll have more to say about that. 
 
The Minister of Finance finds this whole debate very interesting, and I suppose he should. He has a little 
bit of explaining to do in the fact that we not only have a very large deficit, there’s no money. That’s a 
very interesting problem for the Minister of Finance to attempt to explain to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan then, when they want a fuel rebate program. How is it that you run a large deficit at a time 
of restraint, and at the same time you have no money for anyone? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s not that there’s no money for anyone. There is money in the budget for certain 
individuals. There’s money for oil companies. There’s massive cuts in taxes to oil companies which will 
amount to about $150 million, not in one year, but this year, next year, and the year after. And at that 
point it will come to an end, Mr. Speaker, because the people of the province will reject that policy of 
cutting taxes to the rich and charging it up to the poor. It’s a policy that will be rejected at the first 
opportunity that the people of this province have to reject the Tory philosophy that you take from the 
poor and give to the rich. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of things that I would like to say in the area of health. And I would like 
to take this opportunity to congratulate the minister at the very, very fancy footwork which he did in 
raising the budget of Health significantly but decreasing services to people. And I think that it’s not hard 
for the people of the province to understand and it will not take them a great deal of time to find out that 
the increase in the budget of Health came not from an increase from the Minister of Finance, but came 



 
April 8, 1983 

 

 
729 

from what I am now calling the weak Minister of Social Services, because when he was refused by the 
Minister of Finance any funding he looked over his shoulder to the Minister of Social Services and said, 
‘There’s a bit of money there. I’ll raise my budget by taking programs out of another department.’ And 
that’s exactly what he did. By moving home care and nursing homes from Social Services, he took 
money from another department and called it his own and says, ‘Now we are number one in health.’ 
 
Well, this kind of a cynical attitude by this government will not be accepted by the people of the 
province. And it will not be accepted by the people who have children in the dental care program who 
are seeing cut-backs in that program in terms of the four-year-olds, who are seeing a halt to the 
expansion, by the 17-year-olds not being included in that plan — the fact that many adolescents are 
being encouraged to go to the private sector dentists and each time they are encouraged to go there it 
saves the good old Minister of Health some money and he will go on encouraging them until finally he 
can say, ‘There’s not enough people using this program and we should do it in.’ I believe that’s 
happening already, and you need only look at the staff in the dental plan to find out that people already 
are being removed from that program. And I believe the number is in the area of 23 less staff in the 
dental plan program this year as to what it was last year. 
 
And so we see the undermining of a very basic and a very fundamental program in the province of 
Saskatchewan, one which was brought in by an NDP government — the first one in North America — 
and I think that the first Conservative government in 50 years has made up their mind to get rid of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an area which is very dear to the hearts of all Saskatchewan residents . . . I say that, still 
giving the government a chance, because I think that in the back of their minds they have a thought that 
they would like to do exactly what the Alberta government has done in the area of deterrent fees. Mr. 
Speaker, we saw last week the Government of Alberta introduce the most regressive taxation structure 
on the health care that we have seen in the country in the past 10 years. What it is, is a deterrent fee of 
$20 per day in a public ward, and $20 increasing to other numbers as you get into semi-private and 
private facilities in the hospitals. I think this government is watching very closely. They’re digging away 
at the roots of medicare by cutting back in psych services, dental plan, but in the back of their mind they 
really want to go after the big deterrent fee. And Alberta is taking the risk for the other Tory provinces, 
because they think that their position is so secure there that they can run a little experiment in Alberta to 
see whether or not they get away with it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that if the federal government is not strong enough to delay this and put if off, or if 
there is a Tory government elected next year federally, you will see deterrent fees in every province, if 
it’s allowed to take place in Alberta the way they are proposing at the present time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can see that we have hit a little bit of a soft spot with the Conservative government and 
old Liberals in the House who have seen the result of deterrent fees in the past, in 1971 when a 
government was defeated on the fact that it had introduced deterrent fees in this province. And I predict 
and I give a warning to this government that if it follows its Conservative cousin’s position in Alberta, if 
it does follow the steps taken by the Conservative government in Alberta, that it too will face the same 
results as the previous government, that being the Ross Thatcher government, being turfed out for that 
particular reason. 



 
April 8, 1983 
 

730 
 

I think there is another area of cynicism by the Minister of Health which I would like to comment on, 
and that’s the fact that, at a time when he is increasing the budget in some areas — I laud him for that, 
the fact that there is more money going into cancer — but his explanation in the House was a little 
curious when he said the reason that money was going into cancer treatment was because it was popular 
in Saskatchewan. I don’t mind the government putting more money into cancer treatment; I think it’s an 
excellent idea. But the reasoning behind the fact that more money is going to cancer and less to psych 
services, I believe because they did a poll and found out that cancer in fact was more popular, and they 
thought they could get away with cutting psych services, is not acceptable in a province which believes 
that medicare and equality for all people. And I think that that little line will come back to haunt this 
government when you’re talking about the popularity of certain health programs and deciding your 
spending priority, not on the needs of the people, but on an opinion poll done by a firm in Toronto, and 
therefore putting more money into cancer and acting like heroes about it. 
 
That’s a little bit of a deception and shows the insensitivity of this government towards the real people in 
this province. And that will be the case that we will take to the people in psych services, those people 
who are facing tough times, that in trying to run a popularity contest with the cheer-leading and the 
flag-waving that goes on by this group, eventually, Mr. Speaker, eventually will get them into nothing 
but hot water, and at the time of the next election, they will be facing the consequences of that kind of 
action. 
 
And there are other areas of cut-backs besides psych services. We see health promotion and health 
education; I’ll say that funding for rural hospitals is not adequate to meet the needs. I’ve had meetings 
with a number of hospital boards who are telling me they are facing the reality, the stark reality, of 
cutting staff at their next board meeting as a result of the funding in hospitals not being increased to the 
level that they need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have met with the Kincaid Hospital Board who will be asking for a meeting with the 
Minister of Health in the very near future to see if they can get emergency funding so that they do not 
have to lay off one staff, and I will be assisting them in getting the meeting set up so that we can see 
whether or not the doors of that hospital can, in fact, be kept open. Because here again I’ll go back to the 
era from 1964 to ’71 under another right-wing government when the doors of many, many hospitals 
were closed with the same kind of attempt of the government to shift the responsibility of closing 
hospitals from themselves to the local hospital boards. 
 
But here again you’re underestimating the will and the strength of the hospital boards in this province. 
You’re also underestimating the importance of a good healthy medicare system in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other area which I mentioned earlier was in the area of psych services, and, by this 
government’s own studies which they have done, they admit that there is a crisis in the psych services in 
the province. And I quote from an article which appeared in the Star-Phoenix quoting from a report of 
their own hospital’s facilities planning committee in which they say, describing this phase of psychiatric 
services as near crisis. ‘The committee recommends the increase in the number of city-wide psych beds 
to 75 from 55 in the establishment of an in-patient psych unit at St. Paul’s to complement those of the 
other two hospitals.’ 



 
April 8, 1983 

 

 
731 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that the fact that their own people are telling them of this dire need in the area 
of psych services, and the complete ignoring the statement and going with what their opinion polls say is 
a more popular area, show that this government does not listen to the people of the province, and odes 
not even listen to the people who may commission to do studies for them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I say that this is a very, very difficult thing for those people who are in the area of 
psych services to deal with, because they know full well that if they go to bat for those people, funding 
will be only cut more because this is what has happened to other groups who have commented on and 
said that the budget was not good. You don’t do that if you get funding from this provincial government. 
You keep your mouth shut, and I guess you wait till the next election. 
 
But I say that at the next election, they will speak very loudly, the same as the people of and province of 
Manitoba spoke. There was not a great deal of outcry from the groups during the term of office of 
Sterling Lyon because they knew they couldn’t get away with it. But at the time of the election they will 
let you know that they don’t appreciate cuts in their budgets. They don’t appreciate about 1,000 or 1,500 
people being laid off out of the government in one year, and I think that at the time of the next election, 
these people who are quiet now will be very loud in rejecting this right-wing Conservative government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in transferring the home care program and the nursing home care to the Department of 
Health, while the minister is saying what a great increase this is in his budget, he did not mention that 
nursing home construction announced this year is $2.4 million less than the budget that was announced 
in the Department of Social Services last year. There has been a decrease from $6.4 million in the 
budget of Social Services for nursing home construction last year to 4 million this year in the 
Department of Health. 
 
When shuffling numbers from one department to another, you may be able to get rid of that sort of thing 
with your back-benchers who apparently don’t read the estimate book, but for the nursing homes in the 
province who are waiting and waiting patiently for nursing home construction, whether it’s in 
Whitewood, or whether it’s a 144-bed in Saskatoon, I think that they will know that the budget has been 
cut, and they will let you know over the next few months that they’re not very happy with the budget 
that you have announced for construction of nursing homes. 
 
I think the cut of $2.4 million in construction will mean that the waiting lists which have grown a great 
deal since last April 26th will continue to grow, and those people will let you know in the very near 
future that the pioneers of this province deserve to be treated a great deal better, and that simply moving 
them from Social Services to Health is not really the test, but whether the people in the nursing homes 
get better service for less cost will mean whether or not that little program is working. 
 
And I say that the increase of nursing home rates from 390 to 417 in last year’s budget did not impress 
many people, and the predicted increase this July will not be approved by the residents whether or not 
they’re in Social Services or whether they’re in Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to turn now for a few moments to the Department of Social Services, a department 
which is very close to all of us in the opposition. Many of the people who are served in this department 
are the forgotten people of the province since  



 
April 8, 1983 
 

732 
 

April 26th. Mr. Speaker, they are forgotten because the cut which have occurred in the area of senior 
citizens’ programming should be commented on. The Saskatchewan income Plan, which allowed for a 
payment of $25 to single seniors and 45 to couples, has been cut, not increased in this budget. The home 
repair program, which allowed for the improvement of seniors’ homes, has been cut as well. And, at a 
time when welfare rates are sky-rocketing in this province, the numbers of people on welfare, as well as 
the total number, the assistance, public assistance, to the aged has been decreased. Those people who are 
most deserving of the assistance has been cut back in this province as of the budget last week. 
 
I’m not sure what it is that the pioneers of the province have done to make the Tories angry at them, but 
apparently it’s something because there are very few people who are bearing the brunt of this type of a 
budget as the seniors are doing at the present time. And I think that what they’re attempting to do is take 
advantage, as is typical of right-wing government s, of those people who are least able to fend for 
themselves. They believe that the senior citizens are not able to come out and lobby for their position, 
whether it’s over nursing rate increases or whether it’s Saskatchewan Income Plan, but here again they 
will be surprised at the power of the ballot at the time of the next election. 
 
There’s no shelter allowance for senior citizens, even though they’re being asked to pay increases like 
19 per cent for telephones. There’s no promised free telephones. Many of the seniors believed the Tories 
at the time of the last election, and I say that they will not believe them again when promises like that 
are made that they’ll get free telephones immediately after the election. They may get them two months 
before the next election, but here again that kind of cynicism by a government doesn’t tend to get you a 
lot of votes at the ballot box. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the area of social workers, I would like to just take a few moments to outline for the 
Assembly and for the people of the province the fact that a large number of social workers and people 
who work in that area are being cut back by this government. I think the total is in the area of 40 social 
workers or staff who work in the regional offices and in the northern administration. And, Mr. Speaker, 
this at a time when we are at record numbers of people on welfare, record numbers of child abuse, 
record numbers of spouse battery, and I say that it’s simply impossible to expect the number of social 
workers in this province to be cut by 40 and still maintain the operation. 
 
I predict that, as a result of these kind of cut-backs, we will see an ever-increasing number of a type of 
child abuse cases which came to light in Alberta at the time when the Tory government there attempted 
to cut back in very basic social services. And they could take a leaf out of the book of Bob Bogle who 
had to face the music of that kind of cut-back in social services — the numbers of child abuse cases 
which came to light as a result of it. And I say here that the war that was being waged on child abuse, in 
the province prior to April 26th has been given up by this government, and we will be laying the 
responsibility for that kind of increase in child abuse, and the fact that it goes untended to by social 
workers, at the feet of the Minister of Social Services and the chairman of the board, the Premier of this 
province. 
 
I think that over the next months we will make a conscious effort, because the government and the 
ministers are not doing it, to become the people who defend those children who are in those homes and 
now have no social worker who is looking after their best interests at a time when parents and families 
are facing an ever-increasing  



 
April 8, 1983 

 

 
733 

strain because of the policies and the inaction of this government in creating employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the area of non-governmental organizations, I outlined for a few moments this morning, 
during question period, certain cuts which were occurring in the area of the non-governmental 
organizations. Mr. Speaker, these groups have been built up over the last 20, 30, and 40 years, where 
groups, community groups, have gotten together to meet the need of the people in their community 
groups, have good idea. It was a good use of volunteers, that these people would help in transition 
houses, or help in Regent Court park — places like that, where the assistance was given to the poor and 
those who were in need of help from time to time. We felt that these groups, with a local board and a 
hired executive director and maybe two or three secretarial staff, using many, many volunteers, deserved 
seed money from the provincial government. But what we are seeing at this time is not only staff being 
cut back in the department in taking care of the needs of those people, but also the non-governmental 
people, staff and also budgets being cut back significantly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this double whammy for the people who are facing trying times will be well noted 
by the press, and by the people of the province and ever-increasing numbers of people who are facing 
the brunt of these kind of cut-backs. And I’ll mention a few. There was Regent Court which has lost its 
funding; the fair tax deal; By Ourselves. The very group that is the umbrella group for all the NGOs, 
SANGSSA, it was announced yesterday had a budget cut from $108,000 to $13,000, and this after the 
members of the board have written to the Premier, have talked to various individuals about their funding 
and telling them how important it is. And I have here a letter to the Premier addressed to the Hon. Grant 
Devine from Rev. Bob Gay, the secretary of SANGSSA, Bob Gay who is the Regina chaplain, United 
Church downtown chaplain, and I would like to read this into the record. And my colleague from Regina 
Centre mentions that he is the downtown chaplain for all the churches in the city, and it says: 

 
The Regina region of SANGSSA (Saskatchewan Association of Non-Government al Social 
Service Agencies) formally protests the discontinuation of programs such as By Ourselves, the 
mediation diversion program of the John Howard Society, and the loans program of the welfare 
rights centre. 
 

This was written two days before the funding was cut to his organization. 
 

Furthermore, we demand that any non-governmental programs that have been cut back or 
eliminated by this budget to given full 90-days funding in which to appeal the decision that has 
been made. Your response would be appreciated. Sincerely, Reverend Bob Gay. 
 

Well, his response was the fact that his group, it was announced yesterday, are no longer getting 
funding. When I make the case that you don’t speak out against this government, here is a minister in 
Regina who is being told: ‘You don’t speak out against the Devine government.’ And I lay this on the 
table as proof of that page — that you don’t speak out. There is complete intolerance of such groups in 
this province and I say that it is completely intolerable that groups like this are being treated in this 
manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a large number of other points that I would like to make, but I would just like to say 
in conclusion that in the areas that I am critic for — and I don’t have time to go into Agriculture — 
there’s a whole other story to be told in many other areas — that northern Saskatchewan is in a state of 
affairs that needs to be taken care of in the  



 
April 8, 1983 
 

734 
 

very near future, if we are not to face total collapse and the possibility of violence in the North. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in closing I would just like to quote to these people who believe that profits should 
come before people, that profits are the essence of government, a quote from the Catholic bishops from 
their recent paper ‘The Canadian Conference of Catholic Bishops — Ethical Reflections on the 
Economic Crisis.’ And from that I would like to quote the following: 

 
This option calls for economic policies which realize that the needs of the poor have priority over 
the wants of the rich; that the rights of the workers are more important than the maximization of 
profits; that the participation of marginalized groups takes precedence over the preservation of a 
system which excludes them. 
 

And in closing I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that I really would like this government to take a look at 
its misguided policies of taking from the poor and giving to the rich, and attempt to get back to some 
sort of an equitable system, where those at the top, whether they be oil companies or insurance 
companies, pay their share, so that the people at the bottom can live a life of dignity and respect. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — It’s my duty to inform the members that the hon. member is about to exercise his right 
to close debate, and thereafter all members will be precluded from speaking. If any member wishes to 
speak, let him do so now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I had a nice 20-minute speech prepared that I was going to deliver, 
but I think I will go back and respond a bit to the member from Shaunavon. 
 
First of all, what we have here, Mr. Speaker, and what was promoted here, was going to be the first truly 
Tory budget in the province of Saskatchewan. Well, let’s ask ourselves, Mr. Speaker, just exactly what 
that means, and I think we go back, Mr. Speaker, prior to the election of 1982 to approach some of the 
things that the member from Shaunavon referred to. 
 
The number one thing that has, I suppose, dominated Saskatchewan politics since I can remember is the 
NDP line, ‘Only the NDP can look after medicare.’ You will recall the 1978 election, Mr. Speaker, the 
1978 election. ‘Don’t let them take it away. Don’t let them take it away.’ . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
The entire campaign of the NDP back in ’78. And I remember, Mr. Speaker, I remember so well, Mr. 
Speaker, going to the doors, going to the doors in the town of Kindersley . . . And this is the meaning to 
them of medicare and the politics of medicare. I knocked on the door of an old gentleman, Mr. Speaker, 
and he’s crying. He’s crying in 1978 election campaign, because, he’s concerned that there’s going to be 
a change of government and medicare will be taken away from him. Taken away from him, Mr. 
Speaker. And there you see, Mr. Speaker, the real meaning of the party opposite. The real meaning of 
the party opposite, Mr. Speaker. They’re not concerned about  



 
April 8, 1983 

 

 
735 

medicare. What they’re concerned about is poisoning the minds of those old people concerning and 
scaring those old people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I tell you, Mr. Speaker, this government has been in power for one year, and no 
medicare has been taken away, Mr. Speaker. Medicare has been making stronger . . . Medicare is 
stronger now than it has ever been in the province of Saskatchewan, and will continue to be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The second great story, Mr. Speaker, was in the 1982 election campaign. This 
was the next line by the members opposite, all eight of them now: ‘They’re going to take away the 
crown corporations. They’re going to sell power corporation to Calgary Power, and they’re going to sell 
Sask Tel to Ma Bell, and they’re going to sell the potash corporation.’ This was their tactic. Now the 
people, Mr. Speaker, in the 1978 election, of course, they didn’t look at it that way. They came, 
including many people that used to support the NDP . . . They came to us with this line. ‘Well, we think 
we’re going to vote for you guys this time. You’ve got some good ideas, and those people are getting 
old. I’m getting tired of the NDP. Can you give . . . I’ve only got one thing on my mind. You have to 
give me the assurance. Are you going to sell Sask Power and Sask Tel and the potash corporation?’ 
 
Of course the answer is obvious, Mr. Speaker. And one year later we still have Sask Power stronger than 
it was before, with a tremendous program of rural gas. We still have Sask Tel. We still have the potash 
corporation going, and, Mr. Speaker, can you believe it? We have a new water crown corporation. We 
have a new water crown corporation. There goes the second myth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Now we come to the third myth — the biggest one of all. This was the great 
NDP campaign, Mr. Speaker. And here was this one. I call this one the ‘mythical messiah,’ and here’s 
how it went: if we get rid of Mr. Blakeney, if the province loses Mr. Blakeney, in six short months it 
will be ruined. Ruined, Mr. Speaker. Ruined, Mr. Speaker. The man is indispensable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, I assure you, Mr. Speaker, one year later the province has done very well without Mr. Blakeney as 
the premier of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — And we heard, Mr. Speaker, that he was the great statesman. Well, where is the 
great statesman now, Mr. Speaker? Where’s the great statesman, Mr. Speaker, now? The great statesman 
has fallen from the great pedestal down to being an opposition leader. And not only that, Mr. Speaker, 
an opposition leader with a squint, that has to squint to see the flicker of light at the end of the tunnel, 
because there’s nothing there for them, Mr. Speaker. . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — . . . The mythical messiah, Mr. Speaker, is gone from  



 
April 8, 1983 
 

736 
 

Saskatchewan politics. 
 
The fourth thing, Mr. Speaker: the members opposite were always great at saying this, ‘Well, we like 
business, we like business. Yes, we’re pro-business, us NDPers.’ But every time you talk about 
business, what comes to their minds — Shell, Hudson’s Bay, all these other companies? They forget that 
there’s 65,000 small businesses in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And they don’t even 
know what a business is, Mr. speaker. They trap everybody. Everybody that runs a store or a good 
manufacturing plant or anything else, they want to lump them in with the multinational corporations, 
because they don’t understand what business is. That’s the problem with the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — And the member from Shaunavon is saying you need to look at the opinion polls. 
Well, when you look, Mr. Speaker, at what happened in Manitoba last week, you don’t need an opinion 
poll. You don’t need an opinion poll to attract tourism and to attract business and to be friendly with the 
rest of the world. You don’t need an opinion poll, Mr. Speaker, for members of a government, cabinet 
ministers of a government, to participate in the burning of an American flag — Mr. Speaker, the burning 
of an American flag. And that’s consistent with the people across there, Mr. Speaker, as to their views as 
to the way the world should turn — burn the American flag. Mr. Speaker, I think it is disgusting; I think 
it is disgusting as a Canadian. And I can assure you that we might have ideological differences with 
Bulgaria, Cuba or the Soviet Union, but it would be a dark day in this province when we burn those 
flags. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Now, I would like to briefly come back to the fabrications with regard to the 
NDP’s amendment to this budget, Mr. Speaker. The opposition expressed their shock and dismay, Mr. 
Speaker, shock and dismay about the deficit. The opposition, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, has become 
schizophrenic. They’ve become schizophrenic, Mr. Speaker. They continue to say, on the one hand, 
‘Don’t have a deficit, boys; that’s bad news.’ On the other hand, ‘Don’t make expenditure cuts, don’t 
make these slashes and dirty massive cuts,’ and things that we’re doing. They want it both ways, Mr. 
Speaker. They want it both ways. I can tell the Assembly that I don’t like deficits either. Nobody over 
here likes to see a deficit, but sometimes you have to have them, Mr. Speaker. That’s the reality of the 
world. When revenues are going down there’s still demand for expenditures. Mr. Speaker, sometimes 
you have to have that deficit. And you have to have the deficit, Mr. Speaker, if you’re going to bring in 
new programs. 
 
Without the deficit, Mr. Speaker . . . We could have eliminated it, but in doing so we could have also 
eliminated the nine-point job creation program. We would have had to eliminate the massive 
undertaking on skills training. We would have had to not be able to change the heritage fund. We would 
not be able to stimulate the business sector. We would not have been able to make the moves in health, 
social services, and education. Sure, we could have come in with a balanced budget, but that’s what we 
would have had to give up, Mr. Speaker. Our belief is that was wrong. 
 
Now let me go back, Mr. Speaker, to talk about the consistency of the Leader of the Opposition, the 
great messiah of the NDP. Mr. Speaker, let me quote for you for a minute from Hansard. This is from 
Ottawa, from parliament. And it was February 17th, 1983 — that’s this year. A guy by the name of Mr. 
Riis, NDP member. Here’s what he had 



 
April 8, 1983 

 

 
737 

to say: 
 

A deficit per se is not necessarily a disaster. Every businessman knows it’s sound business 
practice to borrow money and invest in order to get a return. 
 

That’s Mr. Riis. 
 
And here’s a statement of a Saskatchewan member of parliament, Mr. Hovdebo from Prince Albert. Mr. 
Speaker, this statement was in the Parliament of Canada, March 28th, 1983, one day before the 
Saskatchewan budget. And what does it say, Mr. Speaker? Here’s quoting from Mr. Hovdebo: 
 

There are times when deficits have a value. Right now, deficit spending is a good idea; it’s going 
to create jobs. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, here’s another quote from one Max Saltsman, who used to be 
an NDP member of parliament: 
 

This is not a budget that we, if we had have been government, would have brought down. We 
have reservations about the size of the deficit. We think it should have been larger. More 
stimulation should have been . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 

Not smaller, the word ‘larger’! Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s where you see. You’ve got two ideas. Either 
the Leader of the Opposition is out of touch with his party — out of touch with his party — otherwise 
they’re absolutely taking both sides of the fence on it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This budget shows, Mr. Speaker, more than anything else, the hook they have over there — the hook 
they have over there. While their leader says, ‘You can’t have a deficit — balanced budget, tight-fisted,’ 
the rest of them say, ‘Spend, spend, spend, spend, spend more money.’ 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan, I believe, think this is a responsible and meaningful 
budget; a budget that makes sense out of a tight financial situation, Mr. Speaker; a budget that uses a 
little bit of common sense, Mr. Speaker; and a budget that helps point us, Mr. Speaker, in a new 
direction and a bright future for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The third point in the amendment, Mr. Speaker, the NDP say, ‘Well, resource 
give-away has created the deficit.’ You know, this has got to be the most feeble of all of their 
approaches, Mr. Speaker, the same one they always take — same one they always take, Mr. Speaker. 
They know they’re caught they know they’re caught with an illogical argument. You can’t have it both 
ways. So they seek to patch that over with Polyfilla, Mr. Speaker. They get some stuff, and they’re 
going to cover this all over to make it good. So here’s what they say they’re going to do. Well, it’s 
because — you know, it’s a typical line — it’s because the new government has got a massive 
give-away to all their buddies in the multinational crown corporations and the dirty, rotten Americans, 
and all this stuff. These rotten American corporations come in here and just  



 
April 8, 1983 
 

738 
 

into our pockets and took all the money out, and that’s why we have a deficit. That’s their third 
argument, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, let’s look at it, Mr. Speaker, with regard to the potash. The potash, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you, 
is operating the same as it did before with the previous government. And who signed the agreements, 
Mr. Speaker, who signed the agreements, who designed the agreements, who put them in place? And we 
haven’t changed a comma in that, Mr. Speaker. We haven’t changed a comma in that. 
 
Then they blame the give-away to the oil companies. Now you give it away to all your friends in the oil 
industry. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the Premier in his address last Tuesday threw away that argument, 
and I think the media in the same point of view have said they didn’t buy it either. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, for years the NDP government have taxed the oil industry to the point where it was 
better for them to see an oil industry shut down, close down, not producing — that was their policy of 
how to keep the oil industry going. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, since we have taken office, we have seen a recovery in production of oil. We have 
seen development in drilling. And that, Mr. Speaker, means jobs in Saskatchewan, not jobs in the 
province of Alberta. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — And that means, Mr. Speaker, strong land sales. Strong land sales, Mr. Speaker, 
increasing three-fold from the time we took office. And that means people coming to the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, to do business here, to create jobs here, to create revenue here, and to create 
this into a better province. 
 
But what would the NDP have had, Mr. Speaker? Well, here’s their economic policy on oil. Here’s what 
they would like to see happen to the oil industry, Mr. Speaker. They would like to see idle jack pumps 
right across the province, idle jack pumps and service rigs, Mr. Speaker, being scrapped up for scrap 
metal and put into something else. That’s their policy on the oil industry, Mr. Speaker. Well, I’ll tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan did not buy that. 
 
Then they say, Mr. Speaker, well we better throw something in for jobs because the Leader of the 
Opposition got the same headline as we got in the budget, but he got his the day before. He wanted to 
see more jobs created — that’s exactly what he got. Since then we haven’t heard a peep out of him, with 
regard to the whole thing, not a peep, Mr. Speaker. So point number four, they got to throw that one in 
— well, didn’t create enough jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, we have done better in creating jobs in the province of Saskatchewan 
than any other province in this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Then point number four. They’ve got to get into the problem with regard to the 
cost-price squeeze that farmers face, and everybody recognize the cost-price squeeze, Mr. Speaker. And 
they say, what are you doing about it? Well, some of us members that have been in this House for more 
than a year now can recall the NDP  



 
April 8, 1983 

 

 
739 

proposals and policies with regard to helping the farmer. 
 
Here’s what they did, Mr. Speaker. Every year just prior to going into an election, out they come with a 
farm fuel rebate. Farm fuel rebate, Mr. Speaker. ‘Oh, boy, look what we’re doing for you. This, this, 
this, and this.’ They got back in. What did they do, Mr. Speaker? They cut it off. Some kind of policy, 
Mr. Speaker. Some kind of a concern. 
 
Well, I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, when we take the price of gasoline off in the province of Saskatchewan 
we’re not about to bring it back in a year later, I’ll tell you that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — They indicated, Mr. Speaker, the savage cuts — the savage cuts that we’re 
doing, Mr. Speaker. Well, I wonder where the savage cuts are, Mr. Speaker. I wonder where the savage 
cuts are in this budget. And if that’s what they got left to . . . The day after the budget, the best they 
could do was raise a question about some small organization that didn’t get 7 per cent funding and got 3 
per cent cut. Savage cuts, Mr. Speaker. Unbelievable. 
 
Again, the NDP wouldn’t have touched anything, Mr. Speaker. They wouldn’t have touched anything, 
Mr. Speaker. Everything that was there should never have been touched, never evaluated. Just leave it in 
place, Mr. Speaker. Well, I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the boys over there, the 
boys over there, Mr. Speaker, are living in a dream world, living in a dream world, Mr. Speaker. They 
wouldn’t want to have any deficit. They don’t want to have any savage cuts. They don’t want to have 
any oil revenue changes. Know what they want, Mr. Speaker? Know what they want, Mr. Speaker? 
They want magic, Mr. Speaker. Magic is what they want. That’s what it’s down to, Mr. Speaker. What 
they really want is magic. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, thankfully, the people of Saskatchewan performed magic last April 26, 1982, 
and eliminated . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — And that magic, Mr. Speaker, was a disappearing act for a political party that had 
lost touch and itself had become a comedy, Mr. Speaker — itself had become a comedy. 
 
And I say in closing, Mr. Speaker, to the members opposite: Wake up boys; get into the world; there’s 
so much more that you could be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 7 
 
Blakeney 
Thompson 
Lingenfelter 

Koskie 
Lusney 
 

Shillington 
Yew 



 
April 8, 1983 
 

740 
 

NAYS — 40 
 
Muller 
Birkbeck 
Andrew 
Lane 
Rousseau 
Pickering 
Hardy 
McLeod 
McLaren 
Klein 
Katzman 
Currie 
Duncan 
Schoenhals 

Smith (Swift Current) 
Boutin 
Weiman 
Sauder 
Petersen 
Glauser 
Meagher 
Schmidt 
Smith (Moose Jaw South) 
Hopfner 
Martens 
Rybchuk 
Young 
 

Gerich 
Domotor 
Maxwell 
Embury 
Dirks 
Hepworth 
Myers 
Zazelenchuk 
Johnson 
Baker 
Dutchak 
Folk 
Morin

 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 40 
 
Muller 
Birkbeck 
Andrew 
Lane 
Rousseau 
Pickering 
Hardy 
McLeod 
McLaren 
Klein 
Katzman 
Currie 
Duncan 
Schoenhals 

Smith (Swift Current) 
Boutin 
Weiman 
Sauder 
Petersen 
Glauser 
Meagher 
Schmidt 
Smith (Moose Jaw South) 
Hopfner 
Martens 
Rybchuk 
Young 
 

Gerich 
Domotor 
Maxwell 
Embury 
Dirks 
Hepworth 
Myers 
Zazelenchuk 
Johnson 
Baker 
Dutchak 
Folk 
Morin

 
 

NAYS — 7 
 
Blakeney 
Thompson 
Lingenfelter 

Koskie 
Lusney 
 

Shillington 
Yew

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 

 
AGRICULTURE 



 
April 8, 1983 
 

741 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 
 

Item 1 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:58 p.m. 
 


	ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
	QUESTIONS
	Mediation Diversion Program
	First Ministers’ Conference on Native Rights
	Mr. Yew: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct my question to the Attorney-General concerning last month’s first minister’s conference on native rights. At that conference your government, along with the governments of most of the provinces, agreed to int...

	Sale of Drag-Line by SPC
	Ministerial Staffs
	MOTION
	ORDERS OF THE DAY
	Mr. Speaker, those perhaps say it all. For the majority of people in my constituency, the budget is a fair one. Our constituency is city boundaries only, but we do not live in isolation of the rural areas that surround us. The recognition of agricultu...


