






















































Hansard: May 30, 1983


2671 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 30, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

NOTICE OF MOTION 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Wednesday next move first 
reading of a bill, An Act to amend The trade Union Act. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
HON. MR. DIRKS: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and to the members of the 
Assembly today, a group of 19 grade 8 students from one of the finest schools in Regina, Dieppe 
School, located in my constituency. They are seated in the Speaker’s gallery and are accompanied by 
their teacher-chaperons, Mr. Dick Lupastin and Bonnie Jones. I will have the privilege of meeting with 
them at 3 o’clock for pictures, and then for some refreshments after that. I would ask all members of the 
Assembly to join with me in welcoming them to the Assembly proceedings this afternoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
MR. KLEIN: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to introduce to you and through you to this 
Assembly, 17 young people from my constituency of Regina North. They’re up in the Speaker’s gallery. 
They are grade 8 students from St. Anne School. They are accompanied here today by their teachers, 
John Stochmal and Mrs. Procyshyn. I’m delighted to remind them that they have a choice of four high 
schools in Regina North to choose from next year, but hopefully today they will enjoy their visit to or 
legislature, enjoy the question period. I look forward to meeting with them a little bit later on and have a 
little visit with them. I ask members to join with me in welcoming them here today. Thank you. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
MR. MAXWELL: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to introduce to you and the other 
members of the Assembly a couple who are here on vacation from Edinburgh, Scotland, seated in the 
front row of the Speaker’s gallery. The gentleman in question is a well-known national union leader in 
Scotland, being the immediate past president of one of the major industries in Scotland, the pub 
industry, Mr. Speaker. And they are testimony to the fact that at least one of the names that perhaps the 
opposition might like to call me is without foundation. I’m proud to present my parents, Bud and Molly 
Maxwell. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2672 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. DOMOTOR: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to this 
Assembly a group of grade 7 students from Watrous Elementary School in Watrous, Sask., part of my 
constituency. They number 35. The teachers accompanying them are Vern Rudneski and Larry Orth and 
the bus driver, Peter Gaulie. I’d like to have the members of the Assembly welcome them here today. 
Thank you. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

Winners of Shell Fuelathon 
 
MR. FOLK: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like this Assembly to join me in congratulating students 
from the University of Saskatchewan’s mechanical engineering college, who placed first out of 16 
universities at the Shell Fuelathon held last Thursday in Oakville. Their ultra car achieved mileage 
records of 1,353 miles per gallon. The car was designed by Darcy Thomson, Jim Spetz, and Brawney 
Ewanchuk, who drove the car in the race. Professor Barry Hertz was their faculty adviser. 
 
This was the second time that the U of S placed first in this competition. Later this week they will be 
competing in the Society of Automotive Engineers competition in Michigan. They’ve won that 
competition every year for the last three years, giving them the North American mileage record. 
 
Please join with me in wishing them every success in their upcoming competition and extend, once 
again, our best wishes for their victory last week. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Sale of Liquor at Taylor Field 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the minister in charge of 
the Saskatchewan Liquor Board and the Liquor Licensing Commission. 
 
Press reports indicated that the minister had advised the press that the amendments introduced into this 
House would permit the sale of light beer in Taylor Field, subject to a referendum of the citizens of 
Regina. My question to the minister is this: will he agree that the amendments introduced to the house 
allow the Liquor Licensing Commission to authorize the sale of all alcoholic beverages — beer, wine 
and spirits — in Taylor Field on all days of the week, Sunday included, without further action by this 
legislature, or by the city council of Regina, or the voters of Regina, or even by the Lieutenant-Governor 
in Council? 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — Mr. Speaker, the amendment that we are introducing to the Liquor 
Licensing Act states quite simply that the citizens of Regina will be given the opportunity to vote in the 
from of a referendum. They will indicate their choice through a referendum whether they want the sale 
of light beer at Taylor Field or not. 
 
This is what this government has been saying all along. I think it is the most democratic method that any 
government could choose by lettering the citizens of this community make the choice. The government 
is not making the choice for them. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. Does the minister deny that 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2673 

the amendment which he introduced into this House permits the Liquor licensing Commission to 
authorize the sale of all alcoholic beverages — beer, wine and spirits — in Taylor Field? 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — That is not the intent, whatsoever, Mr. Speaker, of the legislation. The 
intent of the legislation is that we will allow the citizens of Regina, through a referendum, to vote as to 
whether they want light beer, and that is all, low-alcoholic beer, at Taylor Field — nothing else in the 
stands but low-alcoholic beer. Not wine, not spirits, not anything else, just light beer. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Further supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Does the minister deny that the 
legislation which he introduced allows the Liquor Licensing Commission to authorize the sale of 
alcoholic beverages on Sunday? 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — that is at the discretion, Mr. Speaker, of the Liquor Licensing 
Commission. If the voters of Regina, through referendum, do indicate that they want the sale of light 
beer at Taylor Field, it will be at the discretion of the Liquor Licensing Commission as to whether beer 
will be sold on Sundays or not. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, a further question, In view of the statement by the minister 
that the intention of the government is to authorize the sale of light beer only, will he agree to a House 
amendment to the act which would limit the application of the act to light beer only? 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — I will not entertain that amendment, that suggestion, at this time, Mr. 
Speaker. The Liquor Licensing Commission is a responsible body, and as far as this government is 
concerned, and this caucus is concerned, light beer will be the only beverage allowed at Taylor Field. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Further supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Do I understand the minister to say 
that it is the policy of his government to leave with the Liquor Licensing Commission the decision as to 
whether or not the alcoholic beverages sold will be restricted to light beer? 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — I would expect that these questions, Mr. Speaker, would be answered 
quite adequately, and in detail, in committee of the whole, but as I mentioned earlier, it is the discretion 
of the Liquor Licensing Commission as to what days light beer could be sold at Taylor Field, and as to 
what types of alcoholic beverages can be sold at Taylor Field. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Will you, Mr. Minister, give your 
undertaking that if the citizens of Regina authorize the sale of light beer on days other than Sunday, that 
no extension of that will take place without a further referendum? 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — I don’t know what form the question on the referendum, the so-called 
referendum, will take. That will be up to the city of Regina to decide that. This legislation simply says 
— and I can read it to you if you like — but it follows The Local Government Election Act, part V of 
The Local Government Election Act. It will be up to the city of Regina what form the question will take, 
and indeed it’s up to the city of Regina whether there will be a referendum at all — whether there will 
be a referendum 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2674 

at all. The city of Regina has indicated through a recent vote, five to four, that they wanted the sale of 
light beer at Taylor Field. 
 
Now, all this legislation does is to provide them enabling legislation in the act in the event that they 
should decide through a referendum that they want the sale of light beer at Taylor Field. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, new question, Mr. Minister. The spectre of course is that this is the 
nose of the camel, and that once light beer is sol on days other than Sunday, you’re going to have the 
entire camel inside the tent rummaging around. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, to you is: if it is your intention that only light beer should be sold, and only 
on days other than Sunday, why don’t you put that in the legislation if that’s your government’s 
intention? 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — That is a matter that can be adequately determined by the Liquor 
Licensing Commission, Mr. Speaker. I don’t intend to get into that at this point. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, Mr. Minister, let me deal with a peripheral issue, the referendum itself. 
New question, Mr. Speaker. Referendums of course, Mr. Minister, are not new in dealing with liquor 
questions which are purely of a local nature. But my suggestion to the minister is that this mater is not 
purely of a local nature. Roughrider games are attended by people throughout the province, and I ask 
you, Mr. Minister, how you justify determining a decision of this nature, which affects people 
throughout the entire province, when only the people within the city are able to vote on the referendum. 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — Well, it’s quite plan as the nose on that camel’s face that he referred to 
that the matter of Taylor Field, Mr. Speaker, is under the jurisdiction of the city of Regina. Now, we 
could make legislation that says the whole province, the million people or however many people are 
eligible to vote in this province, should vote on the matter of light beer at Taylor Field. I think the most 
efficient way of doing it is leaving it up to the people of Regina, who form the greatest percentage of 
persons who attend Canadian professional football league games at Taylor Field. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question, Mr. Minister, I want to suggest to you that there’s a far more 
efficient way of conducting a province-wide referendum, and that is to allow the decision to be made on 
the basis of a free vote in this Assembly, as has traditionally been the case, and allow people to speak to 
their elected representatives so they may vote as they please. My question, Mr. Minister, to you is: will 
you admit that the reason why you are passing the buck is because your caucus is badly split and this 
way your caucus doesn’t have to say yea or nay to liquor at Taylor Field? 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — No, I don’t admit to the member from Regina’s statement at all. This is a 
free government. Our caucus members can vote their concerns any way they wish. We have agreed in 
this government that we will allow the city of Regina, through a referendum, to enunciate their wishes. 
There is nothing more democratic than that. And if the member wants to oppose the sale of light beer at 
Taylor Field, in committee of the whole or in this forum, he is free to do so and I’m sure his constituents 
will know where he stands on the matter. 

 
Job Creation Resulting from European Trade Mission 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2675 

MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I want to direct a question to the Minister of Economic Development 
and Trade, better know as the minister of ‘I’ll take notice.’ It has to do with your trade mission jaunt last 
year, which cost the general taxpayer some $30,000. What I would like to ask the minister: can the 
minister tell this Assembly how many jobs have been created in Saskatchewan as a direct result of your 
European trip? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I should take notice. It’s becoming ridiculous and is 
becoming silly — this question period in this Assembly — the questions that are coming out of the 
opposition which are repetitive, which have been asked numerous times in this House, which are really 
questions that should have been asked during the estimates of industry and commerce and in fact were 
asked, were answered, were explained. You know, even if the question doesn’t come out with the true 
facts — as I recall the figure of cost wasn’t that amount of money — to repeat that in question period 
today, the same questions that have been asked, the answers that have been given in the past, is a waste 
of time of this legislature, and, Mr. Speaker, if they want to get back into the questions in estimates, I’d 
be happy to handle them at that time. This is getting to be absolute nonsense the way they’re wasting the 
House’s time with questions that have been asked — and taxpayers’ money — over and over and over 
again. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Well, Mr. Speaker, or rather the minister, just because he can’t answer it, I’ll 
continue to answer the question, because he made a press release indicating what he is spending the 
taxpayers’ money. But I’m going to ask you, on December 16th last year you made a statement that at 
least four European countries had agreed to set up shop here in Saskatchewan, and would be in operation 
in ’83 as a result of your European trip. I’m going to ask you: how many of those four European 
manufacturing companies you said would be opened up. There was a technology company in Germany, 
and you also said that there was a Netherlands high technology. How many of them have set up? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, the year 1983, to the best of my knowledge, isn’t over yet. 
This is only the end of May. I will indicate to the hon. member that he referred to the high-technology 
company — we’ve had some business men from Regina visited recently within the last two months, the 
same company in Germany on a joint-venture basis, and discussions are proceeding; negotiations are 
proceeding. I make no guarantees of what’s going to happen. I indicated one company that did establish 
in the city of Regina as a result of that trip already. Mr. Speaker, it become so obvious to this Assembly 
that that opposition have no idea of what questions to ask in this Assembly any more. They’re lost; 
they’re digging back into the past to see if there’s something they can come up with. 
 

Lake Diefenbaker Pipeline 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I have a question to the Minister of the Urban Affairs, Mr. Minister. It has to 
do wit the foul-water season in Regina and Moose Jaw, and with your government’s election campaign 
promise to solve that some time within the lifetime of some living person. My question to the minister 
is: have you yet received confirmation of a meeting date with the federal government to discuss the 
federal financing support for the Lake Diefenbaker water pipeline? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Yes. 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2676 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — What date? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, the indication from the federal minister is that we will 
hold the meeting prior to the 15th of June. The exact date has not been set, and will probably be set 
some time next week. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Does the minister have a specific proposal to take the federal government, or 
is that something you just hope you’ll be able to get together between now and the 15th? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — We do have a proposal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Will you table in this legislature the terms of 
that proposal? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, the answer to that is obviously no; we will not negotiate 
in public or in the press. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question. Given the minister’s track record, we can understand why you 
wouldn’t want to file your proposal. You did that before. A supplementary question to the minister. Will 
your trip to Ottawa attempt to get financial commitment from the federal government under the terms of 
this special recovery capital projects fund, and billed in the April budget, or are there other programs as 
well which your trip will attempt to explore? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — We are obviously interested in that program that was announced in the 
federal budget. There are other programs as well. That is all part of what we’re putting together. I think 
that . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — What are the other programs, Mr. Minister? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, there are programs through Urban Affairs that have been 
in place in the past. There are some precedents we are considering. I think all those things are part of the 
negotiations. We do not propose to do it publicly, we propose to take the package to Ottawa and try to 
get an answer. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Is Mr. Minister confident that your presentation to the federal government 
will in fact result in a specific commitment by Ottawa to participate in the project? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, I suppose the answer to that would be no, I’m not 
confident. We’re certainly going down to present the best case we can. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, Mr. Minister, would you consider anything less than a specific 
commitment a failure? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — I would expect that, as is the case with most negotiations with the 
federal government, especially in attempts to obtain financial aid, if you will, that it will take some time 
and that this first meeting will set some groundwork, and we will proceed from there under the normal 
course. 

 
SPC Purchase of Drag-line 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2677 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a question to the minister in charge of the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. This question concerns the arrangements between the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation and Manalta Coal Ltd. and its several subsidiaries with respect to the sale and 
purchase of a drag-line, and more particularly it refers to a letter dated May 16, 1983, which I wrote to 
the minister asking for copies of the coal agreement and the chattel mortgage and the guarantees which 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation have issued as a result of this transaction — this puzzling transaction. 
I want to ask the minister whether or not he will be in a position to provide me with that information 
before the crown corporations committee considers the activities of the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation in a couple of days. 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I’m aware of the Leader of the Opposition’s letter, and I’ve 
sent it over to the management at Saskatchewan Power to check it out for me and I’ll be back to you 
very shortly. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. A supplementary. In view of the fact that it’s 
two weeks since I sent the letter and the power corporation will come before the crown corporations 
committee in a very few days, would the minister take steps to see that the material is provided as soon 
as reasonably possible? 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I just saw the letter last week and that’s when I sent it over. 

 
Uniforms for Western Canada Summer Games 

 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday I took notice of a rather unique question, 
unique in the sense it was one I hadn’t heard in the House before. I have the information that involved 
the Western Canada Summer Games bid. It came from the member from Shaunavon; I will provide the 
information, if it’s all right, despite his absence. 
 
In terms of the tenders for the summer games uniform, as I indicated then, there were basically three 
portions to the tender. The sweat-suits, which make up part of the walking uniform — there were 33 
bids in total; the low bid was from Debronis Distributing in Winnipeg at $40 a sweat-suit. The shirts of 
the uniform — there were 21 bids; that one went to Donald C. Flegg of Regina, at $9.75 a shirt. The hats 
— a total of 20 bidders on this one; that want to the Winnipeg firm of Debronis Distributing at $1.35 a 
hat. I believe that was the information he asked for. I’m glad to provide it. 
\ 

Changes to Urban Municipality Act 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — A question to the Minister of Urban Affairs. Mr. Minister, the question arises 
out of a series of articles in the Leader-Post, outlining what the members from Regina and the member 
from Regina Elphinstone have long known, and that is that some of the housing in our ridings is 
substandard. Those articles were accompanied, Mr. Minister, by a comment from Alderman Joe 
McKeown, who stated that some teeth needs to be pulled into The Urban Municipality Act to give urban 
municipalities the power to deal with this slum housing, and to prohibit that kind of housing from being 
rented. 
 
My question to the minister is: since you people are patently scrambling for legislation, 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2678 

trying to keep this session going until you can bring in your major trade union act, will the minister 
consider an amendment to The Urban Municipality Act which will allow the city of Regina to deal with 
this very serious problem? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, having sat through the last three question periods, I have 
real trouble how you can indicate that we’re scrambling for anything. 
 
In reference to your question, The Urban Municipality Act is being rewritten. It is being rewritten in 
very close consultation wit the municipalities of this province, and any other groups involved, and it is 
very possible that an amendment of that type may be part of it. It is not completed yet — the rewrite is 
not completed — it will be introduced in the fall, and at that time you will find out what’s involved. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, supplementary to the minister. Why will the minister not consider an 
agreement now, to deal with a problem which is readily apparent? The difficulty, Mr. Minister, is 
dealing with . . . in writing for fall, is that there’s going to be a lot of people suffering in substandard 
housing while you get this perfect whole of an legislative act together. My question, Mr. Minister, is: 
why not deal with this simple amendment now, since you have patently had lots of time? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of rather pressing items in The Urban 
Municipality Act. We have decided, rather then deal with them in an ad hoc nature, to deal with the 
rewrite of the entire act; deal with all the questions involved at one time; do it through a process of 
consultation that will allow all the municipalities to have input. And despite the fact that it may in fact 
be a matter of two or three months that it gets here later, we propose to proceed in that manner. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, have you taken 
the opportunity to ask poor people’s organizations about this problem? Will you undertake to consult 
with them as well, as well as the municipalities? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, as I’m sure the minister realizes, the urban act is to 
provide the authority for the urban municipalities to deal with the problem that are in the boundaries. We 
will deal with the urban municipalities to deal with the problem that are in their boundaries. We will 
deal with the urban municipalities. I would expect that in specific cases, if your constituency has one, 
that your people would make their protestations, if that’s the right word, to their aldermen, who I believe 
would take them on to the next course, to the next stage. 
 
I should add, Mr. Speaker, that The Urban Municipality Act, when we cam to power, had been under 
review for upwards to three years. The urban municipalities were very distressed at the lack of any 
movement as far as rewriting that bill is concerned, and they seem quite surprised that we’re able to 
have it ready for introduction in this session. 

 
Unemployment in Saskatchewan 

 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, last week I took notice of a question from the Leader of the 
Opposition concerning the number of construction workers that were unemployed in the province. On 
checking our research and trying to find that figure out, I was able to do so. But I did find out from 
StatsCanada that the construction industry in Saskatchewan a year ago, from January to April 1982, 
averaged 20,250 people employed. From January to April 183, we have 22,500 construction people 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2679 

employed — an increase of 2,250 people. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 

Increase in SGI Premiums 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Minister of Economic 
Development and Trade and the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office, 
and this has to do with a letter which I’m advised the minister has received from the village of Shell 
Lake. It’s a small matter, but one indicative of the policies of the corporation. My question is this, Mr. 
Minister: did you receive a letter from the village of Shell Lake offering a protest of the fact that for the 
same fidelity bond that that village bought a year ago and paid $20, they have now had to pay, from your 
corporation, $50, an increase of more than 100 per cent over the premium previously payable? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — No, Mr. Speaker, I don’t recall receiving the letter. It may be in my office, 
and it may be at SGI, and I’ll probably get a copy of it very shortly. However, I’m not surprised at the 
increase in a bonding that the Leader of the Opposition is referring to. I think he said a fidelity bond. 
The history of SGI, in bonding, has been a disaster for years. It was a losing proposition. It cost the 
government and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan a lot of money because of the losses that we incurred by 
that department, and we’ve moved to take steps to improve that situation. From $20 to $50, although it 
may sound like a lot of money in percentage, is not a great deal of money. When you consider the risk 
taken by SGI, a fidelity bond of $50 is not that serious, Mr. Speaker. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 
Bill No. 94 — An Act to amend The Land Bank Repeal and Temporary Provisions Act 

 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend The Land Bank Repeal 
and Temporary Provisions Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 

 
Bill No. 95 — An Act to amend The Farm Purchase Program Act 

 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend the farm purchase 
program. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 96 — An Act to amend the provision of Legal Services to Certain Persons in 
Saskatchewan 

 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill respecting the provisions of legal 
services to certain persons in Saskatchewan. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2680 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, prior to orders for the day, I raise a point of order to the Chair, 
perhaps for clarification more than anything. The point of order is this, Mr. Speaker, and I know you’ve 
addressed it on many occasions, and I would simply ask for your guidance to it. I refer to Beauchesne’s 
Parliamentary Procedure, page 131, paragraph 358, dealing with the question of question period, Mr. 
Speaker. To read from that, and as I say, I recall many times you indicating with regards to that 
question, but the direction I would like is this: the questions should be asked only with respect to matters 
that are of sufficiently urgent importance to require immediate answer. 
 
The question I have is things like the village of Shell Lake — those types of questions to a minister — 
‘Did you receive a letter from the village of Shell Lake about my $30 increase with regards to a fidelity 
bond?’ Now, the question I have: does that really fall into the question of sufficient urgency and 
importance to require an immediate answer? And I suppose that’s the concern I have with regards to the 
nature of the questioning in question period and do they properly fir within a proper question period. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I’ll take time to review the record on this topic. It’s a little bit subjective for me to 
decide whether or not to the member it’s urgent, and for that reason I’d like to go back and take a look at 
some of the questions of today, and I’ll bring in a ruling tomorrow. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Bill No. 77 to Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, by leave of the Assembly, moved by 
myself, seconded by the member from Kindersley: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 77, An Act to amend The Surrogate Court Act, be 
discharged and the bill referred to the standing committee on non-controversial bills. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 68 — An Act to amend The Summary Offences Procedure Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Could you introduce your official please, Mr. Minister? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Ron Hewitt, of the Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2681 

Clause 6 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Some of the provisions here under the summary procedures is making in it, Mr. 
Minister, in compliance with the Young Offenders Act, as you indicated in addressing it on the second 
reading. And when the Minister of Finance, I guess, put the bill through on second reading, sections 9.1 
and 10.1, and all of these tend to be in agreement with the young offenders, with some modifications. 
And 10.1 is the proviso — whereas in young offenders it’s ‘shall’ and 10.1 is the provision insofar as 
service on the parent or guardian. 
 
All I’m asking you here is . . . the Young Offenders Act has a specific provision for protecting the young 
offender in respect to the making of a statement which would incriminate himself. What I’m asking is: 
while you are putting into effect some of the provisions similar to the young offenders, I don’t see you 
putting in a similar provision under the Young Offenders Act which provides a basic protection — as I 
understand it — in respect to young offenders making a statement, an incriminating statement. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the hon. member, many of the changes will affect 
. . . The Young Offenders Act will affect other pieces of legislation. For example, the Canada and 
Saskatchewan Evidence Acts, which would deal with the matter of incriminating statements or the 
ability not to testify against oneself. Those acts are not changed. 
 
I call to the hon. member’s attention as well the charter which deals with that. Whether or not there will 
be the need for the non obstante provisions (notwithstanding provisions) in some acts because of the 
charter, we have made no decision yet with regard to provincial statutes. Whether in fact The 
Saskatchewan Evidence Act should have a different rule for young offenders as opposed to adults, is a 
decision that has not yet been made. 
 
Clause 6 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 7 and 8 agreed to. 
 
Clause 9 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I just want to ask one question. Here it was indicated that ordinarily under the Young 
Offenders Act, again, the modus where a juvenile offender is to be charged with an offence, the peace 
officer shall make reasonable efforts. Under the Young Offenders Act it indicates that it’s mandatory, 
that it shall be served on the parents or those standing in the place of the parents. And what I’m asking 
is: why have you deviated from that mandatory provision and left it under the discretion of the court? 
Why not make it mandatory? Is it because you view the seriousness of the offences under the provincial 
statutes less severe than what would be dealt with under the federal statute? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — It may be very difficult in some cases to notify the parent. We wish the parents 
to be notified and we’ve made it quite clear, but it strikes us as wrong to have a charge thrown out, 
perhaps a serious one, by reason of the failure of the peace officers to notify the parents of the young 
offenders. And in fact if there may be circumstances where the parent avoids notification — it may have 
nothing to do with the child — and if we take the federal position, the charge would be thrown out and a 
very serious crime may not be dealt with as a result. So we felt it was far too stringent, 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2682 

and rather than make it absolute, we require in our legislation that reasonable efforts be made, so that if 
there is a parent that’s trying to avoid taking responsibility for their child or avoiding being served so 
that the child can get away with having committed a serious offence, then reasonable efforts are all that 
is required. We think that it’s, frankly, a more reasonable approach than the stringent approach of the 
federal Young Offenders Act. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Well, I’ll accept what you have said. I find it hard to believe that, you know, the 
offences under provincial law or municipal by-law that you could support on the basis of the severity of 
the crime would be more severe than what would be under the federal statute. And the federal statute has 
gone further and made it mandatory. And I note that you have made a provision there under 10.1 that it’s 
in the discretion of the court to take a look and determine whether or not sufficient effort has been made. 
 
I think that these provisions are good as a protection. The only thing that I worry about is that here we 
have probably very young and inexperienced individuals, and I would have thought that the provision 
would have been that service shall be made, or that the officer that hadn’t been able to make service on 
the parents shall make every reasonable effort, and the officer, to continue, shall come forward and 
indicate to the court . . . In other words, put it onto the prosecuting end of it to justify that every effort 
had been made. It just seems to me that that would turn it around a little bit and certainly protect the 
young offender. 
 
I worry a little bit in the case of the young person who may not, in fact, be represented by legal counsel. 
If you’re represented by legal counsel, of course, the rights are far more readily available to the 
individual. I just wanted to raise that. I think it’s a departure from the Young Offenders Act. I think that 
if could take it that step, and if we found that it wasn’t workable, then it could always be modified to the 
extent that you have here. But I’ll accept your comments in respect to it. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Chairman, we believe that our proposals are far more workable than the 
stringent requirements set out in the Young Offenders Act. I draw to your attention the provisions in 
section 10, which allows the court to adjourn proceedings if the court is not satisfied with the efforts to 
notify the parents, and can require further efforts after the adjournment. That’s a far more reasonable 
approach in our view than to throw out the charge and let someone go free without facing the 
consequence of their act because the parent has not been notified. 
 
I think that the hon. member has to be aware that there will be situations where either the young 
offender, the one under 18, is no longer living at home; the parent may have nothing to do with the 
child; the parent may refuse and avoid service just to let the child (young offender) get off scot-free. 
We’re taking the approach that if there are reasonable efforts to notify the parents, and if the courts are 
satisfied — because you have to read both of those together — if the courts are satisfied that there has 
been reasonable efforts, then the matter can be proceeded with. And if there is the discretion in the 
courts, there’s a more than an adequate protection to the young offender, there’s a more than adequate 
protection to the young offender, there’s a more than adequate protection to the parents so that they are 
notified as to what the alleged offender has done, and thirdly, there is the protection to society by 
covering those situations where perhaps a parent may be avoiding service of the notice. 
 
Clause 10 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 11 and 12 agreed to. 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2683 

The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 73 — An Act to amend the Corrections Act 
 
Clauses 1 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 

 
THIRD READINGS 

 
Bill No. 68 — An Act to amend The Summary Offences Procedure Act 

 
HON. MR. LANE: — I move, with leave, that the bill now be read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 
Bill No. 73 — An Act to amend the Corrections Act 

 
HON. MR. LANE: — I move that the bill now be reads a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Andrew that Bill 
No. 84 — An Act respecting the Provision of Financial Assistance for Capital Works Projects be 
now read a second time. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to address myself, as chairman of 
the public accounts committee, to one somewhat narrow aspect of this, Mr. Minister, and that is the 
question of whether or not the projects fund — and I’m not totally sure, quite frankly I’m not totally sure 
I completely understand what’s being done here — but the question of interest to me is whether or not 
the minister might consider requiring than an annual report be provided for this particular piece of 
legislation. It strikes me that it might be useful to members to have that. The kind of projects which will 
be funded under here are of broad interest to members, and I think will be of interest to members of the 
public accounts committee. This kind of activity is becoming increasingly common in government. 
Increasingly we find that we are putting a stamp on money and sending it on. We get money in on taxes, 
put a stamp on it, and send it on. 
 
Sorry, Mr. Speaker, I forgot that I should not be drinking coffee when you’re in your chair. Sorry. That 
was absent-mindedly done. 
 
This kind of expenditure is becoming increasingly common. Someone once estimated that 
approximately 50 per cent of the money which the government takes in is given out in a grant to 
someone else, and it raises some questions as to whether or not the taxpayers’ money is being properly 
spent. He who raises the money and he who levels 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2684 

the taxation does not spend it. I have some concern, Mr. Minister, with respect to the efficiency with 
which this money is used and the effectiveness with which we sometimes reach our goals. I wonder, Mr. 
Minister, if it might not be an appropriate step to provide that an annual report for this kind of a fund be 
filed. There is, as I understand it, no requirement that something of this nature file an annual report, but 
it would be quite useful, quite useful to members of public accounts and I think of interest to members 
generally. 
 
The sort of projects which are envisioned are, I think . . . As I understand it, the sort of projects which 
we envision are projects which are not directly under the control of the government itself. This in fact is 
a fund which will, by and large, be used to fund other projects and to fund other people in capital 
projects. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if it might not be appropriate to provide that an annual report setting or 
a good deal of information about how the fund is used be provided, and be provided to the Assembly so 
that we may monitor the efficiency and effectiveness and economy with which the taxpayers’ dollar is 
being spent in this area. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to address a few comments to the Assembly on Bill 
No. 84, and I would like to address a few of the comments made by the Minister of Finance when he 
introduced the bill. He talked as if the bill were a result of what he refers to as good stewardship of 
public affairs and of good management, and I think the facts are far from that. The results of their 
economic policies can hardly be called good management. There is in fact less private investment, there 
are fewer jobs, and there are more on welfare. And I think all of that is well known. We have reviewed 
those matters in this House on a number of occasions and it will not serve to enlighten the House very 
much if I repeat all of those facts which are well known. I want, however, to address particularly the 
aspects of that matter which affect the bill which is before us and the projects which the minister 
referred to. 
 
Let’s talk about the good management which produced this so-called $30 million. Where did eight of it 
come from? Eight of it came from money he didn’t spend creating jobs. he put 10 million in his budget 
for the JOBS program; he spent 2 million, the results of which are that there are far more people 
unemployed than there otherwise would be; he has thus saved 8 million, and he tells us he’s going to put 
these in projects next year, this year, because he didn’t get around to it last year, and he represents that 
as good management. He says that it’s all the fault of the federal government — it’s certainly not his 
fault — that the money wasn’t spent and that jobs weren’t created, and that’s why it wasn’t done, and it 
is certainly good management that what he didn’t do last year he proposes to do this year. Well, that’s 
one definition of good management. But I wouldn’t brag too much about the fact that you promised 
something last year, you didn’t deliver it, you are now saying you’re gong to do it again, and taking 
credit for good management. 
 
Where else did money come from? It came from vacancies — and he is proud to say that. He’s saying it 
came from vacancies in non-essential projects — vacancies in things like the children’s dentistry 
program, which is non-essential I take it, or the occupational health and safety program, where he has 
not staffed up to the full. 
 
He has of course saved some money elsewhere in the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan program, by saying 
that people who join the plan, who are forced to go on welfare, will not be paid for certain of their 
expenses during the first three months. The minister apparently believes that people rush onto welfare 
and accordingly do not exhaust their own resources before they do go on welfare. That is not my 
experience. My experience 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2685 

is that many of my constituents and may constituents, I suspect, of other members are very, very 
reluctant to make the decision to go down and apply for Saskatchewan assistance. They regard it as 
somehow an evidence of the failure of the economic system under which they live, but they are none the 
less convinced that somehow they should be able to get along without applying for Saskatchewan 
assistance, and therefore they wait until the last possible minute. And they usually spend a great deal of 
their resources. And so usually there isn’t a lot to come and go on when they apply for Saskatchewan 
assistance. None the less, the minister has decided that he is going to defer some payments for as much 
as three months. He is going to declare these to be savings and call all that good management. 
 
He is suggesting that these savings that he has made are going to result in capital projects. He doesn’t 
outline for us what kind of capital projects, but no doubt he feels they will be valuable capital projects. 
Well, they may well be, but I don’t think they’ll be any more valuable capital projects than the capital 
projects which the minister himself cancelled last year. And I invite the minister to look at the 
information he gave me on March 10 or 1983, in a written response, indicating how much he had saved 
in capital projects over and above amounts previously budgeted. 
 
He saved $3.6 million on the technical institute at Moose Jaw and Prince Albert, which, being 
interpreted, means that the money was budgeted. He didn’t get around to spending it when it should 
have been spent because we have pressures on our technical institutes. He didn’t get around to spending 
it, and he declares that that is prudent management, and now he is going to use that money for other 
capital projects. I only wish he had done something more to build the technical institutes in 1982, when 
at Prince Albert not a spoonful of dirt has been moved, and indeed since the day of the election of the 
government opposite not a spoonful of dirt has been moved. Moving on, Mr. Speaker, to other projects 
where money has been saved. Projects in the North have been cutback — capital projects — by $12.3 
million, on the minister’s own figures. Now, no doubt he can say these projects were not necessary, and 
no doubt some of them could have been deferred, but my bet is that many of the projects which will be 
proceeded with on the basis of his $30 million fund will be no more urgent and no more publicly 
valuable than the projects which he deferred in the North to the extent of $12.3 million. 
 
We then have the court-houses in Regina and Moose Jaw . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I know 
that those projects can be deferred, but I say, Mr. Speaker, that the test will be whether or not the 
projects, and all of the projects which are going to be put forward by the minister in his $30 million fund 
are more important than the court-house at Saskatoon, or the court-house in Regina, which he has 
deferred — and all of these, Mr. Minister, at the cost not only of valuable assets which we certainly will 
need in the future, but at the cost of jobs at the present day. 
 
Capital assistance to urban municipalities was cut back about $2 million — $1.9 million — and I am 
sure that the minister feels that the capital projects of the urban municipalities were frivolous and could 
have been delayed, and he delayed them. But the test will be whether or not the projects which he is now 
going to come forward with were any more valuable than the projects which he cut last year in order to 
get the money. And I think that those are very, very good questions which should be answered when we 
are asking ourselves whether or not this prudent government has acted wisely in cutting back all these 
projects in 1982 and then saying that they are going to go 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2686 

ahead with some projects, unnamed, in 1983. 
 
Now, there’s Health capital projects is totalling $18.3 million were cut back, and we all know them. I 
know the minister feels that hospitals at La Ronge and Maidstone are frivolous and are not needed. And 
he didn’t go ahead with them; indeed he cut them back so that he would have money to declare that he 
had a fund to create capital projects. Well, the test of course is going to be whether the projects 
proceeded with are in fact more urgent than the hospital at La Ronge and the hospital at Maidstone and 
the others which he has cut back. 
 
And there are highway projects; they’re all over the province. And he’s cut those back; he cut back the 
highway capital budget back by close to $12 million — all for the sake of getting a fund of money which 
he says he can spend. Well, the question then of course is whether or not the projects he’s going to come 
forward with are more valuable than all the highway capital projects which were cut back. 
 
And when I use that $11.7 million I’m not referring to the northern projects, because I lumped them in 
another category. In fact, Mr. Speaker, he cut back last year on capital projects totalling $74 million. He 
announced this as prudent management. He has recaptured $30 million of this and says, “What a good 
boy am I. I’m now gong to spend $30 million on capital. True, I cut back $74 million last year, but that’s 
because we had put everything on hold. And we call this prudent management.’ 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the consequences of this are all over the province to be seen — projects not 
proceeded with, projects which are valuable projects put forward by the minister will be valuable 
projects, and we are gong to look forward to seeing his project array, to seeing whether they are in fact 
more urgent and more valuable than things like the Maidstone hospital. But whatever they are, Mr. 
Speaker, I think the minister can take very scant credit for cutting back $74 million in capital projects, 
recapturing in this way $30 million, spending $34 million in other ways, and declaring that this is 
prudent government and he now has $30 million for capital projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to turn to another aspect of this, he referred tangentially in his remarks to the community 
capital fund of 1974 and said that in some way this was similar to the community capital fund of 1974, 
and of course it had some similarities in the sense that there is going to be a statutory appropriation, but 
the similarities end there. The community capital fund was money put in hand so that the municipalities 
could proceed with projects which they considered most urgent in the municipalities, whether it be city, 
village, or as the case may be. I see no evidence that this bill will allow the municipalities to choose the 
projects which, in their judgement, are most urgent. 
 
Furthermore, the money set aside for the community capital fund was set aside out of surplus, out of 
money which was not borrowed. Whatever the minister says, his $30 million is coming from borrowed 
money. If he hadn’t set up the fund he would have $30 million to reduce his huge deficit. He chose not 
to reduce his huge deficit. He chose to borrow the full $225 million or $230 million — whatever it may 
turn out to be — and then set aside 30 million for capital projects. 
 
That may not be a bad idea, but it has nothing to do with the way the community capital fund came into 
being. The community capital fund came into being because we got a 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2687 

proper return from our resources, got a surplus because of that proper return and set it aside so that 
municipalities could plan five years of municipal projects — and they did so. And it was the first time, I 
believe in the history of Saskatchewan, that a specific sum of money — approximately $46 million 
which was a good deal more money than now because of the ravages of inflation — was set aside so the 
municipalities would know in advance over a period of years that money was available to them, and they 
could proceed with street improvements, or rinks, or swimming pools, or sewer and water systems, or 
other projects which in their opinion were top priority. 
 
I know from this bill very little about how the money will be spent, whether municipalities will be given 
any opportunity to have a voice, whether or not in fact the projects will in any sense be like the ones 
funded out of the community capital fund. In my judgement the community capital fund was good 
management because it provided municipalities wit money as much as five years in advance so that they 
would know, or advice as much as five years in advance so that they would know that they could 
undertake a project of, let’s say, street paving or putting in curbs and gutter slabs over a period of three 
or four years, and know that the money was there. And that, I think, is wise. It allows municipalities to 
make intelligent decisions, decisions which save the ratepayers money, and ultimately decisions which 
would save all the taxpayers of Saskatchewan money. 
 
Just a word or two about this job creation package and how it appeared in the speech of the Minister of 
Finance. A favourite phrase of his is ‘smoke and mirrors.’ And certainly smoke and mirrors would be a 
good description of the job creation package which he included in his 1983-84 budget. He included, for 
example, a $32 million cultural recreational facilities program — a good idea — represents almost, well, 
about three-quarters of the $43 million program which he cut out of the March 1982 budget. In the 
budget, he cuts it out, lets it lie fallow for a year, trims it back, puts it in the budget again and says, 
‘Look what we’re doing. It’s a good program. It would have been a better program at $43 million, but at 
$32 million it’s a useful program.’ 
 
He then talks about a $20 million tax reduction for small business. A couple of points on that. The one 
we make and have made on a number of occasions refers to the question of whether or not it’s a tax 
reduction, but I don’t want to deal with that today. I want to say that it is money which is not going to be 
spent in this year’s budget — not a dime of it. And what in effect he is saying is that yes, he’s got a 
program; yes, it may create some jobs and we’re going to pay for it next year. And how we’re going to 
pay for it we will find out next year. 
 
He announces $8 million for his JOBS program and I say ‘bully!’ he announced $10 million last year; he 
spent 2; he’s got 8 left and he re-announces it and says, ‘Yes, indeed, we’re going ahead with the JOBS 
program.’ And I say, ‘Well, fine.’ But I wouldn’t take so much credit for the fact that I budgeted ?$10 
million, did not get on with the program, have some left to tidy up, and then announce it again as a great 
new program. 
 
The $30 million special projects fund, which really comes out of these ‘82-83 money, arises not because 
of prudent management but because of deliberate cuts by the government opposite, largely in capital 
programs — capital programs which should have been started in 1982, which should be rolling now. 
And the Minister of Highways knows that many of those and other ministers know many of those. We 
should be moving on high schools in Regina and Saskatoon, and we should have been moving sooner 
than the government opposite proposes to move. 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2688 

The other item announced by the minister was a new crown water utility. I haven’t heard a lot about that 
new crown water utility since it was announced in the budget speech. It may well be a little goody that’s 
going to be brought in about early in August when the government gets its legislative program in hand. 
Or maybe that they’re going to bring it in later on in this year. I wish they would. I wish they would tell 
us what they have in mind, particularly since it’s supposed to create jobs this year. And already in this 
fiscal year — and April is gone and May is gone, and we now don’t know even the broad outline of this 
utility which is announced to create jobs. 
 
Well, I said, Mr. Speaker, that in many of the aspects of this bill it is aptly described by the phrase, the 
favourite of the minister, ‘smoke and mirrors.’ Mr. Speaker, I clearly have no objection to the 
government getting on with the need for creating capital projects in this province. We all have spoken of 
it many times. We have deplored the fact that the government opposite has cut back so many programs, 
capital programs, which are valuable and which I think we all know should be built now. The 
government opposite will suggest that we are at one and the same time saying we wish the deficit cut 
back and more spending. And that, of course, is true, but we also want more revenue from resources, 
and the members opposite are unwilling to acknowledge that that could be so. 
 
But aside from those general comments on the fiscal framework in which the program operates, and 
aside from the claims, and I say quite spurious claims, by the minister that the money arose from savings 
that were valuable savings rather than cut-backs in capital projects that should have been proceeded 
with, we welcome the fact that the government is finally going to spend some money on capital projects 
to create valuable assets for the future and jobs today. I will be supporting the bill, although I certainly 
don’t support the rhetoric with which the minister introduced it. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I wish to make, Mr. Speaker, a couple of comment with regards to the 
statement of the Leader of the Opposition: first of all, the accusation that somehow this money is 
because we cut $60 million in capital programs, and therefore we show $30 million into this program. 
That’s not where the money came from at all, Mr. Speaker. We, in our November budget, set out capital 
projects. We lived up to those commitments for capital projects. 
 
I would like to refer the House and the Leader of the Opposition to the way he developed capital 
projects, Mr. Speaker. I’ll refer to a letter dated July 16, 1974 — that was just prior to the ’75 election. 
There were similar letters, of course, prior to each election. And permit me to read the letter out, Mr. 
Speaker, from ‘Allan Blakeney, Premier,’ to the ‘Hon. John Brockelbank, Minister of Government 
Services’: 
 

As you know, I have asked MLAs to submit proposals for our next budget and their suggestions 
for the 1975 election program. In a number of cases it is clear that the proposals which they put 
forward for the 1975 budget will not be able to be included as early as that, but may be sensible 
to include in the 1975 election program. 
 
When I refer to a 1975 election program, I am thinking more of the individual commitments to 
be made by MLAs in their constituency rather than on a province-wide basis. 

 
That’s, Mr. Speaker, how the hon. members established their capital program that they say are so 
demanding and so important and so structured. The reason they were 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2689 

important, Mr. Speaker, and the way they looked at them, Mr. Speaker — if I can announce a nursing 
home in my riding and I can announce a new highway in my riding and I can announce a new public 
building in my riding, then I’m going to be elected. And that’s exactly what you did in the budget of 
1982. That’s exactly what you did. 
 
And not only that, they went beyond that during the election and they announced more. They announced 
more projects, Mr. Speaker. Well, I will tell you what the people of Saskatchewan think about that type 
of tactic of developing and building a budget. They thought exactly the way we suggested that they 
would and returned eight members to that side and the rest to this side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — but let me go on and read . . . This letter went out then, of course, to all 
MLAs and candidates. Here’s one back . . . This is a gem. Here’s one back — Spiritwood, January 26, 
1982, to Hon. Ed Tchorzewski, 312 Legislative Building, Regina. 
 

Dear Ed: I have been asked to update my shopping list and mail a copy to Elwood Cowley. You 
will find enclosed such lists. (Signed:) Yours truly, Lloyd E. Johnson, MLA 

 
Shopping lists. Is that how we prepare a budget, a capital budget? I’ve got to send in my shopping list. 
He sounds like it’s Christmas-time, Mr. Speaker, Christmas-time. And that’s true not only of Lloyd 
Johnson, that’s true or everyone. And I ask — I ask this Assembly and I ask the member opposite — 
what did that type of planning do for Lloyd Johnson, and what does that type of planning do for Ed 
Tchorzewski? You can go through the whole thing. Everyone is the same; all sent in the same way. 
 
So he talk s about capital projects — capital projects, Mr. Speaker, in a more cynical light, an cynical 
light that we might see in the politics of the Maritime provinces, not in what is good for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Then he makes references, Mr. Speaker, he makes references to: well, what are you going to do about 
the court-houses? Well, let’s go back and look at the budget that he put together and talk about the 
court-houses. 1980-81 — Regina Court-House, a couple of years ago, appropriated a million dollars; 
spent 297,000. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What did he do with the extra money? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — 1981-82 — appropriated $332,000; spent zero. Nothing. Now, tell me, Mr. 
Speaker, about who’s appropriating money and then not spending it on capital projects. Or go to the 
Saskatoon Court House — appropriated 1977-78, $53,000; spent nothing. 1978-79 budget — Saskatoon 
Court House, appropriated $321,000; spent nothing. 1979-80 — appropriated $327,000; spent nothing. 
1980-81 — appropriated $194,000. They finally spent some money — $14,000. 1981-82 — $234,000; 
spent $24,000. Mr. Speaker, the list goes on. I don’t need to be counselled and chastised by the member 
opposite about allocating and appropriating dollars to spend on capital projects, just to find out where 
that money is in fact being spent. 
 
We indicated, Mr. Speaker, that this money was collectively, by all departments, 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2690 

gathered together by prudent management, and that’s in fact how it was . . . (inaudible) . . . It was by 
vacant positions primarily, Mr. Speaker, vacant positions. And what does that mean? That means a 
government not hiring more and more civil servants. And we make no apology to anyone. We will hire 
as many civil servants as is needed to deliver the programs that this government delivers, but no more. 
And we are not going to hire people, Mr. Speaker, for the sake of hiring people and saying we have 
more on our pay-roll, because under that logic, sure, you can hire everyone on unemployment right now 
— eliminate unemployment — but that makes brilliant economic sense, brilliant economic sense, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In that regard he’s like his colleague in Ottawa, Mr. Broadbent, who suggest that you should go hog 
wild with government spending, and that’s the only way to correct unemployment. We have seen that 
the only western world that has developed that theory for the last couple of years, Mr. Speaker, is 
Francois Mitterrand of France, and no economy in the western world right now is in poorer shape than 
the economy of France under the socialists with the connection with the communists. That is what the 
worst economy in the western world — the worst inflation, the worst unemployment, the worst situation 
of any economy across the piece, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now he talks about the JOBS program. Well, what we did, Mr. Speaker, with regard to the JOBS 
program — they were against us; the NDP was against us — the federal government and we, 
collectively, together, tried to put in a program to make it work. We committed more money to that 
program than the federal government committed to that program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He talks about the P.A.-Duck Lake technical institute. Well, we’re heard that argument before, heard 
that argument many times before, and we heard it most during the P.A.-Duck Lake by-election. We 
recall the ads when they were on TV or the news releases that were coming out, and here is what it said: 
‘Don’t believe these guys; they’ll never come clean with you; they’ll never tell the truth. When you say 
that we’re gonna build a technical institute, don’t believe em; don’t believe em, because it’ll never 
happen. It’s a ploy to elect a member in P.A.-Duck Lake.’ That, along with the brilliantly conceived 
campaign that tried to tell people that really we were in the Depression and it was the 30s again . . . I 
don’t know who put that one together. 
 
But collectively, I suppose the only thing we can do, Mr. Speaker, is ask ourselves: what was the results 
of that? Now I suppose they could counter by saying, ‘Well, the people of Duck Lake don’t understand, 
they don’t understand.’ But that reality, Mr. Speaker, is this: the people of P.A.-Duck Lake sent a 
member to this House representing the Progressive Conservatives. The NDP took a further licking at the 
polls. 
 
Now, let’s go back to the question of their advice to the people of Prince Albert: ‘Don’t trust these 
guys.’ I can indicate that the member of government services, along with the Minster of Advanced 
Education and Manpower were in P.A. — what, a week ago, two weeks ago? — to announce an 
expanded P.A. technical institute, twice the size that was originally proposed — twice the size, Mr. 
Minister, Mr. Minister, than was originally proposed. I understand, Mr. Speaker, that the people of 
Prince Albert are extremely happy. And the reason for that program, Mr. Speaker, is because this 
government is making a commitment to technical education in this province, a commitment that was 
forgotten for 11 years when the members opposite were in government. Forgotten, Mr. Speaker, to the 
point where one out of every two people desiring to go to technical school was turned away, and 
couldn’t get in, and couldn’t get that education. We had the worst record, the poorest record, of any 
province in the entire country. We are 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2691 

resolved to correct that, Mr. Speaker, and we have committed a 60 per cent increase in the number of 
training spaces across this province over the next four years; and we don’t have to apologize to anyone 
for that program, and we are very proud of that program. 
 
The member opposite goes back to one of his pet peeves; small business program and the Minister of 
Tourism and Small Business. Well, the program is a failure. I heard the member for Regina Centre talk 
about it’s big failure. The minister stood up in the House the other day to announce so far to date 1,200 
jobs have been created — created, Mr. Speaker, 1,200 jobs. And the applications that are out now to be 
sent in are a further 4,000, and I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that that program is a good program, and it 
is going to hit its target of creating 4,000 jobs; and then we will watch the member from Regina Centre 
eat his words, eat his words, but that is becoming nothing new to him and to the members opposite these 
days. 
 
So where does the Leader of the Opposition ultimately fall to? Well, it’s starting to affect him, this idea 
that we can have a deficit over here, but we have to have more government spending over here. So it’s 
starting to affect him, and it should, because it’s the most inconsistent approach he’s taken. Most 
inconsistent approach he’s taken, Mr. Speaker. So what’s he say? Well, he says, ‘you guys would have 
been able to have a balanced budget if you hadn’t of given that money up to your friends in the 
multinational oil companies.’ Well sir, multinational oil companies. 
 
Maybe we should go back once again, Mr. Speaker, and remind ourselves of what kind of shape the oil 
industry was in n this province a year ago when we took office — what kind of shape it was in, Mr. 
Speaker. Over 50 per cent of all wells were shut in — 50 per cent. Swift Current was down to almost 
zero. The South-east was at about 30 per cent. The drilling program in the province was the lowest than 
it had been in — what? — 10 years. Nothing was happening, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . So where were the oil rigs? Good eye, good thinking. The oil rigs were not in the province of 
Saskatchewan — any place but the province of Saskatchewan. And then on top of that, Mr. Speaker, we 
had an energy agreement entered into by the members opposite and Mr. Trudeau. I remember them 
come flagging home with that, and the price of oil was going out of sight, and we’re going to be able to 
pave streets with gold. They entered into the agreement, Mr. Speaker. The problem is they didn’t read 
very well what the future held. That was the situation we fond ourselves in. 
 
If we were to listen to the members opposite, what would we have done? Raise the taxes to the oil 
industry. Now wouldn’t that have been brilliant. We would then have no production across the province. 
We would have nobody drilling and seeking for wells. We would have nobody buying land. And how 
much money would we then receive as a government from the oil industry? Nothing, Mr. Speaker, 
nothing. 
 
There comes a point in time where you can’t tax people to the edge, to the limit, Mr. Speaker, and they 
simply look for some place else to spend their money. The members opposite have never understood 
that. It’s never come through to them that perhaps you can make a little adjustment, a small adjustment, 
Mr. Speaker — ad that’s in fact what we did — make a small adjustment, spend a little money, and in so 
doing you make a whole lot more in return. And that’s what’s happened with the oil industry in the 
province of Saskatchewan. People are working again. Dollars are flowering again; oil is flowing again. 
It’s not a question of apologizing for that, Mr. Speaker. I believe that’s an example of how government 
and industry collectively addressing a question create more dollars for the government, more dollars for 
the industry, and more jobs 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2692 

throughout the province, and more demands for goods and services throughout the province. Surely, 
that’s what we have to do collectively to build a better and stronger economy for this province. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, one of the main savings that we were able to capture — and the member opposite 
doesn’t make reference to it — one of the main things that we were able to capture was fewer dollars 
that we had to spend in the Mortgage Interest Reduction program. We can say, fine, we were lucky on 
that. We had to use our best guess as to what interest rates were going to do. And I and I don’t think 
anybody else in the government can profess to know exactly what the rate of interest is going to be three 
and four months from now. I wish we could, but we can’t. 
 
But I also recall, Mr. Speaker, the same hollow words coming from the members opposite when we 
brought the program in and when we announced it during the election. ‘It’ll break the Government of 
Saskatchewan. I’ll bring it to its knees. It’s the reason you have a deficit. You shouldn’t do it. It’s too 
wealthy. It’s too much for the rich people.’ That was the criticism, Mr. Speaker. But what have we spent 
on the program? $22 million — $22 million, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the reason we have a deficit and 
that is going to break the treasury? But what it did to people, Mr. Speaker, is provided them a sense of 
confidence — confidence that their government was prepared to stand behind them in tough times, a 
sense of confidence that the government was prepared to say to them, ‘When your interest rates go to 20 
and 19 and 18 per cent, we’re prepared to give you a hand.’ Confidence in the sense that the young 
individual could say, ‘No, I’m not going to stay away from building a house; I will proceed with 
building a house because my government is prepared to look at my concerns.’ 
 
And what do we have as a result, Mr. Speaker? We have the most positive housing program of any 
province in this entire country, and we have the best record of any province in this country with regard 
to single housing starts. And we are very, very proud of our record to date on that, Mr. Speaker, and we 
will not apologize to anyone for that. 
 
I believe that the various departments, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — State your point of order. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think the minister is not introducing this bill, but winding 
up the debate. I am not aware that the bill deals with mortgage interest reduction, or my remarks dealt 
with mortgage interest reduction. I think the minister, by the rules, is confined to winding up the debate 
in commenting on matters raised in the debate and is not permitted by the rules to launch into new areas 
not covered by the bill or by the previous debate. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — In speaking to the point of order, I was trying to rebut the statements being 
made by the member opposite in his speech in closing the debate. My understanding is that when a 
minister closes a debate he has the opportunity to rebut the statements being made by the member 
opposite. All I simply did was try to go down the list and try to rebut. He talked about capital projects, 
although they have nothing to 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2693 

do with the bill. I tried to rebut those. He went on to the JOBS program, and the vacancies, and SAP 
(Saskatchewan Assistance Plan) — and I haven’t got to SAP yet; I was going to come to that in a few 
minutes — trying to rebate each of those. Then he went into the whole resource revenues and small 
business, so I simply wanted to take the opportunity to rebut those arguments being made by the 
member opposite. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The point of order raised by the hon. member is covered in rule 28, and I think that 
rule 28 speaks about no one speaking twice. And when you do speak the second time, as a minister, 
you’re only to have the right to close debate. 
 
However, I realize that the hon. member when he spoke in debate on second reading also covered quite a 
broad area that was far beyond the parameters of the bill, so, though his point of order is well taken with 
respect to the minister, I think that both members have been exceeding the jurisdiction that should have 
been covered under this particular bill. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I will not make reference to anything more in closing than 
simply to try to address the point raised about the social assistance payments. 
 
The member opposite indicated that the savings that the government had made to accumulate this $30 
million came from social assistance payments. Nothing could be farther from the truth, Mr. Speaker. In 
fact, in the year 1982-83 the payments are in fact over what we, in fact, budgeted by almost $50 million 
into Social Services. So I hardly think what we’re seeing in the Leader of the Opposition’s statement to 
us — he’s trying to build a case, Mr. Speaker, that he was unable to build during the budget debate and 
through his arguments through the whole committee of finance and the estimates, so now he’s trying to 
build it. My view is that it’s too late to do it at this point in time. And my view, as well, is that the day is 
getting probably very late for him in the whole field of public life anyway. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division, bill read a second time and referred to a committee 
of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

YEAS — 34 
 
Andrew Weiman Maxwell 
Lane  Tusa Embury 
Muirhead  Hodgins Dirks 
Pickering  Sauder Myers 
Sandberg Glauser Zazelenchuk 
McLeod Meagher Dutchak 
Garner Parker Folk 
Klein Smith (Moose Jaw) Blakeney 
Katzman Rybchuk Thompson 
Duncan Caswell Koskie 
Schoenhals Domotor Shillington 
Smith (Swift Current)   
 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2694 

NAYS — 0 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Andrew that Bill 
No. 83 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act be now read a second time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I wont’ say a great deal about this bill . . . (inaudible 
interjections) . . . If tempted by members opposite, I may. It is a bill of very considerable complexity 
arising primarily because of the changes in the federal Income Tax Act with respect to forward 
averaging, and I think it will be most appropriate, or more appropriate, if we consider most of these 
provisions in committee. 
 
I do want to raise one aspect and, in effect, to give the minister notice that I will be raising it in 
committee, and that has to do with the payment of the surcharge. And that is where the tax paid, the 
Saskatchewan tax paid, exceeds $4,000. As I understand the amendments, the effect of the amendments 
is to change the rate at which we levy income tax on the surcharge from a graduated rate to a flat rate. I 
may misconceive the provisions which, as I’ve indicated, Mr. Speaker, are complex, but I ask the 
minister to consider that matter so that when we consider it in committee we may be able to address or 
attention to it. 
 
I am speaking of surcharges, and there are some questions arising out of the treatment of the tax on 
capital gains as well, which I think could be best considered in committee. I will be supporting the bill, 
but will be raising the points that I have mentioned in committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Garner that Bill 
No. 83 — An Act respecting the Operation of Vehicles be now read a second time. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to make a few comments in respect to The Vehicles 
Act that was introduced by the minister last Thursday, I believe. I want to say that I listened to a part of 
his comments, and our only conclusions was that he was blowing so much hot air from his mouth that it 
was very difficult to be able to discern whether he was in fact speaking on the second reading. 
 
I do want to indicate that the minister did in fact spend a great deal of time trying to outline in some 
detail the whole consultative process that he followed. And indeed, I do not disagree with a method by a 
government using a consultative process in arriving at a form of new legislation, some provisional of 
which are new. But I think it’s only fair that the record be clear that the review of The Vehicles Act had 
in fact been essentially 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2695 

totally completed by the previous administration. And also I want to say, the consultative process was 
indeed carried out by the previous administration . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, I certainly can, Mr. 
Minister, because the draft of the whole bill was in fact prepared by one of our legal counsel and the 
contents of this bill are very, very essentially the same, Mr. Minister. 
 
I think that it’s important that while safe driving practises and behaviour . . . I think we have to 
recognize cannot totally be legislated. I think that sensitive legislation which is sensible enforced, 
together with other complementary measures, can indeed improve the highway safety environment. And 
one of the essential directions that the previous government did take was the introduction of safety in 
highway driving, and the whole concept of safety was emphasized. And that was developed under the 
very able chairmanship of a legislative committee of the late Mr. Art Thibault. 
 
I want to say that the minister refers to the Driving Without Impairment program. That program had 
been in fact developed under the previous administration. Specific traffic courts, in order that those who 
are offenders of certain traffic offences could in fact rather than paying a fine, take up some awareness 
of better driving — that was established by Mr. Thibault. 
 
I want to say that we had a safety program in SGI which was complementing the one with the highway 
traffic and the Department of Highways. Unfortunately that has been done away with by this 
government. The whole aspect of their budget has been decreased in respect to safety programs. 
 
But one of the very significant ways in which I think that one must indeed approach highway driving 
safety, and that is through the educational programs in the schools. I don’t think there is a more direct 
way of getting results than through our educational institutions. And certainly my experience is this is 
fairly evident in that, in respect to driver training, many of those who took that course learned many of 
the procedures of the alcohol and how it affects them, both in normal activities and particularly in 
respect to driving. Certainly or young people in our schools have learned the effects — the bad effects 
— of the use of drugs. 
 
When we came with the previous administration in the introduction in The Vehicles Act of the use of 
safety belts, one of the very surprising things, Mr. Speaker, was that those young people who had in fact 
gone through our high schools, our driving training programs, had no problems whatsoever adapting to 
the use of safety belts. I would hope, and I would have thought, that the minister here in alluding to the 
bill, the new Vehicles Act, would have in fact complemented the direction which he’s going in The 
Vehicles Act with the greater stress on how the education process could, in fact, help to alleviate some 
of the tragic accidents which he indeed has talked about. 
 
As I said, the minister spent a better part . . . I had a transcript o fit, and about three times he said he was 
going to get to the nuts and bolts of it, and about three pages later he still hadn’t. And one of the things 
that he talked about was the method of consultation, and the thing that I find rather distressing is that this 
minister stands up and indicates how this government goes through the process of consultation. On the 
other hand, we find so many instances where that consultation in fact, in equally important areas, has not 
in fact taken place. I can just think of a couple of instances developing the Indian and Native Affairs 
Secretariat — not much consultation admitted 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2696 

by the minister; Health cut-backs — no consultation . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. I believe that the bill that is before the House deals with The 
Vehicles Act, but it doesn’t deal with the Health and with Native Affairs, and I think that you’ll have to 
stay with the subject before the House. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I certainly will Mr. Speaker, providing the ruling is consistent as with the Minister of 
Finance . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Are you challenging my ruling? 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — No. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Then I would ask the member to stay on the subject. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — The minister stands up in this House and indicates how this government has such a 
process of consultation. And in respect to this bill . . . And I want to say that there has to be a consistent 
policy in respect to consultation, and it doesn’t exist throughout this government. If one takes a look also 
in respect to the safety on highways, I want to indicate that another important area is the maintaining and 
the development or proper highways, and obviously what this minister has done is to totally neglect the 
whole highway system. He talks about four-laning highways and it’s but a dream. It’s just a myth. It’s 
more Tory rhetoric. I want also to indicate in another area, a very important area which the minister 
failed to address, and that is in respect to school bus safety. The minister, I think, was quite right to 
mention the critically important issue of school bus safety. The minister, I think, was quite right to 
mention the critically important issue of school bus safety, and we note that this bill does, in some minor 
way, address the provisions regarding the use of school bus warning lights alert other motorists that 
children are entering or leaving their school bus. 
 
And as all members know, this issue has now been given a very . . . has been given especially a tragic 
emphasis because of the recent two fatalities and other serious injuries suffered in a school bus accident 
recently at Strasbourg. I certainly want to join with my colleague from Shaunavon and all members of 
this Assembly in expressing profound sympathy to the families of the whole community who have been 
saddened by this accident. I think this points out the need, of course, for additional safety measures for 
the health and the lives of our school children. 
 
Today in Saskatchewan there are some 100,000 school children in rural school divisions. They, and 
many urban children as well, ride daily on or school buses. In my own constituency there are well over 
two million passenger miles per year on school buses in that area. And certainly what we would do is to 
welcome the minister’s view on this issue, and are hopeful that the will attempt not to shirk his 
responsibility in respect to this issue, and that consideration indeed will be made in respect to seat-belts 
for students riding on school buses. 
 
And I want to indicate that we will be considering putting forward an amendment which will address 
this here particular area of concern to us and to many people across the province. I notice recently that 
the Saskatchewan School Trustees, who had been previously opposed to the introduction of seat-belts 
for school buses, the trustees may change stand on seat-belts, I understand that the minister was in 
communication with them, but I want o indicate that we will be seeking an amendment in respect to that 
provision. 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2697 

I think the other area in the role that I want to address, and that is in respect to the provisions of drinking 
and driving — one area in which the minister had proposed a number of legislative changes. The 
difficulty that I saw, Mr. Speaker, is that ordinary in second reading the purpose is to go through the bill 
and to outline the particular intent of a given section that is new to the legislation. This has not been the 
case here. 
 
And one of the disturbing areas that I see in respect to the sections which deal with the drinking and 
driving and the new provisions that you have introduced, Mr. Minister, is in respect to the jurisdiction 
that is given to the provinces under the BNA Act and the jurisdiction that is given to the federal 
government. And as you are probably aware, that under section 91(7) the power to legislate respecting 
criminal law is exclusively in the Parliament of Canada and no provincial legislature has the 
constitutional capacity to legislate in that area. 
 
We find that under the constitution, and this will relate to the specific provisions, Mr. Speaker, the 
provincial legislature may legislate to provide penalties for enforcing any law made in relation to any 
matter coming within any of the classes of subjects enumerated under section 92 of the BNA Act, which 
assigns specific matters to the province for their exclusive legislative power. 
 
And we are all familiar with the legislation by province which provides enforcement, for example, of 
fishing, hunting, consumption of liquor, and operation of vehicles. 
 
Now the section 168, that you have set forward in your legislation . . . In that particular section it seems 
to me that as section 108, the question that has to be asked is: does the proposed section 168 go so far as 
to go beyond the legislative competence of the provincial legislature, and will in fact be deemed to be 
criminal law and therefore not a matter under which the province has jurisdiction? 
 
Section 168, as the minister indicated, defines two specific offences which a person may commit in 
relation to a motor vehicle and the consumption of alcohol and drugs. One is the driving or having 
control of a motor vehicle while his blood and alcohol content exceeds 80 mg per 100 ml due to his 
consumption of alcohol. And the other specific section is driving or having control of a motor vehicle 
while his ability to drive is impaired due to his consumption of alcohol or drugs or both. 
 
Our best review of this, Mr. Minister, is that the two offences are already defined in very, very similar 
language in the Criminal Code of Canada. It is our contention that the way in which it is worded, the 
similarity that it has with the wording of the criminal code . . . It would be deemed that what you are 
doing here is infringing upon the aspect which is in the jurisdiction of the federal government, namely 
the Criminal Code, which only parliament at Ottawa has the legislative power in this area. 
 
Section 168 would also make it an offence for a driver who is suspected by a peace officer of driving a 
motor vehicle within two hours of consuming alcohol or drugs, and who is incapable or providing a 
sample of his breath, to refuse to provide the officer with a sample of the driver’s blood. Now the 
criminal Code of Canada makes it an offence for a driver in similar circumstances to refuse to provide a 
sample of his breath. 
 
And again what I am saying is that you have essentially adopted exactly the same wording as the 
criminal Code. But you’ll take notice that the Criminal Code goes beyond . . . The provincial legislation 
now it take sit a step further. Now it proposes that where 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2698 

the suspected driver is incapable of providing a sample of is breath, he will be guilty of an offence if he 
refuses to provide a sample of his blood. And this is the body fluid extraction in order to provide 
impairment. 
 
Now I want to say that given the extent of the federal Criminal Code provisions, this whole area of law, 
it seems to us, is also criminal law. And if one looks at the Criminal Code, it says that you can in fact 
have a conviction with over 0.8, but it says that all that should be used is the breath sample and not the 
body fluid — it specifically says it shall not be. 
 
The problem that you are creating here, Mr. Minister, without a clarification o fit, is that on the one 
hand, the Criminal Code specifically indicates that fluid samples shall not be taken from the individual 
in the proving of the impairment. So it says it shall not be, and here you are saying it shall be. 
 
And if you go one step further, a further question of the constitutional law arises further on in section 
168. The provincial section 168 authorizes duly qualified persons — medical practitioner, registered 
nurse, lab technician — to take the sample of blood without the consent of the suspected driver. 
Subsection 13 of section 168 provides in the section, except for negligence in the taking. But if one takes 
a look a the jurisdiction under the Criminal Code, the Criminal Code makes it an offence for anyone, 
medical practitioner or not, to assault another person. Because the assault is an intentional use of force 
on another without the person’s consent, and the practitioner who takes the blood in these circumstances 
will in our view be committing an assault on the suspected driver and will be exposed to the risk of 
prosecution under the Criminal Code. 
 
And while you may go on to say that you have an exemption in respect to it, I’m going to tell you that 
you can’t, in provincial legislation, exempt what is a crime under this federal statute, the Criminal Code, 
because under the Criminal Code it says that if you intentionally touch another person without his 
consent, and if you extract a sample of the blood, that that in effect under the Criminal Code constitutes 
an assault. And regardless of what you say in your provincial legislation, you cannot in fact exempt a 
doctor, a lab technician, or a nurse — you cannot — from the criminal offence of assault. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Minister, that it would have been useful if you had addressed this area instead of 
blustering around in respect to all of the representations, because certainly I’ve read through all of your 
remarks and nowhere do you in fact address the issue of how you are going to make provisions, some of 
which are almost identical with the Criminal Code, as not being deemed a provision of the Criminal 
Code enacted in provincial legislation. And certainly in respect to absolving anyone from taking the 
sample of blood without the consent of the individual, I clearly indicate that that would, under the 
Criminal Code, constitute an assault, and there’s no way, under the provincial legislation, that you can 
exempt what in fact is legislated by the federal government as a criminal act. 
 
Those are the essential areas of concern that we have, and obviously what is going to happen here, Mr. 
Minister, without . . . Undoubtedly what will happen is that, if the legislation is passed, there will be 
challenges under the charter of rights in respect to the extraction of the blood sample from the human 
body without consent. There’s no doubt about that; there’ll be challenges. But, more importantly, 
there’ll be the challenge 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2699 

immediately in respect to whether or not you are in fact infringing upon the provisions of the Criminal 
Code. 
 
And I would have thought that there was a way in which you could resolve this confusion, which 
obviously is going to develop. And what we will be doing is proposing a further amendment, and 
amendment which will, I think, resolve it, and that is that the Lieutenant-Governor in Council shall refer 
the question of the constitutional validity of section 168 of this act to the court of appeal, pursuant to 
The Constitutional Questions Act, and section 168 of this act comes into force on the day when this 
question of the constitutionality is in fact analysed. And what you do here is that you get the courts to 
decide, not at the cost of the citizen out there, who will of necessity have to challenge it — and it will be 
challenged — but you have a procedure here which can certainly clarify what all of our legal advice 
indicates; it’s clearly going to be challenged and likely to fail. The provisions that you have instituted 
are likely to fail because it infringes upon the jurisdiction of the Criminal Code, and also in respect to 
the provision as I indicated, that taking a sample without the consent of the individual is in itself a 
criminal act under the code. 
 
And so what we will be doing then is indicating to you an amendment which I think . . . In fairness to 
the public, it would be most beneficial that the matter be cleared up prior to the introduction of the bill. I 
think it would help eliminate . . . If you are convinced that the direction to go, and that would alleviate 
any of the innumerable challenges that will have to be taken in order to challenge — which is likely to 
be challenged — whether or not the provisions are in fact constitutional. 
 
There are a couple of other sections which I want to deal with, but I’m going to deal with those in 
committee of the whole. But in respect to section 171, it’s a section which is introduced . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. I just wanted to read one citation from Beauschesne’s to the 
member. It’s citation 734. It says: 
 

The second reading is the most important stage through which the bill is required to pass; for its 
whole principle is then at issue and is affirmed or denied by a vote of the House. It is not regular 
on this occasion, however, to discuss in detail the clauses of the bill. 

 
And if the member cold leave the discussion of the clauses for committee of the whole, I think it would 
be better. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I’m finished, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to rise in debate on this particular topic. The member that 
just spoke before me has some concerns about the blood tests that may be taken. I’d like to mention that 
member of Webb, the accident that happened on the Trans-Canada which nobody was quite sure, which 
nobody id quite sure why it happened or what the requirements were. With this legislation, if it would 
have been in place, the person couldn’t have said, ‘I’m hurt and I’ve got to go to the hospital,’ and be 
exempt from being checked out to make sure if alcohol was the cause of the accident or not. Just that 
one clause will finally stop people for playing games that should be checked to make sure exactly what 
the facts are. 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2700 

You know the member, in his huffy and puffy attitude that he displays in this House, is concerned about 
the minister when he spent the time to consult with the public. He spent some money, put ads in, got 
responses. That’s a reasonable government. But no, not that huffy, puffy member; he wants to huff and 
puff and yell and scream and blow his temper all the time in this House. Well, I’m just as . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, that’s maybe what we should name him: Mr. Huff and Puff. 
 
But going into the bill, Mr. Speaker, he indicates that the former government was looking at this 
legislation. He’s right. It’s the first thing he’s been right on all day. But they didn’t have the intestinal 
fortitude to grapple with some of the tough sections, and our minister . . . (inaudible) . . . has had that 
ability to handle the tough sections. They weren’t left ignored. He handled the problems. He consulted 
with the people to check to make sure what they thought. He didn’t run away from the blood sample; he 
met it head on and has made a decision. And you know, the member talked about their legal advice. If 
the bill on oil which got them into constitutional fights, and all those other ones, they had the same 
advisers. I’m glad we’re not using them . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You’re using different lawyers, 
the member says from across the row. That’s right, and they’re probably even more incompetent than 
the last ones you used to pay, because you know, when you get free advice, it’s worth what you paid for 
it. 
 
But anyway, you know, Mr. Speaker, I almost am tempted to go back to what the former member from 
Rosthern used to say. He used to say if there’s more than three lawyers or two lawyers on one side, it 
was a waste of time and energy because they talked too much. I don’t always agree with the former 
member, Mr. Boldt, but I agree with him on the opposition — they have a problem with lawyers that 
can’t seem to agree with each other even when it comes to voting. 
 
But getting back to the bill that we’re discussing, The Vehicles Act affects the province in many ways 
because of the amount of vehicles driving down the road. And while in opposition, I had a lot of people 
from the police departments and the law enforcement agencies say, ‘Well, you know the two red lights 
are dangerous for us in the winter-time with the blizzards, the snow, and we need some changes.’ I went 
to the former minister and suggested there was a problem and that we should make uniformity across 
Canada. I’m glad to see that this minister is finally taking hold of that issue — the concerns to the lives 
of those individuals that must be on the highway during the blizzards as the snow-ploughs must be — 
and considering a light change to make the safety for them there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was going through my notes on this bill and I note that many of the changes being done 
are things that have developed in practice, but not written in the law. For example, in just the last few 
years we have hearings in Saskatoon and Regina on motor licensing, and we’re now asking in this bill 
for permission to split the committees and split some of the functions to make it easier and beneficial to 
the public. That’s an important factor — access to the public — so that it can be more speedily . . . 
things can be heard more faster and make it easier. 
 
A second proposal in the bill is a proposal for joint hearings. If a motor carrier is making an application 
in Alberta, in Manitoba, well he doesn’t have to hear all over again in Saskatchewan on the same issues. 
We can join with these other provinces for joint hearings. It makes it more efficient for everybody. 
These are little things but they make the bill more workable; they make the industry more workable. 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2701 

In the bill we also deal with many different issues. The board hears hearings but it doesn’t run like a 
court of law. Most of the people there are not used to always being in law, and therefore it’s allowed to 
use information that isn’t . . . (inaudible) . . . as it would be in a legal case. And that’s important because 
it makes it easier for the average person to go in and make an application or be heard, if he is concerned, 
against the application. And therefore it makes it easier for him or her, whoever it may be. 
 
The other one — the board now has to go out to see things as a board, where under the bill they’re going 
to have the authority to send someone out who’s authorized to go out and look at something and bring 
back a report. And they can base decisions on that report of a person who is authorized and capable, 
once again speeding up the efficiency of the board to make decisions for the betterment of the people 
affected. A lot of the bill goes along that way, making it more efficient, and includes getting the board 
involved in educational programs to assist the community or the industry, whichever way you call it. 
 
Another one that sort of irks me as I go through it — it’s interesting to know that a Greyhound bus 
driver must have his licence signed and approved in every little community, or, I should say, every city 
that he goes through, and an STC bus driver or a Moose Mountain bus driver. That provision was placed 
in the law for taxi-drivers so that the individual driving the cab would have a little picture of himself on 
the wall of the cab so that the passenger could get in, look at that thing, see who the driver was. And it 
was a security check for many people, because these people are always security checked by the local 
police. The proposal now is that’s required for bus drivers because they are checked by their company 
because they are full-time employees, and not like taxi drivers who may only work for a short period 
and therefore need a little more checking. You know, I notice that the police are very pleased with this 
idea, and in the consulting, that’s what the minister has found — what the police like, and the people 
like of Saskatchewan — and his reply showed those kind of things. 
 
Registrations of vehicles — and I think in the minister’s speech he made reference to riding in trailers. 
In it he made the comment that you shouldn’t be riding in a trailer behind a vehicle, except he 
recognizes the one exception that must be recognized, and that is the farm industry. If a farmer is 
hauling his hay back from the field, and it’s half a mile or a mile, usually the fellows that are loading it 
sit on top of the hay pile, and the speed is low enough that there is no problems. But going down the 
road at 100 kilometres an hour in a two-wheel trailer hooked onto . . . (inaudible) . . . hooked onto the 
back of a truck with a bolt, fatigue of metal very easily can happen, and being a two-wheel trailer, it will 
go everywhere and somebody will be killed. So safety is considered on that proposal. And therefore, on 
the other, you’re talking about a different type of trailer which if it does break loose, it will normally 
steer itself down and because of it’s a four-wheel unit. 
 
It goes on to talk about registrations, and I noticed with a little bit of comedy that he referred to in one 
area that certain vehicles are not required to be licensed, and the example I discovered in the research I 
was doing was a pavement machine that’s laying pavement on the highway isn’t required to be licensed, 
but if that same machine was working in my yard, or your yard. Mr. Speaker, it requires a licence. So 
they’re going to try and standardize the rules for all machines affected. Once again, making it simpler 
for the industry. 
 
Other areas that intrigue me as I was going through it, Mr. Speaker, is the operating authorities. And I 
think, Mr. Speaker, you may remember when the CNR pulled out of 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2702 

Saskatchewan — I believe it was the CNR — several years ago, and stopped giving service to the small 
communities, the former government was left in the dilemma of why do you do? — these communities 
are going to get no service. It gives authority to the board to put temporary service in these situations so 
that the people are not suffering to be without service. It goes in where a carrier is not providing one part 
of the service of his total contract and lets it lapse, so that it may be possible for another vehicle to use 
some of that jurisdiction. That’s important because sometimes the carrier cannot haul all of the things 
and chooses to leave certain ones out, and somebody else may pick up the slack and that’s important. 
 
We go into the . . . One of the other things that I noticed when I was going through the article is when I 
head on to Saskatoon and on to where I live, you see the sign ’60 kilometres an hour while passing 
highway workers.’ I was surprised to discover that’s not law. That’s just a rule of courtesy. And now 
we’re going to see protection for these workers who must fix our roads and are working out there. They 
will be protected because this will make it legitimate for that sign, and people must be safe. 
 
The other thing I note is warning flares must be out at all times. Vehicles over 80 inches, or whatever 
that means — that new measurement — are required to have flares of some type so that when I’m 
coming upon them in the evening, that my lights will be reflected back and I know that there’s 
something on the road that I have to be careful for . . . (inaudible) . . . highway workers. But if they’re 
off the road and in the ditch, they’re not required to have that signal going, which is fair game because I 
don’t have to worry about the vehicle if it’s in the ditch, where I do have to worry about it when it’s 
sitting on the edge of the road. So those little things, consulting with people, are so important. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I sat and listened to the huff and puff member from Quill Lakes speak earlier. 
He got on to school buses, and you know I’ve sat in the House and listened. I remember the member 
from Kinistino when he was a member of this House and how he spoke on seat-belt legislation. But I 
also remember that on all the information he produced at the time, he never did say ‘school buses.’ The 
member across the way says ‘buses.’ I suggest that we all be calm, cool, check everything that’s about 
them before we make snap decisions. And I compliment the minister on that because he’s going to sit 
down with the people involved in the bussing industry of children, ask their opinion, check to make sure 
what it really means, and not just run into the fire without good, sound facts. That’s responsible. 
 
I think basically on that note, Mr. Speaker, that’s what that whole bill does — consulted; put out a white 
paper; took and made some of the tough decisions. And that tough decision . . . one of them was the 
taking of blood. Why? Because we must know. And the Webb example is a prime example of a question 
that will never be answered, where if that rule would have been there, we probably would have an 
answer today because that would have conclusively said if liquor was or was not the fault. Nobody 
knows today. This provision would have helped. 
 
He’s taken and listened to the police people, the STC people, the traffic people, about their concerns. 
The bill is gone through, as I said, consulting process. The former members had it on their plate, worked 
on it for — I heard three years, I think somebody said; the huff and puff minister said that. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — 10 years. 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2703 

MR. KATZMAN: — Was it 10? . . . But never had the gumption to bring it before the House because 
they couldn’t make the tough decisions. The tough decisions have been made; the bill is before the 
House. And I’d like to see when the time to vote comes in principle, if we will see like we saw today 
here earlier, where the member from Regina said no and another member from Regina said he was going 
to support it. And when it came time for the vote, one of them changed their mind. So when the vote 
comes on this bill, I hope to see all members on all sides — because this was a consultative process, 
because it’s good legislation, because it’s for the betterment of all — I hope to see all members support 
this bill as I will. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
MR. WEIMAN: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to point out by saying it’s an honour as well as a 
privilege to be able to speak in the House again on this important topic and enter into debate on it. 
Really though, Mr. Speaker, one has no choice. One has no choice because if one is to deal with the 
problem of vehicle safety with any type of responsibility or conscience, one is almost forced or impelled 
to speak in favour of the Bill 81, The Vehicles Act, and changes to it. 
 
Before I begin, I would like to have a couple of points clarified, and then I will just briefly go through 
some of the main topics of the bill. A point of clarification I would like to make, Mr. Speaker, is times 
that we’ve stood in the House this past week, the week before, we’ve heard the opposition members 
saying, ‘This is day 46 and noting is done, this is day 47, 48 and nothing is done,’ and so on and so on. 
‘You’re standing there wasting time. What kind of government do you have? What type of inactivity 
that you have that you are wasting time?’ The clarification I would like to point out to the members 
opposite is: when you are willing to listen to the demands and the wishes of the citizenry, I do not 
consider that a waster of time. When you are willing to not only listen and consult, but to take action that 
some may be opposed to in order and save lives, that is not a waste of time. I myself personally am 
prepared to stay here forever if I must, in order to encourage that kind of attitude in order to get that kind 
of approach accomplished. And I do not consider day 50 or 51 or 52 a waste of time if it will make 
changes to a vehicles act that will save one life in my constituency. 
 
As I have indicated, Mr. Speaker, the reasons for this change in The Vehicles Act and the revision of it 
mainly stem from two sources: one, a public demand; and, secondly, and inactivity of the opposition 
who at that time were the government. We are looking at a bill that was passed originally in 1939, when 
we had a different type of vehicle on the road, we had different types of roads itself, and in many cases a 
lot of these roads did not exist. It was time for a change; it was time for a revision. 
 
Also, to the average person — and I include myself in that category — the bill itself was difficult to 
read, difficult to understand, and lacked continuity. In many cases, when one read it, one was hit with a 
barrage of what I call gobbledegook — very difficult indeed to understand. The Hon. James Garner has 
undertaken quite a duty in order to rewrite the act, to bring continuity to it, so one did not have to search 
all over the place for important information. 
 
Not only did he undertake to rework it, to rewrite it, to add some type of logic to it, he determined 
himself that he was going to take it out to the public, not once in 10 years, not twice, but three times: 
first of all, in the fall of ’82, with the white paper; then again to be followed up in early spring, the 
tail-end of February for a questionnaire; and immediately followed by a lawman’s draft. This, the 
opposition says, is wasting time. 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2704 

You tell those 6,000 people who personally wrote into either members of the Legislative Assembly or to 
the minister, or phoned him, that they wasted their time — over 6,000 letters and phone calls since the 
introduction of the bill first was advertised. 
 
As I’ve said, the previous government, who are now sitting in the opposition, they were aware that 
revisions were much needed, that conditions had changed, that vehicles had changed, weight loads had 
changed. They refused to do anything about it. It’s easy to take credit if you haven’t done anything — 
that’s what they would have us believe in the legislature and that’s what they would have the people of 
Saskatchewan to believe. I don’t think the people of Saskatchewan do believe that. 
 
As I indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, the reason for the action of this bill and its introduction is because 
the people of Saskatchewan wanted it, needed it, and, at the same token, to save lives. Some of the 
measures that are in the bill are not meant to go out and save those very lives. 
 
Some of the things that the people of the province have been asking — either on the phone or through 
their letters to us — and that we’ve acted upon: one highlight — to increase the suspension period. Up to 
this revision, there were three suspension periods for drinking while impaired. Quickly, just to review 
those, the first got a penalty of six months suspension of driver’s licence; the second was one year; and 
the third was a three-year suspension. The people that we listened to, and we did listen to everyone that 
wished to reply, whether they were individuals or associations or groups, had indicated that there were 
still those drivers who went about driving while impaired, that had not gotten the message. Our minister 
undertook to increase the suspension period for the fourth offence to a five-year suspension. Driving 
while disqualified, the penalty was also increased. And we have heard of the blood testing of which I 
will return to later. 
 
Very simply, some of the suspensions and the topics regarding those, in order to bring about a safe 
driving habit — a safer driving mentality in this province — as I’ve said, were not one of punishment 
but one of saving lives. And to do that you have to have to increase and continue the educational 
component. 
 
The DWI, the Driving Without Impairment program, will be pursued vigorously. Those people taking it 
will be able in a sense to have their suspension halved, from six months to three months. Tied very 
closely to that, however, and it should be made abundantly clear to the people of the province, is that 
aspect of enforcement of which I spoke earlier. 
 
I might point out that the DWI programs are not programs that are implemented to be controlled by the 
governments. They are programs that are the control of and the implementation of local community 
groups — the local and drug administrations or commissions within the local communities. 
 
A few other highlights have already been pointed out by the member from Rosthern, but I think they 
bear quick scanning for the fact that they are very sensible, common-sense programs that go along with 
The Vehicles Act. 
 
The explosive goods, inflammable goods, that are carried by our trucks down the highways must stop at 
all railroad crossings. Flares are required. No riding in trailers. You can’t have a much more 
common-sense approach than that. And of course no stunting. 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2705 

To briefly return to the blood testing. I would like to point out that in the province of British Columbia, 
presently, both sides of the House have indicated that they are in favour of this very topic. In fact, they 
have similar legislation in British Columbia waiting to be proclaimed. Not only is the support coming 
from the legislature in Victoria, however, it’s also coming from the general population, and a very 
interesting group. And if I may quote from the Victoria Times, an interesting group called the Victoria 
Civil Liberties Association — people who are concerned with, and watch-dogs of, civil liberties of the 
population of British Columbia. And I quote: 
 

The Victoria Civil Liberties Association treasurer, Richard Simpson, said mandatory blood tests 
appear to be a small civil liberties trade-off to curb the drunken driving problem. Many of the 
changes in the act are that directive. 

 
One important quote, if I may continue, that Mr. Richard Simpson continues with, and one that I believe 
should be borne in mind by members of the opposition because it’s one that I am convinced has been 
indicated to us very shortly by the populace of Saskatchewan, and I think the opposition should bear 
heed. The same gentleman, Richard Simpson: 
 

‘We know the drunken driving problem in B.C. is pretty serious,’ said Simpson, ‘and you have to 
consider the rights of the people getting hit by drunk drivers.’ 

 
I cannot speak more favourably than I have, for my favour in this act, The Vehicles Act, Mr. Speaker, I 
will be speaking and voting in favour of it. Thank you. 
 
MR. DOMOTOR: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to add a few more words or comments with 
respect to The Vehicles Act in connection with what a couple of fellow colleagues have mentioned, and 
particularly with respect to the bill. The members opposite mention that it was a part that they had 
already got in on their own, but they really hadn’t. They had sat on that for a long time. It gathered dust. 
It took a government that had action under the capable administration of the Minister of Highways to get 
the act re-modified and brought into this session within the year — not 11 years or 10 years, but within a 
year. And I should suggest that we should commend the Minister of Highways for the fine work that he 
has done in getting this bill before the House. 
 
Not only that, he should be commended for the way he took on the consultative process, the consultation 
with members of the public, inviting them to send letters in and to listen to their concerns. And I know 
for a fact that we had many representations to the MLAs with respect to some of the provisions within 
the act, and my colleague from Saskatoon Fairview mentioned the DWI. And I know for a fact, talking 
to some of the teachers that teach the DWI and members from Humboldt, in Humboldt itself, have 
suggested that it should be compulsory for people who have 0.08 to taken. Now we haven’t gone that 
route. We’ve said, ‘Look, we’ll give you an option. If you want to get your licence back a little sooner, 
we can cut it down from six months to three months.’ And I think this is a step in the right direction and 
it gives the people a chance to get their licence and it is not restrictive, but it’s placed there for safety. 
And safety is the key, Mr. Speaker, and it’s good to see that this is being emphasized in the act and also 
being emphasized with respect to the enforcement of the act. 
 
You talk about stunting. There’s been a lot of concern in the rural areas, or not only rural but in the 
cities, with respect to the kind of modifications that have been done to some 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2706 

of these vehicles, and not much was done on it by the previous administration. And it’s good to see that 
it’s in the particular part of the act where the police officer is going to have some authority and some 
clout to be able to go ahead and prevent some careless, misguided individuals maybe driving around and 
not paying any particular attention and going ahead and changing their vehicles to such a position where 
they end up becoming a hazard rather than a vehicle that is safe for the road. 
 
Flares are certainly a good idea. We see a lot of times driving down the highway and you come across a 
truck or a vehicle on the side and it has no signal, no nothing, and it’s pitch black, and very simply can 
run into it. With the idea of using of flares for the extended widths of certain vehicles, certainly will 
prevent further accidents. And this, again, is kind of commendable to the Department of Highways for 
bringing in some of these regulations and some of these regulations. 
 
Again, I’d just like to, without taking any further time, congratulate the Minister of Highways on the 
fine work he has done on this and the consultative process he has taken with the people in 
Saskatchewan, and I’ll be supporting the motion. Thank you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
MRS. CASWELL: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a very important bill. There are many bills that 
affect just a small segment of the population. They affect, perhaps, farmers which certainly is a large 
segment, but still one segment of the population; or they affect business men; or they affect construction 
people or union people. But this bill affects everyone and everybody’s family, because almost 
everybody drives or has someone who drives and, if you don’t drive, you certainly walk across a road or 
on a road . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And if you don’t . . . Thank you. 
 
There’s seldom that the opposition has anything useful to say, but the hon. member from Regina Centre 
has mentioned that if you don’t drive, you may drink, and indeed this also applies to that segment. That 
was supposed to be humorous, but it came from the Regina Centre so it was limited . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, anyway I’m glad I’m getting to the meat of this issue. 
 
And I think that what we have to do . . . The government’s role . . . there’s a great discussion in society 
today what is the government’s role, and to limit the role of government to do that what it does best and 
that what it should do. I think when the hon. member from Saskatoon Fairview was discussing the 
importance of this bill in terms of saving lives and that the opposition never got around to its 
house-cleaning and its revamping of a bill, it was because the opposition consistently majored in the 
minors when it came to government role. They love to control that which they had not business 
controlling and ignoring those basic, fundamental issues of road safety, road travel, saving lives, in 
terms of making rules that are practicable, practical, sensible and that can be enforced in such a way that 
the victims, or the possible victims, on our roads will be protected and the person who is irresponsible in 
the use of drugs and alcohol would be deterred or punished. 
 
This is legislation at its best and government at its best, when we concentrate on the role of government 
as it should be, which is to control people where they affect the lives and the property of other people, 
and not to control them into their business an don and on and on in government regulations. So I would 
like to commend our Minister of 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2707 

Highways who, first of all, has taken this job to make a concise bill — although it’s a full bill it’s 
because it’s a very important subject — and to do it with a great deal of consultation throughout the 
province, and to not limit the type of people or the groups he would listen to. He listened to individuals; 
he listened to rural people; he listened to urban people; he listened to experts and he listened to that very 
important segment, the individual voter, who had something to say about something that affects 
everyone. 
 
I am particularly pleased that we are dealing with not only the issue of alcohol, but of drugs, because 
both certainly can be a hazard on the road, and are a hazard in or society, and we must learn to control 
both and to see both as a possible harm to our society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go in depth on some of the specific issues concerning this, I think that many people 
all over Canada are looking towards stricter regulations on drunken driving, and I congratulate the 
minister for dealing with this. Perhaps some people wanted him to have it harsher, in terms of changing 
the alcohol content — there was some discussion, I know, from that — but he, I believe, has chosen a 
reasonable approach, an approach that we can all deal with. I congratulate him for wanting to make the 
RCMP’s job easier. I’m sure they want to control the roads in a responsible and feasible manner, and 
this bill will help them do that. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will, of course, be supporting this bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to wrap up second reading of this very 
important bill, hopefully before 5 o’clock. 
 
Just on addressing some of the comments made by the members opposite . . . You know, we have the 
member from Quill Lakes. It seems to me that his biggest claim to fame is he believes he’s a legend in 
his own mind, you know. Mr. Speaker, this member has undoubtedly not studied this bill, and then when 
he has the gall, Mr. Speaker, he has the gall to stand up in this Assembly and state that the NDP have 
brought about this piece of legislation . . . Mr. Speaker, there isn’t enough courage in all eight of them to 
blow up a balloon, let alone introduce a new Vehicles Act to try and save some lives in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation has been on the drawing board for the 
last 11, 12 years. Where was the NDP? One year alone, 265 people lost their lives. The autopsies proved 
40 per cent of those fatalities — there was alcohol in the bloodstream. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the NDP would have had the courage, the courage to take this off the shelf and dust it off 
and bring it before the people of Saskatchewan, we’d have had a lot less funerals and a lot more people 
alive in the province of Saskatchewan today. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, I cannot accept anything coming from the members opposite 
when they want to sit there now as the gang of eight — sit there and try and take credit for a piece of 
legislation that’s going to save lives only because they took the back-door approach. They were afraid. 
They were afraid to consult with the 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2708 

people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we asked the people of Saskatchewan, along with some of the input, what they did want 
for a new Vehicles Act in the province of Saskatchewan. Didn’t force anything on them — not the 
socialist way — the Progressive Conservative way is asking people, Mr. Speaker. We put on a white 
paper; we put on a survey. Mr. Speaker, we had responses from every corner of the province of 
Saskatchewan from people from every walk of life. We asked the SMA what they thought; we asked the 
police commission what they thought; we asked the agriculture people what they thought; the travelling 
public, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They had informed us as to what they want for a new Vehicles Act, and, Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to 
stand in this Assembly today and say that those people have been heard by a Progressive Conservative 
government under the very able leadership of Grant Devine, not under the Allan Blakeney socialists. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, I think we’ve cleared up about who’s going to get credit for 
introducing the new Vehicles Act. The courage, Mr. Speaker, was on this side of the House; and that 
corner of the House — the gang of eight — has absolutely nothing to do with it, Mr. Speaker, nothing at 
all. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they talked about DWI. Yes, DWI, they did start like they did a lot of other things — 
on a Mickey Mouse scale, a Mickey Mouse scale; left it up to the discretion of the courts. Mr. Speaker, 
the member opposite from Quill Lakes talked about education. The educational aspect with the new 
Vehicles Act is the DWI program. Not going to force it on people, Mr. Speaker, as the socialists would 
have done. No, no. We’re not going to force it. It’s freedom of choice. If an individual wants their 
driver’s licence back within three months, they make the decision to take a DWI course. Two 
week-ends, two nights a week. Their choice. Get their licence back in three months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we’re trying to do in this section is put it out to the people of Saskatchewan that look, 
you’ve made a mistake once . . . We’re trying to educate them as to the effects of drinking and driving 
on the highways in the province of Saskatchewan, so that we wont’ have that second-time offender 
around, Mr. Speaker. We’re trying to make it consistent with all the offences: first time, six months; 
second time, one year; third time, three years; and fourth time, five years. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
personally believe that by the time an individual has committed four offences, he or she has got a 
problem, and they’re going to have to recognize that problem and do something about it. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, I cannot and I will not accept the loss of lives that take place in the province of Saskatchewan 
each year because of impaired drivers. It’s not right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talk about rights. What about the rights of the individuals that are hurt or have a loss of 
life? Mr. Speaker, a driver’s licence is a privilege, it’s not a God-given right. 
 
Some other things, Mr. Speaker, I would like to discuss, but I see it’s now near 5 o’clock, so I’ll call it 5 
o’clock, because I see I cannot wrap up, and I will wrap up later on. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


	ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
	WELCOME TO STUDENTS
	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS
	Winners of Shell Fuelathon
	QUESTIONS
	Sale of Liquor at Taylor Field
	Job Creation Resulting from European Trade Mission
	MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I want to direct a question to the Minister of Economic Development and Trade, better know as the minister of ‘I’ll take notice.’ It has to do with your trade mission jaunt last year, which cost the general taxpayer some $3...
	Lake Diefenbaker Pipeline
	SPC Purchase of Drag-line
	HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a question to the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. This question concerns the arrangements between the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and Manalta Coal Ltd. and its several ...
	Uniforms for Western Canada Summer Games
	Changes to Urban Municipality Act
	Unemployment in Saskatchewan
	Increase in SGI Premiums
	INTRODUCTION OF BILLS
	POINT OF ORDER
	HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, prior to orders for the day, I raise a point of order to the Chair, perhaps for clarification more than anything. The point of order is this, Mr. Speaker, and I know you’ve addressed it on many occasions, and I would s...
	ORDERS OF THE DAY
	Clause 9
	THIRD READINGS

	Bill No. 68 — An Act to amend The Summary Offences Procedure Act
	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	SECOND READINGS
	YEAS — 34


