






















































Hansard: June 15, 1983


3105 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
June 15, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PETITIONS 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise under the provisions of rule 11. As 
all members will know, my colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, is away from this Assembly as part 
of the official provincial government delegation to the funeral of Archbishop O’Neill. He’s asked that in 
his absence I sign and present to the Assembly a petition from certain Saskatchewan residents who are 
gravely concerned about The Trade Union Act. I am therefore pleased now to present this petition 
containing some 34 pages of signatures. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: – Mr. Speaker, I am also very pleased, under the provisions of rule 11 of the Rules and 
Procedures of the legislature, to present a petition on behalf of a number of individuals of 
Saskatchewan, the working people who are very concerned about Bill 104. I do so present the petition. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – Yes, Mr. Speaker. I am also pleased to present a petition to the legislature from a 
number of Saskatchewan working people, under the provisions of rule 11 of the Rules and Procedures 
of the Legislative Assembly. The signatories to the petition are concerned by and firmly opposed to Bill 
104. I do so present the petition. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, I wish to make use of rule 11 of the Rules and Procedures of 
the Legislative Assembly, I present a petition to the legislature from a number of individual 
Saskatchewan working people who are gravely concerned by the provision of Bill 104 and are firmly 
opposed to it. 
 
MR. ENGEL: – Mr. Speaker, under the provisions of rule 11 of the Rules and Procedures of the 
Legislative Assembly provides for the presentation of petitions to the legislature. Under that rule, I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of a number of individual workers who are gravely concerned by the 
provisions of Bill 104 and firmly opposed to it. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: – Mr. Speaker, rule 11 of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly 
provides for the presentation of petitions to the legislature. Under that rule, I rise to present a petition on 
behalf of a number of individual who are gravely concerned by the provision of Bill 104 and firmly 
opposed to it. 
 
MR. YEW: – Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to present a petition to the legislature from a number of 
individual Saskatchewan working people who are gravely concerned by the provisions of Bill 104 and 
who are firmly opposed to it. This petition is presented under the provisions of rule 11 of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise under the provisions of rule 11 to 
present a petition signed by a number of United Church minister and others who are associated in a 
professional way with the United Church of Canada. 



 
June 15, 1983 
 

 
3106 

MR. LUSNEY: – Mr. Speaker, under the provisions of rule 11, I am pleased to present another petition 
on behalf of concerned working people of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to present a petition to the legislature from a number of 
Saskatchewan working people under the provisions of rule 11 of the Rules and Procedures of the 
Legislative Assembly. And I want to say the signatories to the petitions are indeed concerned by and 
firmly opposed to Bill 104. I so present the petition. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, I wish to use rule 11 of the Rules and Procedures to present to 
the Legislative Assembly yet another petition from a number of Saskatchewan citizens who are very 
concerned by provisions of Bill 104 and who are firmly opposed to it. 
 
MR. ENGEL: – Mr. Speaker, under the provisions of rule 11 of the Rules and Procedures of the 
legislature, I would like to present a petition signed – there’s about 17 pages of them here – by 
individuals Saskatchewan residents who are concerned about the provisions of Bill 104 and firmly 
oppose it. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, once again, rise under rule 11 to present a petition 
with 142 names on of greatly concerned individuals in the province of Saskatchewan over 104 and 
firmly oppose it. 
 
MR. YEW: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to present a petition to the legislature from a 
number of Saskatchewan working people who are greatly concerned bout he provisions of Bill 104 and 
who are firmly opposed to it. This petition is presented to you under the provisions of rule 11. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present, under rule 11, a petition 
signed by some 118 people, all in Saskatoon, of various occupations, who are concerned that bill 104 is 
not in the best interests of Saskatchewan people and petitions this Assembly to withdraw Bill 104. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: – Mr. Speaker, under the provisions of rule 11, I am pleased to present yet another 
petition on behalf of concerned working people of Saskatchewan who oppose Bill 104. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – Mr. Speaker, I am pleased on behalf of the working people of Saskatchewan who 
have signed this petition, under rule 11, submit the petitions. The signatories of this petition are 
concerned, and indeed, firmly opposed to Bill 104. I so submit. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, I wish to make use of rule 11 of the Rules and Procedures of 
the Legislative Assembly to submit to the Assembly a number of names of people who are opposed to 
the provisions of Bill 104 and wish to express their opposition to it. 
 
MR. ENGEL: – Mr. Speaker, under provision of rule 11 I would like to present petitions. Most of these 
people are from North Battleford; they are 42 in number, who are opposed to the provisions of Bill 104 
and are concerned that this bill be withdrawn at this time. I’d like to present this petition. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: – Mr. Speaker, I rise under rule 11. Under that rule I rise to present a 



 
June 15, 1983 

 
3107 

petition on behalf of a number of individual workers who are greatly concerned by the provisions of Bill 
104 and firmly opposed to it, the petition of 139 names on it. 
 
MR. YEW: – Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to present a petition to the legislature from a number of 
Saskatchewan working people who are greatly concerned about the provisions of Bill 104 and who are 
firmly opposed to it. This petition is presented under the provisions of rule 11. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise under the provisions of rule 11 to 
present a petition signed by some 78 people in Saskatoon of a wide variety of occupations – I see on one 
page what must be the entire staff of the Saskatoon library – who fear that their rights would be 
jeopardized and their freedom of association will be endangered by Bill 104. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: – Mr. Speaker, once again under the provisions of rule 11, I am pleased to present to 
this legislature a petition on behalf of concerned working people of Saskatchewan who oppose Bill 104. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – Mr. Speaker, I present a petition to the legislature from some 52 in number of 
Saskatchewan working people, under the provisions of rule 11. I want to indicate that the signatories of 
this petition are concerned and firmly oppose Bill 104. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, I wish to make use of rule 11 of the Rules and Procedures of 
the Legislative Assembly to present to the Assembly a petition which lists out a number of people, many 
of them nurses from the hospital in Saskatoon, who wish to express to their Assembly through the one 
means they have to express such a presentation as they are not allowed to appear in person, and wish to 
express their oppositions to amendments to Bill 104. 
 
MR. ENGEL: – Mr. Speaker, I wish to present a petition under the provisions of rule 11 for some 117 
people, most of them from Carrot River and Arborfield. They are housekeeping aides, cook 3, cook 1, 
nurse’s aide, laundry aide, and so on – most of the occupations – dietary aide, maintenance 2 persons, 
that are opposed to Bill 104, and wish this Assembly to withdraw that bill. I present this petition of these 
117 at this time. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, I rise under rule 11. Under that rule, I rise 
to present a petition on behalf of a number of individual workers who are gravely concerned by the 
provisions of Bill 104 and totally opposed to it. I now present 122 names, and they’re all from 
Saskatoon. 
 
MR. YEW: – Mr. Speaker, I would like to present a petition to the legislature on behalf of some 
registered nurses from Weyburn and Regina who are gravely concerned by the provisions of bill 104 and 
who are firmly opposed to it. The petition is presented under rule 11. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wish to present under the provisions of 
rule 11, signators 81 in number, the vast majority of whom appear to have come from one of the 
Saskatoon hospitals, who in the short time available to them have got this petition up to protest the 
erosion of their rights as free men and women in a free society. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: – Mr. Speaker, under the provisions of rule 11 I wish to present to this legislature yet 
another petition on behalf of concerned working people of 



 
June 15, 1983 
 

 
3108 

Saskatchewan who oppose Bill 104. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – Mr. Speaker, I’d like to present yet another petition to the legislature from some 54 
working people in the province of Saskatchewan under the provisions of rule 11. The signatories of this 
petitions are concerned and firmly opposed to Bill 104. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, I wish to make rule of rule 11 of the Rules and Procedures of 
the Legislative Assembly to present to the legislature yet another petition from a group of workers in 
Saskatchewan who wish to use this forum to express their opposition to the amendments proposed to 
Bill 104 by the Conservative government. 
 
MR. ENGEL: – Mr. Speaker, I have before me a petition I wish to present here that includes 
approximately 48 names of petitioners who request your honourable Assembly be pleased to withdraw 
Bill 104. 
 
The petitioners come from Nipawin, White Fox, Ridgedale, Codette, and Choiceland, Snowden, 
Nipawin areas, and are people that are very concerned with what is happening with Bill 104 and what 
it’s going to do to them. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I rise under rule 11 to present a petition of 
69 names, all from Saskatoon, who are strongly opposed to Bill 104. 
 
MR. YEW: – Mr. Speaker, I would like to present a petition to the legislator from 31 registered nurses 
of Regina who are gravely concerned by the provisions of Bill 104, and who are firmly opposed to it. 
This petition is presented under the provisions of rule 11. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wish to present, under the provisions of 
rule 11, the signators of 106 workers, largely hospital workers in the Moose Jaw and Swift Current area, 
who wish to protest the stripping of their rights. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: – Mr. Speaker, under the provisions of rule 11, I have yet another petition to present to 
the legislature on behalf of the concerned working people of Saskatchewan who oppose Bill 104. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of honour, on behalf of a group of working 
people, to submit a petition under rule 11. The signatories to this petition are firmly opposed to the 
implementation of Bill 104. I so submit. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, I wish to make use of rule 11 of the Rules and Procedures of 
the Assembly to present to you and the Assembly a list of names of a number of individuals who are 
opposed to amendment to The Trade Union Act, and the petition is presented to the Assembly with the 
hope that it would lead to the withdrawal of these amendments to Bill 104. 
 
MR. ENGEL: – Mr. Speaker, on behalf of four pages of carpenters from Saskatoon area, and the 
balance is from, it looks like a hospital up there, I wish to present the petitions to this Assembly, who are 
concerned that this provisions of Bill 104 amendments be dropped at this time. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I now want to present another petition under rule 11 
with 119 names on mostly from Saskatoon and the Estevan area, who are strongly opposed to Bill 104. 



 
June 15, 1983 

 
3109 

MR. YEW: – Mr. Speaker, I would like to present a petition to the legislature on behalf of yet another 
25 nurses from Regina, who are gravely concerned about the provisions of Bill 104, and who are firmly 
opposed to it. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The afternoon mail has just arrived, and I 
therefore present through this petition 140 signatories, apparently by the occupation from 
Intercontinental Packers in Saskatoon, who rightly understand, Mr. Speaker, that Bill 104 will erode 
their rights as free men and women. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: – Mr. Speaker, under the provisions of rule 11, I have yet another petition to present to 
this legislature on behalf of individual working people who opposed bill 104 and ask for its withdrawal. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – Mr. Speaker, on behalf of some 47 working men and women across this province, I’d 
like to submit a petition on their behalf under the provisions of rule 11 of the Legislative Assembly, and 
indicate that the signatories to this petition are indeed opposed to Bill 104. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, I wish to take this opportunity to present to the Assembly 
under the rule 11 of the Rules and Procedures of the Assembly, a list of names of individuals who are 
oppose to the amendments to Bill 104. They include registered nurses, orderlies, ward clerks, and a 
number of other individuals from hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
MR. ENGEL: – Mr. Speaker, on behalf of 52 concerned workers in both Regina and Saskatoon, I wish 
to present a petition under the provision of rule 11 of the Legislature Assembly. These people, who are 
teachers, counsellors, and stenos, and so on, are concerned that the provisions of Bill 104 will take a way 
some of their freedoms and rights. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to present another 124 names under rule 11 from 
Estevan, Bienfait, and Torquay area, who are also opposed to Bill 104. 
 
MR. YEW: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to present a petition to the legislature on behalf of 
yet another group of registered nurses from Regina, who are greatly concerned about the provisions 
under Bill 104, and who are firmly opposed to it. I present this under the provisions of rule 11. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wish to present a petition under the 
provisions of rule 11 – 22 signators, although few in number they come from a wide variety of 
Saskatchewan communities, who wish to inform this Assembly that they believe that Bill 104 is not in 
the best interests of Saskatchewan people. They ask the government members to withdraw it. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: – Mr. Speaker, under the provisions of rule 11, I have yet another petition to present to 
this Assembly on behalf of working people of Saskatchewan, who also ask for the withdrawal of Bill 
104. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to present a petition to the legislature from 
some 51 working men and women across the province under the 



 
June 15, 1983 
 

 
3110 

provisions of rule 11, and on their behalf to indicate that the signatories to this petition are indeed 
opposed and concerned by the legislation being introduced under Bill 104. I so submit. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, I wish to take this opportunity to present to the Legislative 
Assembly on behalf of the number of individuals a petition under rule 11 in which petition they ask for 
the withdrawal of Bill 104 which would amend the labour act which they believe will take away some of 
their rights. This list would include a number of individuals from either a bank or a credit union. There 
are tellers, file clerks, and others who wish us to present this petition to the Assembly. 
 
MR. ENGEL: – Mr. Speaker, on behalf of a good cross-section of workers in Regina and east up into 
the Qu’Appelle area, I would like to present a petition under rule 11. Some of these people are teachers, 
researchers, receptionists, social workers, rehab workers, accounting clerks, and so on, and these people 
are concerned with the provisions of Bill 104 and pray as petitioners that that bill would be withdrawn at 
this time. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: – Mr. Speaker, I also want to under rule 11 present to this legislature another 
petition with 60 names of working men and women across the province who request that the government 
consider withdrawing Bill 104. 
 
MR. YEW: – Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to present a petition to the legislature on behalf of yet another 
group of working people who are greatly concerned about the provisions of Bill 104 and who are firmly 
opposed to it. I present this under the provisions of rule 11. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This one, I now, would be of 
considerable interest to members opposite. There are 11 names from Regina. But the description of their 
occupation, I would guess that most of these are public servants. I know this one will be copied 
endlessly. These people understand, as do all the others, that Bill 104 will erode their rights. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: – Mr. Speaker, under the provisions of rule 11, I have yet another petition to present to 
this Assembly on behalf of the working people of Saskatchewan who oppose Bill 104. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to present a petition on behalf of some 120 working 
men and women from across the province, a petition under rule 11, and indicate the signatories of this 
petition are concerned and firmly oppose Bill 104. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, I wish to use this opportunity to present to this Assembly 
under rule 11, a petition which includes a number of names of individuals who are concerned about 
amendments to The Trade Union Act, Bill 104, because they feel that it’ll take aw ay some of their 
rights that they have worked hard for over the last number of years. 
 
MR. ENGEL: – Mr. Speaker, on behalf of some 51 people from across Saskatchewan who indicate that 
Bill 104 amendments are not in the best interests of Saskatchewan working people, I wish to present this 
petition under the provisions of rule 11. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: – Mr. Speaker, I want to present yet another petition on behalf of 30 working men 
and women across the province who request the government to withdraw 



 
June 15, 1983 

 
3111 

Bill 104. 
 
MR. YEW: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to present a petition to the legislature on behalf of 
yet another fairly large group of working people, some of them in the civil service, others with the 
bricklayers’ union and various other working groups, and I would like to state on their behalf that they 
are gravely concerned about the provisions under Bill 104 and are firmly opposed to it, and they so wish 
to have this bill withdrawn. I submit it under rule 11. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to present to this Assembly, under the 
provisions of rule 11, petitions containing 150 names, addresses, and occupations – people of some 
courage – most of whom it appears work at Intercontinental Packers in Saskatoon, who in the short 
period of time available to them have got this petition together and ask that Bill 104 be withdrawn. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: – Mr. Speaker, under the provisions of rule 11, I have another petition to present to this 
legislature on behalf of working Saskatchewan people who wish the withdrawal of Bill 104. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – Mr. Speaker, I want to present a petition to the legislature on behalf of some 55 
working people of Saskatchewan, under the provision of rule 11, and indicate their opposition to the 
proceeding with Bill 104. I so submit. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to submit to the Assembly, under 
rule 11 of Rules and Procedures of this Assembly, a list of names of individuals who are opposed to 
amendments to The Trade Union Act included in Bill 104, I would like to now submit this petition. 
 
MR. ENGEL: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a great deal of pleasure that I have to stand up on 
behalf of some 48 workers in Saskatchewan who understand what the provisions of Bill 104, are, and 
would urge this Assembly to withdraw bill 104. Under the provisions of rule 11 of the Legislative 
Assembly, I present this petition. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: – Mr. Speaker, under rule 11, I now present another 83 names, containing names of 
dairy workers, pipe fitters, garage workers, who are strongly opposed to Bill 104 and request that the 
government withdraw the legislation. 
 
MR. YEW: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to present a petition to the legislature on behalf of a 
various number of working people fro Regina, from various trades, who are gravely concerned by the 
provision so Bill 104, and who are clearly opposed to it and wish to have this bill withdrawn. I present 
this petition to the legislature, presented under the provisions of rule 11. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Under the provisions of rule 11, I wish to 
present the petition of 148 people, most of whom describe themselves as labourers, who have been 
moved to use this ancient mechanism to attempt to elicit from the government some compassion, some 
understanding, and some respect for their fundamental freedoms. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: – Mr. Speaker, under the provisions of rule 11, I wish to present this petition to the 
Legislative Assembly on behalf of concerned working people who oppose Bill 104. 



 
June 15, 1983 
 

 
3112 

MR. KOSKIE: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to present a petition to the legislature on behalf 
of some 53 working people of Saskatchewan. I submit this petition under the provisions of rule 11 of the 
Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly. I want to indicate that the signatories to this petition 
are opposed to Bill 104. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to submit on behalf of a group of 
individuals, most of them being from the city of Moose Jaw, a petition which expressed their opposition 
to the amendments proposed in Bill 104, and I would like to now submit this petition under the rules of 
this Legislative Assembly, rule 11. 
 
MR. YEW: – Mr. Speaker, I would like to present a petition to the legislature, a list of 51 working 
people who are direly concerned about the provisions of Bill 104 and who are firmly opposed to it. I 
present this petition under the provisions of rule 11. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise under the provisions of rule 11 to 
present a petition behalf of a number of people – 102, to be exact. Given their occupations, which are in 
recreation – lifeguards and so on – I would assume these to be fairly young people. Notwithstanding 
their lack of experience and lack of age, they appreciate what this government is doing to them and they 
ask that it come to a halt. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: – Mr. Speaker, under the provisions of rule 11, I have a good number of petitioners 
here, working people of Saskatchewan, who oppose Bill 104 and ask this government to withdraw the 
bill. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I would like to present yet another petition to the legislature 
from a number of working people in Saskatchewan, primarily registered nurses, from the city of 
Saskatchewan. I submit this petition under the provision of rule 11 of the Rules and Procedures of the 
Legislative Assembly and indicate on behalf of the petitioners that they oppose strongly implementation 
of Bill 104. I so submit. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to present to the 
Assembly a petition which includes a number of people from the city of Moose Jaw who are wishing me 
to express through this petition their opposition to Bill 104, the amendments to The Trade Union Act, 
and ask that the Conservative government look at withdrawing regressive amendments. 
 
MR. YEW: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to present a petition to the legislature on behalf of a 
number of working people, namely welders, pipe fitters, carpenters – all from various areas such as 
Prince Albert, Duck Lake, Key Lake, Buffalo Narrows, and northern Saskatchewan. I hereby submit this 
petition on behalf of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly under rule 11. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise under the provision of rule 11 to 
present a petition on behalf of 119 Saskatchewan citizens, almost all of them women, comprising two 
heterogeneous occupations, hospital workers and day care worker; homogeneous, through, in the sense 
that they both care for people. And all they ask is that this government who some compassion for them 
and withdraw Bill 104. 



 
June 15, 1983 

 
3113 

MR. LUSNEY: – Mr. Speaker, under the provisions of rule 11, I have yet another petition to present to 
this legislature on behalf of concerned individual working people of Saskatchewan who oppose Bill 104. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to present yet another petition to this legislature 
from another group of working people in Saskatchewan. I submit the petition under the provisions of 
rule 11, and I want to indicate that those who signed the petition are firmly opposed to the 
implementation of Bill 104. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to present to the Assembly a list 
of names included in this petition who are diametrically opposed to the amendments to The Trade Union 
Act included in Bill 104. This list includes a number of people, working people, from Saskatchewan. I 
think the majority would be from the city of Moose Jaw, who wants to use this forum under rule 11 of 
the Rules and Procedures of this Assembly to express their opposition to these amendments. 
 
MR. YEW: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to present a petition again to the legislature on 
behalf of 47 working people who are gravely concerned about the provisions of Bill 104, and who are 
firmly opposed to it, and would like to see this bill withdrawn. This petition is presented under the 
provisions of rule 11. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wish to rise under the provisions of rule 
11 to present the petition of 144 people. It is not clear how this petition was taken up. It includes people 
from Saskatoon, Gull Lake, and wide variety of different parts of the province. It seems to include the 
staff of the fire hall in Saskatoon and a number of farmers at Gull Lake, whose rights are not directly 
affected, but who understand that if you take away the rights of one individual in society you imperil 
them all. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: – Mr. Speaker, under the provisions of rule 11, I wish to present another petition to this 
Assembly on behalf of concerned working people of Saskatchewan who oppose Bill 104. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – Mr. Speaker, I would like to present yet another petition to the legislature from a large 
number of working people in Saskatchewan, primarily registered nurses. I submit the petition under the 
provisions of rule 11 of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly, and I want to say that 
those who have signed the petition are indeed concerned and opposed Bill 104. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, I wish to take this opportunity to present to the Legislative 
Assembly, under rule 11 of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly, a list of names who 
are included on this petition who are opposed to the proposed amendments which we are dealing with in 
the Assembly here today and would wish that the Conservative government would withdraw these 
amendments included in Bill 104. 
 
MR. YEW: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to present a petition to the legislature, a petition of 
47 names from the University of Saskatchewan which lists a number of professors, teachers, and staff. I 
present this under the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly under rule 7. These petitioners, 
Mr. Speaker, are firmly opposed to the provisions of Bill 104, and would like to have it withdrawn. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wish to rise under the 



 
June 15, 1983 
 

 
3114 

provisions of rule 11 to present a petition of 123 people, apparently from Saskatoon, all of whom stating 
that in their view the amendments to The Trade Union Act are not in the best interests of Saskatchewan 
people and they a ask that the bill be withdrawn. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: – Mr. Speaker, under the ;provisions of rule 11 I wish to present yet another petition on 
behalf of concerned working people of Saskatchewan who oppose Bill 104. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to present yet another petition to the legislature from 
yet another large number of working people in Saskatchewan. In this case they are primarily registered 
nurses from across the province. I submit this petition under the provisions of rule 11 of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly and I want to indicate that those who have signed are opposed 
and certainly concerned in respect to Bill 104. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to submit to the Assembly under 
rule 11 of the Rules and Procedures of this Assembly a list of 60 signatures who are working men and 
women from across Saskatchewan. The do not indicate which town they are from, but do indicate they 
work and earn their living in Saskatchewan and are concerned with provisions included in amendments 
to The Trade Union Act, Bill 104, and wish that the Conservative government would withdraw the 
amendment and the bill. 
 
MR. YEW: – Mr. Speaker, I would like to present a petition to the legislature from a wide sector of 
working people from Moose Jaw, Regina, a various group of working people: truck drivers, librarians, 
child care workers, and also people from the university I submit this under rule 11 of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly and I wish to state that they are gravely concerned about Bill 
104 and are firmly opposed to it. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise under provisions of rule 11 have a 
fairly large petition here to present to this legislature on behalf of concerned working people who wish 
the withdrawal of Bill 104. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: – Mr. Speaker, under the provisions of rule 11 I have a fairly large petition here to 
present to this legislature on behalf of concerned working people who wish the withdrawal of Bill 104. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to present yet another petition to the legislature 
from a number of working people from across the province, in Regina and other cities – again, primarily 
a group of nurses, who are in fact opposed to the legislature that is being introduced. And I submit this 
under rule . . . provisions 11. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, I wish to take this opportunity to submit to this Assembly 
under rule 11 of the Rules and Procedures, a list of 60 names of people who work in Saskatchewan and 
are opposed to the proposed amendments to Bill 104, which we are dealing with in the Assembly at this 
time, and would like the Conservative government to have this bill withdrawn. 
 
MR. YEW: – Mr. Speaker, I would like to present a petition to the legislature – a list of 50 names from 
various working people from Saskatoon. There are various pipe fitters, waitresses, labourers, carpenters, 
etc. These people are direly concerned about Bill 



 
June 15, 1983 

 
3115 

104 and the amendments for The Trade Union Act that are not in the best interest of Saskatchewan 
working people, and thereby petition to have Bill 104 withdrawn. I submit such under rule 11 of the 
Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise under the provisions of rule 11 to 
present the petitions of 32 signatories. Unlike all of the others I have given this does not give their 
address their occupations – so we know only that these people are concerned about what’s happening 
and thy earnestly hope this government will rethink its actions. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to present a petition to the legislature from a 
number of Saskatchewan working people under the provisions of rule 11 of the Rules and Procedures of 
the Legislative Assembly act. Those who have signed this petition are indeed concerned and opposed to 
Bill 104. I so submit. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, It is an honour to present on behalf of 50 individuals who 
would like us to submit their names as being opposed to Bill 104 under the rule 11 of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly, who would like this Assembly to consider the withdrawal of the 
amendments to The Trade Union Act in Bill 104. I now submit the petition of 50 names. 
 
MR. YEW: – Mr. Speaker, I would like to present a petition to the legislature on behalf of 51 working 
people who are gravely concerned about the provisions of Bill 104 and who would like to have the . . . 
who are firmly opposed to it and would like to have the bill withdrawn, and I submit such under the . . . 
this petition presented under the provisions of rule 11. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present the petition of a number 
of signators who urge that Bill 104, which will strip them of their rights to associate as employees, be 
withdrawn. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to present a petition to the legislature on behalf 
of some 30 working people throughout the province of Saskatchewan. I submit this petition under the 
provisions of rule 11 of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly, and I want to indicate the 
grave concern that these people who have signed this petition have in respect to the implementation of 
Bill 104. I so submit. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to submit on behalf of 46 individuals included in 
this petition, who would include dietary aides, RNs, nurses’ aides, from the hospital in North Battleford, 
who are wishing to express their opposition to the amendments to Bill 104, or included in 104, and 
would ask that the Legislative Assembly would consider the withdrawal of this bill at this time. I submit 
this petition under rule 11 of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
MR. YEW: – Mr. Speaker, I would like to present a petition to the legislature on behalf of people from 
various working groups and classes: truck drivers, meat cutters, housewives, and various other trades. 
These people are direly concerned about Bill 104 and are firmly opposed to it, and they would like to 
have the bill withdrawn. I submit such under rule 11 of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present the petition under rule 
11, of a number of signators, people who did not expect the election of a 



 
June 15, 1983 
 

 
3116 

Conservative administration to result in . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — When you’re presenting petitions, that’s all you’re allowed to do, is to make your 
presentation and not make a speech. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – I rise, Mr. Speaker, to present the petition of a number of Saskatchewan 
people who are concerned with Bill 104 and ask this administration to reverse itself. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am indeed pleased to present a petition to the legislature on 
behalf of some 48 working people from across Saskatchewan. I submit this petition under the provisions 
of rule 11 of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly, and I want to indicate that those who 
have signed the petition indicate their concern and firmly oppose Bill 104. I so submit. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, I wish to take this opportunity to submit a list of 55 names 
under rule 11 of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly. Mr. Speaker, these individuals 
are from the constituency of the Minister of Labour, and these brave souls have asked us to submit on 
this petition to this Assembly, and are asking that the amendments to The Trade Union Act included in 
Bill 104 be withdrawn. Is might say as well that these individuals also work for the government so I 
consider them deserving of some sort of an award. 
 
MR. YEW: – Mr. Speaker, I would like to present a petition to the legislature on behalf of about 30 
working people of various trades who are greatly concerned by the provisions of Bill 104, and are firmly 
opposed to it, and would like us to have this bill withdrawn. I submit such under rule 11. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise under the provisions of rule 11 to 
present the petition of a number of people, most of whom work in the constituency of Estevan. They 
wish to protest not just to their member, but to all members of this Assembly, the grave erosion of their 
rights under Bill 104. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, I very much appreciate to have an opportunity to submit to 
this Assembly a list of 51 names of individuals who are wanting us to relay to this Assembly their 
dismay with the amendments to The Trade Union Act which are proposed here in this Assembly at the 
present time. I would like to now submit this petition under rule 21 of the Rules and Procedures of the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I rise under the provisions of rule 11 to present the petition of 30 people who 
wish to protest to this Assembly and hope that somebody will listen to their plea that Bill 104 be 
withdrawn. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to take this opportunity to submit to the Assembly a 
list of 54 names of individuals who are wishing to use this forum of petition to express their opposition 
to the amendments proposed to The Trade Union Act which are included in Bill 104, and not only their 
opposition to it, but they are asking that the government and this Assembly withdraw the bill at this 
time. I here submit. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise under the provisions of rule 11 to 
present the petition of a number of people from Saskatoon who would appear to be associated with the 
university, who wish to protest what Bill 104 is doing 



 
June 15, 1983 

 
3117 

to them and their rights. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to take this opportunity to submit to the Assembly 
under rule 11 of the Rules and Procedures of the Assembly a list of 51 names on a petition. These 
individuals, too, are wishing to express their opposition to Bill 104 and asking that it be withdrawn at 
this time. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wish to rise to present the petition of a 
number of signators from the community of Prince Albert, who wish to protest to this Assembly the 
erosion of their rights to associate as employees. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to submit to the Assembly a list 
of 49 names of individuals who work here in the province. They would include people who work as 
miners, maintenance workers, shift workers, and looking at their place of residence, I would take them 
to be potash workers from Saskatoon. They wish to express through a petition from their opposition to 
Bill 104 and ask that it be withdrawn at this time under rule 11 of the Rules and Procedures of the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present the petition of 55 
tradesmen from the Regina area who understand what we hope to impress upon the government, and 
that is that Bill 104 erodes their rights to form a union and work in a union. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, I wish to submit my final petition which I have here today, on 
behalf of a number of workers in the province of Saskatchewan, 60 to be precise, who are wanting to 
express their opposition to the government’s proposals to amend The Trade Union Act the amendments 
which they would see as taking away rights, and would ask that Bill 104, being considered by this 
Assembly, be withdrawn at this time. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present the last petition of 
Saskatchewan people who pray that this unprecedented display of protest will move the government to 
withdraw Bill 104. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: —Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Bill 104 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – A question to the Minister of Labour. Mr. Minister, you have witnessed an 
unprecedented – at least in my time and I wish the Attorney General were here to confirm that because 
he has been here as long – an unprecedented display of protest. Members of this Assembly have just 
learned of some 7,000 workers who have voiced their opposition. My office is daily flooded with 
petitions. There will be more. My question is: will you now table your countervailing evidence that there 
are thousands of workers who support Bill 140. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, I will tell the Assembly and the member opposite that I have no 
intention of withdrawing Bill 104. I’ve been listening and we are with a few House amendments. 



 
June 15, 1983 
 

 
3118 

MR. SHILLINGTON: – The question, Mr. Minister . . . I’m surprised to learn that you think a few 
House amendments will pacify this level of concern. I didn’t ask you, Mr. Minister, if you’re going to 
withdraw it. I asked you if you would table some evidence of your assertion that there are thousands of 
Saskatchewan workers who support this outrage. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, I’ve told the Assembly many times that I have had a lot of 
correspondence and a lot of phone calls and a lot of meetings with a number of people around the 
province – workers in this province – and I have no intention of tabling that information because it 
wasn’t sent to me on that basis. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Well, without, Mr. Minister, disclosing the names which it would no doubt 
fear retribution by an eight-man opposition, without disclosing their names, could you just tell us how 
many people have had the courage to put their name to paper to support you? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, those people that gave me their names gave it to me in 
confidence, and I have told a number of people on radio shows that I have thousands of names in my 
office, but I have no intention of tabling them. They were given to me in confidence. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, to give us some evidence of that, some 
evidence beyond your own bald assertion, Mr. Minister, if you won’t give us the names of these 
phantom people, will you at least tell us how many there were? Were there 7,000? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, I told the member opposite that we had thousands, and I’m 
going to stick by my words. There are thousands of the up in my office, but I have no intention of 
putting their names on the Table. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Are you telling us, Mr. Minister, that there are thousands of people who have 
described themselves as working men and women who have written to you supporting this? Is that what 
you’re telling this Assembly? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t hear the question. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – I don’t doubt it; the Attorney-General is so vocal in misinterpreting. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Does the member have a question? If you have, get directly to it. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Mr. Minister, do you have 7,000 names of working men and women who 
support this outrage? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t want to embarrass the member opposite if I tabled 
the thousands of names that I have. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Will you admit, Mr. Minister . . . Mr. Minister, will you admit what is 
painfully evident to everyone, and that is that you’re not tabling them because you don’t have them? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, I do have them, and I’ll live and die by that statement: I do 
have them. But I have no intention of tabling them. 



 
June 15, 1983 

 
3119 

MR. SHILLINGTON: – Mr. Minister, do you have any which you are free to table? Do you have shred 
of evidence of any working men and women who will support you in this outrage? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Minister, I’ve said it many times already in this Assembly in the last 10 
minutes. I have not intention of tabling that information because it was given to me in confidence. 
That’s the way it’s going to stay. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to address a question to the Minister of Labour. I 
would just like to ask him: prior to brining in his amendments here, did he authorize or did he have any 
consultation or review of the Georgia model, that is, the labour legislation which is in place in the state 
of Georgia? And is that in fact what is being imposed on the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, I have never been in Georgia, U.S.A., in my life before. I 
wouldn’t have a clue what their labour legislation says because I haven’t seen it. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I would like to ask the minister whether or not, in 
designing and introducing the amendments, whether the minister in fact availed himself of the very 
regressive legislation that is in place in other conservative provinces, such as Alberta. Did you in fact 
review that as a model? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, we looked at a lot of trade union acts all across Canada, in no 
specific province – all acts, even the federal act. But the bulk of our amendments came out of the wishes 
of the people that submitted briefs and that to us from the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – One further supplemental, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask the minister whether he has, as 
his party has indicated in the past, to introduce in the future the right-to-work legislation here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, I’m not even going to talk about right-to-work legislation. The 
amendments proved that we weren’t going right-to-work legislation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Mr. Minister, you stated last year in this Assembly that you were considering 
right-to-work legislation – that that option was being considered. Are there, Mr. Minister, further 
amendments being considered to The Trade Union Act or The Labour Standards Act which will further 
erode the rights of working men and women? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, we chose a moderate approach to the amendments of The 
Trade Union Act and that’s what we’re sticky by. I’m sure that, given a chance to be implemented, it’s 
going to work and you’ll see that it’s going to work. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you’ve just witnessed 



 
June 15, 1983 
 

 
3120 

an unprecedented display of concern by over 7,000 people who don’t think it’s going to work in their 
interests. Mr. Minister, does this unprecedented protest not give you any cause for concern at all? Will 
you not rethink this matter? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, about all that I’ve got out of it so far is the fact that you’ve 
taken up two hours and ten minutes of time to be able to use up that time and not be able to debate the 
amendments, because you haven’t got the support to do it. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Mr. Minister, it just seemed like two hours; it really wasn’t hours. Your 
mathematics is as bad as our drafting. Mr. Minister, you have 7,000 people who are concerned and have 
the courage, in the vast majority of cases, to put their address beside their names. I ask you, Mr. 
Minister, will you not, in light of this, at least let the bill stand over the summer, so that people who are 
affected may contact and contact members of this Assembly? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to stay here all summer and hear the debate and 
get the bill passed, because it’s needed out there. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Mr. Minister, will you not admit that you are ramming this bill through the 
House to protect yourself yet further displays of concern by Saskatchewan people? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, we gave you an extra 10 days to have a look at the 
amendments, with no legislature. You had 24 hours a day for 10 days to look at the amendments. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Mr. Minister, you misunderstood my question, as you seem to misunderstand 
so much these days. My question was not whether or not we have sufficient time to deal with it, 
although that’s also in doubt, but whether or not the citizens of Saskatchewan have sufficient time to 
organize themselves and to bring their point of view to bear on this bill. And that’s why, Mr. Minister, I 
ask you again: will you not let this bill stand over the summer? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, the House Leader will decide that, but it’s not our intentions to 
do so. I would suggest that the people have had nine months to present their petitions, because they’ve 
known for nine months that we’re coming with amendments to The Trade Union Act. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to address a question to the Minister of Labour. The 
Minister of Labour ahs indicated that he has given . . . that his government is an open government. Here 
is a piece of legislation which will affect the rights of a lot of working people in Saskatchewan. If indeed 
you are, in fairness, going to allow the various groups to have an opportunity to examine a bill, why 
don’t you introduce the bill, allow it to sit on the order paper, allow their representative parties to 
examine it, and then proceed with your bill? Why are you ramming it through the House in a most 
secretive manner that has ever been witnessed in this province? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Give the hon. member an opportunity to reply. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, we have no intention of ramming. You can take all the time 
you want; we’re here to debate, and let’s get into the debate and the clause-by- 



 
June 15, 1983 

 
3121 

clause. That’s where we need to discuss it. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – Mr. Speaker, the minister has indicated on a number of occasions that he has had 
thousands of people writing in to him in support of his position and amendments, I would like to ask him 
if he would, in fact, detail at least, the time, the place, and the number of meetings that he’s had with the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour – that major group that represents the working people in this 
province. Forget about your chamber of commerce individuals. Let us have the list of the meetings 
you’ve had with the Saskatchewan labour federation. And you present that to the House. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, I can remember one meeting with the Saskatchewan Chamber 
of Commerce. I can remember one meeting with the SFL. I can remember one meeting with the building 
trade. I can remember one meeting with the personnel association. I can remember one meeting with the 
federated co-ops, and it can go on and on and on. We had one meeting with them all. Anyone that 
submitted a brief, we sat down with them. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – I’d like to ask a further question to the Minister of Labour. He has now detailed that 
he has in fact met with the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour one occasion I would like to ask the 
minister whether he feels that one meeting with a major labour group in Saskatchewan constitutes good 
faith consultation by his government, and as a Minister of Labour? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Well, Mr. Speaker, I suppose, in my judgement, it was. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the chamber of commerce had ample 
opportunity to present their point of view – they drafted the amendments. Trade unionists have not. And, 
Mr. Speaker, they have had only 10 days to react to this because nobody, nobody anticipated what we 
got. Notwithstanding that fact, a very significant fraction of trade unionists have responded with a 
protest, by my calculations a third of a quarter. Mr. Minister, will you not let this matter stand over the 
summer so that you can surely come to understand what an outrage this is? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, my understanding is that we are here to debate the amendments 
to The Trade Union Act. We are here to debate it. We have no intention of tabling or not tabling it or 
carrying on with it during the summer. And that’s our stand right at the moment. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Well, perhaps, Mr. Minister, you’d enlighten the Assembly as to why. What 
pressing urgency lies behind these amendments that they cannot wait until fall? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, we’re prepared to sit here. Have your time to look into the . . . 
whatever it is that you want to investigate. You’ve had eight or nine months to do it because you’ve 
know that it’s been coming for that length of time. It seems strange that you’ve left it until now. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Mr. Minister, we were in error. We quite overestimated your compassion. We 
did not anticipate this. Mr. Minister, I want to ask you if you really 



 
June 15, 1983 
 

 
3122 

believe that, when you tell us that this bill take precedent and must be passed before the House deals 
with anything else, that that really gives an eight-man opposition the option of standing it over the 
summer. Do you really believe that we have any option but to have this thing passed in a few days . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Give the hon. minister the opportunity to answer. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, so ashamed! I’m not ashamed at all! The whole intent of the 
amendments is employee rights, and we are going to expand and protect employee rights, give them the 
opportunity of secret ballot votes, and I don’t care if there’s another . . . There’s no other system in the 
world where a secret ballot vote isn’t the most democratic thing. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to direct another question to the Minister of Labour. 
Mr. Minister, you are introducing what is indeed a controversial piece of legislation, and you know it. 
What I’m asking you is that this session has been sitting for 57 days, and we had a fall session in the old 
session, and I indicate to you that you delayed the introduction of this bill until the very last so you 
could ram it through this House. What are you afraid of? Are you afraid of the workers of 
Saskatchewan? What are you afraid of? Allowing the people of Saskatchewan an opportunity to voice 
their opinion? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, I’m not afraid of anything. We took our time to go through 
this, months and months and months and months. We’ve been receiving briefs up until a couple of 
months ago. We wanted to wait and give everybody an opportunity to have their input, and as I said, my 
cabinet days in Saskatoon have been filled with the union workers and unions themselves coming and 
talking to us. We gave them the time. We’ve given them eight months to do it, and that’s the reason we 
never had it ready until now. We wanted to give them that opportunity. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – A further supplement. Mr. Minister, in the bill that you have introduced, will you in 
fact not deny to this House, will you in fact agree with the proposition that the major changes in this 
legislation are in fact the changes requested by the chamber of commerce of this province? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, I could bring you 12 briefs or 15 briefs that are exactly the 
same as what’s in the chamber of commerce. They’re all asking for the same thing. There are co-ops in 
there too, and could be matched with the chamber of commerce brief. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – One further supplemental. Mr. Minister, you said that your government has been 
working for months in respect to the preparation of this legislation. What I want to ask you is: in view of 
the magnitude of the effect it will have on the working people of Saskatchewan, why are you so adverse 
and completely opposed to give the workers of this province . . . If you agree that it’s a benefit to the 
working people of Saskatchewan, then why are you ramming it through this House? Why don’t you 
leave it over the summer and give the people the opportunity to totally support the bill? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, you’ve had, and everyone has had, weeks and weeks and 
weeks and weeks to give consideration to this. You’ve had two weeks since 



 
June 15, 1983 

 
3123 

it’s been tabled . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I’m talking about working people. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Okay . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We are not going to be setting it aside 
for the summer. We are going to follow through on it and get it passed. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the minister, out of the briefs that he has 
received – he says he’s received hundreds of briefs and thousands of letters – can you tell this Assembly 
how many recommendations from labour are included from the briefs which are included in the 
amendments to Bill 104? Will you tell me how many, whether there’s one, or two, or zero, 
recommendations that are in favour of the workers from the brief that you have included in the 
amendments? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, I would like to suggest to the members opposite there are a lot 
of items in that amendment bill that have been asked for by the workers of this province. And I get the 
feeling that you people across the way do not agree with secret ballot votes, you do not agree with 
employee rights, because that is what is built into the amendments of that act. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – A question to the Minister of Labour. He has indicated in answering some question 
how this bill is going to be so much better for the working people. I ask you: have you received any 
representation from Saskatchewan Federation of Labour or any other labour unions to delay the 
implementation? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, certainly we’ve had representations to delay the bill or do away 
with it totally. But that doesn’t mean that we are going to do that. We feel that the amendments are fair. 
We want to get some responsibilities built back into the system. We want a good work stability, and the 
employees out in this province are wanting . . . Jobs are becoming their number one priority and you 
know it and I know it. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: – I’d like to ask a supplemental to the minister, If indeed, Mr. Minister, you are 
convinced that the bill that you’re introducing is a benefit to the working people of this province, if you 
are in fact telling the truth to his legislature, then I ask you, I ask you: why are you afraid to delay it and 
allow the working people an opportunity to thoroughly join with you in the endorsation? Because indeed 
they haven’t. Why are you rushing it through this house at such a late date in the session? Why are you 
jamming it though without allowing the people of this province to voice their opinion? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, I’ve said previously many times that there are thousands of 
employees that have come to us to ask for the amendments and that’s what we’re coming with . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Thousands of them. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Mr. Minister, by common admission this is the worse drafted legislation to 
come before this Assembly in a long time, certainly the worst thing we’ve ever got from your 
administration. WE can only assume that it wasn’t intentional and that it was done hastily. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Does the member have a question? The member is making a speech and I would 
ask you to get into the question. 



 
June 15, 1983 
 

 
3124 

MR. SHILLINGTON: – My question is: since it obviously took you many months to make up your 
mind, why do you deny Saskatchewan workers the same length of time to consider this and respond? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, the workers have been coming to us and asking for the 
amendments. The unions were here with their briefs and we didn’t have hundreds, as the member 
opposite said. We have 58 to be exact. A lot of them, almost a third of them, are union briefs. The 
balance, we’ve been sifting out all of them, trying to arrive at a moderate approach to give everyone the 
opportunity to have their employee rights, their secret ballot votes, and that’s the thing that they’re 
asking for, and we’re giving it to them. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Mr. Minister, new question. Mr. Minister, only someone of your political 
persuasion could describe these amendments as moderate. Mr. Minister, by way of background, let me 
tell you I went through this; I found only four amendments that exist in other legislation across Canada. 
This is new legislation, Mr. Minister, and surely working people and their associations should have the 
right for something more than 10 days to consider the ramifications of a bill which is without precedent. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: – Mr. Speaker, I’ve said that we are giving you the opportunity to debate the 
bill, and we’ll be here as long as you wish to debate. You’ll have your input, and we’ll pass the bill. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – That’s right, Mr. Minister. You will pass the bill and you will do it in a very 
. . . 

 
TABLING OF REPORTS 

 
Report of Chief Electoral Officer 

 
MR. SPEAKER: — Before orders of the day, I’d like to lay on the table a report from the chief 
electoral office, who says that he has the honour to submit herewith, pursuant to section 222(1) of The 
Election Act, a report respecting returns of the election expenses incurred by candidates in the 
constituency of Prince Albert-Duck Lake, for the by-election held on February 21, 1983. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. McLaren that bill 
No. 104 – An Act to amend The Trade Union Act be now read a second time. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Order! There’s so much noise in the House it’s impossible to carry 
on business. I’d ask the House to return to some semblance of order. 



 
June 15, 1983 

 
3125 

 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I want to begin by talking about 
freedom. Freedom is something that the members opposite . . . about which they’ve had a good deal to 
say. We heard the member from Saskatoon Westmount tell us how poor people needed freedom – 
freedom to live in poverty without being assisted by government. No doubt we’re going to hear it again 
and again and again, as the Minister of Labour, with his peculiar views on trade unions, believes that the 
workers need protection against each other, but none is against their employers – because that’s what 
your documents say, Mr. Minister, is that the union members need protection against their associations, 
not against their employers. 
 
I want to begin by referring Conservative members to the charter of rights and freedoms. This may 
sound trite, but members opposite obviously need to be reminded because they have forgotten 
fundamental freedoms upon which this country was built. Mr. Speaker, section 2 says: 
 

Whereas Canada is founded upon principles that recognize the supremacy of God and the rule of 
the law . . . everyone has the following fundamental freedoms: (a) freedom of conscience and 
religion: (b) freedom of thought, belief, opinion, expression, and freedom of the press and other 
media of communications; freedom of peaceable assembly; and freedom of association. 

 
Mr. Speaker, since it seems to be so badly needed by members opposite, I’m going to table this copy of 
the charter of rights and freedoms. 
 
Members opposite are comparing Saskatchewan to Poland and East Germany. I may say that so, Mr. 
Speaker, are a lot of Saskatchewan workers. A lot of workers area saying the same thing. I remind the 
Conservative members of this because they seem to have forgotten that freedom of association is one of 
the four fundamental freedoms contained in this country’s constitution, and in the constitution of 
virtually every other democracy. Nowhere does our constitution say what the Minister of Labour seems 
to imply into it. Nowhere does the constitution say freedom of association except in certain 
circumstances, freedom of association except for working people. Nowhere does Canada’s constitution 
say you’re completely free to associate except when you’re trying to form a union of working people. 
 
Freedom of association is a fundamental freedom guaranteed by the constitution of Canada. I just read it. 
There are no qualifiers such as members opposite attempt to put on. There are no conditions. Freedom of 
association is guaranteed in the constitution without qualification and without condition. I suggest that 
members opposite remind themselves . . . Oh, we’ve got the goon squad back again with one new 
addition. Welcome to the member from Saskatoon Nutana to the goon squad. Every time members 
opposite get a little sensitive we see coming to this side the goon squad to try to disrupt the Assembly. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – I say, welcome to one new member. I haven’t seen you as part of the goon 
squad to date. So welcome to it. 
 
I remind the Conservative members, because there are sections . . . I remind Conservative members of 
this because there are sections in Bill 104, which I will come to later, that 



 
June 15, 1983 
 

 
3126 

actually attempt to qualify, or put conditions, on freedom of association in the case of Saskatchewan’s 
working people. 
 
Freedom of association, Mr. Speaker, is not something that originated with the charter of rights and 
freedom. Freedom of association was something that a former prime minister, who must be rolling over 
in his grave when he sees what people under the same name as him are doing . . . A former prime 
minister passed in the House of Commons a bill of rights, the Canadian Bill of Rights. And I want to 
remind members opposite what the late John George Diefenbaker had to say about fundamental 
freedom. 
 
Part 1 of that act, passed in 1960, states: 
 

It is hereby recognized and declared that in Canada there have existed and shall continue to exist 
without discrimination by reason of race, national origin, colour, religion or sex, the following 
human rights and fundamental freedoms, namely, the right of the individual to life, liberty, 
security of the person and enjoyment of property and the right not to be deprived thereof except 
by due process of law; the right not to be deprived thereof except by due process of law; the right 
of the individual to equality before the law . . . freedom of religion; freedom of speech; freedom 
of association and freedom of assembly . . . 

 
Something that is being denied the Saskatchewan workers. 
 
Freedom of association is guaranteed in numerous international treaties in which Canada is signatory. I 
remind members opposite, in 1948 Canada signed an international treaty, Convention No. 89, “Freedom 
of Association and Protection of the Right to Organize.” I have a copy of a the document here. I’m not 
going to go through it in detail, but I would invite members opposite to do so, because your bill violates 
many of the fundamental principles that Canada agreed to observe and respect in this international 
labour convention . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, if members opposite want me to read it, it 
certainly would be germane, and I could only think it would do them some good. 
 
Canada also signed Convention No. 98, “Right to Organize and to Collective Bargaining,” 1949 – 
another year. I have that document; I have a number of others, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to read from one 
other. It is the International Bill of Human Rights, the United Nation, again something Canada signed – 
if I’m not mistaken, when John Diefenbaker was prime minister. Article 20 says: 
 

Everyone has the right to freedom of peaceable assembly and freedom of association. 
 

But apparently not in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, apparently not here. 
 
Freedom of association, Mr. Speaker, has been recognized and supported by a number of clergy, one of 
who was not the Catholic bishops, not the United Church ministers who signed that today, not Father 
Bob Ogle – someone who’s been dead for almost 20 years, Pope John Paul; this is Pope John Paul II, not 
Pope John Paul I. But I want to relate to members opposite from his 1981 encyclical called On Human 
Work. The leader of the Roman Catholic Church had much to say about unions of working people and 
freedom of association, and I want members opposite to see what he had to say about states like Poland, 
and I suspect he might have said that about 



 
June 15, 1983 

 
3127 

Saskatchewan, had this been introduced in time. And he said, directly for the member from Kindersley 
who seems to need it: 
 

While work in all its many sense is an obligation, that is to say a duty, it is also a source of rights 
on the part of the worker. (It is also a source of rights on the part of the worker.) These rights 
must be examined in the broader context of human rights as a whole, which are connatural with 
man and many of which are proclaimed by various international organizations and increasingly 
guaranteed by individual states. 

 
That is true, Mr. Speaker, this bill goes contrary to the flow of our history, of our history. The 
Conservative government in Ontario, Queen’s Park, the Conservative government in Ontario, introduce 
the bill, which I’m told went some distance toward outlawing strike-breakers. 
 
That is not what this government has done. What this government ahs done is to make the work of 
strike-breakers infinitely easier, and to make it infinitely easier for employers to utilize it. What this 
province is doing runs contrary to the flow of modern history which has been to expand upon, and 
strengthen our laws which guarantee respect for individual and workers’ rights. 
 
Respect for this broad range human rights constitutes the fundamental condition for peace in the most 
world, peace both within individual countries and societies and international relations. I want to 
emphasize that last sentence. I want to remind the Minister of Labour that during the period of the 
former administration during the decade of the ‘70s, the average time lost for strikes in Saskatchewan 
was half the national average. That’s right, Mr. Minister. Under the, legislation which you are about to 
destroy, Saskatchewan had half the national average in terms of lost time due to strikes. 
 
Mr. Minister, the 7,000 or so people who wrote in fervently hope that we might equal the national 
average, much less be below it, because we will not. One of the many things your bill does is to foster 
and encourage strikes, disunity, and disharmony in labour-management relations. 
 
I shall, Mr. Minister, get on in a moment to the way that your bill does that. If you lose the page . . . The 
document, I may say, I got from the library is not the easiest to use. I want to remind members opposite 
who treat this as such a joke, I want to remind them of what the same Pope, Pope John Paul II, who has 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . He is not. I indicated I was in error when I said it was Pope John Paul I. I 
want to remind members opposite what he had to say about unions and their place in society. They are 
not, as the member opposite seems to suppose, an instrument of oppression for working people. That is 
the whole context from which your bill is drawn up, that unions are an instrument of oppression to 
working people, and along comes a white knight on a big white charger to save union people from 
themselves, because unions have nothing more than an association of themselves, because unions have 
noting more than an association of themselves. I want to remind you, Mr. Minister – since you need it so 
badly – of what Pope John Paul II had to say. In section 20, the “Importance of Unions:” 
 

All these rights, together with the need for the workers themselves to secure them, give rise to 
yet another right: the right of association, that is to form association for the purpose of defending 
the vital interest of those 



 
June 15, 1983 
 

 
3128 

employed the various professions. These associations called labour or trade unions. The vital 
interests of the workers are to a certain extent common for all of them . . . 
 

I will pick out another couple of sentences, which I think are particularly germane to the minister who 
has proceeded on talking about worker rights, obviously implying that’s worker protection from the 
union. That’s obviously what you’re saying. The member might well profit from reading the whole 
thing, but I don’t intend to do that. 
 

The experience of history (talking again about trade unions) teaches that organizations of this 
type are an indispensable element of social life, especially in modern industrialized societies. 
 

It may be the assumption of the minister opposite that the Tory wrecking crew is going to so thoroughly 
de-industrialize Saskatchewan that we will have no use for trade unison. That may be your assumption. 
It’s not mine, because I don’t think this administration is going to last long enough in office to 
accomplish it, although you’re making brilliant progress to date in the de-industrialization of 
Saskatchewan. Well, I want to go on. 
 

Catholic social teaching does not hold that unions are no more than a reflection of (a class 
interest) . . . and that they are mouthpiece for a class struggle . . . They are indeed a mouthpiece 
for the struggle for social justice, a mouthpiece for the struggle for the just rights of working 
people in accordance with their individual professions. 

 
Skipping the next sentence and going on: 
 

Even if in controversial questions the struggle takes on a character of opposition towards others, 
that is because it (being the trade union) aims at the good of social justice, not just struggle for 
the sake of “struggle” . . . (which is what the Minister of Labour seems to ascribe to trade 
unions). It is characteristic of work that it first and foremost unites peoples. In this consists its 
social power . . . 
 

You saw some of it today. And if you insist on passing this legislation in its present form, you will see it 
again. I spoke last night of my memories, many of them fond, of the former premier, Ross Thatcher, as 
an individual; I say “as an individual.” I grew up four miles from the man’s ranch. Long before I was in 
politics many of my memories of Ross Thatcher as an individual are warm. But I remember him passing 
Bill 2. I remember that self-satisfied smile on his face – the type of smirk which I see upon members 
opposite – and I tell you he was not long in regretting it, because bill 2 was a factor in the defeat of that 
government. 
 
So I say to members opposite: if you don’t feel it now, you will come to feel the power of working men 
and women bonding together to struggle for social justice. It goes on: 
 

. . . it is clear that, even if it is because of their work needs that people unite to secure their rights, 
their union remains a constructive factor of social order and solidarity, and it is impossible to 
ignore it. 
 

I want to repeat that. 



 
June 15, 1983 

 
3129 

. . . their union remains a constructive factor of social order and solidarity, and it is impossible to 
ignore it. 

 
One more paragraph, Mr. Minister, and I’m going to leave this. 

 
Speaking of protection of the just rights of workers according to their individual professions, we 
must . . . always keep in mind that which . . . conditions the specific dignity of the subject of 
work. The activity of union organizations opens up many possibilities in this respect, including 
their efforts to instruct and educate  the workers and to foster their self-education. Praise is due 
to the work of the schools, what are known as workers’ or people’s universities and the training 
programmes and courses which have developed and are still developing this field of activity. It is 
always hoped that thanks to the work of their union workers will have more, but above all will be 
more. 

 
Mr. Minister, if you’re done nothing else, this despicable bill, I suspect, will breathe a great deal of life, 
as there has always been, but it will breathe a great deal of activity into workers’ labour schools. Mr. 
Minister, my point is that working people in Saskatchewan, as elsewhere in Canada, are guaranteed the 
fundamental freedom to band together as they wish, and no government, no matter what is majority, has 
the right to place conditions, qualifiers on that fundamental freedom, and no government, no matter how 
large its majority, will succeed in doing so in the long run. 
 
I tell Conservative members this: even though your large majority may ram Bill 104 through this 
legislature, at some point, Mr. Minister, you government is going to be called upon to defend this 
legislation before another tribunal – a tribunal where the number of sheep in back-benchers’ clothing 
won’t be the deciding factor. That, of course, will be the tribunal of public opinion. You are not going to 
enjoy defending it in the long run before that tribunal any more than the late Ross Thatcher did. He had 
the same arrogant smile I see on members opposite – that smile which said what I’ve heard from so 
many rednecks and I just believe them. There are other people out there . . . I say to the minister 
opposite: there are other people out in society besides those who would tear away at workers’ rights. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, let me come to the question of why so many workers have used their 
freedom of association over the years to band together in unions of working people, and there have been 
many reasons. To understand those reasons, you have to understand the history of Saskatchewan. Others 
have spoken eloquently about life in our province in the early days, about how harsh the climate was and 
how that harsh climate made individuals feel so vulnerable, so exposed, but they learned to protect 
themselves by banding together, co-operating, as we often say in Saskatchewan; about how those 
pioneers often turned to collective action to fight against common enemies such as the powerful railway 
and grain trade monopolies which gouged individuals at every turn. 
 
So, Saskatchewan because in many a unique place –a place where collective action, whether you call it 
social solidarity, whether you call it co-operation, whatever you call it, became the norm rather than the 
exception. And with that came willingness on the part of the Saskatchewan people to ten submerge their 
own self-interest to the common good. That was why the principle which led to the creation of the wheat 
pool, of the producer and consumer co-operatives, and unions of working people, had such a strong 
growth within Saskatchewan. 



 
June 15, 1983 
 

 
3130 

Unions, like wheat pools, like consumer co-operatives, like credit unions, were organizations formed to 
work for the common good of their members, where each member had an equal voice, where the 
minority was listened to and respected, but here the majority ruled. It is against that special backdrop 
that early unions of working people were formed. 
 
Why did working people feel the need for collective action? For the same reason people all over the 
world feel the need for collective action to try to improve their working conditions, their share of the 
wealth for their toil; for the reason so eloquently started by Pope John Paul II. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I understand the member from Saskatoon University would like to introduce a group of 
students. I’d be quite happy to stand aside, provided I wouldn’t lose my priority in this debate. 

 
WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 
MR. FOLK: – Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and thank you to members of the opposition for the 
leave. I’d like to introduce to you and through you to the members of this Assembly, a group of 62 
students from Greystone Heights Elementary School in Saskatoon. They’re in grade 5 and 6. They’re 
accompanied today by Jackie Semchuk, their teacher, and other chaperones. I’ve already had the 
pleasure of having my picture taken with them, and enjoyed some refreshments with them, and fielded a 
few question. I’d ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in wishing this group a very 
enjoyable stay here in Regina. We hope you’ve enjoyed it here on your tour of the Legislative Building, 
and a very good trip back to a great city of Saskatoon. Thank you very much. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill 104 (continued) 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In Saskatchewan as elsewhere, these 
associations of workers often met strong resistance from employers. On rare occasions the employers 
have had the active backing of a right-wing government, and that, Mr. Speaker, has violated the 
fundamental sense of fair play the Saskatchewan people have, and those right-wing governments which 
have trampled over workers in Saskatchewan have historically met a quick end. I ask members opposite 
to consider that, to consider the history of governments which have tried to trample on workers’ rights. 
 
Against the powers and prerogatives of a powerful employer, what chance does an individual worker 
have to improve working conditions unless that individual worker is able to band together in common 
cause? To listen to some members opposite talk, one would think that workers in the smallest plants and 
the in the smallest shops organize themselves, and that it was small employers and small-businessmen 
who were beset by this conspiracy. Of course it’s just the opposite. The earliest associations and the 



 
June 15, 1983 

 
3131 

earliest unions were by workers who worked in the largest plants and the largest shops and they had the 
most difficult time in contending with an employer. Individually they were that much weaker and of 
course the employer was that much stronger. 
 
By any standards, Saskatchewan’s record of labour-management peace and progress is one of the best in 
Canada. But it is far from perfect. Our province has had its black marks. During the 1960s some of the 
provision, which are being re-enacted in this bill, were in our labour legislation then; they caused 
nothing but havoc. I refer members opposite to the provisions requiring . . . which gives an employer the 
right to ask for a strike vote after 30 days. I say to members opposite that was in the trade union 
legislation in the ’60s put in by the late Ross Thatcher. It had a horrifying effect on strikes. For reason 
that are not entirely clear why that happens, but that seems to be the pattern. It may be that after a couple 
of weeks employers realize that their employees are capable of forming a union, are capable of staying 
out, and are capable of hurting them if it carries on. It may be as well, in fairness, that the employees 
have missed a pay cheque and they’re beginning to understand that a strike hurts. But it’s well known 
among conciliators that the third week is crucial – the third week is the key week in settling a strike. If 
you miss that you have missed a golden opportunity. 
 
What the minister is enacting with this strike after a 30-day period is that it will be virtually impossible 
to settle the strike until after the 30 days have elapsed, because there will be no room for negotiation, no 
room for moving, no room for conciliation as long as that mandatory vote hangs over the heads of those 
involved in the negotiations. 
 
So this province has had its black marks. The 1960s were a black mark. And then, as I predict, will be 
the case in the ’80s, at least the first portion of it during which time you’re in office. In the ‘60s this 
province had a strike record which was far worse than the national average. It was the worst in Canada. 
It was because of legislation the likes of which we now see being re-enacted. 
 
You can go back further than that – in the time of yet another Conservative administration. You don’t 
have to ask a working person, “Why unions?” If you read the history of the Estevan coal-miner’s strike 
you wouldn’t have to ask. If you had read the documents and the accounts – they are in the 
Attorney-General’s department – of Black Tuesday, September 29, 1931, the day when three striking 
miners were murdered by the police as they attempted to hold a rally in that city . . . I urge members 
opposite to read those accounts, then visit the graves of those three miners in Bienfait, and then come 
back to the Assembly and speak on Bill 104. I ask members opposite to broaden their horizons to that 
extent. 
 
You wouldn’t have to ask a working person, “Why unions?” if you listened to the story of an employer, 
who in a rage during a labour dispute in 1973, threatened to bulldoze his plant with the workers locked 
inside unless they agreed to his demands. I urge the Premier in all sincerity to investigate that incident, 
and then explain why that employer – the general manager of which was the current Minister of Labour 
– how that employer who did that could be fit today to the Minister of Labour and to be introducing this 
particular bill. 
 
So this point, I hope that I have established two things for the benefit of Conservative members 
opposite. The first is that working people, like everyone else in this country, enjoy the fundamental 
freedom to associate as they wish, and that freedom is guaranteed by the constitution of this country. 
And I suggest to members opposite that 



 
June 15, 1983 
 

 
3132 

it would be wise, wise indeed, to refer these amendments to the court of appeal for a decision on their 
constitutionality before they’re enacted, because I say Mr. Minister, that these amendments may well be 
contrary to the charter of rights, denying, as they do, working people their fundamental freedoms. 
 
I can guarantee the minister of one thing. One of the ways the workers of this province will test your 
mettle is to challenge these courts, because I’ve no doubt but what the court of appeal will have an 
opportunity after they’re enacted, if you don’t do it before, to challenge this legislation. It will be done 
as surely as the sun will rise tomorrow morning. 
 
Secondly, the second thing I hope I’ve established in the minds of members opposite is that, in spite of 
the fact that Saskatchewan has a relatively good record of labour-management relations, there are valid 
and compelling reasons which have encouraged working people over the years to band together. They 
have done so. 
 
I want to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member from Prince Albert says more petitions – there will 
be more. There will be more as the people of Saskatchewan come to understand what the arrogance of 
55 seats . . . how the arrogance of 55 seats can warp the judgement of a government. People of 
Saskatchewan are coming to understand what 55, 56 seats means. What I means is that your judgement 
is warped and you don’t listen. We sat today and introduced an unprecedented number of petitions, 
something that . . . I have been elected since ’75. I’ve been associated with this Assembly in one fashion 
or . . . or since ’71, as has the member from Quill Lake. The member from Qu’Appelle, previously the 
member from Lumsden, goes back into the ’60s, and there is no precedent for what we say today. The 
arrogance – you could have cut the arrogance in this room with a knife – notwithstanding an 
unprecedented protest. 
 
Let’s contrast that, Mr. Chairman, with the record of the CCF and NDP with respect to working people. 
From its creation, the CCF in Saskatchewan was a movement of working people, both urban and rural. 
One of its earlier manifestations was in fact a party called a farmer-labour party. The CCF grew out of 
the farmer-labour party. That party had a commitment to working people, to ordinary people. It had a 
commitment to people and not just to the railways and the banks and the Montreal corporate lawyers; it 
had a commitment to ordinary people. 
 
This commitment was manifest in many ways. Support for co-operatives of all kinds – this province was 
in 1945, remains in 1983, the only province with a department of co-operatives. What that evidences is a 
solid commitment by Saskatchewan people to working together. Farmers may call it co-operatives; 
working people may call it unions, but it is the same phenomenon. There are policies and programs 
which strengthen family farms. By the time the CCF left office, farmers in Saskatchewan enjoyed a 
prosperity which was without equal in Canada, and that government enacted a sound statutory 
framework for working people in the struggle to better themselves. 
 
Throughout the years, the successive CCF and NDP governments, this statutory framework had 
developed into four distinctive acts. The Labour Standards Act, about which I predict that we will see, in 
this government’s arrogance, I predict we will see a further erosion of workers’ rights by amendments to 
The Labour Standards Act. I would be delighted to think that we might get through another session 
without amendments to The Labour Standards Act, but I just do not believe that. I wonder how the 
minister is 



 
June 15, 1983 

 
3133 

going to justify that, because The Labour Standards Act basically deals with unorganized workers. You 
can hardly defend unorganised workers against the unions. I wonder how you’re going to justify that 
particular bit of pandering to the business community. 
 
The Labour Standards Act sets out minimum standards for wages, hours, and working conditions, to 
which every employee is entitled. It makes no difference if that employee is unionized or not; it makes 
no difference whether that employee is working for a small business or a multinational corporation; it 
makes no difference whether that employee is working in urban setting or a rural. Regardless, that 
employee is guaranteed certain minimum standards by law. 
 
When we left office, Mr. Speaker, many of these minimum standards, including the minimum wage, 
were the best in Canada. I question, Mr. Speaker, how much longer that will be the case. I question 
whether or not that pinnacle of legislation will survive what years this government has left in office. 
 
The Occupational Health and Safety Act was yet another corner-stone. This act was the first of its kind 
in Canada, when it was introduced by the NDP in 1972. Many jurisdictions have attempted to copy it 
since, but it remains the best in the country by far. And this law quite simply recognized the rights of 
individual worker with respect to health and safety issues in their workplace. It recognizes and it is built 
on a worker’s right to: (1) know about any hazardous conditions in the workplace; (2) participate in 
decisions about workplace health and safety; and (3) refuse hazardous work. 
 
It’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that last year there were 50 per cent more man-hours lost due to 
accidents, compensable accidents, by the workmen’s compensation board – 50 per cent more time lost 
due to compensable accidents by the workmen’s compensations board than due to strikes. The Minister 
of Labour thinks that the amount of time we have lost due to strikes is abominable. I wonder why he is 
not concerned about time lost due to accidents, why we saw occupational health and safety gutted, as we 
did. But perhaps the member is coming to that; perhaps the minister, in his unique way, once he finished 
The Trade Union Act, will turn his brilliance to The Occupational Health and Safety Act. 
 
The third corner-stone of workers’ rights is the workmen’s compensation act. The act provides 
compensation for victims of industrial accidents and for the survivors of those who die from work-elated 
injuries. Under the NDP, this law was much improved in 1974, after a comprehensive review of a joint 
employer-employee review committee. IN 1979 a new act was introduce by the NDP, which greatly 
increased the benefits available to injured workers and the spouses of fatally injured workers. Last year, 
after yet another review by a joint employer-employee committee, our government was prepared to 
increase those benefits once again. We have waited over a year. We know this government is sitting on 
those recommendations, that the Minister of Labour has repeatedly promise to make a decision on them, 
but no doubt is having difficulty getting back to his desk to do so. 
 
The fourth pillar of workers rights in this province, enacted by the CCF, was The Trade Union Act. It 
was with a sense of pride and accomplishment that the first CCF government under Premier Tommy 
Douglas introduced Saskatchewan’s first trade union act in 1944. It was the first industrial relations 
statute of its kind in Canada. It wasn’t until three years later that the Parliament of Canada passed a 
similar law at the 



 
June 15, 1983 
 

 
3134 

federal level. Other provinces eventually followed the Saskatchewan lead. 
 
In 1944 Tommy Douglas looked to a number of precedents, one of which was the US. Statutes. You 
know, Mr. Minister, you have been successful in spreading the myth that Saskatchewan’s legislation is 
vastly different than other provinces, that it is a difference of a kind. I say, Mr. Minister, that is just not 
factual. It is just not factual. Indeed, if you read Canada’s labour legislation, most are very similar to 
Saskatchewan‘s because they followed Saskatchewan’s. What they lack is some of the refinements. 
Some of them lack them all. Some of them lack only some of them. But the difference in this province’s 
trade union legislation and other provinces has not been nearly as marked as you suggest. The difference 
now will be very real, because the kind of things, which you are introducing, are, by and large, without 
precedent. It’s by and large without precedent. 
 
Saskatchewan’s trade union legislation, as it exists today prior to the passage of Bill 104, is relatively 
simple and straightforward. It embodies four major principles: 
 
First: individual employee rights. The law guarantees workers the right to organize as they see fit, and if 
they so choose, to bargain collectively with their employer. It acknowledges, respects and protects the 
basic right of workers to decided whether or not to establish a union at their work place without any 
interventions and without any interference from their employer. 
 
The second is collective employee rights. While the law provides extensive protection for the rights of 
individual workers, it also defends them collectively. The law recognizes and protects workers as a 
group, once they have decided for themselves, of their own volition, to form an organization – not 
matter what the name, whether it be called an employee association, trade union, or whatever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask you to have a look at the House. What we see is symbolic of the interest members 
opposite have in the workers of Saskatchewan. In a debate in which they . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Right. In a debate in which their very rights are being taken away – and by far the most controversial 
piece of legislation this session – there are six members. Mr. Speaker, if my colleagues were to get up 
and leave, you would be forced to close this Assembly. That is the kind of interest members opposite 
have in the rights of workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was talking about the recognition that Saskatchewan laws gave to workers as a group 
once they decided for themselves to join a union. The law requires that the majority of workers must 
support the formation of such an organization; 50 per cent of those who are eligible to vote must vote in 
favour of forming the union; the majority must support it or sustain it as a simple practical matter; and 
that a majority of workers can have such an organization broken up or decertified, as it’s called, as their 
exclusive bargaining agent. And that happens on occasion. 
 
To listen to the members opposite you would think that workers have no control over their unions. As 
you are wont to describe them, the unions are instruments of oppression. I tell you that, unlike many of 
the employers, union representatives are elected, and union representatives are defeated when they’re 
not doing their jobs. Unions can only be formed by a majority of workers. If they aren’t serving a useful 
purpose, workers can and do vote to decertify. 
 
The collective rights section of The Trade Union Act recognizes that, as in any democratic body, the 
majority rules, and it has throughout the history of this province. 



 
June 15, 1983 

 
3135 

The third major principle of the current law is the specific references to unfair labour practices. The law 
sets out many specific labour-management practices which are illegal. It forbids certain acts by an 
employer such as interference, intimidation or coercion I say, Mr. Minister, that the amendments which 
you introduced seem designed to do nothing other than encourage employers to interfere, to intimidate, 
and to coerce their employers. 
 
At the same time, the existing legislation forbids certain acts by employees, as individuals or through 
their organizations. The rules are there. They are specific, and they have served this province well. 
 
The fourth and major principle in The Trade Union Act, as it exists today, is that it is meant to help not 
hinder the collective bargaining process. I would remind the minister that during the period of time 
when this legislation was in existence – during the ‘70s — Saskatchewan had a lost-time record half the 
national average. If Canada’s lost-time – lost time due to strikes – if Canada’ average was 
Saskatchewan‘s average this would be a different country. This would be a different country, Mr. 
Minister. Unfortunately it isn’t, because in the national level and other provinces, Conservative 
right-wing governments with close ties to narrow-minded business groups have held sway And 
regrettably this legislation is now being torn apart. 
 
The current law establishes an unfettered, unencumbered statutory framework within which collective 
bargaining can take place without unnecessary interference. It does not place petty, foolish and 
cumbersome restraints on the collective bargaining process, and I’m going to object in a moment to 
some of it – restraints which you place on collective bargaining which I think will serve us very, very 
poorly. 
 
It does not, for example, require conciliation or mediation to take lace prior to a work stoppage. It does 
provide the parties with a legislative framework to voluntarily accept conciliation. By definition the only 
way conciliation can work is if it’s voluntary. 
 
It’s our belief, Mr. Speaker, that the fewer obstacles we put in the way of both sides sitting down and 
bargaining away their differences, the better. That’s the major principle behind The Trade Union Act. 
We can put our money where our mouth was. We introduced that in 1973. We ushered in a period of 
labour-management peace which was unprecedented since the ‘50s. It brought to an end the dark years 
of strife which the former Liberal administration had introduced in the '60s. And that period, which I 
suggest for some time will be viewed as a golden period in Saskatchewan’s history, has again been 
brought to an end with Bill 104. 
 
Let us look for a moment at what the results of this legislation was. Members opposite would have us 
believe that the legislation – The Labour Standards Act, The Workers’ Compensation Act, The 
Occupation Health and Safety Act, and The Trade Union Act — heralded a period of unprecedented 
disaster. The truth is, Mr. Speaker, it heralded a period of unprecedented peace and prosperity – a period 
which many people are looking back on nostalgically, wish they had not brought it to an end last April a 
period which many people can hardly wait to re-establish whenever you people have the courage to call 
another election. 
 
The point must be made, Mr. Speaker, that during the ‘70s under this comprehensive, positive NDP 
policy towards working people the whole of our province benefited. The NDP policy towards . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . One member says I’ve knocked 



 
June 15, 1983 
 

 
3136 

them right out of their seats with this speech. I have indeed done that. There are only about eight left in 
the House. 
 
The point must be made, Mr. Speaker, that during the ’70s under this comprehensive, positive NDP 
policy towards working people, the whole province benefited. This NDP policy towards working people 
just didn’t permit economic development in our province. It didn’t just permit it – it made a positive 
contribution to it, just as surely as this legislation will make a negative contribution towards economic 
development. The record is clear on that point. During the 1970s, Saskatchewan created new jobs at an 
unprecedented rate, an average of 9,000 new jobs each year. That average was met during 1981, the last 
year we were in office. Members opposite may not want me to recall the record during 1982 when this 
wrecking crew took over. And you ‘re going to need to create 9,000 new jobs for some time to come to 
undo the damage you people have done. The Trade Union Act will be part of that damage. 
 
During the period of that administration, members opposite would have us believe that The Trade Union 
Act drove businesses out by the score. In a bizarre document that I’m going to get to called 
“Background Notes on the Proposed Trade Union Act,” we see the comment repeatedly made that 
amendment to The Trade Union Act are necessary to restore investor confidence. I ask members 
opposite if they aren’t admitting they are sacrificing the needs of working people to the get-rich-quick 
schemes of a very few. I ask members opposite to consider the very injustice and inequity of justifying 
these amendments, however bad they may be, by saying it’s necessary to restore industrial confidence. 
But I also ask you to examine the truth of the statement and hold it up against the historical record. 
 
In 1981 and in the ‘70s new investment in our province grew at an unprecedented rate. It’s averaged 
increases of 19 per cent a year. Our relative positive with respect to the economies of the other Canadian 
provinces was much improved. Saskatchewan went from being a have-not province to have a province 
during the 1970s under the NDP policy for working people. The Trade Union Act, which you people 
believe you need to tear apart to restore investor confidence, brought unprecedented investment into this 
province. Saskatchewan went from being a have-not province to a have province during the ‘70s when 
this legislation was brought in. 
 
Let me just give you one specific example of what this kind of atmosphere did for Saskatchewan in the 
‘70s. In 1971 the Saskatchewan per capita income was 20 per cent lower than the national average – a 
very considerable difference. In 1981 Saskatchewan’s per capita income was higher than the national 
average – a remarkable change in status – and that came about in a period in which a government was in 
office that enacted a large number of acts which benefited working people but when they benefit 
working people, they benefit everyone. Surely members opposite must understand history if they do not 
understand the trade union movement. 
 
In summary, the NDP policy for working people helped this province through a decade of prosperity and 
progress for the entire economy. What this government is trying to do is to rewrite economic history, to 
suggest that somehow or other The Trade Union Act, and The Labour Standards Act, and The 
Occupational Health and Safety Act, and The Worker’s Compensation Act were obstacles to economic 
growth. Of course, the opposite is true. That legislation brought in an unprecedented prosperity to this 
province. 
 
I want to turn, Mr. Speaker – as time is drawing on – I want to turn, for a moment, to the 



 
June 15, 1983 

 
3137 

principle behind the NDP’s policy towards working people and the principles enunciated by this 
government in Bill 104. I want to remind members of the stark contrast between the former 
administration and this administration . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yeah, there’s quite a contrast. 
“That’s right, “ the member from Prince Albert says: and we saw the result of that contrast today of 
petitions containing the names of over 7,000 people. 
 
Let’s take a moment to contrast the principles behind the NDP . . . We’re being distracted by a note from 
the government House Leader actually that I’ll come to in a moment. And I may say for the benefit of 
members opposite that I will co-operate with the request made. I want to take a moment to contrast the 
record of the NDP administration – the period of peace and prosperity for all – and the principles 
enunciated by this bill, and I want members opposite to ask themselves how on earth they believe this 
bill is going to maintain, never mind foster, the prosperity and peace which this province used to enjoy. 
 
I, at many times, called this piece of legislation the chamber of commerce bill, and have done so with 
good reasons. It is an employers’ bill. It incorporates only suggestions made by the employers. It speaks 
to the bad experience that some employers have had, and the Minister of Labour in particular in the past. 
I do not like bringing up personalities. When I see a Minister of Labour who allows his bitter personal 
experiences to be reflected in legislation, I think I would be derelict in my duty if I did not. 
 
It ignores entirely suggestions which have been made by individual workers and their representatives. I 
do not believe, Mr. Minister, that the briefs which you to from working people were all intended to be 
confidential. I do not believe you will be breaking the confidence by introducing them in this House. I 
will tell you why you will not table those briefs, because they are uniformly opposed – they are 
uniformly opposed to the legislation which you have brought in. It would be amusing, Mr. Minister, if it 
were not so tragic. Your comment that you have thousands of letters supporting this legislation would be 
amusing if it weren’t so tragic. It would be amusing because no one who is in any way familiar with the 
minister’s office would believe that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I suggest to you that you have no support on this thing from working people. 
 
The minister kept telling us that working people have applauded the bill, and that he received thousands 
of letters. I say, Mr. Minister, that applause came to a sharp conclusion when they saw the bill. The 
number of workers who have applauded the bill in recent days have been noticeable by their absence. 
The member from Quill Lakes offered you the opportunity to give those legion of supporters out there a 
chance to rally to your side and delay this legislation. You didn’t take it, with good reason, because there 
aren’t any. I wished, Mr. Minister, you had the courage to admit that. You haven’t the courage and of 
course there aren’t any such thousands of letters. 
 
I see five principles underlying Bill 104, this chamber of commerce bill. The first is a false assumption 
that there’s a fundamental difference between workers and their unions. Mr. Minister, the workers are 
the unions. Only a majority of workers can establish a union, only a majority can sustain one, and only a 
majority can at any time switch to another union. A majority may even, and on occasions do, revert to 
non-union status. A union is not, as Conservative members opposite seem to believe, an 



 
June 15, 1983 
 

 
3138 

institution that can exist or function without the support of the majority of the workers involved; it can 
only function with the support of the majority of the workers. 
 
The second principle of this bill is that it is designed to reduce the rights and protections of individual 
workers; not increase them as the Minister of Labour claims . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If the 
member thinks I’m out of order, why doesn’t he call a point of order? 
 
For example, I say the provision of this bill which says that there cannot be a second certification 
application after one has been successful, for a minimum of six months, reduces and restricts the right of 
individual workers to associate or organize. Mr. Minister, we both know where the bizarre provision 
comes from it. It comes from an incident in 1973, Morris Rod-Weeder, where a certain employer 
couldn’t resist dancing on what he thought was the graves of the union representatives – did so in such 
an obnoxious fashion as to irritate all the workers who promptly contacted the union, promptly held 
another vote and certified. That’s the explanation for that. 
 
As I say, Mr. Minister, when you allow bitter personal experiences to be reflected in this legislation, we 
would be derelict in our duty if we did not bring that to the attention of the public. As I’ve noted earlier, 
there’s a fundamental freedom guaranteed by the constitution of Canada, and that’s being violated. 
 
Another example is that now an employer can threaten an employee with the loss of seniority rights fro 
simply trying to exercise his or her rights under the law. Mr. Minister, in wrapping up, I really hope you 
explain how that protects workers’ rights – how that protects workers’ rights. 
 
The third principle is that this bill reduces the rights and protections which workers have now 
collectively enjoyed. This is the minister’s and the Conservative government’s assault on the principle 
of collective action, of social solidarity. Someone said a moment ago that these proceedings reminded 
them of Poland. Oh, how that is true. The workers of Poland know the principle of social solidarity, and 
they know what it means, and aptly named their union movement “Solidarity” as they struggle against 
the oppressive measures of an anti-democratic regime in that nation. 
 
I suggest that the Minister of Labour knows what the principle of social solidarity means as well. I 
suspect he found that out through bitter personal experience at the Morris Rod-Weeder Company, In 
solidarity there is strength in workers, and you seek to reduce that strength, Mr. Minister. This bill is 
your attempt to weaken the social solidarity of Saskatchewan workers. 
 
The fourth principle is that this bill is designed to strengthen the hand of employers, and it will almost 
certainly do so. Every single provision of Bill 104 will substantially strengthen the enormous power that 
employers now hold over employees in Saskatchewan. 
 
The fifth and final principle I find in this Conservative bill is the most interesting and the most bizarre. It 
is that Bill 104 introduces heavy-handed, cumbersome state intervention in the collective bargaining 
process. But, of course, there are two rules, are there not, Mr. Minister? There are two rules, are there 
not? There is, as we have said before on other occasions, socialism for the rich and free enterprise for 
the poor. It’s getting the government off the backs of the business community, but getting the 
government on the backs of the workers. There are, are there not, Mr. Minister, two 



 
June 15, 1983 

 
3139 

standards, depending upon whether or not this government perceives these people to be friends or 
enemies? This from a government that preaches that it’s the best government which governs the least. 
Yet here they are imposing bureaucratic red tape and interference on the collective bargaining process. 
 
Provisions such as the 48 hours notice of a work stoppage, possible required strike vote after 30 days – 
provisions such as these are not productive. They do not facilitate collective bargaining and quite simply 
amount to state intervention in the entire collective bargaining process. 
 
Mr. Minister, it was a fundamental principle of the legislation introduced by the former administration 
that workers and management would be free to work out their problems themselves without a good deal 
of interference. You, Mr. Minister, have a driven a tank over top of that principle. 
 
I want to continue, Mr. Minister, in a somewhat different vein. I want to take time now to respond to the 
points which the Minister of Labour puts forward, as the reasons why Saskatchewan must have Bill 104, 
and the changes which Bill 104 introduces to labour-management relations the documents I referred to, 
“Background Notes on The Trade Union Act,” speaks repeatedly of labour-management relations, and 
that seems to be a simple argument that this stripping away of worker’s rights is necessary to enhance 
investor confidence to encourage investors to come to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when Bill 104 was first introduced, I called it a way station on the road to right-to-work 
legislation; a way station on the road to labour laws such as now exist in southern Dixie states; Georgia, 
Mississippi, Arkansas. And the kind of talk we have heard from the minister about the need to boost 
investor confidence is the kind of talk we hear in those seven jurisdictions. It’s the same old open for 
business pitch and, Mr. Minister, I did some checking into that pitch that has been formulated by the 
American state of Georgia, because we’ve heard a lot in recent months about the Georgia model, and 
about this government’s plan to make Saskatchewan Georgia North. I’ve discovered that the pitch we 
heard from the Minister of Labour is very similar to the pitch which was used to sell the state of Georgia 
to prospective investors. And I am fortunate enough, Mr. Minister, to have with me a document which is 
in fact that brochure and it rings with the very same phrases, Mr. Minister, as what I have heard you use 
in your background notes. 
 
Let me just quote a couple of those for you. Here’s the boast – the state of Georgia’s – and it’s so 
reminiscent of what we saw in your publication: 
 

The pro-business attitude of state government (this is Georgia speaking) . . . The pro-business 
attitude of state government has given us the most streamlined environmental permitting procedure 
in the Southwest as well as right-to-work legislation free port tax incentives, a fair and taxable 
equitable tax structure which allows industry to pay only its fair share. Georgia leads the nation in 
the percentage of labour-management elections won by management. Georgia prohibits public 
employee collective bargaining (Is that next, Mr. Minister?), strikes by public employees. 
 
Mr. Minister, will it be your proud boast someday if Saskatchewan will lead the nation in the 
number of labour-management disputes won by management? Will that be your proud boast? It may 
well be, Mr. Minister. It may well be. 



 
June 15, 1983 
 

 
3140 

This right-wing government has coupled its open for business talk with anti-worker laws. That of 
course was the case with the Thatcher government. It was the case with Bill 2, The Essential 
Services Continuation Act. It’s remarkable, Mr. Speaker, how the language then and the 
language today is so similar. 
 
I want to refer Conservative members to the 1965 throne speech debate. When Premier Ross 
Thatcher told this Assembly . . . It’s a direct quote; it might have been lifted out of your 
documents: “And the welcome mat to private enterprise is out.” Time and time again, our 
ministers have invited business men from Canada, from France, Germany, an the Untied States 
to locate here. It didn’t work in the ‘’60s; it won’t work today. I warned Conservative . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Who built the potash mines? By and large, the CCF did. By and large, 
the potash mines were all in place before 1964. If the member had any understanding of 
Saskatchewan history, you’d know the accuracy of that statement. 
 
I warn Conservative members that your lack of understanding of Saskatchewan history – not just 
the potash mines, but the labour history of this province – is going to be your undoing. I just ask 
you to reread the history of the ’60s. Ross Thatcher came to power promising to create 80,000 
new jobs in four years. How reminiscent that is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member from 
Prince Albert asked me if I’ve ever belonged to a trade union. I’ll never find out the truth of your 
status, because if you did, no trade union would ever admit to having left such an unblemished 
right-winger behind. 
 
The only way, Mr. Thatcher said, the only way to encourage private enterprise to come into our 
province was to use regressive labour laws. But you know, the welcome mat wasn’t worn out .It 
wasn’t then and it isn’t now. Between 1965 and 1971, unemployment in Saskatchewan increased 
by 63 per cent. My, how reminiscent that is. Real investment in agriculture declined by 36 per 
cent. Real investment in primary industry declined by 49 per cent. Total real investment . . . 

 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. I’d like to interrupt the hon. member to advise him that we would 
like to take time now for Royal Assent, and he will be recognized again when the House begins 
tomorrow. At this time the House will prepare for Royal Assent. 
 
ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 
 
At 4:47 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant-Government entered the Chamber, took his seat upon the throne 
and gave Royal Assent to the following bill: 
 
Bill No. 105 – An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the 
Fiscal year ending on March 31, 1984. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 4:49 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:50 p.m. 


	QUESTIONS
	TABLING OF REPORTS
	ORDERS OF THE DAY
	ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS

