






















































Hansard: June 02, 1983


2845 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
June 2, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 
REPORTS OF COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills 

 
Bill No. 53 — An Act to amend The Non-profit Corporations Act 

 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the standing committee on non-controversial 
bills, I present the third report of the committee, which is as follows. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the non-controversial bills committee, I wish to report Bill No. 53, An Act 
to amend The Non-profit Corporations Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading and consideration in committee 
of the whole on the said bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 52 — An Act to amend The Religious Societies Land Act 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the non-controversial bills committee, I wish to 
report Bill No. 52, An Act to amend The Religious Societies Land Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move second reading and consideration in committee of 
the whole on the said bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I would move the said bill be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 59 — An Act to amend The Property Improvement Grant Act 



 
June 2, 1983 
 

 
2846 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the non-controversial bills committee, I wish to 
report Bill No. 59, An Act to amend The Property Improvement Grant Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — When shall this bill be considered a second time? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading and consideration in committee 
of the whole on the said bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 
Bill No. 60 — An Act to amend The Senior Citizens School Tax Rebate Act 

 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — As chairman of the non-controversial bills committee, I wish to report Bill 
No. 60, An Act to amend The Senior Citizens School Tax Rebate Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading and consideration in committee 
of the whole on the said bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 
Bill No. 63 — An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act 

 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the non-controversial bills committee, I wish to 
report Bill No. 63, An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading and consideration in committee 
of the whole of the said bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 
Bill No. 64 — An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act (No. 2) 



 
June 2, 1983 

 
2847 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the non-controversial bills committee, I wish to 
report Bill No. 64, An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act (No. 2), as being 
non-controversial. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading and consideration in committee 
of the whole on the said bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 
Bill No. 65 — An Act to amend The Western Development Museum Act 

 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the non-controversial bills committee, I wish to 
report Bill No. 65, An Act to amend The Western Development Museum Act, as being 
non-controversial. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading and consideration in committee 
of the whole on the said bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 
Bill No. 66 — An Act to amend The Statute Law 

 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the non-controversial bills committee, I wish to 
report Bill No. 66, An Act to amend the Statute Law, as being non-controversial. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading and consideration in committee 
of the whole on the said bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 



 
June 2, 1983 
 

 
2848 

Bill No. 71 — An Act to amend The Exemptions Act 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the non-controversial bills committee, I wish to 
report Bill No. 71, An Act to amend The Exemptions Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading and consideration in committee 
of the whole on the said bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 
Bill No. 72 — An Act to amend The Homesteads Act 

 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the non-controversial bills committee, I wish to 
report Bill No. 72, An Act to amend The Homesteads Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading and consideration in committee 
of the whole on the said bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 
Bill No. 74 — An Act to amend The Small Claims Enforcement Act 

 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the non-controversial bills committee, I wish to 
report Bill No. 74, An Act to amend The Small Claims Enforcement Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading and consideration in committee 
of the whole on the said bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 



 
June 2, 1983 

 
2849 

Bill No. 76 — An Act to amend The Regulations Act 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the non-controversial bills committee, I wish to 
report Bill No. 76, An Act to amend The Regulations Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading and consideration in committee 
of the whole on the said bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 
Bill No. 69 — An Act top amend The Beef Stabilization Act 

 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the non-controversial bills committee, I wish to 
report Bill No. 69, Ac Act to amend The Beef Stabilization Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading and consideration in committee 
of the whole on the said bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 
Bill No. 77 — An Act to amend The Surrogate Court Act 

 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the non-controversial bills committee, I wish to 
report Bill No. 77, An Act to amend The Surrogate Court Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading and consideration in committee 
of the whole on the said bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 



 
June 2, 1983 
 

 
2850 

Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. MULLER: — Mr. Speaker, this gives me a great deal of pleasure to rise in this House and 
welcome 21 grade 6 students from Christopher Lake, their teacher Dorothy Dennison, parents Dorothy 
Finlayson, Mr. and Mrs. Lou Bell, and Mrs. June Muir; and I hope they have an educational stay in this 
legislature this afternoon. I wish them a safe trip home. I’ll be meeting with them for pictures and 
refreshments at about 2:45. Would the legislature please greet them. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
HON. MR. MAXWELL: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to introduce to you and to other 
members of the Assembly a group of 38 students from Turtleford School in the town of Turtleford, back 
in my constituency of the same name. This happy group are seated behind me in the west gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. They are accompanied today by teacher William Kresowaty, Gail Wionzec, and parent Marilyn 
McDonald. 
 
We certainly wish you a very happy stay in Regina. Thank you for bringing the sunshine with you, and 
happy to say I’ll be meeting you at 2:30 in the rotunda. Would you please join with me in giving a very 
warm welcome to the students from Turtleford. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
MR. YEW: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker I would like to introduce to you, and through you to members 
of this Assembly, a group of 43 students from my constituency, the Cumberland constituency. They are 
grade 6 students who attend Creighton School, and they are seated in the east gallery. They are 
accompanied today by their teacher, Irene Coderre. I look forward to meeting with them with our young 
guests, later this afternoon for refreshments, and also for a visit. I hope that they enjoy their visit to 
Regina, and I know that we all wish them a safe journey back to Creighton. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 
members of this Assembly to join with me in welcoming this group of guests here today. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 
QUESTIONS 

 
Amendments to The Trade Union Act 

 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A question to the Minister of Labour on 
the amendments to The Trade Union Act, to which you gave first reading yesterday. Bill 104, or the 
chamber of commerce bill, as that bill is becoming known in Saskatchewan. The legislation, Mr. 
Minister, takes you down the road to one of your cherished goals, that of right-to-work legislation. I 
want to ask you, Mr. Minister, about your story — and I’ll be generous enough to use that word, ‘your 
story’ — that this legislation will improve the rights and protections of workers. My question, Mr. 
Minister, is: can you point to one of these amendments, just one, which was actively asked for and 
sought by Saskatchewan workers or their representatives? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I was very surprised that the chairman of the non- 



 
June 2, 1983 

 
2851 

controversial committee missed 104 on his list. Mr. Speaker, the amendments that we have come with 
are out of a tremendous number of briefs, and good briefs, that we’ve received from unions and 
employer groups and individuals and workers and so on, and we have taken out of all those the 17 or 18 
amendments that we thought were going to be what was needed to create some industrial peace in this 
province. And that’s what we have come with, and to my knowledge so far . . . I’m getting a lot of 
response from the workers out in the province right now and they are very favourable. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Chairman, I didn’t ask you about your 
private conversations with workers. It may come as some surprise to you to know that we don’t trust 
your version of what you . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I would ask the member to realize that we are in question period, and that debate is 
not allowed, and if you have a question I would like you to get directly to it. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — My question, Mr. Minister, is: do you have any evidence which you can 
table in this House that any one of these amendments which you introduced were sought by workers 
individually or their representatives collectively? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be happy to debate this in committee of the whole, and if 
you really wanted it I could provide a number of letters from employees, but I have no intention of doing 
it because they are signed letters, even. They were not ashamed to put their names to the letters, and I’m 
not going to open up that trust that they had with me in taking the action to talk to me about it, or wrote 
to me about it. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question, Mr. Speaker. I take the minister’s refusal to table even the 
briefs as proof-positive that none of these amendments were sought by workers or their representatives. 
Mr. Minister, by way of question, you say these amendments will protect individual worker’s rights. Let 
me refer you to one of the amendments which gives the labour relations board the power to have an 
employer supervise strike votes. Can the minister please tell me how that legislation will protect the 
rights and protections of workers? How does that amendment protect workers? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, employees or anyone that feels that they have been 
discriminated against can apply to the labour relations board, and that is not saying that the labour 
relations board will accept their story. They have the opportunity of preserving it. If the labour relations 
board sees that there may be some discrepancies in how the votes were conducted, at least they have a 
democratic process to go through to do it in the confines of a ballot or a voting booth, and expressing 
their opinion. And if that isn’t a democratic process I don’t know what is. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Another amendment would allow and employer 
with a strike vote a few days off to hire . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please! I would like to refer to the hon. member to Beauchesne’s page 132, 
paragraph 359 sub 12. And it said: 
 

Questions should not anticipate a debate scheduled for the day, but should be reserved for the 
debate. 
 

And I would rule that the questions, basically, are out of order because this item is scheduled for debate 
on the order paper and you will be given that opportunity later. 



 
June 2, 1983 
 

 
2852 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Minister of Labour 
and I would like to direct the question to the minister concerning The Trade Union Act amendments 
which he has introduced into this House and the question I ask is this: are you prepared to present this 
legislation for public hearing and public scrutiny over the summer, and introduce it at the session of the 
legislature later this year? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I have no intention of doing what the Hon. Leader of the 
Opposition is asking. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In view of the fact that this legislation will 
touch the lives of many hundreds of people, and in view of the fact that the amendments to The Vehicles 
Act will touch the lives of many hundreds of people, and in view of the fact that your colleague and 
seat-mate had the good sense to have a white paper, to send out a questionnaire to Saskatchewan 
residents, to issue a layman’s draft of the legislation, and provide ample opportunity for public 
discussion, will you follow the same course as you seat-mate, the Minister of Highways, and follow as 
similar course of action with respect to this legislation? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve gone through the process. In fact I know I’ve 
gone through the process. In the last eight or nine months I’ve been talking to many, many groups 
around the province — individuals, union workers coming into my office. And we could carry this on 
forever. At this point in time, we’ve come down with 17 or 18 amendments that, generally speaking, are 
the priority items in any people’s minds. The general public was fed up with the amount of work 
stoppages that are occurring in this province. All we’re asking is for some responsibility with unions, 
employers, and employees to be put into place, and some co-operative approach to solving our economic 
problems; and if that can happen we wouldn’t even need a trade union act. 
 
When you start looking at the number of lost man-days of work over the last 10 years, and when you 
start looking at the families that have lost out on their income to pay their mortgages, and pay for their 
cars, and get their children to universities — that’s got to have a tremendous impact. And all we’re 
doing is trying to lessen that amount of lost income and still leave the union act, The Trade Union Act in 
place. As long as there’s section 36, clause 1 in there, there is no ‘right to work’. They still have the 
right to organize. They still have the right to choose the union of their choice. They still have the right to 
collective bargaining . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That isn’t ‘right to work.’ And when they . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. I believe that when the question is out or order the answer also is 
approaching debate and is also out of order, and I would ask that this subject be left. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I want to ask another question, and invite you to rule it 
either in order or out of order. This concerns the questions of whether or not the minister should 
properly submit this bill to public hearings and to a white paper — which has nothing to do with the 
content of the bill. 
 
My question to you, sir, is this: in view of the fact that this bill will, as you freely admit, touch the lives 
of many hundreds and thousands of people across this province, do you not feel it appropriate to provide 
an opportunity for those same lives and those same citizens to have an opportunity to present their case 
to a tribunal, to a royal 



 
June 2, 1983 

 
2853 

commission, to any other body which would hear public presentations? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, we are not destroying The Trade Union Act. All we’re doing 
is adding and making some amendments to it. You talk about my seat-mate — he’s coming with a whole 
brand new vehicles act, and I would suggest that it probably needs a white paper. If I was coming out 
with a new trade union act, I’d go the same route that my colleague has done. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, you alleged that this bill is opposed by the executive members 
of trade unions but supported by workers, and yet, Mr. Minister, the timing of the introduction of this 
bill in the House is designed to minimize the opportunities that workers will have to make their views 
known, because you’ve introduced it in the dying days of the session. Mr. Minister, I ask you again: if 
you believe that this bill is supported by the vast majority of workers, will you give them an opportunity 
to say so and let this bill stand over until the fall? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, the timing of this bill will be up to my House Leader. I’m sure 
that the members opposite will have ample time to look at the 18 amendments to a trade union act. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the Minister of Advanced Education 
and Manpower can shed some light on this. It had to do, Mr. Minister, with the information you tabled 
in this legislature a week ago Friday last, information that you and a number of senior civil servants 
travelled to Atlanta, Georgia to study that southern state’s economic development model. Can the 
minister please inform this Assembly when this trip took place and whether the information you 
gathered on this trip had anything to do with the amendments to The Trade Union Act which we have 
now had first reading? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Speaker, I will admit to having been taken by surprise, perhaps to even 
shock, having been asked that question, because a I fail to see too much relevance between the trip that I 
made to Atlanta, and to Orlando, and The Trade Union Act, the legislation we’re talking about. I went 
there specifically for the purpose of taking a look at educational programs and/or attaching training to, 
establishing some relevance to, industry. That’s what I devoted my attention to, entirely. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question. The relevance, Mr. Minister, is that The Trade Union Act . . . 
I can see the minister’s having trouble hearing. New question, Mr. Speaker. The relevance is that this 
Trade Union Act is, of course, part and parcel of the open for business philosophy. My question to you, 
Mr. Minister, is: did you file a written report to your colleagues in cabinet, and if so, will you table the 
same in the legislature? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is the negative: no, I did not. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 
Winter Road for Northern Saskatchewan 



 
June 2, 1983 
 

 
2854 

MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker I direct my question to the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. It’s regarding a situation that’s developing up in the far northern part of Saskatchewan 
due to the closure of Uranium’s Eldorado mine and the stores that have closed down. I have a band 
council resolution, by way of information, Mr. Speaker, that has been sent to the provincial government 
and the federal government requesting a winter road from Wollaston Lake to Fond-du-Lac and Stony 
Rapids-Black Lake area. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you comment on the band council resolution at this time, and could you indicate 
whether your department will be taking steps to provide a winter road to the citizens of Fond-du-Lac, 
Black Lake, Stony Rapids, and that uranium city area? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have not seen the resolutions from this band. I’m quite 
prepared to take a very close look at this resolution. I am meeting on almost a weekly basis with the 
Minister of Northern Saskatchewan to ensure that we can solve and assist the people of northern 
Saskatchewan in nay of their transportation problems. And by all means I’m quite prepared to take a 
look at that resolution and review it. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. I 
would assume then that the Minister of Highways and Transportation has not received this band council 
resolution. It’s dated May 10, 1983, which is three weeks ago, to the provincial government. I direct this 
supplementary to the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. Due to the fact that the high cost of supplies 
into them areas, and the band council resolution states out quite clearly that they are now paying 80 
cents a pound for supplies, and that will probably go up to $1 a pound . . . Would the Minister of 
Northern Saskatchewan indicate whether he has seen the band council resolution, and if not, when he 
does see it will he support the band council resolution to supply a winter road to the citizens of that far 
northern area? 
 
HON. MR. MCLEOD: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can say to the hon. member that I haven’t seen the 
actual band council resolution but I have been made aware of the concerns that they’re expressing. The 
concerns of that band are the same concerns as you have indicated have been expressed from all over the 
communities in the Athabasca basin. The problem we have — as the hon. member also will know very 
well — presently is the situation at Uranium City, that everyone in this house and everyone in the 
province is, I’m sure, well aware of, that the population certainly hasn’t stabilized yet. The predictions 
are that it would be about in the 250 to 300 level. We know that we have to look very carefully at all 
modes of transportation in terms of getting supplies to that whole basin. We know that that’s a problem 
that’s on our plate. We accept that responsibility. As my colleague, the Minster of Highways and 
Transportation, has said, ‘we’re looking at that all the time.’ 
 
So as you will know, about the winter road, we made an announcement at one stage that there was 
unlikely there would be a winter road across Lake Athabasca again after the past winter. What we have 
said subsequent to that is: at the time that we announced that Uranium City would be the regional centre 
for that area we have said that we would look at all modes of transportation to see which is most cost 
effective, and we are still doing that. I can assure the hon. member that that’s under consideration at all 
times. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. By way 
of information, whether uranium City stabilizes or it doesn’t 



 
June 2, 1983 

 
2855 

stabilize, the fact is that they have lost the source of supplies, Northern Transportation Company, who 
runs the barges from Fort McMurray, will no longer be coming in. that barge, when it did come in to 
uranium City, supplied Fond-du-Lac and Black Lake and Stony Rapids twice yearly, in September and, I 
believe, in July. 
 
The main concern expressed in the band council resolution is the fact that they need to get these supplies 
in and they just can’t afford to pay 80 cents a pound right now — and will be going up to a dollar with 
air freight — and their main request is that the Government of Saskatchewan and the Government of 
Canada provide a winter road from Wollaston Lake to Fond-du-Lac. My question is: will you support 
this band council resolution from the Fond-du-Lac band to put in a winter road in for the upcoming 
winter? 
 
HON. MR. MCLEOD: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what I’ve indicated to the hon. member is . . . I’ll just 
reiterate what I’ve said. All modes of transportation into that area are under consideration. You 
mentioned the barge system. Certainly there are discussions going on between our government and the 
federal government who operates the barge system out of Fort McMurray. So there’s the barge system, 
there’s air transportation, and there is the possibility of a inter road, whether is’ across Lake Athabasca 
or from Wollaston, coming from the east side. All of these things are under consideration. I can’t say to 
you today which way we’ll go, but we are very much aware of the problems of the remote northern 
communities in terms of the costs of getting supplies to them. We’re aware of that and we’re addressing 
the problem. 

 
Funding of New National Metis Alliance 

 
MR. YEW: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker I’d like to direct my question to the Minister of Justice, the 
minister responsible for the new Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat. My question is . . . A prominent 
PC Tory political organizer — who was on the government pay-roll, by the way — has now feebly 
established a national Metis alliance of Canada — or whatever — in order to undermine and destroy the 
popular and democratic Association of Metis and Non-Status Indians in Saskatchewan. My question is, 
Mr. Minister: has your department provided any funding to this new Tory front organization — the 
national Metis alliance of whatever? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — It’s obviously had a tremendous impact on the hon. member. First of all, to the 
best of my knowledge, the individual that the hon. member has raised the matter before, the individual is 
not on the pay-roll of the government. That’s the first inaccuracy and error in your statement. Secondly, 
I’m not aware of any funding. Thirdly, I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we’re seeing today an example of the 
true NDP position that people cannot go out on their own and organize and get institutions or 
organizations established, that the NDP selectively chooses ones that are of their choice, and if anyone 
else goes out to try and start any organization, they are condemned by the NDP as an organization. 
 
I will defend, Mr. Speaker, I will defend the right of anyone to go out and establish organizations and 
exercise their right to freedom of assembly and freedom of speech, and this government will stand 
behind anybody that wants to make that effort. And I’m very much ashamed of the opposition opposing 
that type of activity. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
MR. YEW: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. My question to the Minister of Justice was: did you or did 
you not provide any funding to the national Metis association of this new 



 
June 2, 1983 
 

 
2856 

organization? And if you have, for what purposes? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — As I indicated in my answer, if the NDP opposition had been listening, that to 
the best of my knowledge no funds were supplied. That means no moneys were supplied; no dollars 
were supplied, no cents were supplied; no credit cards were supplied. And that’s what I said in my 
answer, and I hope that the hon. member will get up and apologize to the people of this province for the 
position he’s taking against people going out and organizing for their own self-interest, and as I say 
exercising their right of freedom of speech and freedom of assembly. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
MR. YEW: — Mr. Speaker, a new question. It’s been quite noticeable over the past year that your 
government has consistently had adverse communications in relationships with existing parent native 
organizations. My question to you, Mr. Minister of Justice, is: are you deliberately trying to undermine 
the parent native organizations such as FSI and AMNSIS (Association of Metis and Non-Status Indians 
of Saskatchewan)? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I find it very strange that the NDP would take the position that this 
government is trying to undermine natives’ organizations when the president of the AMNSIS publicly 
stated that relations were no better or no worse between this government and the previous government. 
And he made it quite clear, Mr. Sinclair made it quite clear, that the ongoing difference between any 
native organization and any government were no better or no worse. 
 
This government has, in fact, increased the payments to native women’s organizations, more so than 
ever in the history of this province. 
 
Thirdly, we have made it clear that this government supports, for the first time in Saskatchewan’s 
history, economic development on the reserves, as a matter of policy; that in fact over $2 million is 
being given to the bands of this province for economic development. This government stands for 
economic development of the native people; this government stands for economic responsibility and 
some economic independence. 
 
I know it’s a big change from what the hon. member’s policies were in the past, but a change in policy 
was long overdue, Mr. Speaker. I suggest to the hon. member that he has been inaccurate and in error in 
every position that he’s taken today and I would hope that he would reasonably go back and reconsider 
his position. 
 
MR. YEW: — New question, Mr. Speaker. As a preamble, the Minister of Justice indicates that they 
have allotted to the native community, to the band councils, $2.1 million, and I commend them for that. 
However, the former . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
MR. YEW: — However, for the record, I also remind the hon. member that the former administration, 
the NDP government of this province . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Does the member have a question? This is a supplementary, and I 
think that the member realizes you are not allowed a long preamble. 



 
June 2, 1983 

 
2857 

MR. YEW: — My apologies, Mr. Speaker. I indicated it was a new question. That’s why I lead off with 
a preamble. However, the former administration had earmarked $24.5 million for the native community. 
Now, my question to you: are you telling me and the native community of this province that you will 
resolve all native problems and social and economic conditions of the unemployed, the high 
sky-rocketing welfare roll of this native . . . of this province in the native community by that $2.1 
million? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — No, I would suggest that all the money in the world would not resolve the 
problems that exist, and I don’t believe that it’s within the scope of any government to solve all the 
problems that exist, and we make no pretensions that we’re going to be able to solve all the problems 
that exist. And I don’t think that the NDP opposition stands up and says that it solved all the problems 
that exist. 
 
I did indicate to the hon. member and gave him the statistics during committee of finance which showed 
that in the last 10 months, or the first 10 months of the PC government, more money was spent on 
economic development — direct economic development for the natives — than in all 11 years of the 
NDP government, that there has been a redirection of funding directly to economic development. 
 
And I suggest to the hon. member, I appreciate the fact that he is commending us for our efforts. We are 
attempting to get direct economic development. I make no pretensions that our approach is going to be 
any better or any worse than anyone else’s. I do believe that the Indian leadership now is of the ability 
and the capability and the maturity to start to take advantage and initiate economic development, and 
this government intends to support them in every way that we can. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 
ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 
House-Media Ball Game 

 
MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Speaker, as is traditional, it’s my duty as Government Whip to report on last 
night’s baseball game between our MLAs and members of the press. Now to make a long story short, 
Mr. Speaker, the MLAs crushed their feeble media opponents, and as a matter of fact, we actually toyed 
with them. Very briefly, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity, however, to name just a few 
of the game’s many, many stars. 
 
Hot on the corners for the MLAs were two members from Saskatoon: Saskatoon University, Rick Folk; 
and the member for Saskatoon Riverside, Jo-Ann Zazelenchuk. But defence isn’t the only thing the 
MLA team had going for it. The bats were hot too, and the game was highlighted by several extra base 
hits. As a matter of fact our Minister of Finance, the Hon. Bob Andrew, made more than several vicious 
cuts. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
MR. KLEIN: — Impressingly enough, however, the winning run was scored by NDP member, Fred 
Thompson. I would like to point out, however, that he crossed home plate on an extra base hit by the PC 
member for Cut Knife-Lloyd, Michael Hopfner. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the media changed their tactic quite dramatically for baseball from 



 
June 2, 1983 
 

 
2858 

their hockey team strategy. Firstly, Mr. Speaker, in hockey they had more than quite a few left-wingers. 
But it was painfully obvious that last night all, save one, batted from the right side. I’m envious of the 
female representation in this Assembly. They supplemented their ranks with women who are by far their 
superior ball players. 
 
Eva Lukomski, from the Leader-Post, pitched the entire game. This was an exceptional feat when you 
consider the awesome power that she faced, and even Joe Ralko of Canadian Press could only withstand 
the pressures of catching for three innings. George Bentley, of Broadcast News, made an excellent, 
eye-closed double play. And in fairness to their morale, our pitcher, MLA Duane Weiman, who’s from 
Saskatoon Fairview, allowed a grand-slam home run by his own volition, to Michel Potvin of CBC 
Radio Canada. 
 
Unfortunately, a slight rhubarb did result also, and Danny Oldfield of the CBC proved to be no belly 
match at all for our umpire, Ralph Katzman, the MLA from Rosthern. 
 
In summation, Mr. Speaker, the biggest flash the media made followed at a gathering after the game, 
and a presentation of the trophy was made to our captain, Keith Parker, the MLA from Moose Jaw 
North, and the big award for the night went to the NDP — Fred Thompson, MLA, Athabasca. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
MR. KLEIN: — Understandingly, he accepted the prize, which was a blue shirt. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that the MLAs were disappointed with the absence of the 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. We were also disappointed, but, as suspected, being that the MLAs won so 
handily, we noticed the total lack of coverage of this exciting event in today’s press. Thank you. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, would like to say a few words about the game 
last night. I found it a very interesting game, and it’s always nice to be on the winning side. I guess I 
shouldn’t have said that, Mr. Speaker. But I do want to say, in scoring the winning run I did have a lot of 
help, and most certainly that winning run would never have come about if it hadn’t been for the 
tremendous infield that we had. Rick Folk at third base had no problems handling baseballs. As he does 
with curling rocks and golf clubs, he did a fine job, and, as our coach on first base who has played 
semi-pro ball, he proved that he is quite capable of handling some tremendous shots that the press were 
batting out there. It was a close game. It was well played, and I really enjoyed that game. 
 
In closing, I want to thank all the members of the Conservative Party who allowed me to play with them 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And I don’t know who paid the press catcher, but when he threw the ball 
and hit me on the head, it was pretty accurate. It got me square on the jaw. But anyway, it was a good 
game. 
 
I want to thank the Kleins for their generous hospitality after the game, and the press for providing 
refreshments, and in closing, I know that the press is waiting for next year. 
 
But I want to close with a little bit of caution that we did not have the member for Kelvington-Wadena 
playing for us, nor the Deputy Premier, not the member for Shaunavon or Regina Centre. And them four 
players, I hear, will be around next year, so we most certainly will be looking forward to that game next 
year and I think that we will 



 
June 2, 1983 

 
2859 

be able to repeat . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Right. That was our B team last night. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 
MOTIONS 

 
Referral of Bills to Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills 

 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I move, seconded by the Minister 
of Finance, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 98, An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of The Northern Municipalities Act 
be discharged and the bill referred to the standing committee on non-controversial bills. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — I move, seconded by the Minister of Finance, with leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 101, Ac Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of The Vehicles Act, 1983, be 
discharged and the bill referred to the standing committee on non-controversial bills. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Finance, with leave of 
the Assembly: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 102, An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments resulting from the enactment of The Public Trustee Act and to repeal The 
Administration of Estates of mentally Disordered Persons Act be discharged and the bill referred 
to the standing committee on non-controversial bills. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 86 — An Act to amend The Heritage Fund (Saskatchewan) Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister introduce his officials please? 



 
June 2, 1983 
 

 
2860 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Yes. Mike Costello and Ron Davis. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I want to ask a couple of questions about this. As I 
understand the bill, it will have the effect of removing the limitations on the ability of the government to 
draw down out of the heritage fund in any one year. I’m not sure that I understand what the bill does in 
this regard, and I could refer to section 5 of the bill where it repeals section 16 and 17 of the act, but I 
will ask the questions here because there are a number of other sections may interrelate. 
 
Is it correct to say that the effect of this Bill 86 will be to permit the transfer from the heritage fund to 
the Consolidated Fund of 100 per cent of the income received by the heritage fund in any year from its 
sources of revenue which are royalties, land sales and the like; and if that is accurate, is it also permitted 
to transfer any of the capital standing in the heritage fund to the Consolidated Fund for expenditure in a 
current year? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The first thing is that 100 per cent of the revenue or the income can be now 
taken from the heritage fund into the Consolidated Fund, but this does not allow us to draw capital from 
the heritage fund into the Consolidated Fund. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I must say that I regret the need for 
making that change, and I acknowledge that if we are running significant deficits in the Consolidated 
Fund. It is perhaps not reasonable — if they’re likely to continue — to run up surpluses in the heritage 
fund. But does the minister feel that there will be a need to transfer funds from the heritage fund to the 
Consolidated Fund, right up to 100 per cent of the revenue of the heritage fund on a consistent basis, or 
is this thought of as a contingency measure? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, I suppose in response, that this year we haven’t taken the full 100 per 
cent. We left a small amount there. Our only argument is this: is if you have savings, fine, that’s a good 
mechanism. If you don’t have savings and are in fact going to have to borrow money, then it doesn’t 
make sense to save it in one area and borrow at twice as much in the other area. As to when that will 
come down, I suppose we’ve had that debate before, as to when we’ll be able to get a balance. 
 
Clearly, I think you’ve expressed my views that I think this government — and collectively all 
governments — must address the question of the deficits. When we get to that point of the balance I 
suppose . . . I would hope sooner rather than later we are able to save some extra money. Because what 
that does more than anything, I suppose, is signal the return to a significant recovery. But when that 
recovery will come and how strong it will come, I suppose we can hope, but we have to wait and see as 
to exactly what the numbers do. 
 
So this is not necessarily a temporary thing, for one year. Clearly, when we’re able to balance the whole 
thing then I would certainly want to see more and more money saved in the heritage fund. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move an amendment. 



 
June 2, 1983 

 
2861 

Mr. Chairman, I would like to move an amendment to section 6 of the bill and it will read as follows. It 
will in effect put in a new section 16 and 17 for the ones that are repealed and it will say: 
 

That the fund dividend in 1984-85 fiscal year and any subsequent fiscal year must not exceed 80 
per cent of the estimated revenue to be credited to the fund pursuant to the clauses therein listed: 
19(a) to (c); 22(c) to (f); and 24 (c) to (e). 

 
And it then goes on to say in provincial development expenditures: 
 

The total of all payments from the fund for the provincial development expenditures for the 
‘84-85 fiscal year and the subsequent fiscal years must not exceed 20 per cent of the difference 
between the estimated revenue to be credited to the fund in that fiscal year pursuant to clauses 
19(a) to (c), 22(c) to (f), and 24(c) to (e), and the fund dividend in that fiscal year. 

 
The effect of the amendment, Mr. Chairman, is — if I may paraphrase it — to repeal section 16 and 17 
for one year, and to reinstate it for the next year. It has the effect of repealing sections 16 and 17 for the 
fiscal year 1983-84. 
 
I do that, Mr. Chairman, I move this amendment in order to make clear what I would like the bill to do 
— to acknowledge that we have a deficit this year and that, accordingly, it is not totally reasonable to 
accumulate a surplus in the heritage fund, and to have a deficit in the Consolidated Fund but that we 
need not anticipate that this will continue indefinitely. 
 
The minister has indicated his aim is to balance the budget over four years. I would have thought that the 
budget number 3 would, under those circumstances, need to be balanced, otherwise budget number 4 is 
going to have a tremendous surplus, because we’re already in deficit of more than $500 million. And if 
we’re going to make the four years, on average, even, we’re got to pick up $500 million in two budgets. 
I would think that the next budget, the ‘83-84 budget, would have to be at least balanced. 
 
And we don’t need to dwell upon that in detail, save only to say that its purpose is to meet the point 
made by the minister: that it is prudent, if you’re having a deficit in the Consolidated Fund, to take all 
the money out of the heritage fund in that year in order to keep down the deficit, I acknowledge that. I 
make the point that it is not prudent to assume that that will be necessary indefinitely into the future, and 
that I would like to legislate this for a one-year period and to reinstate the old system for ‘84-85 and 
subsequent fiscal years. I would not want to think that we were expecting to have, as a regular part of the 
finances of the province, a deficit which would require the transfer of all the money from the heritage 
fund. 
 
That being the argument, Mr. Chairman, I so move the amendment as I have read it and as presented. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I would, Mr. Chairman, simply call on all members of the Assembly to 
defeat this amendment. I think we have to look at it for what it says. Number one, I am not very likely to 
unveil what the budget is going to be for next March. I am not about to commit, at this particular point, 
no options within that budget. I think the hon. member agrees that, in the event that expenditures are 
higher than revenues, that it 



 
June 2, 1983 
 

 
2862 

makes more sense to use the dollars that are rolling into government rather than saving some at a lower 
rate and borrowing money to cover it at a higher rate. That doesn’t make a lot of sense, I think, to me 
and to the hon. member. He makes the view that, I suppose, the nature of this proposed amendment 
would be to force a balanced budget next year. I don’t make any commitment to that next year. 
 
I think that all members, in looking at this particular amendment, should recognize that in order to do 
this we eliminate one potential. And when we toured around this year looking at how to develop the 
budget, there’s basically three options. The options are: (1) to run a deficit, (2) to cut further programs, 
(3) to further increase taxation. What the hon. member’s amendment would ask us for is to eliminate 
those two options — cut programs further or increase taxes further. 
 
Now I’m not convinced that, at this point in time, I’m prepared to commit to raising taxes $200 million, 
$300 million. I’m not prepared to admit that we should cut programs because in order to cut programs of 
that magnitude, we’re going to be cutting programs into health and education, social services. And I take 
it from that, and I think the only interpretation one can take from it is the hon. member is in effect asking 
us to cut social programs. That’s what he’s asking for in this amendment. 
 
We’ve been through this debate many times. I don’t believe that what we want to do is in fact cut social 
programs. I think the members opposite would dearly love us to cut social programs so they could then 
attack politically a government that doesn’t care any more, a government that’s destroying medicare. I 
could assure the members opposite that that is not going to happen under this administration. We’ve 
been through that debate a number of times. I simply ask the members of this Assembly, all members of 
this Assembly to join with me in defeating this amendment. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’m sorry that I did not make my 
position clear. I’m not asking for cuts. I’m asking that this measure which is being taken this year of 
taking all of the money out of the heritage fund be acknowledged to be a temporary measure and that it 
be for one year, and that if it is needed for subsequent years, undoubtedly the legislature will deal with 
that. I am asking the legislature to make the decision that this is a temporary requirement, and 
accordingly I’d put a time limit on it. If the minister thinks that ‘83-84 is the wrong one and he wishes to 
make it for two years — fine. But what I object to is the minister making it permanent, deciding that, in 
effect, there will be no commitment to placing any sum of money aside for any future expenditure form 
the heritage fund. That’s what the minister’s proposal does. While I understand the need for it this year, 
and it may well be next year, I do not believe we should make it permanent, and accordingly I have 
moved the amendment which would acknowledge that this was a temporary need and not a permanent 
need. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, I simply make this point, Mr. Speaker. You can go to any jurisdiction 
across the country. Let’s take British Columbia as an example that had an accumulated surplus in excess 
of a billion dollars. They didn’t opt to go to the route of a heritage fund, but I think even the hon. 
member would agree that the government of the province of British Columbia were probably as keen on 
saving money as any government across this country. That’s, I suppose, stemmed from the history of the 
former premier, WAC Bennett, out there. That in fact was eroded over the last couple of years to the 
point where the deficit in the province of British Columbia is exceeding probably a billion dollars. 



 
June 2, 1983 

 
2863 

That system does not change whether there’s a heritage fund or there’s rules of a heritage fund. That 
system changes because of the cyclical nature of the Canadian economy, and I think as all know, the 
cyclical nature of the Canadian economy probably went through its greatest turbulence in the last five 
years. 
 
What we hold in the future, clearly, some of it is under our control, a great deal of it is not under our 
control. That’s just common sense and reason. Any government — and I think in particular, government 
in Saskatchewan or government in Alberta or government in British Columbia — are, when good times 
return; when the demand for potash and the prices of potash escalate; should the price of oil get back on 
that incline that we saw in the last decade; then clearly money will be set aside. You don’t need 
legislation to do that. It’s the way you manage the government. Legislation is going to make no 
difference; you simply come in and change the rules as we have done here. The question is not 
legislation. 
 
The question is whether or not you have the dedication of trying to put together a budget that you think 
is sensitive to the nature of the economy as you see it, sensitive to the nature of the wishes of the people, 
and the population of the province as you see it. If those are wrong, if your read of the needs and the 
reaction of the economy is wrong, then clearly the system is that the people will vote you out of office. 
My view is the read that we have had, the budget that we have delivered is a proper budget, is a 
reasonable budget, is consistent with the economy as we find it today, and is consistent with what we 
believe the people of this province want from their government. 
 
From that, I simply say this amendment would call for one thing. Each year we come back in another 
piece of legislation, and too often, I think, in government we want to get to a situation . . . We want to 
get to a situation where we do everything by passing laws. The world out there doesn’t run by whether 
or not you pass a law. The world out there runs by how you run your show. 
 
And I simply say to the members opposite; if we don’t run the show the proper way, the people will run 
us out. I believe we’re doing it the proper way. I suppose that’s the matter of the political debate of the 
time. That’s the pressure one faces and no legislation or no rule is going to make any difference to that. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I don’t deny what the minister has 
said. I just deny the assumptions or I regret the assumptions which underlay what he says — or which 
underlie what he says — because this provision has been in the heritage fund since its inception. It has 
caused no difficulty previously. The economic circumstances are different, and while we could argue 
about whether or not the government is following the appropriate course of action, it has decided to 
follow this course of action, and, having done that, it has decided to take 100 per cent from the heritage 
fund. So far, so good. 
 
What I am attempting to find out is whether or not the government is willing to make any commitment 
of any kind to the effect that that is a temporary measure — whether it is willing to suggest that it will 
ever go back to the previous system of having a heritage fund in the sense of setting aside 15 per cent or 
so of the total dollars that come in from fast-depleting resources, like royalties on conventional oil, in 
order to provide a financial base for five to 10 years hence. And what the minister seems to be saying is, 
‘No, those days are over. We are no longer going to accumulate any money from 



 
June 2, 1983 
 

 
2864 

resource revenues. We are going to take it all into current revenue, and we do not ever contemplate the 
day when we will be able to set aside any resource moneys for capital expenditures, either of the 
long-term variety to create assets for future generations, as the phrase used to go, or the shorter-term 
variety of provincial development expenses.’ 
 
And it may well be that this is in fact a statement of where we are, but I certainly regret it if it’s true, and 
the purpose of the amendment is to attempt to find out from the minister whether he will commit himself 
at all to any period in the future when he would aim to save even a per cent or two of that money for 
capital investment. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — What I would simply indicate is this: when surpluses are achievable, then 
certainly we will strive for surpluses. I make no commitments to anything. I will see what nature of 
economy develops and I will react to that economy the best way I see how. In that regard, I notice from 
the paper last night that Premier Bennett in British Columbia, and I made reference to British Columbia 
being as committed as anyone to save in dollars, indicates a deficit this year — ‘83-84 budget yet to be 
presented will be in the area of a $3 billion to $4 billion deficit. I think that reflects what the economy 
across the country is in fact experiencing and how we have to react to it. 
 
How do we spend money with regard to the heritage fund, if we are going to use the heritage fund to buy 
another potash mine, or whether we’re going to use the funds of the Government of Saskatchewan, 
somehow, to promote a company, whether it’s through incentives to the private sector — that’s the 
option you must have with the government as to how you see stimulation to take place. The only thing I 
say, and I think the hon. member is . . . that the real reason for this deficit or for this amendment is so 
that each year it comes up in the House again, legislation just as we see with the pension program. Each 
year you have to pass a piece of legislation in the House. The dividend from the heritage fund to the 
Consolidated Fund is debated in the House. There is a proper forum to debate that, whether it should 
have been more or should have been less, and I think there’s an appropriate time at that point in time to 
in fact debate that. 
 
How we manage the economy, how do we manage the fiscal situation of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, is how you’re going to do it. And whether you’re spending and building a hospital from 
the heritage fund or from the Consolidated Fund seems to me to not make a great deal of difference. 
Whether you’re going to use money from the heritage fund to buy, enter into some joint venture — be it 
whatever it might be — whether it comes from the heritage fund or the Consolidated Fund doesn’t seem 
to me to make a great deal of difference. What does at the bottom line make a difference is looking at 
the two of them and whether you can bring to a balance the total revenues versus total expenditures. I’ve 
indicated to the hon. member, I’ve made it clear across this province, that I would like nothing better 
than to be able to have a significant decrease in that deficit down to a balancing situation. But I am not 
prepared to balance the budget on the backs of the health care and on the backs of education and on the 
backs of social welfare. I won’t do that. I do not subscribe to the theory that we should significantly 
increase taxation in this province at this point in time. I do not subscribe to that theory, and I will not be 
boxed in, if you like, or committed to doing those particular things. 
 
I simply say we will handle the economy and handle the fiscal situation the best we see 



 
June 2, 1983 

 
2865 

how, and that’s how we intend to do it. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, may I make one brief comment in reply 
to the minister. He refers to British Columbia, and I would like all hon. members to think of British 
Columbia and the fact that when they had resource revenues coming from natural gas in substantial 
amounts, they took it into current revenue, and they set nothing aside, and now they have enormous 
deficits. And they would very much like, I think, to have some of that money that they spent when they 
were spending 100 per cent of their resource revenues on current account. It wouldn’t make a large 
difference, but it would all help. 
 
And, in the same way, I would like to think that Saskatchewan had some cushion. While I acknowledge 
that cushions are for times when the times are a little tough and this may well be a reasonable year to say 
that times are a little tough, but this is not to suggest that we ought to abandon the idea of the cushion, 
particularly from resource revenues which are enormously volatile, as we all know, and as people in 
British Columbia know to their sorrow. And they would know very well that if they had the same 
resource flow from natural gas and from timber that they had a couple or three years ago, they wouldn’t 
be having their problems. 
 
And the purpose, essentially, of the heritage fund was to put money in and to allow a more or less level 
amount to be taken out, so that our expenditures, so that our social expenditures which the minister 
wishes to protect, would not be subject to be placed under pressure because resource revenues this year 
were going down. And it’s inevitable that it happens some year. So I think that the B.C. example is an 
excellent argument for the idea of a resource fund, the idea of putting something aside. And, while I 
freely acknowledge that this year is perhaps it’s unreasonable to ask a government to put some aside, I 
wish the government would consider not abandoning the idea and putting a time limit on the period 
during which they feel they will have to use all of the resource revenue for current purposes. And that’s 
all I’m going to say. 
 
WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. YEW: — My apologies to the Minister of Finance, and also to the members of this Assembly. I 
mistakenly introduced a different group of students earlier this afternoon. Mr. Chairman, I would like to 
take this privilege now to introduce to you and to this Assembly, a group of 43 students from my 
constituency — the Cumberland constituency. They’re from Creighton. They are grade 6 students who 
attend the Creighton School; they are seated on the east gallery. They are accompanied today by their 
teacher, Irene Coderre, and Pam Backman, Doris Martin, and David Woodward. I look forward to 
meeting with them later today, this afternoon, for refreshments and a visit. I hope that they enjoy their 
visit in to Regina and I know that the hon. members of this Assembly will wish to join me in expressing 
a good hearty welcome to this group of students who have travelled so far to join with this Assembly 
this afternoon. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 86 — An Act to amend The Heritage Fund (Saskatchewan) Act 
 
Clause 5 (continued) 



 
June 2, 1983 
 

 
2866 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — I suppose only to respond to it is that clearly the deficit situations around the 
western world find themselves in significant problems. Everybody . . . I think people should be 
concerned about the significance of those deficits. We have to resolve ourselves as to how we could 
control these. Perhaps one of the main areas that we have to look at now is for governments to in fact 
control their expenditures. And how do they do that, as I think all members will agree, is a very, very 
difficult challenge; and a challenge that is perhaps ten-fold more difficult for many jurisdictions and 
countries around the world than it is for us here in Saskatchewan. 
 
In the event that we can save money, clearly, we’re going to try to save money. Any government has to 
do that. I guess what you have to bear with me is that how we do that is going to be how we’re judged as 
a government, and I simply would leave it at that. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 5 agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 agreed to. 
 
Clause 7 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I ask a couple of questions which deal with section 20 of the 
act, section 7 of the bill, and I’m now dealing with subsection (8), which is half-way down the page. 
 

Subject to subsection (9), the Minister of Energy and Mines may make grants, loans, equity 
investments, or other payments . . . 

 
And I think those are new words, and I ask what is contemplated by ‘other payments.’ 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I’m advised that nothing was intended by this other than the standard 
drafting type form. In other words, it’s not designed as the Minister of Energy to have some free hand in 
spending a lot of money. That’s not the intention. Apparently, it’s the drafting technique used and that’s 
the reason for it. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I refer now to that subsection (8), the 
same one I referred to earlier, and clause (c), and what the provision says is: 
 

. . . the Minister of Energy may make grants, loans, equity investments . . . to fulfil any 
contractual or trust obligation of the Crown that is related to non-renewable resource revenue or 
mineral resources. 

 
That is sort of directly drafted, and I’m asking what it was meant to cover. Does it have anything to do 
with Indian land claims or the like? It seems to be a very specific piece of draftsmanship. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I am advised that it’s the old Bill 42, compensation payments to the oil 
companies, that this is required to be paid from this. It was formerly paid apparently by OC, and that 
was seen to be not legal, and therefore this is the purpose of this particular section to cover that off. You 
can refer to page 127 of the Estimates is where that thing is set in as well. 



 
June 2, 1983 

 
2867 

Clause 7 agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 11 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 12 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, I’m not quite clear as to how this fits into 
The Farm Purchase Program Act, Bill 45, that we passed a while ago. 
 
It appears to me that under Bill 45 you can pay some money without appropriation, and under this one it 
requires to be appropriated, and I don’t want to pursue this with any diligence, since undoubtedly we 
will sort it our later. But I simply didn’t know how it was intended to fit in with Bill 45. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Chairman, I simply direct this request to the hon. member. I do have a 
previous commitment. The Minister of Agriculture is here, that will be able to hand the rest of the 
questions. I take it the bulk of the questions will be fairly technical in nature from here, as it relates to 
the particular clauses of the fund. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, this was in fact my last question, and it 
is clearly a technical one that doesn’t raise policy, and if the minister would drop me a note on it, or 
have one of his staff drop me a note on it, that’s fine, and having said that, I’m perfectly happy to 
dispose of this bill. 
 
Clause 12 agreed to. 
 
Clause 13 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 

 
Bill No. 94 — An Act to amend The Land Bank Repeal and Temporary Provisions Act 

 
Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 

 
Bill No. 95 — An Act to amend The Farm Purchase Program Act 

 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I wonder if the minister could give us 
just a quick explanation of just how this farm purchase program fund is going to work. In broad terms, 
what do you expect to come into this fund, and what do you expect to go our of the fund? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Chairman, essentially what’s going into the fund is lease fees for land 
bank land, interest on loans and penalties on arrears for those loans. Paid out of the fund is interest to the 
department of Finance on the long-term debts against the land bank land, and cost of advertising of 
vacant lands for sale, and maybe a couple 



 
June 2, 1983 
 

 
2868 

of other minor things, but those are the essential major things. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 

 
Bill No. 81 — An Act respecting the Operation of Vehicles 

 
Clause 1 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the Minister of Highways please introduce his officials? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Okay, Mr. Bill McLaren, Mr. Bill Sheard, Mr. Barry Hornsberger, and John 
Weir. I also have Mr. Ken Shultz here, Mr. Carl Shiels, and Mr. Terry Pollock. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: —Thank you. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I was out of the House when our critic 
in the area commented on Bill 81, but I would like to just go over in brief form a few of the issues that I 
find with the bill and a few of the areas that we have some concern with. 
 
First of all, in looking at your notes and listening to your speech on the bill in the House, I agree with 
you that the project which is undertaken here to revise The Vehicles Act was not an easy one. This 
project has been going on for some time, both under the previous administration — as you have 
mentioned — and under your guidance, with a great deal of work done. And I would like to congratulate 
you on the policy of bringing out a white paper on the bill and having input into it. I think that it need be 
said that other ministers of your cabinet would be well advised to follow the lead that you have set out 
here. I suppose the question period today would have been an indication of that and the lack of it being 
done with amendments to the labour act. I would just like to say that I’m sure that the public and many 
people in the province appreciate the opportunity to have some input into this area. 
 
The one thing that does concern me — and I’m sure that you, Mr. Minister, are concerned about the 
accidents that occur on the road as a result of trying to mix alcohol and driving — but it bothers me a 
little that at the same time as we are tightening up — as I think we should be — in the area of drinking 
and driving, that another minister of your government has two bills before the House — Bill 92 and Bill 
93: 92, which will extend the number of outlets in the province; and Bill 93, which will allow for 
alcohol to be served at Taylor Field. This kind of double standard . . . I think that you would be well 
advised to encourage your colleagues in cabinet, as you have the public of Saskatchewan, to become 
aware of the problem associated with attempting to drink and drive at the same time. Because I think it’s 
a little ludicrous for the minister in charge of The Liquor Act to be allowing liquor at Taylor Field, and 
you to be standing outside of Taylor Field putting the hard hand on them because of the fact that they 
have been drinking in the Taylor Field, and now they come out and another minister nabs them for the 
fact that they are then going to drink and drive. 
 
I think there is a big conflict here in the minds of people as to what this government really believes in 
when it comes to the consumption of alcohol and opening up of 



 
June 2, 1983 

 
2869 

alcohol in the province of Saskatchewan; or whether in fact your version of it — that it’s a great 
problem and we should be doing something about it — is the way to go. 
 
Another area which I think, Mr. Minister, you are directly responsible for and you could do something 
about the safety of the roads, is to do with highway construction. You will be well aware of many pieces 
of roads in the province that are in dire need of repair. At the same time, your budget is not being 
increased to any extent. In fact, if you take out the highway traffic board and other areas that are being 
added to your budget, you would indeed find that there is no increase in real dollars. In fact, in 1981 
dollars, you are looking at a cut-back in actual amounts of pavement that will be put on roads — the 
number of cubic yards of pavement put on roads — as well as the number of years of earth that will be 
moved in road construction. The filling of pot-holes is increased, that area of spending. But four-laning 
of highways on very heavily used areas, whether it’s to the Alberta border from where you left off on 
that project or whether it’s east to the Manitoba border, I think you have a responsibility there in 
improving the roads, and I use those only as two examples where we now have new signs up on the 
road, the Red Coat Trail signs, but the road is in worse condition than it has been for many, many years. 
 
So in talking about safety, I think that, while we can change the act and we can improve the act, and I 
can agree with you doing that, I think yourself getting money for road construction is a very important 
part of your job as minister. I know that in getting into cabinet, the first budget or two may be difficult, 
but I hope that next time around, the increase in highway construction, not in patching of roads, but in 
highway construction, will get the 15 or 20 per cent injection of capital that we need and that the 
injection is not in terms of roads and actually building up the grades on some of the roads that are 
becoming ever-increasingly difficult to drive on. 
 
The main point that I would like to raise today, and I intend to, when we get to the appropriate clause, 
move an amendment, unless the minister has taken our advice and will be moving his own amendment, 
but that is to deal with the problem associated with fatalities or the possibility of fatalities in school 
buses. I think that there are many people, and I get letters off and on from constituents whoa re 
concerned about the fact that school buses in the province of Saskatchewan do not have seat belts. 
 
I think that at a time when we are insisting that people who drive in automobiles, cars, and trucks wear 
seat-belts because it is safe . . . I know that the minister agrees with this; he has said it many times in this 
House since he has become part of the government and part of cabinet that he has been convinced that 
seat-belts work in automobiles and vehicles in Saskatchewan. I would encourage him to extend this 
philosophy and belief to school buses in the province of Saskatchewan, and to the many thousands of 
students who travel for many miles every week in school buses in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
While the accident rate in school buses and involving school buses has been kept to a minimum, I think 
because of very good drivers in the province of Saskatchewan, and I think to a great extent as well, the 
fact that drivers in general in rural Saskatchewan are very cautious when they are approaching school 
buses. Yet I think the statistics would show that the accidents over the last number of years would 
warrant the wearing of seat-belts by students. I would just like to give some statistics here. 



 
June 2, 1983 
 

 
2870 

In 1979, the total number of accidents involving school buses was 156; in 1980 was 157, and in 1981 
was 100. And while it wasn’t until recently at Strasbourg, when we had the terrible accident that took 
the lives of one driver and one student, we had up till that time been very fortunate in avoiding deaths in 
school buses, even though several deaths had resulted from collisions which have involved school buses 
and other vehicles. And I would encourage the minister to look at changing his stand in this area, as I 
know other people are looking at and making judgements on whether or not their views over the past 
years are actually accurate. 
 
I have here a news clipping from May 28 which is titled, ‘Trustees may change stand on seat belts,’ and 
it goes on to say: 
 

The Saskatchewan School Trustees Association is willing to reconsider its opposition to the 
mandatory use of seat belts on school buses following this week’s fatal accident at Strasbourg, 
association executive director Jake Volk of Saskatoon said Friday. 

 
And I would urge the minister to look at the amendment which we are proposing today, and to look at it 
seriously, and if he can find his way to support it, either support our amendment or move quickly to 
move his own amendment which we would agree to support at this time. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I have a few brief remarks that I would like to share with 
yourself and the Assembly. I am not going to try and stir the waters too much. I think we have to qualify 
the difference between the new Vehicles Act and the amendments to The Trade Union Act. That’s 
exactly what they are — amendments. I believe my colleague has done a very adequate job of handling 
this and negotiating and discussing with many groups. 
 
The Vehicles Act, I would like to clarify, is a brand new bill — a brand new piece of legislation. That’s 
why we went the route of the white paper. The member opposite talked about, I guess, a double 
standard, not being consistent, when he talks about my colleague, Mr. Sandberg, and some of the goals 
we have before us from him. I think there is a big difference here, Mr. Chairman, that what we’re saying 
is we’re not trying to control individual social habits. What we are trying to do is regulate their driving 
habits. People still have that freedom of choice, but will not have the freedom of choice when it comes 
to drinking and driving in the province of Saskatchewan, and I don’t believe that by this government that 
it is a double standard. 
 
Thirdly, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite wanted to discuss the highways budget. Well, I don’t think 
this is really the time nor the place to discuss the highway budget. I mean, I just would like to clarify for 
all members of this Assembly and for the media that the province of Manitoba this year did take a 10 per 
cent reduction in their capital expenditure; the province of Alberta took a 12 per cent total decrease in 
their total transportation budget; where our capital program in the province of Saskatchewan was not a 
drastic increase but an increase. Last year there was $108 million spent on capital. This year there’s 
$110 million spent on capital. Mr. Chairman, I think this is what this is pointing out to all members of 
this Assembly, and the people of Saskatchewan: that while our neighbouring provinces’ budgets are 
going down in either transportation or capital program, the province of Saskatchewan is moving ahead, 
is going up that graduated scale with an increase in capital, and, Mr. Chairman, to maybe wrap this point 
up . . . It’s a little different philosophy than what was developed by the previous government where, as 
soon as we got close to an election, 



 
June 2, 1983 

 
2871 

up went the budget; and as soon as the election was over, down it went. 
 
Now, for individuals in the province of Saskatchewan . . . Talking about the road contractors in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman, they didn’t know where they were at with the NDP. Under 
the Devine government, the Progressive Conservative government of the province of Saskatchewan, the 
industry knows exactly the direction this government is going, and we’re going up and straight ahead, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
One more point, Mr. Chairman. It has to do with the member stating that the roads have all fallen apart. 
Well, we’ve been governing this province for one year; the roads don’t all just fall apart in one year. I’d 
simply like to state that the members opposite, through their playing politics with the transportation 
budget in the province of Saskatchewan, did not have enough foresight to look into bringing in a 
constant program, whether it comes to twinning of the roads in the province of Saskatchewan or going 
with pavement overlays. 
 
Last point, Mr. Chairman, that I would like to discuss, and it is the seat-belt aspect on school buses. I 
think the members of this Assembly are quite aware that I have arranged a meeting with SSTA. That 
meeting is set for June 17 to discuss school bus safety in all aspects, Mr. Chairman, throughout the 
province of Saskatchewan, not only just seat-belts. I don’t believe that we can railroad or ram something 
through to the individuals of Saskatchewan without proper discussion. To my knowledge, after 
discussing it with Mr. Volk, the previous ministers had not met with SSTA regarding this, but I’m 
prepared to go into more detail with this, Mr. Chairman, when we get to that section of the bill. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Chairman, I will have given you copies of three amendments which have 
to do with different sections of the legislation. I only propose to deal with one under subsection (1) 
because it is a problem of a somewhat general nature which may affect . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
It’s the constitutionality of the blood test. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you have had an opportunity to review the constitutionality of this section. I 
say to you that there is grave doubt in the minds of many of the profession — I mean by the legal 
profession — that it might be unconstitutional, and I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you have given any 
consideration to this issue, and if you’ve received any legal opinions. If so, would you be prepared to 
file the same for the benefit of this Assembly? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, the advice that we have is that we have a very good 
constitutional position on this section, and the member is quite entitled to bring forth his amendment 
because I believe the problem has got to be solved. Someone has to stand up and take a positive, direct 
course in the Government of Saskatchewan. We are prepared to accept that responsibility at this time. I 
believe corrective measures have to be taken, and they have to be taken in the very, very short term, Mr. 
Chairman. So that’s why I will not be accepting this amendment, and I will be asking all members of the 
Assembly to vote against this. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, the issues which I raise under the amendments I can raise 
under the individual sections. I just want to raise that issue, because I thought you might be in a position 
to share with us the legal opinion which you have. That’s not without precedent. And I don’t know 
whether the minister is so ashamed of his legal talent that he’s not prepared to make it public. 



 
June 2, 1983 
 

 
2872 

AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . (inaudible) . . . didn’t you ask me? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, the member from Qu’Appelle is not, unfortunately, the Minister of 
Highways, so we have to deal with the minister who is bringing forth the legislation. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You could’ve asked me, and . . . 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I don’t know if the chairman would let me ask you . . . (inaudible 
interjections) . . . 
 
Mr. Minister, I was hoping . . . I only raise the matter now rather than under the appropriate sections 
because I was hoping that you’d be able to share with us the legal opinion you have. Because my view is 
differently than the advice you have received and many lawyers I’ve talked to do not share your easy 
confidence that you’re going to breeze past the courts with this amendment. 
 
I want to propose an amendment to subsection 1, Mr. Chairman; it is one to change the name to ‘An Act 
to Assist and Foster the Welfare of the Legal Profession Act,’ because that’s what the bill may be. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, this does not surprise me, you know. Just the other day we had 
second reading of this bill, and all members of the Assembly rose and voted in support of this legislation 
— unanimous support of this Chamber, Mr. Speaker. Now it looks like we’re seeing a flip-flop done; it 
looks like we’re seeing a flip-flop done now. Mr. Chairman, they talk about this government being 
inconsistent, and I’m trying to create waves in the water, but it looks like the members opposite are 
going to be inconsistent here this afternoon and not be supporting the new Vehicles Act, which in turn is 
going to be saving lives in the province of Saskatchewan. It looks like the members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, want drinking-driving to take place in the province of Saskatchewan. We don’t happen to want 
that. 
 
As far as the consultation is concerned, Mr. Chairman, I have consulted with the Attorney-General’s 
office, who I have the greatest deal of confidence in, our own lawyers of highway traffic board, and Mr. 
Chairman, I am not prepared to accept this amendment because I believe it is imperative that the new 
Vehicles Act move ahead and move ahead right away. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I would have thought even the minister was not so full of bluster and 
hot air that you couldn’t understand the difference between opposing the bill and raising a concern about 
whether or not this Assembly has the constitutional power to do it. Mr. Minister, we are not, by this 
motion, opposing the measures which you are enacting. What we are saying to you is there is very 
serious doubt about the constitutionality of this provision. By introducing unconstitutional legislation 
you create a good deal of inconvenience and confusion for the public and we suggest you could forestall 
all of that by a reference to the courts. Now you say you’re not prepared to do that because you’ve got it 
chapter and verse — the old Testament — that this thing is constitutionally sound. 
 
I’d simply ask the minister, not whether or not you think we’re against it — we’re prepared to let the 
public make up their own mind about that, not whether or not you think  



 
June 2, 1983 

 
2873 

it’s a good thing — we’ve listened to that, painfully. My simple short question, Mr. Minister, is: do you 
have a legal opinion that you’re not so ashamed of that you’re prepared to file? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and members opposite, B.C. felt it was not going to be 
challenged. They have moved ahead on it. They have recognized it. And I am just . . . Just by the 
documentation here, it was unanimously approved by all members of their legislature in B.C. 
 
The member opposite wants to talk about hot air and that. Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Chairman, I’ve got a 
heck of a lot more faith in the Attorney-General of this province and the lawyers working for highway 
traffic board than I have for the member opposite or any legal minds that he could maybe bring forward, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
The only thing that it looks like to me now that the NDP is trying to do — they are not only trying to 
confuse the people of Saskatchewan, it looks like now they’re trying to use their old scare tactics as they 
did in some of the previous elections — to scare the people of Saskatchewan, use a fear technique, a fear 
approach, Mr. Chairman, to scare the people of Saskatchewan. It’s not going to help them out this time, 
I guarantee you. My concern is the safety of the people of Saskatchewan. I’m not here to play politics in 
this Assembly with the new Vehicles Act. The members opposite, if they can and will, they would do it, 
but they are not going to on this bill. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, on that issue I can assure you that the attempt to make the 
bill as meaningful as possible is the only reason that the amendment was brought in, because I can 
almost guarantee the minister that he will be with his act in court very quickly, because I can assure you 
that someone, very soon after being charged, will appeal it. And we will see that we will have a huge 
court battle, and the lawyers of the province will be very happy, and I suppose you are getting good 
advice from various people because maybe that’s in their best interest. But our interest is, is in 
protecting the rights of the people and making sure that the bill is in fact constitutionally sound and to 
avoid that kind of a problem in a court challenge. Mr. Minister, you having been warned that this is 
going to happen, when it does happen, there words will possibly mean something to you, even if they 
don’t at this time. Because it’s almost guaranteed that there will be a challenge. It will be challenged as 
being unconstitutional, and you in fact will have wasted a great deal of time and a great deal of money 
and a great deal of controversy. And all we’re doing is attempting to make the bill better, which would 
help you as well, because it’s not good politics, even for you, to be involved in this kind of a harangue, 
and I don’t see why you don’t accept the amendment. But if you don’t want to, I suppose that’s fine as 
well. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there are two or three points. I mean, in the survey that 
we released to the people of Saskatchewan — and to me, they are the people that I am concerned about 
— 71 per cent of the thousands of people that responded to that questionnaire requested this. They 
realized the serious problem there is on the highways of Saskatchewan. Mr. Chairman, this just starts to 
lead me to believe that it’s the same old game again, just the same old game. It looks like, Mr. 
Chairman, that we have the NDP, the NDP trying to bail out their friends in Ottawa — the friends, the 
Liberal Party of Canada. That’s the direction. That’s what they’re playing — politics. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would like to share with you an editorial from B.C. It’s the Vancouver Province, July 
30, 1982. The headline is, ‘To Catch a Drunk’: 



 
June 2, 1983 
 

 
2874 

The public should strongly support the provincial government’s common-sense proposal to 
enable police officers to obtain blood samples of suspected impaired drivers, even when they are 
unconscious or otherwise injured. 

 
I’ll share another paragraph with you, Mr. Chairman, because it’s quite obvious that the members 
opposite aren’t concerned about this because it looks like they’re going to lose their little game of 
playing with people’s lives again. I quote again: 
 

Some people will see the move as a violation of civil liberties. They will argue that drivers, in 
effect, would be forced to provide potentially self-incriminating information. But this defence of 
a loophole through which many drunk drivers escape the consequences of their actions is 
unacceptable to us. There is far greater public good in catching and punishing these killers and 
keeping them off the road than there is in defending abstract niceties. The civil rights of their 
victims and potential victims are far more important. Other people have the right to live and use 
the roads without fear of being mown down by besotted drivers. 

 
Mr. Chairman, I have documentation here to support this. Once again I would like to reassure you and 
members of this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan that we have consulted to a great deal, not 
only the Attorney-General’s office, but the lawyers at highway traffic board. They have recommended to 
us that we are on very safe ground. That’s why this government is, shall we say, taking the bull by the 
horns and going to move ahead on this very serious issue facing the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 3 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 13 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, it would be agreeable to us to go page by page, up to 128 
anyway. 
 
Agreed. 
 
Pages 11 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Page 19 with amendment agreed to. 
 
Pages 20 to 57 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Page 58 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I have given a brief outline of why I would be promoting 
and proposing this amendment to section 128. I will just go over, very briefly, again, the fact that you 
will be well aware that many people in the province would like to see the introduction of seat-belts, and 
seat-belts being made mandatory on school buses. I’m sure that you, coming from a rural constituency, 
will have had 



 
June 2, 1983 

 
2875 

pressure and letters from your own constituents on this issue. In checking the number of miles travelled 
by students in my own constituency, I find that on an annual basis, about two million miles are travelled 
by students in the constituency of Shaunavon. I think that we have been extremely fortunate in the fact 
that in my constituency — and I think in yours as well — the number of accidents have been very 
minimal. 
 
Two years ago we did have a serious accident involving a half-ton truck and a school bus at an 
intersection close to Shaunavon where no lives were lost, but several children were injured. And people 
in that case said that a number of the injuries would not have occurred had seat-belts been involved in 
those instances. And for that reason and the fact that I think it’s becoming more and more agreeable by 
the people of the province that we should be moving towards seat-belts, as difficult as that may be . . . 
And that’s not to say that I don’t agree with people who say that there will be difficulty, both in terms of 
the money involved in putting seat-belts into buses, as well as the responsibility that will then be placed 
on the school units to keep them in working condition, as well as the responsibility on bus drivers to see 
that they are used, but I think nevertheless sometimes as a government you have to do things that are 
difficult and maybe even have hooks in them politically for you. But I would encourage you to support 
this amendment and to move quickly to see that seat-belts are made mandatory and used on school buses 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I just think two or three points I would like to make on 
this. The bill does state . . . When the member opposite states: 
 

The Lieutenant-Governor in Council shall make regulations requiring the installation of seat 
belts in school buses. 

 
That’s in his amendment. 
 
Section 128 of the bill: The Lieutenant-Governor in Council may make regulations. . . ‘ I think we’re 
almost basically saying the same thing. I believe it is already covered there. Mr. Chairman, but I don’t 
think at this tie that we want to lock into something until I’ve at least had a chance to talk to SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees’ Association) and find out their viewpoint. After contacting Mr. Volk 
and expressing my concern, he was as deeply shocked as I was at that tragic loss of life. And we’re 
going to look at the whole . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We’re going to look at the whole aspect of 
school bus safety, but if the member opposite wants to interject . . . I didn’t want to read these letters 
into the record, Mr. Chairman, but I can see the member opposite is forcing me to do this now. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I have a couple of letters here. One letter is dated September 21, 1981, to a Dorothy 
Bettcher, resolutions committee chairperson, Spiritwood, Saskatchewan. And it says: 
 

Dear Madam: 
 
Thank you (and this is going to take a little while, Mr. Chairman, but I think it’s very important 
to point out to members opposite and to the people of Saskatchewan) for bringing of the 1981 
SYND . . . 

 
Now we should maybe clarify that. That would be the Saskatchewan Youth of the New Democratic 
convention. 
 

. . . to my attention, because the matter of freight rates and grain 



 
June 2, 1983 
 

 
2876 

transportation rates are best discussed by the Hon. Gordon MacMurchy, Minister of Agriculture 
(at the time; thank goodness that’s not here now) and minister responsible for the transportation 
agency. I will ask him to respond to resolution no. 1. 

 
And, Mr. Chairman, I’m not going to read all the resolutions. I’m just going to read one of the 
resolutions . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, okay, if you would like to hear them all then. If you 
insist, then that’s fine. I didn’t want to belabour the House and take additional time and cost the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Read them, they’re junk anyway. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, I don’t think you could say they were junk. I think it’s going to prove the 
inconsistency of the members opposite. 
 

With regard to examinations for school bus drivers, we feel that the current licensing standards 
are sufficiently rigorous to assure a high level of confidence on the part of Saskatchewan school 
bus drivers. This is supported by the exceptionally good accident record of school buses in the 
province. In addition, all bus drivers, including school bus drivers, are currently required to 
submit medical reports. Under existing medical standards, conditions such as heart attacks, 
epilepsy, and other medical problems which affect their ability to drive would exclude them from 
the required licence classification or endorsement. 
 
On the matter of school buses, recent amendments to the Canadian motor vehicle standards 
require all new buses to provide increased occupancy protection in the form of passive restraint 
systems. This includes higher seat backs with greater padding, and more secure anchorage of the 
seat to the floor. The passive approach is considered to be as effective as seat-belts in large 
vehicles such as school buses, and eliminates the problems of misuse and abuse of seat-belts by 
student passengers. 

 
Mr. Chairman, I think we had better just clarify this and read this once more for the members opposite. 
 

The passive approach is considered to be as effective as seat-belts in large vehicles such as 
school buses, and eliminates the problems of misuse and abuse of seat-belts by student 
passengers. 
 
The provincial regulations pertaining to school buses has also been upgraded in recent years to 
require better securement of seats and seat cushions in older buses. These improvements are 
expected to further improve the already excellent safety record of school buses in the province. 
 
Thank you for your interest in traffic and school bus safety. Yours very truly, 

 
Original signed by R. J. Long — R. J. (Bob) Long, Minister in charge. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I think I should also in fairness read you the resolution that this outlined. 



 
June 2, 1983 

 
2877 

AN HON. MEMBER: — I’ve got a Safeway flyer to read as well . . . 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, the member opposite, Mr. Chairman, won’t even allow me to read 
something as important as this into the record. Now he wants to go to Safeway and go shopping. I’m 
talking about the lives of the school children. You know, Mr. Chairman, that shows what a bunch of 
hypocrites we’re dealing with in this Assembly. I’m talking about young school children, over 60,000 of 
them every day that get on school buses in the province of Saskatchewan and the member from Regina 
Centre wants to talk about a Safeway flyer. That’s how sincere — that’s how real sincere — Mr. 
Chairman, they are about the new Vehicles Act, about seat-belts in school buses. This letter is just going 
to further prove their inconsistency, and their could-care-less attitude of safety of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now back to the resolution, Mr. Chairman: 
 

3. Be it resolved, that all buses be modified so as to allow seat-belt installation with seats 
anchored securely. 
 
Be it further resolved, that seat-belt installation be made mandatory on buses, and the wearing of 
such belts be optional. 

 
Now, Mr. Chairman, here we have, 1981, signed by the former member opposite. Now as soon as 
there’s an accident, what is the opposition prepared to do? Jump on the bandwagon; let’s play politics 
with the lives of the children of Saskatchewan. Mr. Chairman, I’m not prepared to do that with the lives 
of the children of Saskatchewan. No politics is being played by this government in The Vehicles Act, or 
in the transportation of schoolchildren in the province of Saskatchewan. If members opposite want, I’ve 
got another letter I could read them from another minister. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — The minister may have to read that letter. When you talk about flip-flop, 
the example of this minister . . . And I remember very well sitting in this House when he was 
complaining about the use of seat-belts — mandatory use of seat-belts — in the province of 
Saskatchewan in opposition . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yeah, and the Minister of Highways. And 
then, all of a sudden, when he got into government, he had this flash of light, blinding light, that decided 
in his mind — not for political reasons, never for political reasons, not this minister — but he suddenly 
decided that he was then in favour of seat-belts. He is the one who should rise in this House and preach 
about, and preach to people about changing their minds, because he is so pure, and he can do this 
boisterous thing here in the Assembly. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, I think the issue at hand is a serious one. If the minister were serious, he would 
accept this very reasonable approach to what is a serious problem. He would accept the amendment 
which we are proposing here, which would allow the requiring of the installation of seat-belts in school 
buses. He says that in section 128, it’s already there. And I would like to ask him how in the world he 
would explain to me in this bill that that is already included in section 128. If he would do that for me 
and explain to me where it is, maybe we don’t need the amendment. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Okay, Mr. Chairman, it looks like the member opposite has a little problem 
reading, so we’ll take him to school again. Section 128(1): 
 

The Lieutenant-Governor in Council may make regulations: ((f) of that 



 
June 2, 1983 
 

 
2878 

section, look on page 59) prescribing the specifications and standards of safety equipment worn 
by drivers or occupants of vehicles; 

 
Mr. Chairman, this does give us the power in regulation, after consultation — not jumping on a political 
bandwagon — after consultation, does give an order in council through regulations the power to 
implement this. It’s already in the act; it’s being covered. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’m going to take a minute. You know, the member opposite wants to play the role of 
holier-than-thou, you know. The people of Saskatchewan are not prepared to accept that, Mr. Chairman, 
not prepared to accept that. Not prepared, Mr. Chairman. My prime concern is the new Vehicles Act — I 
cannot and I will not accept the tragic loss of life that takes place in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I have been the minister but a little over a year. They were the government for over 10 
years. Where was the new Vehicles Act? It was sitting on some shelf, because they didn’t have the 
courage, they didn’t have the guts, to take it off the shelf and save some lives in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, the minister says that it is included in the bill, and very 
obviously he would have a hard time convincing anyone that there’s anything about seat-belts in buses 
in this bill, because there isn’t. It’s like the minister in running The Liquor Act through the House, trying 
to say that there’s not going to be liquor served on Sundays, because he hasn’t read the bill. And here 
again is another example of a minister trying to say that seat-belts in school buses is included, when in 
fact it’s very obvious that it isn’t. And I just think that the minister is trying to find a reason for not 
supporting this amendment and that’s fine, if that’s what he chooses to do. But I think that he should 
look very carefully at the possibility of including this in the bill. And he says that there was an 
opportune time for us in government to have carried this out, and yes, there were a few things we hadn’t 
completed when we left office, just as in two years when we boot you out there’ll be a couple of things 
that we will have ready to go the minute that we get back into power. And no one will ever say that 
they’ve completed all of the things that they intended to do as a government. But when you leave office, 
Mr. Minister of Highways, in a couple of short years, we will find things that you have not completed as 
well and we will hearken back to those. 
 
But getting back to the issue of seat-belts in school buses, I think it’s a simple matter. We vote in it and 
either you vote with us on this issue or you vote against it. And I think that we should let ’er roll. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I will be requesting that all members of this Assembly — 
reasonable intelligent members of this Assembly — vote against this amendment. I mean, we have 
clarified where it’s in there, section 121, 1(e) and (f). I mean, it’s right there, Mr. Chairman. I have 
already committed that I’m going to meet with SSTA and discuss it with them, not only seat-belts but 
school bus safety. 
 
You know, and it does surprise me a little bit when the members opposite says they had a few more 
things to do. Well, I guess one of them of them was to screw up their courage. They couldn’t do that. 
And now they’ve stated dreaming about becoming the government of the province of Saskatchewan. I 
mean, we’ll let them go off, Mr. Chairman, into dream-land. We will continue to govern this province 
and govern it, I believe, in a very responsible way, as we have done about in bringing this Vehicles Act 
in. We’ve gone through a white paper, a request for individuals and that through our advertisement in 



 
June 2, 1983 

 
2879 

the paper asking the people what they want. We’ve gone to a layman’s draft. I don’t think there’s been 
amore democratic process ever used to bring a piece of legislation to this Assembly. I know it’s not the 
NDP way. It is the Progressive Conservative way. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Page 58 agreed to. 
 
Pages 59 to 77 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Pages 78, clause 165 as amended agreed to. 
 
Pages 79 to 83 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Page 84 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — There is an amendment to section 171. Moved by the member from Regina 
Centre and seconded by the member from Shaunavon, that section 171 of Bill 81, The Vehicles Act, be 
deleted and in lieu thereof the following section be substituted: 
 

A peace officer shall have the power to arrest prescribed by the Criminal Code of Canada; and in 
particular bit without restricting the generality of the foregoing, a peace officer and any 
individual shall have the rights and obligations prescribed by sections 25 to 31 inclusive and 
sections 448 to 489 inclusive of the Criminal code of Canada. 

 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I will speak to it briefly. Mr. Minister, I’m concerned about the breadth of 
the power of arrest. The power of arrest itself in The Vehicles Act is controversial. For many years there 
was no power of arrest itself in The Vehicles Act. I understand that law enforcement agencies indicate 
that causes them some difficulty, and I’m not prepared to argue that there aren’t some cases in which a 
peace officer may find it awkward to enforce this legislation without a power of arrest. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, your section is pretty broad, and contains no protections. Mr. Minister, what I am 
asking you to consider is to simply incorporate the powers of arrest under the Criminal code. Those 
powers of arrest have been the subject of a good deal of analysis and review by authorities over the 
years. They have gone through decades of refinement, and I suggest, Mr. Minister, that this is all you 
need. You don’t need any further power of arrest, nor should the citizen get any less protection under 
your act than under the Criminal Code of Canada. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think it’s ludicrous to suggest that somebody who’s picked up for speeding should have 
fewer rights than a rapist or a murderist, or someone — or an arsonist. Surely, Mr. Minister, what you 
want is nothing more, and probably nothing less, than the rights of arrest under the Criminal Code of 
Canada. It may not be perfect, and no doubt it isn’t, but it has been the subject of a good deal of 
refinement over the years and I’d suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that you should go no further than the 
Criminal Code of Canada, and I’m not going to argue that you should give peace officers under The 
Vehicles Act any less. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve taken my crash course in being a lawyer, so I’ll try and 
compete with the members opposite . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . I said I 



 
June 2, 1983 
 

 
2880 

will try. I’ll do my best at it anyways, Mr. Chairman. What we’re basically saying here . . . I will read 
you the sections that we’re talking about. In section 171 ‘under arrest’ applies only if a peace officer has 
reason to believe persons will not appear in court. To assist police in identification of persons applies 
only to not having a valid driver’s licence; not having a valid registration certificate; failing to stop on 
police signal; driving without due care; tampering with a vehicle (this meaning someone trying to steal 
someone else’s car); and failing to supply information on request. 
 
Mr. Chairman, what this section simply is doing, and we have had consultation with all law enforcement 
groups in the province of Saskatchewan. This is part of their input into it, to enable them to do their job 
more efficiently and more effectively. And there is the section in here where it says: 
 

Where a police officer finds a person committing a violation of section 16, 32, subsection 83(7), 
or section 87, 111, or 172, he may arrest that person without a warrant, if he has reasonable and 
probable grounds to believe and does believe that the person will not appear in court to answer a 
summons. 

 
Legal advisers tell me what the member opposite is asking for, if it’s under the Criminal Code, then 
there would be the power of arrest if an individual was jay-walking, driving a car with a broken 
headlight. I believe, Mr. Chairman, that that amendment does not answer the problems that are needed 
out there. We have had consultations, as I stated previously, with the law enforcement officers of this 
province, who have to administer and carry out this law. Once again, I believe it is a very common-sense 
approach to a new and better vehicles act, and will help solve some of the problems. It’s not going to 
solve all of the problems, Mr. Chairman, but I believe it is a step in the right direction so that I would 
ask all members on this side of the House, that corner of the House, and even the opposition, to vote 
against this, Mr. Chairman. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, why does . . . Leaving aside the issue of what sections a right of arrest 
should be granted with respect to, why does the minister believe that a peace officer needs greater 
powers of arrest or greater powers of detention under The Vehicles Act than under the Criminal Code? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, what we are trying to do: they have no powers now basically 
under The Vehicles Act. It is under the Criminal Code act. We are trying to give them some additional 
powers to make their job more efficient and more effective for all of the public. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’m going to say this, Mr. Chairman, then I’m going to let the matter go. I 
feel for the minister’s officials in attempting to make a legal star out of the political star over there. But I 
say, Mr. Minister, I don’t argue with the need for power of arrest. I recognize the difficulty law 
enforcement agencies have faced. What I am saying is that powers of arrest can be the subject of very 
considerable abuse. That is recognized by any democratic system. Democratic systems throughout the 
world have taken steps over the last number of decades to refine and curb the powers of arrest of a law 
enforcement officer so that they can’t be abused. There’s nothing unique to our society about that. 
That’s a process which has gone on world-wide in the functioning democracies. 
 
Mr. Minister, I suggest to you that this section is the subject of abuse. I think it may be more awkward 
for peace officers than what’s set out in the Criminal Code, as well. I 



 
June 2, 1983 

 
2881 

don’t make a great point of that because I’d want to discuss that with them. But my reading of it is it’s 
going to be more awkward for them than what’s set out in the Criminal Code. I suggest to you, Mr. 
Minister, that what you should have done, and what you should do now, is to simply adopt the powers of 
arrest in the Criminal Code. They have worked with reasonable efficiency and effectiveness to both 
individuals and peace officers. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ll try and clarify this for the member opposite. I mean, I 
don’t think we need to go for the powers of arrest, as I’ve stated, for jay-walking, driving a car with a 
broken headlight, a broken tail-light, a signal light that doesn’t work. This is a section, this is a section 
— and I’m quite prepared to admit it to this Assembly — asked for by the law enforcement officers of 
the province. This wasn’t a section asked for by the politicians, the bureaucrats. This was asked for by 
the law enforcement officers of the province. The only way this act, and any other act, is going to work 
is by a total co-operation from all people in all parts of Saskatchewan. I believe it is a very positive step 
forward and another indication of where this government is listening to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to ask the minister why he feels it’s necessary 
to have this power of arrest for the arrest for the offence of driving without due care and attention. I 
think the minister will know that this is a relatively minor offence. The minister will know that if the 
matter is serious driving without due care and attention then it will undoubtedly fall under the dangerous 
driving or reckless driving provisions of the Criminal Code, where you can arrest. This is a much more 
less serious type of thing. Driving without due care and attention is nor reckless driving, or dangerous 
driving, because that is criminal law, and this is admittedly a much less dangerous operation of a motor 
vehicle, and one which has been used . . . Convictions have been attained for really quite minor 
violations. 
 
Keep in mind that nobody has been convicted at the time they are arrested. The circumstances are such 
that the peace officer does not believe that the person has been guilty of dangerous driving, because if he 
had reasonable probable causes for believing that he was guilty of dangerous driving, he’s arrest him 
under the Criminal Code, and that would be that. He thinks that the driving is not what he’d like it to be. 
It doesn’t amount to dangerous driving under the code, but it is something less than that. It’s not quite up 
to the peace officer’s idea of what is proper, driving without due care and attention, and so he wants to 
arrest without a warrant. 
 
That seems to me to be a relatively minor offence for arresting people without a warrant, particularly 
when, in order to get around the problem, all the peace officer would have to believe is that he had 
reasonable and probable grounds for believing that the driving was dangerous. If he thinks that, then 
he’s got another remedy altogether. It’s only when he doesn’t think it’s dangerous driving that he now 
wants to arrest this person without a warrant, because he thinks that the driving isn’t quite up to what he 
thinks ought to be. It’s without due care and attention. I wonder why the minister thinks that’s necessary. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Two points, Mr. Chairman. One, and it applies only if the peace officer has 
reason to believe that the person will not appear in court, and I believe it is one of the more serious 
offences under The Vehicles Act, Mr. Chairman. This has been a request. I can’t foresee any abuses of 
this. After all, I believe the law enforcement officers over the province are out there to assist all of the 
motoring public. They’re as concerned about this tragic loss of life that occurs in the province as well as 
I believe, 



 
June 2, 1983 
 

 
2882 

and I very sincerely believe this, all members of this Assembly are too, and that’s why they voted in 
favour on second reading and I’m very sure and very hopeful that all members will be able to give this 
bill unanimous support on third reading, Mr. Chairman. 
 
We’re here, and I appreciate the debate and the discussion. I think it’s very healthy and very worth while 
by all members of the Assembly. I think it’s pointing out the concern that’s there. We do our jobs as 
deemed necessary in here, but I think I go back to those two points that, number one, where the police 
officers believes they will not appear in court, and that also it is one of the more serious offences that we 
have. And if it doesn’t work, Mr. Chairman, I’m quite prepared to come in in another session and 
remove this section, if it doesn’t work. This is a bill that’s not cut in stone, or, using my own phrase, 
drawn across the tight wire. I’m prepared to amend this if it doesn’t work. My bottom line to it is: let’s 
bring in this new Vehicles Act. I have a great deal of confidence that it will work, but if it doesn’t, I’m 
prepared to also amend it. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, I think the section is badly drafted, and I say this for the 
record. I think the section is going to cause peace officers some real problems. 
 
Mr. Minister, the way the section reads, I believe an offence must actually have been committed before 
there is a power of arrest. I think you have made an officer’s job very difficult. If no offence has been 
committed, then I don’t think there’s any power of arrest, and if the peace officer is wrong about 
whether or not an offence is committed, I think the arrest is illegal and someone may resist it. 
 
This section reads, ‘. . . where a peace officer finds a person committing a violation.’ If he doesn’t find 
the person . . . My reading of that is he doesn’t find a violation being committed he doesn’t have the 
power of arrest, and I think this section is going to cause peace officers some real problems, Mr. 
Minister. I think it’s badly drafter, and I really wish the minister would consider some of other power of 
arrest. I suggested mine under the Criminal Code, but yours, Mr. Minister, I think is going to cause 
peace officers some real problems, and I’ll make that prediction: that this will be amended. This section 
is going to wind up being amended. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I won’t belabour it. It looks like the member opposite and 
I would disagree on this. I will still go back to the two or three points where the law enforcement 
officers of the province — they’re the ones that have to administer it. They have identified a problem 
there. This is one of the corrective measures. They believe it’s going to work. But as I stated just 
previously on that, if any section of this act is not working I’m prepared to amend that section at a later 
date. 
 
Clause 171 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 172 to 180 agreed to. 
 
Clause 181 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — We have an amendment, moved by the member from Regina Centre and 
seconded by the member from Shaunavon, that section 181 of Bill 81, The Vehicles Act, be amended by 
adding thereto after subsection (3) a new subsection (4): 



 
June 2, 1983 

 
2883 

Notwithstanding anything contained herein, the owner or anyone having an interest in the vehicle 
seized pursuant to this section may apply to a judge of the magistrate’s provincial court for 
release of the vehicle and any judge of the said court may release it on any terms he considers 
just. 

 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — These amendments show the result of some rather hurried preparation and 
typing. There are some typos in them, and that could be corrected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to discuss, however, the substance of the amendments. We could agree to them. We 
could correct the typos. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m concerned about the breadth of the section. I don’t argue that there may not be an 
occasion where an officer would want to use this, but I am concerned about the breadth of the section. 
And it strikes me that one solution to the problem of too broad a section is to simply give a judge of the 
provincial court — and if you want to make that a judge of the Queen’s Bench I could live with that, 
although the provincial court is more accessible if you happen to live in many communities in 
Saskatchewan. It simply gives a judge an overriding authority to review the officer’s decision, and to 
return the vehicle if he thinks it’s improper. I suggest, Mr. Minister, that there’s nothing excessive about 
that. You’re simply giving a judge the power to review what can be a pretty aggressive act by a police 
officer — to seize a vehicle. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, to consider this. It’s not intended to rob a police officer of the power to seize 
a vehicle that may be necessary. It does give the individual who’s had his vehicle seized — that can 
entail some very serious consequences — gives a judge the overriding power to review it and return the 
vehicle if he thinks it’s improper. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, what we’re doing here . . . I believe we’re making it a little 
easier where in the previous bill it said: 
 

Where a vehicle has been seized under subsection (1) no person shall take it out of the 
possession of the persons making the seizure of remove it from the place in which it has been 
stored, without the written consent of a traffic officer, police officer, or police constable. 

 
Now we are saying in this section here, and that simply where it is . . . police officer . . . (inaudible) . . . 
seizing a vehicle portion . . . I can read you . . . The basic, the section that we’re saying is 181(a): ‘obtain 
the written consent of the board to do so.’ I mean, we’re taking this power away and giving it to the 
independent highway traffic board. That’s what we’re doing in this section. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Just for the benefit of the record, let me read this as I had intended it to . . . 
Let me read the amendment as I had intended it: 
 

Notwithstanding anything contained herein, the owner or anyone having an interest in a vehicle 
(could be a chattel mortgage on this vehicle that they seize) anyone having an interest in the 
vehicle seized, pursuant to the section, may apply to a judge of the provincial court for release of 
the vehicle, and any judge of the said court may release it on any terms he considers just. 

 
Mr. Minister, I would never put myself in the position of defending each section in that old Vehicles 
Act. Some of those were pretty aggressive, and I doubt that any 



 
June 2, 1983 
 

 
2884 

government would pass them in this day. Seems to have been a different view of civil liberties in the 
‘30s and ‘40s than there is now. I wouldn’t begin to defend those old sections. 
 
I simply say that you give a citizen who has had his vehicle seized a right to go to a judge and say, ‘They 
shouldn’t have taken my vehicle,’ and the judge is given a discretion to say in turn,’ I think you’re right. 
I think the officer was mistaken. Here’s your grain truck back.’ And he might seize a grain truck in the 
middle of harvest, by way of example. I pick perhaps an extreme example; but that could happen. 
 
So I say, Mr. Minister, this doesn’t take anything way from the power of the officer out on the road, or 
the street, as I would have phrased it. It simply gives a citizen the protection of judicial review. I’m 
surprised that the minister can’t agree to that. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, it states in there, if it’s in property taken, you can go to the 
Court of Queen’s Bench. We also have prepared . . . We have an amendment here — or if someone has 
a vested interest in that, to bring forth an amendment that we can bring now to clarify that section, where 
the individual has a vested interest in it to obtain it back. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll read it. It’s the subsection 181 of Bill No. 81 be amended by 
striking out, ‘or his agent’ in subsection 2 and substituting: 
 

his agent or any person having an interest in that vehicle. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 181 as amended agreed to. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Chairman, I think it would be satisfactory to proceed page by page until 
you come to page 93, in which case we come again to my amendment. 
 
Pages 87 to 92 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Page 93 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — There is an amendment on section 205. Moved by the member from Shaunavon: 
 

Amend section 205 of the printed bill: 
 
(a) By striking out subsection (2) in subsection (1) and substituting subsections (2) and (3); 
 
(b) Providing the following subsection after subsection (2): (3) The Lieutenant Governor in 
Council shall refer the question of constitutional validity of section 168 of this act to the court of 
appeal pursuant to The Constitutional Questions Act. Section 168 of this act comes into force on 
the day in which it is finally determined to be constitutionally valid. 

 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I want to speak briefly to this, Mr. Minister. You have lifted this 



 
June 2, 1983 

 
2885 

section just almost verbatim out of the Criminal Code and I think if you review the decisions of the 
Supreme Court of Canada on this area of the law, as tortured as those decisions are at times, you will 
find that a province cannot enact something for which the federal government has already enacted a law. 
And that’s the basis of the argument. And I’ve checked with some lawyers whose knowledge of 
constitutional law is superior to mine and that they have quite frankly agreed with me. 
 
Mr. Minister, if that school of thought is accurate, you’re going to bring upon the motoring public a 
good deal of inconvenience and confusion. Some will get convicted who should not be, if that school of 
thought is accurate, and somebody is going to be put to the expense of going to the courts, probably to 
the Supreme Court, to have the issue wrestled to the ground. There is, Mr. Minister, an act, The 
Constitutional Questions Act — I had a copy of it here on my desk; I can’t find it at the moment — there 
is an act specifically designed to deal with that problem, and that is to refer that section to the court of 
appeal who could render a decision and let us know before it becomes law whether or not it’s valid. 
 
I say, Mr. Minister, I’m not going to rag the puck on this thing endlessly — I hate to bring your officials 
back after supper for this singular issue — but I do think, Mr. Minister, you’d be well advised to refer 
this to the court of appeal initially and determine its validity before putting the public to the 
inconvenience and expense of enforcement of the section and the inconvenience of some citizen doing it 
himself. 
 
Just let me say one more thing, Mr. Minister. There are laws in those statutes which sit in front of me 
which are unconstitutional, which have been unconstitutional for 50 years, and nobody cares and 
nobody’s challenged them. But, Mr. Minister, the first person whose licence you lift under this section 
with a few bucks is going to take a run at you. And if this is unconstitutional, it isn’t going to last very 
long, but it will last long enough to convict some innocent people if it is unconstitutional, and to put 
some individual to the very considerable expense of testing the constitutionality of the section. So I urge 
you, Mr. Minister, to consider this. I think it’s reasonable, and I would hope that the minister would see 
the logic of it. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Okay, Mr. Chairman, what we’re simply saying on this is that the federal 
government could, or may, before we receive proclamation on this — and we’re looking at staggered 
dates for the proclamation on this — come in with their own section, their own amendment, to the 
Criminal Code. But we’re saying that if we go . . . Well, we’re just not prepared to wait, Mr. Chairman. 
The legal advice that we have is that it is constitutional. We’re prepared to go down with it now and take 
corrective measures. But proclamation is going to be staged over a period of time, and maybe before 
proclamation comes in on this section, the federal government will accept their responsibility. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, would the minister state unequivocally 
that he has legal advice which says that this section is constitutional? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, I think the Leader of the Opposition is very much aware, more so maybe 
than other individuals, that nothing is 100 per cent sure. But the legal advice that we have obtained to 
date — and I have the greatest deal of confidence in that legal advice and those individuals — is that we 
are on very safe ground. I guess an answer to your question is: to the very best of our knowledge, we can 
move ahead with this section. 



 
June 2, 1983 
 

 
2886 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — A further question to the minister. Does the minister have advice from the 
Department of Justice that in their opinion this section is within the constitutional power of the province 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Yes, from the constitutional law branch. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, is the minister aware that if that should 
be faulty, the circumstances could be very unfortunate for the point of view of law enforcement in 
Saskatchewan? It is possible that peace officers would have a number of occasions when they might or 
might not have gathered evidence which would have led to a conviction for some offence dealing with 
drinking and driving. They failed to gather evidence because they relied upon the blood test which was 
taken and which showed that alcohol content was above 0.08. They then find that this evidence is not 
able to be entered and we find a number of people who would have been convicted had this provision 
not been enacted — not convicted because the provision was enacted and subsequently found to be 
unsound, and ultra vires of the provincial legislature. 
 
Is the minister going to instruct, of have the Minister of Justice instruct, peace officers to assume that the 
blood test would be only bit of evidence and that if there’s any other evidence about, that that could also 
be entered so that we don’t find peace officers relying on the blood test as they now rely upon the 
breathalyser as virtually their entire evidence, only to find that the blood test is beyond the legislative 
power of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, two or three points on this. I mean, the member opposite said it 
was very important. I think it is very important every time we have a loss of life in this province due to 
an impaired driver. The blood sample is going to be used only when a breath sample cannot be taken. I 
mean, what we are trying to do with this section is plug the loophole, shall we say, and try and prevent 
those individuals that are trying to circumvent the law in the province of Saskatchewan that could cost 
us some additional lives. But on the Attorney-General thing, I cannot speak for the Attorney-General on 
what his recommendations or that will be. I’m quite sure the Attorney-General would be pleased to 
answer those questions on his own. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I has asked the minister a question, and 
he made a statement, and I have failed to connect the statement to the question. I wasn’t even talking 
about the merits or otherwise of the provision or what its purpose was. I was talking about the merits or 
otherwise of the provision or what its purpose was. I was talking about the circumstance that will arise if 
that provision is found to be beyond the power of the legislature of Saskatchewan. 
 
I am asking the minister whether or not he has any proposals that would lead to some other evidence 
besides the blood tests being gathered so that in the event that the blood tests are found to be beyond our 
power, the result will not be necessarily that a number of people who might have been convicted on 
other evidence are not convicted, because the reliance was placed upon the blood tests which show 0.08 
or more, but which are not able to be admitted as evidence. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, what we’re saying: this is basically giving the law enforcement 
officers one more tool for gathering evidence in carrying out their duties. I mean, there is a problem out 
there. The problem has been identified. The federal government has not acted out there. The problem 
has been identified. The federal government has not acted on that problem yet. The people of 
Saskatchewan after the 



 
June 2, 1983 

 
2887 

survey have, I believe, instructed me with the 70-some per cent of the thousands of replies that we have, 
that they would like to see corrective measures taken. I believe it’s a forward step. There’s no 100 per 
cent sure system but from the legal advice that we have obtained, we believe, and I go back, that we are 
on safe grounds. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I don’t know what question the minister 
thought he was answering, but it wasn’t the one that I asked. No one denies the need to address the 
question of convicting people who are driving while impaired, so that let us not go off on that little frolic 
again. We are conceding that, Mr. Minister. We agree. What we are trying to say is that . . . and let me 
give you and example. let me give you an example. If, for any reason breathalyser tests were found to be 
unconstitutional, and they’re not, but if for any reason they were, a large number of people would not be 
convicted in this province who were otherwise subject to convictions. Why? Because the police are 
relying almost exclusively on breathalyser tests in order to get convictions of 0.08. They don’t bother 
walking lines any more or doing all of the other . . . recording all of the other indices of intoxication. 
And there’s nothing wrong with that so far as the police are concerned, because the breathalyser has 
proved to be good, solid evidence and has worked in a great number of cases. 
 
I am saying to you that, in my judgement, you cannot assume that blood tests under this section are 
going to be as firmly constitutional as the breathalyser is now. The breathalyser is federal law and is 
firmly imbedded in the criminal law of Canada. Blood tests obtained pursuant to provincial legislation 
are far from firmly part of the criminal law of Canada — far from firmly. And accordingly, I am 
suggesting that a total reliance on them as evidence is going to be unwise. And I am asking you whether 
or not you have any proposals for ensuring that there is not total reliance on these tests, but that other 
evidence is gathered as it used to be in the days before breathalysers, and is not longer gathered 
routinely by policemen. 
 
I am saying . . . I am asking you what steps you propose to take to deal with that narrow question. And 
before I take my seat, Mr. Chairman, let me say that I agree that the minister should be acting to deal 
with this problem on the roads, and I agree that the public agrees with that. And I agree that something 
has to be done about this and so I’ll save the minister the time of saying all that, and ask him to deal with 
the question of what he proposes to do by way of taking steps to see that additional evidence is gathered. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, now we’re going to deal directly with his questions, 
directly with this question. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, right now there is no way of obtaining evidence. I will give you 
an example, sir. There is no way of obtaining evidence if there is an accident and one of the drivers of 
one of the new vehicles is unconscious, or injured, or if someone is feigning an injury. That individual 
can get off scott-free. Can get off scott-free. This is going to enable the officer another tool. 
Constitutionally, we seem to disagree. We seem to disagree. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — We believe it’s . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . but it’s better than what we 
had. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — The Minister of Agriculture is almost answering the question for 



 
June 2, 1983 
 

 
2888 

me here. We believe, on the advice that we have obtained, that it is workable, number one; it’s 
acceptable by the medical practitioners in the province of Saskatchewan; and that it is constitutionally as 
safe as any other piece of legislation that has to do with the constitution. We believe we’re on safe 
grounds. It appears that the member opposite does not agree. That’s fine. I do appreciate that he agrees 
with us that this is a good step. It’s a step that we have to take. The province of British Columbia has 
taken this step already. I guess we have to be number two; we’d like to have been number one. We’re 
number two in this respect. 
 
Just maybe, be fore proclamation of this bill comes in, the federal government will have accepted that 
responsibility and amended the Criminal Code. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, may I briefly ask the minister to direct 
his attention to the question I previously asked? Mr. Minister, it’s a fairly simple question. If you don’t 
want to answer it, just say no . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Well, the theory that all of these people are 
in circumstances where no evidence of possible intoxication can be gathered is, I think, not sound . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right. But a remarkable number of them don’t have two broken legs. 
And for those who don’t have two broken legs, are you going to ask them to walk a line? That is a 
facetious question. But what I am really asking is: is there any proposal to instruct peace officers to be 
aware of the fact that this evidence could come under attack? Let me put it that way. And if I don’t get 
an answer — if he wants to tell me what a splendid provision this is — then I’ll listen again and I’ll 
abandon the question. But the question is not whether the provision is splendid, or constitutional, or in 
B.C., but whether or not any steps are going to be taken to see whether fall-back evidence is at hand 
should this evidence be found to be inadmissible. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to assure you of the co-operation that we’re having 
with all members of this Assembly. I am quite prepared to share this with, number one, the 
Attorney-General, and with the police officers, the law enforcement officers out there in the field, and I 
appreciate your input into this. 
 
Sir, it’s going to be a very workable piece of legislation, and I know you will join with us in taking 
credit for saving a lot of lives with our new Vehicles Act. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Page 93 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


	ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
	Bill No. 63 — An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act
	Bill No. 65 — An Act to amend The Western Development Museum Act
	Bill No. 66 — An Act to amend The Statute Law
	Bill No. 72 — An Act to amend The Homesteads Act
	Bill No. 74 — An Act to amend The Small Claims Enforcement Act
	Bill No. 69 — An Act top amend The Beef Stabilization Act
	Bill No. 77 — An Act to amend The Surrogate Court Act
	WELCOME TO STUDENTS
	QUESTIONS
	Amendments to The Trade Union Act
	Winter Road for Northern Saskatchewan
	MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker I direct my question to the Minister of Highways and Transportation. It’s regarding a situation that’s developing up in the far northern part of Saskatchewan due to the closure of Uranium’s Eldorado mine and the...
	Funding of New National Metis Alliance
	ANNOUNCEMENTS
	House-Media Ball Game
	MOTIONS
	Referral of Bills to Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills
	ORDERS OF THE DAY
	Clause 5


