






















































Hansard: March 28, 1983


 
 

(298) 299 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 28, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to introduce to you, and through 
you to the members of the Legislative Assembly, 52 students from the Weyburn Junior High School, 
from the grade 8 class there. They are accompanied today by teachers Jim Nedelcov and Garry Krueger, 
and, as well, bus drivers Merv Waddell and Wayne Vilcue. I hope they’ve enjoyed their tour here. 
They’re seated in the west gallery, and I will be meeting with them at 2:30 for pictures and refreshments 
and to hear their views on the legislative process, and I would ask all members of the Legislative 
Assembly to join with me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hepworth: — And as well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through you, on 
behalf of the Minister of Agriculture, Hon. Eric Berntson, a group of 29 students from the Manor High 
School, from grades 10 to 12. They are as well accompanied, and in the Speaker’s gallery, I believe, and 
they are as well accompanied by teachers Blair Butterfield and Raoull Hamelin. And as well, Mrs. 
Jermyn will be meeting with them at 3 o’clock for pictures and drinks. I hope they, too, have enjoyed 
their tour here and I would ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in welcoming them here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Congratulations to Curling Rinks 
 

Hon. Mr. Pickering: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s appropriate at this time to recognize the 
member from Saskatoon University, whom, along with Dorenda Schoenhals, Tom Wilson, and Liz Folk, 
won the Canadian mixed curling championships on Saturday. Rick being well known, as we’re all 
aware, in the curling worlds and with all due respect, he’d rather have won the Canadian men’s 
championship, and we’d like to have seen him in Regina, but we’re certainly proud of him here today, 
and we would like to challenge the press to a game sometime at their convenience. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pickering: — I would also like to congratulate, at this time, the Ev Krahn rink. She lost her 
husband during the play-downs of the Canadian senior ladies, and they ended up finishing second with 
only three players, and I think it’s a great accomplishment by the ones who were left behind, to take 
over the duties of performing in the Canadian senior ladies. 



 
March 28, 1983 

 

300 
 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join my colleague in congratulating the member 
from Saskatoon University in your win. We certainly share your, we certainly share the sense of pride in 
your accomplishment, and welcome you back. We also want to join with comments made by the 
member from Assiniboia-Bengough, sorry, Milestone, in expressing our congratulations to the women’s 
rink as well. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Department of Labour, Women’s Division 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question to the Premier concerning the announcement 
you made as a ministerial statement on Friday. It relates particularly to the women’s division. I don’t 
have to tell you, Mr. Premier, that the announcement of the transfer of the women’s division has created 
grave concern among women’s groups in Saskatchewan and outside this province. The concern is that 
the function may be swallowed up entirely and disappear. No doubt Mr. Premier will deny that. What I 
think is uncontrovertible is the complaint that whereas the women’s division used to act as an advocate 
in both the public sector and the private sector, by transferring the women’s division to the public 
service commission whose . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The member is on his feet to ask a question and it appears to me that he’s 
speech-making. I would ask you to get on with your question. I can read the ruling if you wish, but it 
says that a question can be preluded by one well-drawn sentence, and I think we’re far beyond that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I may have got a period or two slipped in there somewhere, Mr. Speaker. My 
question, Mr. Premier, is: why would the government not want to continue to encourage private sector 
companies to introduce affirmative action programs for women — something that seems to be 
impossible for the public service commission to do, whose role relates to the public service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, in response to the member, Mr. Speaker, the, the responsibility for 
employment was put into two departments. First is the public service commission to deal with internal 
government affirmative action programs and others. The second part was put into the new department of 
advanced education and manpower, which creates an awful lot more opportunities for all employment 
opportunities, men and women and students, by identifying the needs with respect to education and 
training and matching the skills of the labour force, on one hand, with the needs of the market on the 
other. 
 
And one of the advantages of including this kind of activity, activity from the Department of Labour, 
and putting it into manpower, training and education — advanced education — is the . . . number one, 
the update of the skills; number two, the recognition of the needs to match the two, in the private sector 
as well as the public sector. So the public service commission can do it in the internal side of 
government and the department of advanced education and manpower, on the external. 
 

Affirmative Action Program for Women 



 
March 28, 1983 

 

301 
 

Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. The women’s division . . . I’m sorry, the affirmative 
action programs are based on the assumption that something more is needed than simply a matching of 
skills and an upgrading of education. It was based on the assumption that there exists within society 
discrimination against women, and that the assumption that there exists within society discrimination 
against women, and that some positive role, some positive steps are needed to see that women obtain 
equality. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Premier, is: will the department of manpower and advanced adult 
education, I think was the name . . . Will that department conduct positive affirmative action programs 
on behalf of women? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the thing that is necessary for employment of men, women, or 
students, of any kind, is the attitude of the public sector and/or the private sector with respect to 
employment. I’d like to point out to the member that in 1982 the province of Saskatchewan employed 
5,000 more women than it did in 1981. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — In fact the decline, decline I believe, if my figures are correct, the decline was 
4,000 in terms of men, and increase of 5,000 in terms of women, for a net increase in 1982 over ’81 of 
1,000 people, and mostly, to a large extent, as a result of the good, positive attitude of both the private 
sector and the internal operations of the government, particularly with respect to the observations on this 
new organization, so that the public service commission can deal with it directly, in terms of the talents 
and the training and the needs. And the private sector can do it as well with respect to the new 
department of advanced education and manpower, which will keep the kinds of information necessary to 
match the two. 
 
One other observation, and I’ll be commenting on it later, it’s extremely important. In the move from 
January to February of this year, there was an increase in the labour force in the province of 
Saskatchewan of 6,000 people. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that never in the history of the 
province of Saskatchewan have we created 6,000 new jobs in one month to match it, but we did last 
month. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I despair of ever getting the Premier to answer the 
question. Let me try it in a different fashion. Will there continue to be a Saskatchewan Advisory Council 
on the Status of Women, and to whom will that council report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, I . . . There may be some announcements with respect to advisory councils, 
and I’m not going to add too much more with respect to suggesting things that the ministers may be 
talking about in the near future. With respect to the activities of the women’s division, as I described 
them. I can elaborate on those again, but I don’t think there’s much, much point in it. With respect to an 
advisory council, I have two advisory councils now reporting to me, one on general development in the 
province that encompasses government in education and labour and so forth, and another advisory 
council with respect to students. With respect to a potential for an advisory council regarding women, 
there may be some subsequent announcements. 
 

Positions in Women’s Division 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, one final supplementary, then. Will . . . You indicated . . . Sorry, Mr. Speaker, 
this should have been filed a new question. You indicated, by way of  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

302 
 

background, that the women’s division would be beefed up in the transfer, but will the Premier confirm 
that of the 16 positions available in the women’s division five or six will be eliminated when it’s 
transferred to the public service commission? Can you confirm that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — No, I, I don’t think I could confirm it, and I would . . . I don’t know if I can recall 
. . . I believe, as a general statement, when we looked at all the reorganizations, there was something like 
in the neighbourhood of a dozen to 18 positions that were affected in the entire reorganization. Even on 
the dozen to 18, or dozen and a half positions that were there, the full bumping rights and privileges 
come under effect. So, with respect to allocating it to one department, I just don’t have those figures, but 
generally, about 12 to 18 positions in the entire reorganization. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll direct this question to the Minister of Continuing Education, 
soon to be the minister of advanced education and manpower. Our information is that employees of the 
women’s division have been advised that some of their positions are being transferred to the public 
service commission, but that none have been advised that their position is being transferred to the 
department of advanced education and manpower. Would the minister confirm that the dismantling of 
the women’s division does not involve any transfer of positions from the women’s division to the new 
department of advanced education and manpower? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be pleased to address myself to that question at the time that I 
become the minister of manpower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, Mr., and Mr. Minster a supplementary. Would you advise the 
House whether you have any — now — have any information on whether employees who were 
previously with the women’s division are to be with the new department of advanced education and 
manpower? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Well, as I’ve mentioned, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think it’s right or proper for me to 
be answering these questions until April the 1st, at which time I become the minister of manpower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — April Fool’s, Mr., Mr., Mr. Speaker. A supplementary question to the minister. 
Is the minister advising the House that he is unwilling to answer any questions, any concerns of the 
employees of the women’s division who are to lose their job on March 31st? He will not tell them 
whether they have any position with his department because he is not addressing those questions until 
April 1st? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve, as I’ve said originally, I don’t think that it is right or 
proper for me to be doing this at this time because I would be, I would be, if anything, working with the 
people from who I am receiving additional responsibilities in the area of manpower and manpowers, 
manpower services in resolving those things, and they, they will be announced in due course. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Premier. Will the Premier confirm that 
employees of the women’s division have been advised that their appointments terminate on March 31st, 
and some have been advised that their positions are being transferred to the public service commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t confirm or deny specific notices or  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

303 
 

information that may have gone to any one of several individuals in this entire reorganization. I just, I 
can’t do that. I don’t know the answer. I would, I would take notice of the question and get specific 
information and provide it to the hon. member. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the minister in charge of the public service 
commission. Is the minister in charge of the public service commission aware that notices have been 
given to a number of employees of the women’s division that their employment will terminate, and that 
a number have been advised that their employment or positions would be transferred to the public 
service commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would be unable to comment on the specific, just like the Premier. 
I think what happened is the announcement was made with regard to the reorganization. At that point in 
time the various, the various members of the civil service who are dealing with that to try to expedite, 
try to make the transfer moves move as smoothly as possible would be involved. I think what the 
Premier indicated on Friday when he was asked a question by the members of the media was there’d be 
very few people who’d lost their jobs, that most every effort would be made to try to, to make it so that 
we could fit everyone into the process, and that this would not be seen as simply a mechanism by which 
a lot of people would be put out on the street. That’s certainly not the case, not the intention of the 
reorganization. 
 

Reactions to MacPherson Report 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a question to the Attorney General. As the Attorney 
General may know, the Saskatchewan Association of Community Legal Services Boards has released its 
reaction in respect to the MacPherson report, calling the MacPherson report ‘incomplete and misleading 
in many instances.’ The association has called for a meeting with the Attorney General, and my question 
to the Attorney General is this: will you give the House a commitment that you will meet with the 
representatives of the community legal services boards before introducing my changes to the legal aid 
system in this legislature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I, I’m unable to give the commitment. I just received the request on Friday. I’m in 
the process of having a reply drafted which will respond to many of their concerns. That, of itself, may 
negate the need for a meeting. If one is still necessary after that, I would be prepared to meet with 
representatives. I certainly don’t intend to get into a situation of going and meeting with each, each 
separate board. The . . . Mr. MacPherson attempted to do that, I believe, in the vast majority of cases 
except for one or two, but I could be subject to correction on that. But I believe that my reply may, may 
respond to many of their concerns. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Attorney General. The Canadian Union of Public 
Employees Local 1949, representing a majority of the employees in the Saskatchewan legal aid system, 
held a meeting in Saskatoon today to discuss the MacPherson report. This committee decided to demand 
an immediate meeting with the Attorney General in order that they discuss the MacPherson report prior 
to introduction in this legislature of changes in funding or functions of the legal aid system. Can the . . . 
will the Attorney General, likewise, give an assurance that he will be prepared to meet with 
representatives at least of the CUPE employees’ local before implementing changes in the legal aid 
system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I’ve received no request for a meeting. I would be prepared to review it if the 
request was made. 



 
March 28, 1983 

 

304 
 

Mr. Koskie: — A supplemental. Is it the position, in view of the number of concerns with the report, is 
it your position, Mr. Attorney General, to meet with the various groups which in fact will be writing to 
you asking for a specific meeting? Are you prepared to meet with them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — First of all, I, I, I don’t see the need for a meeting, with the number of people that 
have responded favourably to the report, and have urged implementation of the report. So I’m not sure 
your question is appropriate to that category, and I’m not sure you’re asking for a general answer. And 
I’ve responded on the two specific items that you, you asked earlier. 
 

Funding for Non-Government Organizations 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Social Services. I have a news release 
here from the president of the Saskatchewan Association of Non-Government al Social Service 
Agencies, Kathy Wasmann. In part, it, it says, ‘The lack of commitment to NGOs (non-government 
organizations) by the provincial government has created anxiety and concern regarding funding within 
the NGO sector.’ I wonder if the minister will give assurances to the NGOs and the members on this 
side of the House at least that no such cuts in funding of NGOs will take place in tomorrow night’s 
budget. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I think it would be presumptuous of me to state what’s going to be in 
the budget tomorrow night when it’s going to be the Minister of Finance bringing it down tomorrow 
night. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as my colleague from Quill Lakes has said, it would be 
presumptuous of you also to deny it when your deputy minister is in Saskatoon speaking to NGOs, and 
is quoted as saying, ‘Many social service agencies make excessive demands on government for funding, 
and may find money that was there before isn’t there now,’ says Walter Podiluk, recently named deputy 
minister. I wonder if you will agree or disagree with this statement made by your deputy minister in 
Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I think some months ago, I had indicated when it came to a review 
of the budget, particularly in terms of the ‘83-84 budget, and we would be looking at the NGO sector, 
that we would be putting a priority on direct service and essential services. Our commitment as a 
government to those NGOs that are still giving that service applies. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, is the minister then saying that those groups who she has decided are not 
serving that purpose will be cut in this year’s budget which will be announced tomorrow night? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, Mr. Speaker, I did not say that. I said some months ago I had indicated in the 
review we would be looking at some priorities, and those priorities still stand. 
 

Surface Lease Agreements for Northern Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to direct my question to the Minister of Environment and 
also the minister for DNS. With, with respect to the surface lease  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

305 
 

agreements for Cluff Lake, Key Lake, and Rabbit Lake, Mr. Ministers, you will note that there were 
major provincial inquiries, extensive consultation sessions, held with the general public and also with 
the residents of northern Saskatchewan. My question is following those extensive consultations, the 
province put forth northern preference clauses for training, for hiring, and job security for Northerners, 
for northern people. My question is: what is the government’s position with respect to those policies? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the . . . I believe the question was directed to the two of us. I’ll 
answer on behalf of both. I, if I understand the hon. member’s question correctly, it is what is our policy 
with regard to northern preference clauses and so on in the surface lease agreements. Is that right? Well, 
the, the policy that we, that we have, that is still being formulated, is that we have to address very, very 
carefully some of the, some of the quotas, quotas that were applied that really didn’t address the, the real 
problem in northern Saskatchewan, that is, that is the employment, the actual employment of, of 
northern people, not only from the point of view of are they, are they working in the, in the mines, but 
how long will they be retained on the job. 
 
And there’s a very serious sort of a problem there, and I know the hon. member understands the, the 
situation. Where you have a quota applied, let’s take the Amok lease, for example, at Cluff Lake, I 
believe at 50 per cent. And the hon. member will know from his home community the number of people 
that have gone in there, and where people have gone in from many communities in the hon. member 
from Athabasca’s riding, where they come in over a very short period, short period of time, there’s a 
rotation goes on. A new group of people come in, and the rotation goes on again. 
 
And this has been going on for a couple of years now, more than a couple of years, Mr. Speaker. Really 
the training and the retention of the individuals and the long-term training that has taken place under that 
circumstance has not been very satisfactory, has not been satisfactory at all, in fact. So, we are certainly 
reviewing those quotas and the situations within the, within the surface lease agreements, although the 
hon. member will know that those surface lease agreements are still in place. And when we’ve come to 
the end of our review, we’ll certainly be announcing some changes or at least some reopening of the 
agreements. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I understand from your reply, Mr. Minister, that you may 
propose some changes with regards to the existing surface lease agreements and northern preference 
policies attached thereto. Will you advise this legislature, then, Mr. Minister, if in fact you have received 
a formal presentation by any one northern interest group, local governments and people associated with 
the northern contractor’s association, etc., requesting for a change with respect to the current policy? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I would say that we haven’t received formal indications from any northern 
interest group or from any company or anyone involved in the whole process. We haven’t received any 
formal communication from any of those organizations as such, but we have received a good, a good 
deal of representation, I guess you could say, on a more informal basis. And it’s because we have gone 
in there with a view to looking at the whole situation that we have inherited, whether it relates to 
northern . . . whether it relates to surface lease agreements in the North, or whether it relates to the whole 
administration in the North, and we have received many representations from people to say, ‘Look at 
this carefully and change some rules.’ And, we have said, ‘Yes,  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

306 
 

we’ll look at it carefully, and, yes, we will change some rules.’ 
 
Mr. Yew: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. If, in fact, you have received no formal presentation by local 
governments or by northern contractor’s association personnel or executive, would you then, Mr. 
Minister, in view of the fact that you are anticipating to make some changes, make a formal consultation 
process available with the people that are directly related to the economic industry in the North, such as 
local government and northern contractor’s association personnel people? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, as I said before, Mr. Speaker, we’re carrying on . . . I hesitate to use the 
word ‘negotiations,’ because it’s not negotiation, but we’re carrying on discussion ever since we took 
over the administration of government last spring. And that will carry on and I will say that we’ll 
continue that process, and when the process is completed and we have a feel for just exactly the kind of, 
the kinds of little changes that will come into effect, we will announce them in due course. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, you will note that our meeting in Prince Albert last Thursday, that the 
northern delegations at this conference are merely . . . By local government, expressed a dire concern 
about the existing surface lease agreements and the fact that your government is not adhering to the 
current policies. 
 
Will the minister advise, will the minister advise that there will be meetings of the monitoring 
committee, as soon as possible, to, to, to assess if in fact those policies are being adhered to? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I have indicated to the hon. member already, Mr. Speaker, that the current 
surface lease agreements are in place, are still in place. Policies are being adhered to. No, I won’t 
indicate at what date the monitoring committees (as you call them) will meet, and I guess I just leave it 
at that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Just a brief supplementary. Then you, in fact, are not following and adhering to the 
policies set out in the, in the surface lease agreements. And like the northern delegation has expressed, 
you’re illegally withdrawing you, your endorsement of those surface lease agreements. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, I would say, Mr. Speaker, the meeting, or the northern delegation that’s 
being referred to by the hon. member were some people certainly from northern Saskatchewan, but to 
say that they would represent all of, all of the people and all of the interests in northern Saskatchewan 
would be stretching, stretching it an awfully, awful long way. So I would say that we are adhering to the 
present surface lease agreements as they now stand and as I’ve indicated to you earlier. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Address in Reply 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in reply which was moved by Mr. Dutchak. 



 
March 28, 1983 

 

307 
 

Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was reading the Leader-Post over the weekend, Mr. 
Speaker, it came to mind that the opposition seems to use the Leader-Post as their main sources for 
research. And I couldn’t help, as I went through, but notice the one article concerning how the House 
seemed to have a little hang-up on movies and its titles. And as I look at the opposition and see them sit 
there kind of lonely, I can’t help but think of ‘Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs,’ and maybe perhaps 
that could win the title. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, before I address directly the optimistic Speech from the Throne, I would like to take 
the members of this Assembly back a short period of time. On December the 2nd, 1981, the now Leader 
of the Opposition, then premier, was basking in the glory of his own self-serving philosophy when he 
addressed the House with the following, and I quote, as he referred to Grant Devine: 
 

In 1978 he was rejected by the voters. (And the quote continues). I would hope that members 
opposite will be busy deciding on who is next. 
 

That ended part of that quote. But little did the Leader of the Opposition know at that time that he would 
be asked the same question. Well, on April 26th, 1982, another question was asked. This time the people 
of the province gave the answer and the NDP were reduced to an embarrassing few numbers in this 
House. And then just over one month ago, Mr. Speaker, the good people of Prince Albert-Duck Lake 
were asked a question, and we all know how they answered. 
 
It gives me a great pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to now repeat history and ask the Leader of the Opposition: 
who is next? Perhaps he will say shortly that he himself may be the next one to go. 
 
I am indeed pleased to have the opportunity to address this Assembly on the positive initiatives outlined 
in the throne speech. I am sorry to say, Mr. Speaker, but I guess I will be like the opposition question 
period, and it will be repetitive, but I am repeating the words that our members have been saying for the 
past week. 
 
I, too, must emphasize the words, ‘positive initiatives’ as opposed to the negative and obviously 
destructive philosophy of the members opposite. 
 
The economic situation in other parts of this country in precarious indeed, and yet Saskatchewan boasts 
the lowest unemployment figure of any province. 
 
While the opposition preaches gloomy cries of negativism — hard word — this province is experiencing 
a steady increase in the number of employed. 
 
Now I am not suggesting for a moment, Mr. Speaker, that I, nor this government, are satisfied with the 
level of employment in Saskatchewan, but the fact remains that it is the lowest in Canada. This is 
evidence of our administration’s positive initiatives. We are committed to new, innovative and 
expanding programs and policies, unlike anything introduced in other jurisdictions, probably throughout 
the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you excuse the pun, again, I am a small businessman. Many of my constituents are small 
business people. I know the frustrations of attempting to secure government contracts, when the process 
is complicated by the stringent requirements of performance bonds, or complicated by other red tape 
. . .that procedures . . . that it seems that the prior administration was adept at creating. I am indeed 
pleased that  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

308 
 

these requirements will be reviewed. They will be revised, leading to stronger, healthier, smaller 
business section. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Klein: — When I observed the plight of our unfortunate neighbours in Manitoba trying to exist 
under an NDP government, I cannot help but feel ecstatic over the fact that this government has made a 
commitment to greater diversification of the economy of this great province. I speak of things such as 
the new natural gas pricing policy which will stimulate the development of our promised, province’s gas 
reserves, thus creating even more employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government’s commitment over the next 10 years will extend, to extend natural gas to 
farmers and rural communities will place this province in the forefront of rural gasification, and again 
will create more employment. I know the members opposite say they, that this cannot be done, but they 
also said removing the interest reduction plan would do nothing for the economy, and yet that program, 
coupled with our Build-A-Home program that we have created, now again created more employment. 
And this is borne out by the tremendous increase in housing starts, Mr. Speaker, since the programs 
were implemented. 
 
They said there was no other way to turn over a family farm from father to son and thence, other than to 
sell the farm to the land bank first. Well, we went one better than that. We showed the members opposite 
a way to turn government control share-croppers into independent landowners. They argued about that 
farm purchase program when we tried to implement . . . when we tried to implement that, but they’ve 
been pretty silent about it now — an obvious impact on its success. 
 
The opposition continues to say it can’t be done. And yet I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this is the reason 
we have mere, a mere eight lonely souls in this province who are participating in the recession, and I 
further suggest that these are the eight member that sit together opposite. 
 
Another recent accomplishment I wish to deal with is our government’s ambulance review committee. A 
report was released earlier this week. Now this committee was chaired by our MLA from Moosomin and 
he did an excellent job. I’d like to highlight some of the findings. The administration of the ambulance 
program will be consolidated under the Department of Health. We will implement: a new funding 
approach, the provision of funding directly to ambulance district boards as opposed to municipalities; 
the establishment of an ambulance service unit reporting at a senior level in the Department of Health; 
the set-up of an advisory committee to ensure continuation of consultation with interested groups and 
individuals. Other key recommendations, Mr. Speaker, are: developing a closer link between ambulance 
services and hospitals to reduce the inequities regarding cost for rural residents, and the need for a more 
uniform communication system. And recognizing the importance of volunteers, we must support the 
development of training programs. This is another example of how our government listens to the people, 
and then acts in a positive attitude. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Klein: — Another positive move was made by our minister of the Sask Potash  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

309 
 

Corporation as he installed new programs designed to encourage potash sales in spite of a world market 
that is very sluggish, to say the least. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province is on the verge of a new and exciting encounter with high technology — a 
technology which will complement and improve this province’s fine record in agriculture. Our 
government is even now developing strategies which will provide the impetus to permit the private 
sector to benefit from the implementation of high technology, and our government will be working 
diligently in both sectors to lead in the development and application of this technology. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Klein: — Now even though I was preceded by my colleagues who made excellent remarks, I would 
like to address, for a moment, the subject of crown corporations, and this in a positive manner. Again, 
contrary to the belief of members opposite, a proper mix and balance is possible and desirable between 
the public and private sectors. In fact, it is our government’s intention to streamline the operations of the 
corporations and increase their effectiveness. And I assure our lonely opposition that one crown will not 
compete against another crown as we have seen in their administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the people of this province are the hardest working individuals in the country, and 
as trustees of their hard-earned tax dollars we will not tolerate the use of tax dollars competing with tax 
dollars. Speaking about the tax dollars, I would like to address some words regarding the effectiveness 
and efficient use of the people’s money in government. 
 
The Progressive Conservative government is committed to giving the people of Saskatchewan value for 
their dollar. Some of us here might appreciate that more than others. We will establish a more efficient 
government, a structure that is better able to respond to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, allow me to remind this Assembly of the NDP strategy for more effective government. 
During their days in government they created an excess of 900 boards and commissions, agencies and so 
on, and the list goes on. Well, I’ve been trying to rationalize our need for such a large number of 
agencies and, truthfully, the only rationale I can find is that the NDP passed out political patronage just 
as though they were passing out candy. And they continued to create more agencies so that anyone who 
so much as displayed an NDP lawn sign could sit on a board and collect a per diem. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that millions of dollars have been wasted by the former administration in their 
attempts to pacify their political hacks. But needless to say, this government will conduct a complete 
review of agencies serving this province. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I too wish to congratulate our member from P.A.-Duck Lake for his positive 
victory as well as for the fine job that he displayed when he delivered his maiden speech to this 
Assembly. Needless to say, I certainly support the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a privilege for me to enter into this debate on the throne speech 
today. But before I get to that, let me go on to what the people are saying out in my riding. Mr. Speaker, 
there’s no doubt in their minds that we are showing  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

310 
 

recovery. But what do we hear from this opposition, this little opposition? Nothing but doom and gloom 
preached on a daily basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me first of all, before I get into the throne speech debate, thank the people and the 
voters of Saltcoats constituency for their trust and confidence placed in me on April 26th. They are very 
satisfied now with the performance of our government, and in fact they were as happy as we were, I 
believe, and I can say that without any doubt. In face of that fact . . .when the confidence was placed 
again, on February 21, when the voters of Prince Albert-Duck Lake voted and elected my good friend 
sitting behind me here, Sid Dutchak. And I congratulate him on his win, and welcome to the legislature, 
Sid. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, to talk a little on the throne speech, the people in my constituency 
expected this kind of a throne speech. They are in tune with the times. They know the world is in a 
recession of some sort, but they also, and again, I say, they, they see the recovery coming. And they’re 
getting sick and tired, as we are, of listening to this tiny little opposition preaching gloom and doom for 
breakfast, dinner, and supper. 
 
I can’t understand how an opposition can condemn the performance of the government up to this date. 
This is a government of our times, and they have fulfilled all of their commitments. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition refers to the throne speech as being barren, and like my colleague across 
the floor says, he refers to them by names of movies, by the ‘The Good, the Bad and the Ugly,’ also 
‘Jaws ll.’ But last but not least, ‘Much Ado About Nothing.’ 
 
Just for the record, Mr. Speaker, to try and consolidate what I’ve been saying about the opposition, 
because I want to tell you what happened back in my constituency on April 27. In a town called 
Stockholm, a bitter, little group of NDP losers demonstrated at a service station for the reduction of the 
gasoline tax. Can you imagine intelligent people, that really knew better than that, to demonstrate in that 
fashion? And they knew full well that an act of that kind can’t be changed while the NDP were still in 
power, and they were, because until the former premier released the reins of the government to the 
present Premier it was unable to act on the reduction of the gas tax. 
 
But the real reason was . . . The real reason they were there was simply to demonstrate against a couple 
that had enough courage to put a ‘Vote Johnson’ sign on their lawn by the service station. These losers 
infringed and, yes, belittled these operators. Can you imagine, I say again, demanding gas to be reduced 
the day after the election? 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, after the Premier Grant Devine took over the reins in government and named his 
cabinet, within hours he did, in fact, remove the tax for the whole province. And that was just the 
beginning, for the people of the province, of all the good things that were going to happen to them. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, a government for the people. Mr. Speaker, I can’t understand how a little group, such 
as to my right here, solidly complained against good programs like the housing mortgage interest rate 
rebate. That has helped people own their own homes in something in the order of 1,195 applications. 
This program, especially, is  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

311 
 

being applauded all over, all over the province, and all over Canada, as a matter of fact. How can this 
little group say that he people out there . . . and try and tell them and indicate them that solid programs 
like the farm purchase program isn’t good for young farmers? 
 
I’ve gotten very many phone calls, Mr. Speaker, from, from various parts of the province, congratulating 
us on the farm purchase program alone. And let me just throw out a few figures. And I think it’s been 
said in this House by many of my colleagues, and I won’t put in all the figures, but over 2,000 
applications have been received since December — since the inception. A large number have paid their 
appraisal fees. Since March the 20th, something over 400 parcels of property have been signed, sealed, 
and more are being processed every day. There will be no more government share-croppers in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and I call that performance. 
 
Just let me go back to housing for a moment. The building of a home project — the Build-A-Home 
project, I’m sorry — in the Saltcoats constituency alone, some 12 or 14 RTM (ready-to-move) homes 
have been, already been started, and are being built right now. Capital grants are still going out to all the 
towns in my constituency. For example, in the town of Esterhazy, just two or three weeks ago, received 
a water assistance grant for their pipeline to assure the town of Esterhazy good water. And their 
assistance amounted to $218,000 — and in lesser amounts all through my constituency on various 
capital grant programs. 
 
I would like to suggest to this little, meagre opposition group here that maybe go out to Esterhazy and 
try and tell the people out there that this is a government that don’t care. And while I’m speaking about 
Esterhazy, Mr. Speaker, MIC (International Minerals and Chemical Corporation) and their employees, 
just a couple of weeks ago, signed a two-year contract. And that contract was settled at a rate of 5 and 6 
basis, rather than the federal 6 and 5. They should be commended that working-class people and 
management can get together. Also, Mr. Speaker, I may add that these same IMC workers were very, 
very fortunate to be recalled one whole month earlier than they expected, and I extend my wishes on 
their continued success in their labour employment through ’83 and on to ’84. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I wish to speak a little of, on agriculture. We’ve added a beef stabilization plan, beef 
stabilization plan number two, which uses far more realistic figures than, than plan number one that lost 
millions of dollars for this province, in its first years of operation, incidentally. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week at the Regina bull sale, although the prices were, although the prices were as 
high as last year, the numbers were down so the volume of the sale wasn’t near as much as it was other 
years, but we still just about sold a million dollars worth of bulls out there. And farmers and ranchers are 
still paying $31,000 and $31,500 for the top bulls at the sale, and that again indicates that the people out 
there are thinking positive, and that they are looking ahead. 
 
I was talking to Eric Pedersen this morning, manager of Canadian Western Agribition, and he told me, 
Mr. Speaker, that the Hon. Whelan was here last Saturday. Mr. Whelan has been trying to tell the boys 
in Ottawa, the federal counterparts, that the Canadian Agribition is one of the top shows in Canada, and 
he has seen fit, finally, to put them on the same status as the Toronto Royal Winter Fair and in 
recognizing this, the Hon. Whelan announced on Saturday that the operating grant for Canadian Western 
Agribition has been raised from $50,000 to $100,000. The Canadian Western 



 
March 28, 1983 

 

312 
 

Agribition are also in the midst of proposing a new livestock facility, or at least a new facility of some 
80,000 square feet just across the street from the Exhibition Auditorium, on the west side of Pasqua 
Street on the parking lot. They’re proposing that through the federal-provincial in their own, their own 
. . . (inaudible) . . . and hoping that that’s about to take place. And along with that expansion too, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re wanting to expand their, their display area and their banquet facilities — banquet 
facilities looking after something like 1,500 people. 
 
We need these kind of facilities in Saskatchewan, and if we aren’t careful, Calgary or Edmonton are sure 
ready to take this show away from us, so I think that I commend the Agribition people for forward 
thinking and trying to get more buildings and more facilities because it is, in fact, the largest agricultural 
show in North America, Mr. Speaker, this is just some of the good things that are happening to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
A little bit more on agriculture. I’m very concerned about the Pepin proposal, a proposal that completely 
disregards the Canadian Western Agribition . . . I’m sorry, the Canadian western farmers and especially 
small businessmen. Indeed, the announcement of Pepin’s was a black day for the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. Let me tell you a few statistics of really what the plan, if it’s implemented, can cost. Let 
me tell you that the town like Langenburg, nearly $4 million extra in freight will be leaving that 
community every 10 years. Towns like Bangor, Waldron, Atwater, Gerald, Tantallon, and I name them 
because they have elevators, will lose from $0.75 million to $1million out of each community for the 
next 10 years. Saltcoats, Bredenbury, and Churchbridge, which are the larger handlings, will lose 
something like $2 million to $3 million in the next 10 years. Last week the Esterhazy Miner, Mr. 
Speaker, has headlines that says: 
 

The Pepin plan could take $4 million out of the community of Esterhazy for the next 10 years, 
and that’s very serious when you think of that kind of capital leaving the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

I think it’s very, very important, Mr. Speaker, that we . . . in general, we should get all the businessmen 
and all the councils to take up the fight against the Crow. Can you imagine a government considering 
such drastic measures under current conditions? But then I look back and remember that the 
Saskatchewan NDP MPs made all this possible when they went to bed with the feds, and they defeated 
the vote, they voted to defeat the Clark government in Ottawa. We wouldn’t have had this problem had 
that not happened. 
 
Also, again last Thursday, I attended one of many meetings that are going on throughout the province, in 
the town of Dubuc, 250 genuinely worried and concerned farmers and businessmen. It made me feel 
good, Mr. Speaker, to assure them that the government was prepared to go to the wall for agriculture in 
Saskatchewan, and I made it abundantly clear that that was my position, and I generalized, Mr. Speaker, 
and said every member of the government, including the opposition, had that thought in mind. 
 
I also distributed copies of a full-page ad from the Montreal Gazette. A full-page ad, February 21, for 
the federal government, and Whelan had placed the following headlines, and I demonstrate, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

The Crow Goes, Without a Flap. 
 

This stuff makes me very angry. It’s utterly disgusting, first of all, and besides it’s  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

313 
 

misleading. And really it says to me that the feds are guaranteeing Quebec that there won’t be any 
change, and if there is — if there’s going to be any change in the Crow — it won’t hurt them. The 
bottom of the line of that particular article quotes: 
 

Higher transportation costs will prevent western pork and beef producers from becoming more 
competitive with their eastern counterparts. 
 

What does that mean to you, Mr. Speaker? I won’t dwell any longer on the Crow in the House, Mr. 
Speaker, because my colleagues have already put it all down in Hansard, and I’m sure it can be picked 
up. But I would like to declare from the floor of this Assembly that I will do everything in my power to 
derail the power, the Pepin plan. 
 
As I go down the throne speech, I look at headings like the energy portfolio. It’s being very aptly looked 
after by our Premier. Headings in the throne debate such as ‘Education’ under the excellent direction of 
the Hon. Gordon Currie, and the likes of ‘Social Services,’ Mr. Speaker, looked after by Hon. Pat Smith, 
who of course is in tune with the times and really on top of her department and doing a good job of it. 
Who better, Mr. Speaker, to be looking after health than Graham Taylor? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: — And also the hon. member from Moosomin and his ambulance — very, very thorough 
. . . (inaudible interjections) . . . A very thorough report on the ambulance system. And headings such as 
‘Highways’ under the watchful eye of Jimmie Garner. And I may add, Mr. Speaker, that I’m pleased to 
be on his transportation committee. And we make good common sense decisions, such as the disposal of 
STC’s (Saskatchewan Transportation Company) super-duper bus that loses money on a daily basis. 
Headings such as ‘Agriculture’ — who better than the Premier to appoint somebody as capable as the 
Hon. Eric Berntson to that portfolio? One of the best agriculture ministers this province has ever had. 
Who better . . . Who better to negotiate the like, with the likes of Pepin and Trudeau and Whelan? And 
again I am pleased and proud to be chairman of that agricultural committee within government. 
 
Now I ask you, Mr. Speaker, under the guidance of those kinds of people — and I’ve only named a few 
of the ministers — how can the opposition even try and say that this isn’t a good government and as fact 
it is open for business . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Just go out and ask anybody on the street and 
they’ll tell you. 
 
Now I would like to share with you a thought, and I think it kind of really fits ‘Snow White and the 
Seven Dwarfs’ over here to my right, who could have done so much more for the people of 
Saskatchewan, and it kind of goes like this, and they call it ‘Four Bones.’ There’s the wishbones, and the 
jaw-bones, and the knuckle-bones, and the backbones. Well, the wishbones are those who spend their 
time wishing somebody else would do the work. Now, they had 11 years of that. The jaw-bones are all 
those who talk and do all the talking but do little else. Then the knuckle-bones who knock everything 
that anyone tries to do. Mr. Speaker, that kind of tells you what we’re opposed to on the opposite side of 
the House. Finally, the fourth bone are the backbones, and that’s your government, to get under the load 
and do all the work. 
 
I guess the message I’m trying to convey is that all the gloom and doom preaching that comes from the 
opposition side of the House on a daily ration. I just don’t understand them. They had 11 years to do all 
the correcting that they say we should do in 10 months or 11 months. 



 
March 28, 1983 

 

314 
 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, and this is very important to me. I’ve requested the Premier to move these 
desks at least five feet farther north, or at least some farther north, just so that all those people out in 
television land can know that just because we’re on this side of the House we’re not necessarily part of 
that organization. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Obviously, Mr. Speaker, I will be voting against the amendment and for the motion. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to rise and enter into the debate on the throne 
speech. First of all I’d like to thank very much the member for Bengough-Milestone and Regina Centre 
for their congratulations to our curling team that just came back from winning a Canadian title. It was 
tremendous, a tremendous thrill for us to do that, and indeed whenever we can put on Saskatchewan 
colours and represent our province, it’s a tremendous thrill for us. 
 
While we were there in St. John, New Brunswick, I had a opportunity to talk to people from all across 
Canada. When they found out I was an MLA, they kept on asking me all kinds of questions about our 
new government here in Saskatchewan. With the exception of one province, they’re very interested in 
what’s happening here, and that one province I mentioned, which is a very close neighbour of ours, the 
comment we heard there was, ‘Boy, did we ever make a mistake. We’ve gone downhill.’ 
 
The comments you hear from them are a lot of tremendous interesting things. They’re asking, ‘You 
eliminated the gas tax?’ And we said, ‘Yes, we promised that and we delivered that within a few 
minutes of taking office.’ ‘Well, well why wasn’t that done before?’ We said, ‘Well, Saskatchewan can 
afford to do it, and we think it’s a great feather in our hat to be able to boast the lowest gas prices in all 
of Canada, seeing that we are a producing province.’ 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Folk: — They asked about our mortgage interest reduction program. They said, ‘Is that really 
helping the people of Saskatchewan?’ And I said, ‘Yes, id definitely is. There is numerous people all 
across the province taking advantage of that.’ They said, ‘Why wasn’t it in place in Saskatchewan 
earlier?’ The obvious reply was, ‘We only took power on April 26th, 1982.’ 
 
Then they also asked details about it so that perhaps their provinces can look at that in the future. 
 
They also asked about the farm purchase program. You know, what does that mean? How is that helping 
the people of Saskatchewan? How is that helping the farmers? Then they quote figures saying we have 
more people in the last few months taking advantage of this opportunity to own their own farm than took 
place in many years under the previous NDP administration under their land bank program. 
 
And they asked about a new attitude, ‘What is the new attitude in Saskatchewan?’ And I  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

315 
 

could reply very simply, ‘It’s a positive attitude.’ 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Folk: — The state of the economy, Mr. Speaker, is probably, as is mentioned in the speech, we’re 
in the worst economic downturn since the depression. In Saskatchewan we consider ourselves fortunate 
in that, indeed, we are the only province to record employment growth, and our unemployment is still 
the lowest. But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, they’re looking upon this downturn rather as something: 
what can our government do about it? Are we going to bury our heads in the sand, which appeared to be 
the policy of the previous administration, or are we going to go out there with a new positive attitude? 
 
I mention those words quite a bit, this new positive attitude, because that’s the feedback I get from the 
people of Saskatoon university, and the people of Saskatchewan. They like the positive attitude of our 
government, our willingness to listen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, especially in the last month or so, the Leader of the Opposition has made quite, quite a few 
references to a speech I made in September to the Industrial Developers Association of Canada. In that 
speech I said that, indeed, business across Canada can come and take a good hard look at coming into 
Saskatchewan. I said, in the past, certain groups were able to grow but the business groups were not able 
to really expand because of their fear of competition from the crown corporations and the ideology of 
the NDP administration. 
 
Why would he be upset with that? I can’t figure it out. I would believe that small business is the largest 
employer we have in Saskatchewan. And I think it’s a tremendous step that we are taking under the 
Minister of Industry and Commerce to try and accommodate these groups, and help make their rationale 
or reason for doing business in Saskatchewan, make it even better for them and more beneficial for 
indeed all the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And he also . . . One other comment I’d like to make about that, that that is the first time the Industrial 
Developers Association of Canada have had their conference in Saskatchewan, and I believe it’s been 
going for 50 years. Now I think there’s . . . there should maybe be a little note in there, saying: why 
would they suddenly come in 1982 to Saskatchewan? I think it’s because we now have a government in 
place here that is willing to accommodate business and for the betterment of everybody in our province. 
And if somebody from the opposition says, ‘Well, they probably made their plans in advance of 
September 1982, I’d say, ‘Well, perhaps, but they obviously knew an election was coming also.’ 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Folk: — I would also like to once again thank the constituents of Saskatoon University for placing 
their confidence in me. And I also like them to thank them for their, their numerous comments they have 
made over the last, almost year right now, that have helped me stay in tune with what’s happening in 
that constituency, and passing on their concerns to the various ministers involved. And I look forward to 
many more years of serving them as the MLA for Saskatoon University. 
 
I’d like to also congratulate at this time the various ministers of this government. 



 
March 28, 1983 

 

316 
 

Comments you hear of their willingness to listen to the people, their willingness to consult with the 
people, and their willingness to study, analyse and bring forth the best possible programs. From a point 
of view of Saskatoon University constituency I’d like to especially thank the Minister of Social Services, 
the Minister of Education and Continuing Education, and the Minister of Health. These are people that 
have brought in a new attitude into these special areas and the positive comments I keep getting back 
from my constituents are that they are doing a tremendous job and they are looking forward to a long 
administration under Mr. Grant Devine and the Progressive Conservative Party. 
 
On April 26th, 1982, a very historic event took place here in Saskatchewan and that was the election of a 
Progressive Conservative government. I am proud to be a part of that government, and I am a . . . proud 
to be in contact with the people of Saskatchewan, getting their comments and bringing them forth to our 
ministers so that we can bring forth the best possible policies. 
 
Last month in P.A.-Duck Lake there was a reconfirmation of those policies with a resounding victory by 
Mr. Sid Dutchak. I would like to thank . . . or congratulate him on his victory, and I’d also like to make 
my analogy of what happened there. There’s a positive response to a positive new government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it goes without saying that I will support the motion and oppose the amendment. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It does give me a great deal of pleasure to be able to take 
part in the throne debate speech. I was notified very quickly that I was going to be part of this and it was 
a very deep honour. I had planned to speak a little later on the budget, but the opportunity such as this 
doesn’t arise very often and I was very grateful for the opportunity. 
 
First of all, I would like to do as my honourable colleague from the . . . the MLA for Saskatoon 
University has said, that he has said that he would like to congratulate Mr. Sid Dutchak on winning the 
P.A.-Duck Lake constituency. I think I, too, would like to congratulate him, and certainly I think it was a 
resounding victory for the Government of Saskatchewan and for the people of Saskatchewan. Because 
what they have done there, they have reinforced our ideas and our concerns and our beliefs that we are 
in fact moving in the right direction and that they believe we are. And I think that’s so important because 
as a new government we feel that our direction is decided by the people, and the people have decided in 
Duck Lake that we are moving in the right direction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Speaker, when I became . . . When we became government and I became 
minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Forest Corporation, the forest industry in the province had 
looked very dismal in the year before that, and in the year 1982, and it’s, it was starting to show signs 
that it was just going downhill. We felt there was a great deal, need for a lot of improvement. The price 
of lumber, the price of plywood, everything was in a declining state, and we felt it was time that we did 
something to overcome these here obstacles and to keep people employed in the northern part of 
Saskatchewan, certainly where I come from, and certainly all across  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

317 
 

the northern part. 
 
When we assumed control of the government all these things were in fact happening. And we didn’t . . . 
took . . . I guess you would say we took steps forward to in fact alleviate the major concerns first. And 
some of the major concerns, I think, were management of the corporation, the direction the corporation 
was going, the need and the use of the wood that was being used there. 
 
1982 certainly was a poor year in the forestry for everyone. The viability of the government-run plants 
has certainly . . . certainly were in serious question, and mainly due to what the previous administration 
had not done. They had not prepared for the downturn in the lumber industry. No insight as to what was 
going to happen or preparation for the . . . of what . . . or the preparation for the downturn was done by 
the previous administration. And certainly this did result in some losses. 
 
Certainly one thing, Mr. Speaker, to spend money to keep the people employed, but to spend money 
foolishly does not help anyone, and this is what the previous administration had did. And I’ll just give 
you an example, Mr. Speaker, an example probably that shows that, that there was no thought taken to 
some of the things they’ve done. 
 
I’d like to speak just a moment about the Western Overlay plant at Yorkton. The Western Overlay plant 
was a plant that was set, put in Yorkton, 135 miles from where it got its products from. The products 
come from Hudson Bay. And what it did, it cost $1.8 million to set the plant up. They sold $92,000 
worth of product; it run one month. Half of that $92,000 is still not collected. In fact, the plant is shut 
down and will not be in operation again. 
 
And what we have done there, Mr. Speaker, we looked at the plant and said, ‘That was needed; it’s 
there; it’s a nice building. What can we do with it?’ Now we’ve been working with some people. We 
feel we have a new industry, possibly, to go into there within the next two weeks, and this building will 
be utilized, through the private sector, employing anywhere from 12 to 30 people. We feel that, Mr. 
Speaker, is the positive approach to take to a job that wasn’t so well done by the previous 
administration. 
 
Another thing that is needed, Mr. Speaker, in talking about forestry, is an overall forest strategy — the 
proper cutting, the allocation of wood, the proper planning, harvesting of our renewable resources, and 
this must be done on a long-term viability and it must be maintained. And we recognize that this must be 
a workable strategy and it will certainly be to the benefit of all the people of Saskatchewan. Forest 
management must be an integral part of the lumber business, and it is our government’s intention to see 
that it is. 
 
Another thing, Mr. Speaker, I suppose we can talk about all the down things and the bad things and the 
good things, but certainly one thing we found when we, I became minister responsible for Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation and a part of my hon. members’ realignment of the DNS, we found that the 
northern housing branch was just about run as poorly as any branch could have been run. There was $9 
million in overruns, houses costing up to $150,000 each, no care of how the books were kept, buildings 
left in disarray, half finished, some were even . . . had been finished and dismantled. 



 
March 28, 1983 

 

318 
 

We’ve been identifying these problems and in the areas associated with these overspendings. And we 
feel that finally, Mr. Speaker, finally we’re getting a handle on them. And we feel, Mr. Speaker, we can 
in fact put these buildings and the future, the future of the northern building, into a perspective that not 
only the people of Saskatchewan can be proud of, but the northern people of Saskatchewan can be proud 
of. It will be their homes, and they’ll be good homes. And they’ll have a care in them; they’ll have a part 
in them. And we are working to make sure that they do in fact have a part, not only in building them, but 
looking after and to keep them that way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Another thing, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve done, I think, and it’s been a very, very 
positive program, we’ve brought in the Build-A-Home Saskatchewan. It was brought in through the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation on behalf of the provincial government, and what it’s really done, 
Mr. Speaker, is put many, many people to work. Our latest figures indicate that there’s been a total of 
1,343 applications, 281 of them under contract or speculation, and in fact the total amount paid out to 
date, Mr. Speaker, is almost $3 million. At the rate it’s going, Mr. Speaker, we’ll have over 1,500 units 
by the 1st of May, and 1,500 units by the 1st of May. And I’d like to remind this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, that the program does end the 1st of May, 1983 and that we expect, we do expect many 
hundreds of applications to have been approved by that date — many, many more than we’ve got to 
date. It’s coming in at the rate of about 300 a week right now. 
 
Housing is a high priority with this government. As you’re well aware, Mr. Speaker, the housing starts 
in this province in the year 1982 up over, were up over 15 per cent over 1981. And this, Mr. Speaker, is 
the only province in Canada that had an increase in housing starts. And in 1983, Mr. Speaker, we predict 
that there’ll be more starts than there was in 1982, and the jobs related to the housing starts today under 
the Build-A-Home Saskatchewan is over 2,000. 
 
There’s no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan is addressing the problem of unemployment. Not 
only is this problem creating employment . . . Not only is this program creating employment but is also 
revenue generating. for every $3,000 grant, many dollars returns to the provincial coffers, in fact about 
$3,700, through personal income tax, from construction and workers’ salaries, education and hospital 
tax on materials, and corporate tax, and builders’ profit. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan is committed to the limited income family, senior citizen, and the 
disabled. In fact, Mr. Speaker, just about a month ago I was at a sod-turning ceremony in Moose Jaw for 
a 18-unit disabled housing unit for the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
I’d just like to touch on one or two more things, Mr. Speaker, here. While we were travelling around the 
province here just a few weeks ago with three of my hon. colleagues, Mr. Pickering, Mr. Schoenhals, 
and Mr. Muirhead, we discovered that there was many different thoughts and feelings throughout the 
province. And we approached all this here water hearings in a general way, and to discuss it in a general 
approach to the concerns that, I suppose, that were brought forward. During the course of our series of 
hearings held in the centres, Prince Albert, Estevan, and many  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

319 
 

others, we listened to many concerned individuals and spokesmen from major provincial organizations, 
as well as all the mayors and reeves of towns and council members. 
 
As you know, water and its interrelated aspects encompass a very broad spectrum of concern. Proper 
assessment and management of our water supply and river systems will be crucial to the future 
development in the areas of domestic and agriculture, and industrial and recreational concerns. 
 
The main focus, Mr. Speaker, of the water committee was to identify existing and emerging water 
issues, and to gather these concerns with the eventual goal of forming a framework for a comprehensive 
water resource management policy, and while, of course, taking into consideration some of the broader 
environmental and wildlife consideration concerns. With a policy such as just suggested, it became 
possible for local governments, for example, to deal effectively with ongoing and future problems, 
therefore eliminate some of the problems they’re dealing at, merely at an ad hoc basis. As it now, as it 
exists, responsibilities and programs for water and waste water are fragmented and involve many 
provincial government departments. And with our realignment announcement the other day of some of 
the departments, that, too, will come into line and put them more and more under one department. 
 
Our government is firmly committed to careful consideration of all the briefs that were submitted to the 
cabinet committee and working towards developing an overall management strategy for water in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to these, all these other major programs, we will be implementing, in the next 
year, a pesticide-container program. The disposal of pesticide containers in rural Saskatchewan has 
become a major issue to various groups . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — . . . such as SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities’ Association), Saskatchewan Safety Council, Saskatchewan 
Wildlife Federation, just to name a few of the 95 identifiable groups who have either passed resolutions 
or requested action from the government. The former administration, Mr. Speaker, had been contacted 
by just as many groups or organizations of other concerned citizens, but their response to the issue was 
to set up a task force to identify the problem. Mr. Speaker, we are going to resolve the problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — At this point, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say that these groups have already identified 
the problem, and we need only to look to their neighbouring province to see how they have dealt with 
the problem. Alberta has established a program which has been operating for five years, Mr. Speaker. 
We used the best of those provinces, Mr. Speaker — what Manitoba had done and what Alberta had 
done — and put it together in a package so that Saskatchewan had the best of two. I asked my officials 
to study the details, Mr. Speaker, and . . . (inaudible) . . . will present the facts to me. With more than 1 
million pesticide containers entering Saskatchewan annually, in comparison to the 500,000 being used in 
Manitoba, it is clearly time that the issue be addressed in this province. Therefore, instead of delaying 
the action through  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

320 
 

appointment of a task force, we shall be bringing in a program this year, which should be in place by the 
end of the spring season. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s many, many more things I could speak about, but my hon. colleague here is all 
ready to say a few words, and at this time I will be supporting the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I, I’m extremely pleased to rise in this throne speech 
debate and speak for a few moments on behalf of not only the government, but most importantly, the 
constituents of Meadow Lake, with whom I have not had the opportunity in this current session to, to 
speak to over the air — and I notice we are on air time. And I always like to take the opportunity to 
remind them that I don’t forget at any time my first responsibility here, and that is to represent them. I, I, 
I feel extremely honoured, as I have told them since 1978 when they first elected me to this House. I’m 
extremely honoured to represent the people of my home town and my home area in this Legislative 
Assembly and I will continue to, to make every attempt to do that to the very best of my ability. 
 
Which, while I speak about my constituency in the, and the, the people that live there, I really think I’d 
be remiss if I did not mention the positive attitude that I find in that constituency, and in all of the 
communities from Frenchman Butte, Paradise Hill, St. Walburg, Goodsoil, Pierceland and over to 
Meadow Lake, if I did not mention the positive attitude that I find in speaking to the small businessman 
and to the people in the agricultural sector, in all, the kinds of things they tell me about the good moves 
that this government is making, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They feel positive about the, the, about our 
approach to the, to the lands branch and as, as people there, all of them will know, and as many, many 
members in this House will know, the, the problem of leased land is very important to the people in my 
area, and the way that our government has, has committed itself to, to, through my hon. colleague, the 
Minister of Agriculture, has committed itself to, to looking at the way in which leased land was 
allocated in the past, recognizing that there were some extreme problems with the methods that were 
used and saying that we’ll get to the bottom of that and come up with a method that will be fair and 
equitable for all farmers concerned. And certainly there is a positive attitude in my riding and I know 
throughout the province to that policy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We also are extremely pleased about the, the attitude of this government toward the young farming 
sector, and the opportunities for young farmers to be able to buy their own land, and as many, many of 
my colleagues have said here throughout this throne speech debate, and throughout the past session, 
since we took over government. It was one of the major planks of, of our, of our policy in coming into 
government. It still remains on of our major planks. We don’t ever, ever succumb to any kind of 
pressure from the group in the corner who would say: ‘Why do you keep mentioning these things?’ I 
know it hurts them immensely to hear them over and over again, but I would say that it’s important that 
we mention them over and over again, because people out there in Saskatchewan, whether they be at the 
elevator right now in a, in a rummy game, or whether they be in the restaurants or their coffee row of, 
throughout this province, they are saying those things over and over again, and how positive they feel 
about the way in this, and the directions that this government is going. 
 
I should join, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with most of, of my colleagues now who have  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

321 
 

congratulated the mover of this throne speech — the newest member of this House and the hon. member 
for Prince Albert-Duck Lake — and I would be remiss if I did not congratulate him on two, two counts, 
first of all on being elected to this House, and I have a little more to say about that in a moment, because 
it relates directly to one of my responsibilities, the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. But the other 
count that I would like to congratulate him on is his, his delivery and the way in which he presented 
himself in this House as a very new member. It was excellent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know you agree 
with that and I know the vast majority of members of this House agree with that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — And I would also congratulate the seconder of the motion, the hon. member for 
Morse, and I would congratulate, while I’m in that mood, the many speakers in this caucus, this 
Progressive Conservative government caucus, who have done such a good job of their presentations in 
this House, and I think what that does is tells the people of Saskatchewan, in whatever corner of this 
province they might live, the long tenure that this government will have here as we look at the quality of 
the members in this caucus and the age range and the fact, the way that all of our people come from, 
from every walk of life that you can imagine in this province. We cover the waterfront. It should all go 
well for our government. Bur more importantly, more importantly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it should all go 
well for the whole province of Saskatchewan and its people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The reason I want to go back to the P.A.-Duck Lake by-election for just a 
moment — and others have mentioned this, and I don’t want to go on about this ad nauseaum to the 
folks across — but I do want to mention to them that, how important that was to myself, as the Minister 
of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, and to the people who put together the new administrative 
plan that we put into, into the, the realignment of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan and 
bringing them back into the real world of Saskatchewan. Because one of the issues, as all of the 
members opposite will know, because I know they all spent a good deal of time campaigning there, and 
I know they all spent a lot of time talking to people in Prince Albert-Duck Lake, to no avail, as, as was 
shown. But I know that one of the things they heard at that door, at the many doors that they knocked 
on, was they were going to vote Progressive Conservative, because the way in which the, the 
realignment or the dismantling of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, that massive 
all-encompassing department, which became an albatross around their necks, and which is now 
realigned and moved down into a more manageable size, and I would be pretentious if I would suggest 
to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it’s, that it is manageable yet, but it certainly is coming to that stage. 
And so I would say that that was an issue in that by-election, and the people of Prince Albert-Duck Lake 
who are close to the situation certainly, certainly said something to me and certainly said something to 
the government and certainly said something to those opposition members in that choice. 
 
Two or three things, Mr. Speaker, that I, that I should talk about, I . . . my colleague, the Minister of 
Environment, talked about, briefly about the forestry sector in our province. As everyone will know, that 
the forestry sector is certainly in a downturn now, there is some evidence across the country and, and 
with housing starts moving up in the United States, and as many of us, most of us will know in this 
province, a good deal of our market is in the United States — I think something in the order of 65 per 
cent —  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

322 
 

that there is some signs of an upturn. While there’s been a downturn in the forest industry, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and we have come in as a new government, we have not been standing still and blaming the 
various problems that we, that we inherited - and –e did inherit many: I will touch on a couple of them 
— we did not sit back and say let’s wait for an upturn in the, in the forest economy before we act. 
 
We have been acting to enhance that, that industry and we believe that, that things are coming along 
well and that, that there will be some moves, and in fact we know, and we will be making some moves 
very, very quickly, very soon now, to enhance that industry and to show that we want a flourishing and a 
long-term forest industry in this province. And certainly that’s one thing that many people in 
Saskatchewan don’t realize; many of our own citizens don’t realize, the importance of forestry in our 
province. And we . . . What I would say is that those of us who represent northern areas do know how 
important it is to our areas but we also know how important it is to our total economy here. 
 
For example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the last year of the former administration, they planted, in forest 
enhancement, they planted something in the order of 7 million trees. Now that sounds like an awful lot 
of trees. And I remember sitting as an opposition member over there, listening to them say, ‘We planted 
7.4 million trees,’ or something to that effect. And I remember listening to that, as many citizens of the 
province probably listened to it at the time, and said, ‘That sounds like an awful lot of trees.’ But in this 
downturn time, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this past year of 1982 when the industry was 
turned down, when revenues were down in terms of the whole provincial economy, we in this 
government showed our commitment to a new and enhanced forest industry by planting 13, more than 
13 million trees in this province. And just to show as an example, from 7.4 million to 13 million in the 
downturn time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — And I would say at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to indicate that we’ll be 
planting a similar number, a similar number in this coming year as well, just to show that once again that 
we’re into that industry. We believe it’s an important part of our provincial economy and we’ll be there 
to help it flourish along with the private sector. 
 
While I mention that, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we’ve been carrying out throughout this past 
year is a, is a development of a, of a long-term timber supply action plan — what we call an action plan, 
because this is a government of action. We don’t call it some kind of a hocus-pocus program, the kinds 
of things we used to hear from the former administration. We call it an action plan and we call it that for 
very good reason, because it is action that we want and that the people in the forest industry want. 
 
So through consultation with all of the players in the, in the whole of the forest industry in 
Saskatchewan, namely the Prince Albert Pulp Company, the MacMillan, the company, MacMillan 
Bloedel, that has a major installation at Hudson Bay — Simpson Timber is at Hudson Bay — The 
Meadow Lake sawmill which is part of PAPCO, and many, many private operators who were a 
forgotten entity by the former administration. Many private sawmill operators have also been brought 
into our consultative process, and we have said to them, ‘We want you to be a part of the action here.’ 
And I know, I know that that really . . . I, I don’t think it surprised them, but it certainly did please them 
to . . . And I think they were skeptical at the beginning because of the way in which they were kicked 
around out in the bush by the former administration for a good number of  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

323 
 

years. And we have said to them. ‘You, as private sawmill operators, will be a part of the forest industry 
in Saskatchewan once we can come up with a timber supply plan that will be equitable and fair and 
reasonable for all players in the industry.’ And I won’t say any more, give any more detail about that 
just now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But it is important and it is worthy of note at this time. 
 
One of the other things, while I talk about the resource industry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the fishery in 
Saskatchewan. Now we have the two, the two aspects. Certainly, commercial fishing is an, is an 
important industry in northern Saskatchewan and I won’t get into that in too much detail right now. It is 
a, it is an important industry and there is some potential for a good deal of, of conflict as members from 
all sides of the House who, who live anywhere near the northern areas will know is that there is a 
potential for conflict between the commercial fishery on one side and sports fishermen on the other side. 
 
One of the solutions to that, we believe, is to enhance the fish stock in the province. We believe that’s 
extremely important. It sounds, it sounds like a very simplistic approach. To me it makes eminent sense. 
The former government’s approach to that whole thing was: well, there’s a problem between 
commercial fishermen on this side and sport fishermen on this side. How can we keep on reallocating 
the fish stock in the lake for these people and continue the problem? And that’s what happened, that the 
problem was continued for a good long time. 
 
One of the things that we have done is, is gone about a, a, oh, a rebuilding program, or continued a 
rebuilding program that had been on the drawing-boards and proposed for some time under the former 
administration. And I’ll be fair to them. I’ll give them that. They proposed this for a good period of time. 
But in coming into, into the administration, we found that it had been on the back burners so far that it 
was . . . a good deal of time was, must pass before it would come forward had there not been an election. 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was an election. It moved from the back burner. The fish culture 
station, or the fish hatchery, at Fort Qu’Appelle has now been moved up and it’s well along in its 
development. And we expect it to be completed at some time this coming summer. And we think it’s an 
extremely important development, too, in the whole fish enhancement process, for stocking fish in our 
northern lakes and our lakes, indeed, throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
While I am talking about commercial fishing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it should be noted, and I think many 
people don’t realize this, but Lake Diefenbaker, the man-made lake in the . . . what those of us who live 
in the northern part of the province and have enjoyed many lakes for many years . . . but Lake 
Diefenbaker has the best quality, and this comes from the freshwater fish marketing corporation, the best 
quality white fish in the whole of the freshwater fish marketing corporation area throughout Canada. 
And that’s something that’s not widely known in our province. There’s a commercial fishery there at 
Lake Diefenbaker that’s within easy access of a lot of people in Saskatchewan. And we think that there’s 
great potential there for a fishery as well as a great potential, as members opposite will know and 
members all around will know, for the commercial fishery in northern Saskatchewan if handled 
properly. 
 
Man’s, man’s traditional view respecting the fisheries, Mr. Speaker, was that the fish populations looked 
after themselves. And it certainly has not been the case that the fish populations looked after themselves. 
It hasn’t been the case, so enhancement is something that we’re totally committed to. 



 
March 28, 1983 

 

324 
 

And just while I’m speaking about the fishery and the fish culture station at Fort Qu’Appelle, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I should point out one more aspect which is something that we as a government added. 
And that was the tourist facility that we’ve added to the fish culture station, because we believe it’s an 
extremely important thing that we are on one hand going to enhance a natural resource, a very renewable 
resource. 
 
We should, as well, be informing the public of our province about just how important that resource is. 
And through a tourist facility that’s accessible by greater and greater numbers of people in our province 
and visitors to our province, we think we can, we can turn some attitudes around and show people in 
Saskatchewan just how important this industry is to us. 
 
One further thing, and I will just . . . to make a point of clarification, I believe, from the throne speech, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that has to do with the reintroduction of The Northern Municipalities Act, and 
it was mentioned very briefly in the throne speech that it would . . . that a revised version of The 
Northern Municipalities Act would be reintroduced. And I just want to allay any fears that people may 
have that there’s some major revision taking place. There certainly has not. The Northern Municipalities 
Act, as, as was introduced, has been called Bill 61 from our former session, will be reintroduced and 
there are, I believe, two or three small amendments. I’ve discussed them with some members of the 
opposition, but just to allay any fears that people in northern Saskatchewan may have that we’ve had a 
change of heart, we certainly have not had a change of heart in that area. And we will be reintroducing 
that bill to move along in the direction and finally culminate the whole consultation process that’s gone 
on for a good period of time to bring autonomous local government and responsibility (and I want to 
emphasize the word responsibility), Mr. Deputy Speaker, to northern local government. 
 
With those few words, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe I will cease my remarks in this debate. I would 
like to go on further. I have many, many other topics I would like to touch on, but I believe my time is 
up. I would only say at this time that I certainly will be supporting the motion. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to rise in this Assembly this 
afternoon to speak in favour of the motion in support of the Speech from the Throne. I think it’s without 
saying that last April 26th the people of Saskatoon Sutherland expressed very clearly their displeasure 
with the policies and the philosophy of the government that was then in place, and chose instead to 
support the ideas and the programs put forward by Premier Grant Devine and the . . . or the present 
Premier Grant Devine and the Progressive Conservative Party. As the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland, it is indeed a pleasure to rise at this time and try to pass on some of the wishes the people 
have expressed to me as they relate specifically to the throne speech that we heard the other evening. 
 
The message, I think, that the people left, Mr. Speaker, on April 26th, the people of Saskatoon 
Sutherland and the other 54 provincial legislative seats, was basically twofold. Mr. Speaker or Mr. 
Deputy, Deputy Speaker, as the case may be, the people said that they did not want their every waking 
moment to be directed and their decisions scrutinized, their every action regulated and controlled by 
government. I  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

325 
 

think, Mr. Speaker, the people of Sutherland wanted a chance to grow, to prosper, to make decisions for 
themselves, to succeed or to fail, and to think and act for themselves. They overwhelmingly rejected the 
socialist philosophy which provides central control of an individual’s every waking moment, all in the 
name of the so-called betterment of society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reason they rejected this notion is not because that, that they did not want society to 
better, but because they realized that society can only improve if the individuals within the society are 
free to improve themselves. 
 
Individual freedom, Mr. Speaker, an idea so often scoffed at in word and deed by the previous 
administration, was the second reason that the constituents of Saskatoon Sutherland made the decision to 
elect me as a member of this new Progressive Conservative government. Mr. Speaker, the people of this 
province believe that individual freedoms are of paramount importance. They know that a socialist 
believes, when it comes to this notion, that individual freedoms come second to the goals of the state as 
defined by the NDP in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, on April 26th the voters rejected this notion and 
affirmed their belief in a free and democratic society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech, which we are here to debate, reaffirms the confidence of the people of 
Saskatchewan, the confidence that they demonstrated in Premier Devine and this party which we 
represent. This government has taken steps, is taking steps and will continue to take the measures that 
are necessary to restore individual rights and freedoms that were so often tramped on by the former 
government. 
 
At the same time, the throne speech reaffirms that he Devine government is committed to preserve and 
strengthen those areas in which government has a legitimate and important role to perform. The 
examples would be: social services, health care, education, retraining, and the protection of public health 
and safety. Those are legitimate roles for government, Mr. Speaker — not owning farmland or creating 
mega-bureaucracies to control our every waking moment. 
 
During the campaign we made promises based on returning financial control and decision-making 
power to the real people of this province. I believe we kept our promises, and we will continue to keep 
them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The throne speech makes reference to the rewriting of The Planning and Development Act, a piece of 
legislation which I, as Minister of Urban Affairs, am responsible for — a prime example of this 
government’s attempt to reform and streamline the regulatory process. The new act will attempt to 
rectify the disastrous overkill imposed on the private sector individual by the previous administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the individual developer or investor, I have found in my time as Minister of Urban Affairs, 
is not, as the opposition would have us believe, an evil villain who will stoop to anything in the name of 
profit. Mr. Speaker, those individual developers do want to earn profits, for profits create wealth, wealth 
provides jobs, creates a tax base, and betters us all. The NDP would do well to remember that effect, Mr. 
Speaker. The investors seek profit, but I have also found that the investor is willing to play by the rules 
of the game, so long as those rules are reasonable and justifiable. 
 
The problem the investor and developer has faced with the current planning development act, as 
administered and interpreted by the former government, is that the rules of the game were impossible to 
read, let alone to define, Mr. Speaker, the rules  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

326 
 

were so confusing and so open to discretion and abuse that literally hundreds of millions (that’s correct, 
hundreds of millions) of Saskatchewan-grown investment dollars — dollars that were targeted at private 
sector development and growth that would provide jobs, income, tax base — were forced out of this 
province. 
 
They were forced out, Mr. Speaker, by the philosophical attitude of the previous administration. That 
attitude stated that we don’t need you or want you here, so you can leave. Once they had left, after 
fighting for months and years to get some word on whether they would be permitted to invest here, they 
simply left in frustration. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, the NDP could say there is no private sector investors in this province who wish to 
help to build, so we the government will help to build the buildings. We’ll build the apartment blocks, to 
develop the subdivisions, and to build the office buildings. And of course, if we build them, we the 
government will own them and control them. 
 
The purpose of the rewrite to The Planning and Development Act is to set the rules for development, to 
clearly and precisely proclaim the preservation, enhancement of public health and safety, while at the 
same time allowing — no, not allowing — encouraging the investor-developer to build this province 
within these guide-lines and rules. Mr. Speaker, we do not intend to throw out the rules. We intend to 
say clearly, these are the rules, and you are welcome here if you agree to abide by them. 
 
With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I will be introducing in the spring session of the legislature the new 
Planning and Development Act. I am proud, proud to report that this act will come to fruition as a result 
of open and candid participation in the development of the act by all those who are generally affected by 
the act: consultation with urban and rural municipalities, developers, architects, engineers, community 
planners, realtors, surveyors and others. We have requested and received input from these various 
groups during the process, not after the fact. In other words, Mr. Speaker, open government in practice. 
 
We will hope to have corrected the mess we inherited in this new legislation, in any subsequent 
amendments that are necessary. This is but one of the changes as outlined in the throne speech that the 
people of Saskatchewan voted for, that we have delivered to date, and that we will continue to deliver. 
 
There are many examples of the progress that Saskatchewan is making under our new government. The 
opportunities for new industries and jobs have been expanded beyond expectations, and I believe 
particularly, when you consider the economic climate in which you find ourselves in, the development 
in the fibre optics industry, which is certainly a main factor in the city and the riding which I represent, 
ahs been dramatic. 
 
I would like to say a word or two about my constituency, the Saskatoon Sutherland. I’m proud to be able 
to represent a mixture of Saskatchewan people who live in my riding, located on the outskirts of 
Saskatoon. It has mainly an urban riding but does have some rural areas. We have six schools, several 
parks, recreation centres, all contributing to the high level of community life. 
 
Some of these schools produced some of the fine athletes that represented Saskatchewan at the Canada 
Winter Games in Chicoutimi last week. Those athletes demonstrated the high standards that 
Saskatchewan demands. Saskatchewan  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

327 
 

returned from the Winter Games the proud recipient of the Centennial Cup. Our team increased their 
medal score by more than 10. We had such gold medal winners as James Rozon from Saskatoon, who 
was one of the four Canadian athletes who won three gold medals. The athletes involved in the games 
demonstrated one more reason the people have chosen to stand behind this Progressive Conservative 
government — the drive and initiative of the private citizen to achieve their personal best. We encourage 
our youth to do their best, to attain their personal goals, not only in athletics but in every aspect of life. 
Our aim is to make this province number one in many areas: job creation, medical care, attitude. To do 
such a thing demands team play. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have been involved in a number of coaching assignments over the years, and I’m proud 
to be part of this PC team. I think the reference I made just now to attitude could be expanded on a little 
bit. In the time I’ve been in this House I’ve been rather disappointed in the understanding of the 
members opposite on just what attitude is all about. They seem to have problems. When the Premier 
speaks about the fact Saskatchewan has chosen not to participate in the recession, they seem to have 
problems realizing that this is an attitudinal statement and that the people of this province are, in fact, 
optimistic and are tired of the pessimism and the doom and gloom that we are hearing so much of 
coming from across the floor. I’m reminded of the words of Vince Lombardi, the famous football coach 
at Green Bay, who said one time that the most important word in the English language is enthusiasm, 
and if you consider that, Mr. Speaker, I think you can realize that the members opposite probably do 
have a great deal of problems understanding that word, and especially in the ways in which the Premier 
of this province uses it. The people of the province, on the other hand, seem to understand it very well. 
 
With those few words, Mr. Speaker, I will say that it is a great pleasure to have been able to take part in 
this debate, and I think it should be obvious that I will be supporting the motion regarding the throne 
speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure for me to join in this throne speech debate 
and make a few brief remarks as member for Saskatoon Centre, a constituency, by the way, that I am 
very, very proud to represent, a constituency that lies in the heart, the downtown centre of the most 
vibrant city in the province of Saskatchewan — and indeed, I feel, the most vibrant city in western 
Canada, and I believe, God willing, and many others willing, that we will be the home of the new NHL 
team for the province of Saskatchewan. So we’re all keeping our fingers crossed for that. I know, and I 
believe that it is, indeed, going to come to pass. 
 
I heard my colleague speak not too long ago that he, he was proud to have won the, the mixed curling 
championship for the country, and I indeed want to add my congratulations to the member, Rick Folk. 
And I want to advise Rick that I was also curling this past weekend in the Co-operative Bonspiel up in 
Tisdale which . . . I very, very much enjoyed curling on Saturday evening and on Sunday morning and 
the fellowship and the good fun that I had with co-operators form northern Saskatchewan. There were 
managers and employees of co-op stores and the co-op retail system in northern Saskatchewan there. 
And I have traveled, traveled far and wide across this province of Saskatchewan, talking to leaders of 
central co-ops, the federated co-ops, of course, the wheat pool, the Credit Union Central, and the co-op 
college, and so on, and they have been telling me, for the past 11 months that we’ve, that we have been 
in government, that they are, they are indeed pleased with the new association that they  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

328 
 

have with government. 
 
They have been telling me that they have . . . they’re tired of being treated like political footballs, as they 
were with the previous administration. They said they want to be treated on an equal footing with other 
free enterprise businesses in Saskatchewan, and we indeed do intend to carry out their wishes. And I’ve 
been distressed, Mr. Speaker, to hear in the last few weeks, indeed disturbed to hear that the NDP are 
again trying to make co-ops their political footballs. I’ve heard reports of annual meetings of credit 
unions and retail co-ops out there where defeated candidates have come in and tried to impose their 
political will on the boards of those associations again. I say, shame on you. It didn’t work in the last 10 
years, and it’s not going to work in the next 20. Co-ops are tired of being political footballs. They’ll no 
longer be used. I spoke briefly . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — . . . to a little co-operative about 30 miles out of Regina a week or so ago. All 
this co-operative . . . all this community consisted of was a little co-op store and a community hall and a 
railroad going through it. Most people that attended that meeting were indeed the finest people in this 
land of Saskatchewan. They’re not political. They simply want to operate their enterprises, and have 
‘one member, one vote’ and derive the benefits of the co-op model. They don’t want to be political 
footballs as they were in the past. They say this new government is indeed a breath of fresh air. 
 
Some Hon. Member: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — I was also pleased to, to hear the Lieutenant-Governor announce in the Speech 
from the Throne, about a week or so ago, that we are implementing a new co-op act, and as Minister of 
Co-operatives I’m pleased to, to, to be very much involved with this. Of course, it’ll combine three acts: 
The Co-operative Associations Act, The Marketing Associations Act, and The Co-operative Production 
Associations Act. And it will attempt to amalgamate these three . . . It will amalgamate these three and 
fill in some of the voids in co-operative legislation that are there now. And co-operatives will be given 
the flexibility in establishing their own rules for family memberships and other joint memberships and 
many other things, Mr. Speaker, which I won’t go into here today because time is indeed limited. But I, I 
am very proud to be the Minister of Co-ops, and be associated with the good people of the co-operatives 
in Saskatchewan, and behind the thrust to develop this new co-operative act. 
 
I’m also pleased to say that the new co-op home building program is working well. The Department of 
Co-operation and Co-operative Development is now holding meetings for prospective homeowners to 
take advantage of this new building program. In addition to the provincial mortgage interest reduction 
plan, the Build-A-Home grant program spoken of by the Minister of the Environment, the minister for 
the Sask Housing Corporation, and the home energy loan program previously announced, we’re making 
a sweat-equity option available to further reduce the cost of acquiring your own home in this province. 
We estimate that through the program a typical co-op home builder can save between $5,000 and 
$10,000 off the price of their home. So that, that is indeed a good program. 
 
Another aspect of my jurisdiction, Mr. Speaker, is the liquor board and the liquor 



 
March 28, 1983 

 

329 
 

licensing commission, which is now in the process of being integrated or amalgamated, if you will, into 
one agency. I submit that there was much, much wastage in the past, in that the liquor licensing 
commission was located in a separate office building on south Albert and the liquor board had its office 
over on Park Street. I’m amazed to see that the previous administration moved the liquor licensing 
commission over to the south Albert location. They were paying $100,000 a year, Mr. Speaker. That 
was pure out-and-out waste. This new government . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . $100,000 a year. Now 
we are integrating these two agencies back into one at the Park Street location. The saving realized will 
be some $276,000, Mr. Speaker, in this first year of operation when the integration gets under way on 
April the 1st. 
 
I spoke also — last night, as a matter of fact, in Saskatoon — to special liquor vendors. The present 
legislation says that there shall be 135 special liquor vendors in the province of Saskatchewan. And I 
was there, along with the new chairman of the board, Mr. Martin Pederson, and the new general 
manager, Mr. David Bock, previously chairman of the public service commission, to speak to the special 
vendors. And they made it very clear to me that it was the first time ever that they can remember that a 
minister and the chairman and a general manager was there to speak to them and listen to their concerns. 
We’ve said all along in the past year that this government would listen to the people of Saskatchewan, 
and this is what we’re doing, and this has been indicated to us in no uncertain terms that it is working. 
 
I’m very pleased to say that persistence is back in vogue in this province, that the people of 
Saskatchewan under a new free enterprise government are willing to persist and make this province 
number one in the country — people who work hard, honest people of Saskatchewan who know that 
free enterprise creates jobs and not the nationalization of our resource industries like potash, and oil, and 
forestries, and meat-packing plants, and malt plants, and so on. It’s going to be free enterprise that’s 
going to bring this province into a position of number one, and of course a positive attitude goes right 
along with that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — I’m excited about the prospects for Saskatchewan. I an see Saskatchewan, 
under a free enterprise government, by the year 2000 not having under a million people, but possibly 
approaching 2 million people, Mr. Speaker. And with 2 million people there will be jobs, there will be 
economic activity, and there will be prosperity for everyone in this province. 
 
I was pleased to hear the Premier announce in his reorganization statement the other day that tourism 
and small business will now come under one portfolio, and under the direction of the minister, George 
McLeod. I’m sure that small business will be invigorated, reinvigorated in this province, and create jobs 
that are badly needed here. 
 
I’ve been very disappointed in the attitude of this government for as long as I’ve lived here, in the past. I 
know, for example, that Denison Mines opened up their potash operation in the province of New 
Brunswick, creating 600 jobs, not too long ago. If it hadn’t been for the negative attitude of that 
government opposite, when they were in power, those 600 jobs would have been here in Saskatchewan 
instead of somewhere down in the Maritimes. It’s a negative attitude that has seen no growth as far as 
business is concerned in this province. 
 
And one final aspect. I’d like to commend the Minister of Finance, Mr. Bob Andrew. He’s  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

330 
 

about as tight with a buck as anyone I know. He is a man that well recognizes what fiscal responsibility 
is, not the irresponsible attitude of the previous administration. They told the people of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, that in the year 1982-83, that we would have a $200 million . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Surplus. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — A $200 million surplus, thank you. Instead it turned out to be a $200 million 
deficit — a $400 million miscalculation. I, I don’t believe their minister of finance could add. But I 
know that our Minister of Finance can add and that he has to face a serious situation in this coming year, 
but we have cut, and we have belt-tightened, and we have streamlined where necessary. And the budget, 
when it comes in tomorrow night will indeed be a responsible budget. When I look at the forecast $30 
billion deficit for our country, it makes me shudder and I’m certainly confident that with the new fiscal 
management in this province that we won’t find ourselves in that kind of a situation. 
 
So, in closing, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say that I am indeed confident in where we’re going in this 
province. I’m confident in our Premier, Mr. Grant Devine, who is indeed the best leader that this 
province is going to have, to have seen in many, many years. With those remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will 
indeed support the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to begin by congratulating the member from Prince 
Albert and the member from Morse in being asked to move and second the reply to the address from the 
throne. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They will not be in the cabinet. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It is, it is, it is indeed a hopeful sign. Such, such honours in the past have sometimes 
augured a cabinet appointment, and I’m sure that has not been lost on any of the members opposite, all 
of whom, I think, have been writing their cabinet entrance exams with these speeches. 
 
I listened to, the, listened to the speeches of members opposite. I may say that, concerning the fact that 
they came from 55 people who should have some independence of mind, those speeches were 
remarkably alike. Indeed, One would almost think that someone xeroxed an outline for your speeches. 
You all used the same outline. 
 
I can’t help, Mr. Speaker, commenting on the member from Regina North West. I may say that, I, it was 
. . . I thought the other day it would be such a pleasure to hear him speak from his feet for a change. 
Instead, when he got up I found what he was saying was not to my liking, Mr. Speaker. I descended two 
floors into the bowels of this building, and I may say, Mr. Speaker, I could hear him almost as well 
down in the cafeteria as I could here. What he had to say was no more intelligible, but the decibel level 
was almost as bad downstairs. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Nutana and I seem to have an ongoing dispute about the women’s division. 
I may say you won. I may say, congratulations; you won. You wanted, you wanted to see the women’s 
division abolished and you have been successful. I read the member’s speech for some time . . . 



 
March 28, 1983 

 

331 
 

An Hon. Member: — What about the women in your caucus. What do the women in your caucus 
represent, Ned? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I can, I can say to the member for Weyburn that had we elected 55 members as you 
did we would also have had five members in our caucus. The difference was not a commitment to 
women. The difference was electoral success. 
 
Let me say, Mr. Speaker, I read the remarks of the member from Saskatoon Nutana several times. I . . . 
It took that often before I could make any sense of them. But I think I finally got a drift out of what she 
said. And what she said is simply, ‘I made it, so why can’t you?’ And that is the trust of her remarks. I 
may say I think that’s typical of members opposite. There is no compassion for the discrimination that 
we find against women. There is no sense that there is collective responsibility to do something to assist 
women, and, Mr. Speaker, there is really no recognition of the plight of women — women occupy 
consistently the lowest echelons of the economy; and the fact that they enjoy the highest rates of 
unemployment. And that will only come to an end, that will only come to an end when we have a 
government which recognizes the problem and takes steps to solve them, and that includes something 
other than the abolition of the women’s division. I may say I did not expect that to happen. I recall 
questioning the Minister of Labour about the women’s division. I recall hearing him express support for 
the women’s division and what it was doing, and I was surprised, Mr. Speaker, to see that women’s 
division abolished — surprised because I think there is universal skepticism that the public service 
commission can carry on the advocacy role that he women’s division did. 
 
The public service commission is by its nature responsible for seeing that all employees are treated fairly 
and justly. It is going to be an awkward appendage to have one group within the public service 
commission which is an advocate on behalf of certain people, and I think the universal assumption 
among women’s groups is that it simply won’t work. It is apparent that there is no provision for any 
encouragement of affirmative action programs in the private sector. I listened to what the Premier had to 
say today. There was no recognition in the Premier’s remarks in question period that . . . of the 
assumption which underlies women’s programs, and that is that women face discrimination. And it is 
not enough to simply treat them equally and provide equal opportunities. As Mr. Justice Wendell 
Holmes said, equal laws applied to unequal people is a kind of discrimination. I saw no recognition of 
that fundamental principle. 
 
The members’ opposite speeches consistently refrain from dealing with the throne speech, and given the 
lack of any information in that throne speech, that’s understandable, and I blame you not for that. That 
just shows, it just shows a bit of integrity. You did not attempt to read something into it that wasn’t 
there, and there wasn’t anything there. All members opposite, Mr. Speaker, spent far more time dealing 
with the remarks from the member for Elphinstone than you did with any portion of the throne speech, 
and I find that not at all surprising. I find that not at all surprising. I have come to, I have come to and 
I’ve come to recognize that the member from Elphinstone, through sheer intelligence and personality, 
dominates most institutions he’s associated with, and it doesn’t surprise me that he dominates most 
institutions he’s associated with, and it doesn’t surprise me that he dominates this throne speech, 
although he’s in the opposition. All members, all members opposite . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . all 
members opposite attempted to ape the, the member for Elphinstone, and that doesn’t surprise me. 



 
March 28, 1983 

 

332 
 

I want to go on very briefly, Mr. Speaker, to deal with, to deal with the, the . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . that’s right, the little blue book again. I want to thank my friend, Mr. Petrychyn, for having provided 
me with a copy. It’s well that I got it from him early because nobody has been able to find this poor soul 
for several months, but I got this early. I got this early before he disappeared into the bowels of this 
government. And I may say, Mr., I may say, Mr. Speaker, that the behaviour of members opposite when 
they were in the opposition, remind me of a story that’s told about Mark Twain. During the First World 
War, some, a cub reporter asked Mark Twain what the Allies should do about the U-boat menace. Mark 
Twain’s answer was prompt: ‘Drain the Atlantic.’ And the reporter, who took him seriously, said, ‘But 
Mr. Twain, how can you do that?’ Mark Twain said, ‘Listen son, don’t bother me with the detail. I just 
do the design work. Somebody else has go to do the engineering.’ And that is the way you people 
behaved when you were in opposition. You did the design work. Somebody else had to do the 
engineering. 
 
I may say I was . . . I may say I did not, I did not believe you people would take yourselves seriously in 
suggesting that you could but taxes and introduce a number of expensive programs. You apparently did 
take yourselves seriously and we are going to see the results of that tomorrow night with the largest 
deficit this province has ever seen. All of that, Mr. Speaker, without scratching the surface of your 
program. And I just flip through this at random. I’ll Pick some trifles out which you haven’t yet 
accomplished, just a few trifles. The . . . Oh, here’s, here’s, here’s a couple of trifles which I’m sure 
we’ll see in the, in the, in the upcoming budget. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Page 29. This is almost 
weightless. There’s almost nothing to it. ‘A PC government . . . Page 29, ‘Fighting Inflation”: 
 

A PC government will battle inflation by phasing out the provincial sales tax, a 10 per cent 
reduction in personal income tax, removing the gas tax. 
 

I want, Mr. . . . I want, Mr. Speaker, to remind members opposite of what my colleague, the member for 
Regina Elphinstone, did near the end of his first term in office as premier. He stood up in this House, 
took the ‘New Deal for People,’ went through it item by item, and every item of that had been 
introduced and implemented. I defy, I defy the current Premier to take this book at he end of his term of 
office and go through this item by item, because the vast majority of this will not be implemented. 
 
Oh, here’s a, here’s a, here’s a, here’s a passage members might enjoy. I just happened to open it — 
another passage you will enjoy. It’s about SGI. It’s about SGI. 
 

Rapid SGI rate increases are hitting drivers especially hard. 
 

And we find out, Mr. Speaker, that that’s causing bad feelings. I wonder what the, the behaviour of the 
member from Regina South caused this week with the antics that went on. And I regret that the time 
available tome does not allow me to dwell on it in more detail. 
 
The . . . Ah! Just another trifle. Just another trifle I’m sure you’ll be getting to shortly. You’re going to 
combine the Department of Health and social services. I say to the member from Swift Current, I’m 
sorry about that. We rather enjoyed having you as a minister but apparently you’re to disappear. . . . 
(inaudible interjections) . . . 



 
March 28, 1983 

 

333 
 

You’re going to ‘expand the drug plan to include all prescription drugs.’ I assume that’ll be coming 
shortly. ‘Establish a comprehensive day care service.’ I assume we’ll see all of that very shortly. 
 
I say to the members opposite that the time has come to drain the Atlantic. The time has come when you 
are going to have to start implementing your program and the victory which you wove with such success 
is going to start coming unraveled. We saw part of the fabric coming unraveled last week when the 
minister tried to conceal what was a very substantial rate increase in SGI. He was as unsuccessful in 
concealing that substantial increase as any member of the cabinet. And the fabric is going to come 
further unraveled, Mr. Speaker, when we have the Minister of finance deliver the budget speech 
tomorrow night. For all the ballyhoo, and I’m sure there’ll be a great deal, it will be apparent that you 
hadn’t thought out the, the platform, that it is not capable of implementation in any kind of responsible 
fashion. It will be, it will be obvious, Mr. Speaker, that he budget in this province is getting out of 
control. I’m sure there will be a great deal said about jobs and soon and so forth. But I will venture to 
say that there will not be as much capital, as much capital, as many capital dollars spent in this budget, 
in the midst of a severe employment crisis, as there was in the budget of March, 1982, when we were 
virtually at full employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to, I want to deal for a moment with the throne speech. My colleagues have called it 
barren, and barren it was indeed. Never have so many listened to so little for so long. It might indeed, 
Mr. Speaker, have been called the ‘Drone Speech.’ It’s tediousness, it’s barenessness, it’s cliches, it’s 
dreary, negative tones, mean that for many years March 17 may not be known as St. Patrick’s Day in 
Saskatchewan; it may well be known as just ‘Bleak Thursday.’ In many ways, Mr. Speaker, that bleak, 
eerie, negative throne speech came as no surprise, for its overall approach and in each of its many 
components it was entirely consistent with this government’s policies — remarkably consistent and 
consistently reactionary. It served as one more example of this government’s harsh and heartless 
negative policy. No matter what the problems facing this government, Mr. Speaker, they can find any 
number of reasons why they shouldn’t solve them. 
 
From the very beginning the Conservative government’s position has been clear in its deeds, which have 
been virtually non-existent, its slogans, of which we’ve had no end, and its performance, which has been 
dismal. And the hollow slogans are well-known. It was interesting, Mr. Speaker, that not once in the 
throne speech did we hear the phrase ‘open for business’ and there is good reason for that. They did not 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It was not the centre of the throne speech as it has been and there is a 
good reason for that, and that is because ‘open for business’ has become a standing joke even among 
Conservatives. The one thing that is remarkable about the open for business approach is its failure to, to, 
to provide one single success. A single success has not arisen out of the Open for Business . . . Open for 
Business conference, and it is no wonder, it is no wonder that that was not in the throne speech. 
 
The Premier’s approach throughout the past few months has had the same old huckster’s hype: cut 
government spending, eliminate programs, reduce income support payments for those in need, reduce 
government regulation of industry, abandon public sector investments, Saskatchewan is open for 
business, it’s up for sale, and there is so much more we could be. 
 
The feverish hollow cheers of a government barren of any solutions facing the  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

334 
 

Saskatchewan people was noteworthy. In the end, however, the truth will out; in the end, the people of 
Saskatchewan will not judge you by your slogans, not by the superficial platitudes, but by your 
performance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan people will judge this government’s policies by the results which flow 
from them, and to date that has been dismal. By that test you are failing, and failing very badly. Not only 
have these negative policies failed to stimulate or even protect employment, not only have, have they 
allowed the recession to creep into Saskatchewan even further, worse, Mr. Speaker, the Tory’s negative 
nay-saying irresolute approach and your harsh, heartless policies have had even more serious and 
long-term consequences. 
 
By emphasizing narrow self-interest, you have reinforced social fragmentation, isolation and alienation. 
Your approach on the minimum wage sets the haves against the have-nots. It is cheered by the chamber 
of commerce and decried by those . . . by the trade union movement and those groups which speak on 
behalf of the poor — cheered by the haves and decried by the have-nots. By stressing greed and profits 
available to foreign investors, you have encouraged our community to abdicate any responsibility for the 
well-being of its citizens. 
 
We saw nothing in the throne speech about the creation of jobs — nothing at all. Apparently this 
government has no responsibility to attempt to create jobs in the midst of what is the worst recession 
since the war. By the incessant preaching of the survival of the fittest, you are turning the victims of the 
recession into scapegoats. I think in this category we can refer again to the transfer of the women — the 
abolition of the women’s division. Let’s call it what it is. 
 
The bankruptcy of this government, Mr. Speaker, is also apparent from the resolution that the . . . The 
bankruptcy of the government is apparent not just in the ministers; it’s also apparent in the 
backbenchers. I noted with interest the resolutions put forward by members opposite, the same negative 
empty approach as we saw in the throne speech. 
 
Let’s consider for a moment, Mr. Speaker. Of the 15 resolutions advanced by Conservative members, 11 
sought to evade and avoid constructive leadership at the provincial level; 11 sought to blame the federal 
government for something — 11 out of the 15. Does any of them commend the Devine government for 
its outstanding performance flowing from its open for business rhetoric? Hardly. Then, what 
government members make up for in imagination they . . . What government members lack in 
imagination they make up for in integrity, for apparently no members opposite so lacked integrity that 
they would praise this government for is economic performance. 
 
Does any them, does any of them, does any of them commend this government for its job creation? 
Given the fact that unemployment is up sharply, given the fact that the numbers, numbers on welfare are 
up sharply, given the fact that the size of the labour force has shrunk, given the fact that all of these 
things, that government members can hardly be blamed for not wanting to defend this government’s 
record of job creation, does any of them commend the government? Does any of these resolutions 
opposite commend the government for its sensitive, sympathetic policies to natives or women or senior 
citizens? That degree of hypocrisy is apparently beyond even members opposite. 
 
I was particularly interested to note the resolution from the member for Regina Lakeview. I thought he 
might comment the government for its all-out efforts to secure  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

335 
 

an adequate water supply. I thought the member might want to deal with the subject. I though he might 
want to commend the government for its repeated attempts over the past years to reassure the public 
service and to strengthen its morale — not, not, not so. Instead, the member from Lakeview avoided all 
of these issues and put forward a resolution dealing with the final report of the Regina Airport study. 
Now that’s presumably, I suppose, to facilitate the Premier’s frequent flights out of the province to 
assure investors in New York and Toronto that Saskatchewan is not participating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech on Thursday, Bleak Thursday as it will be known, has been a bitter 
disappointment to the people of Saskatchewan. It has provoked a growing fear among my constituents 
and people from across Saskatchewan. And the fear is that the government’s slick advertising slogans 
are, are a mask a mask for inaction, indecision, indifference and inhumanity. And that mask, Mr. 
Speaker, is being torn away. 
 
To be sure, Mr. Speaker, my constituents know about the rich rewards to Tory friends. They know about 
the tens of millions of dollars in reduced oil royalties. They know about the 100 per cent increase in 
incomes for natural gas producers announced by the Premier last month. But they could be forgiven for 
saying, ‘Well, what about me, my family, my neighbours, and my community’? The questions, Mr. 
Speaker, are the same right across the province. 
 
In Yorkton, for over the last 12 months, the number of unemployed men and women seeking work has 
jumped by 60 per cent to more than 6,000. In Melfort, the number of unemployed seeking work has shot 
up by more than 300 per cent in the last year. In Saskatoon the number of unemployed seeking work has 
increased by 100 per cent and now stands at 17,000 — double the number a year ago. And they’re 
asking these questions in Estevan, Mr. Speaker, where there’s been a 50 per cent increase in the number 
of unemployed men and women seeking work in the last 12 months. 
 
On Friday afternoon I had occasion, I may say to the member from Moosomin, I had occasion to meet 
with working men and women in Estevan to listen to their fears and disappointments about the 
government’s policies. I was there in part because they seldom get to see their own MLA. He doesn’t 
live there; he never has. He occasionally passes through on his way to the States. They asked a number 
of questions. They asked if it was true that he Premier was so embarrassed about paying his deputy 
minister almost $90,000 — four times what he pays his chauffeur — that he refused to answer any 
questions about either here in the Assembly. The were asked . . . They asked me if somehow or other he 
could be persuaded to stop here in the province for awhile and provide some leadership in taking this 
province out of the recession, instead of going off to New York to tell the bankers that we are not 
participating in the recession. 
 
Finally, they asked me how, how they could go about persuading him to make good on his swell 
promises to adopt positive policies of job creation instead of, instead of the harsh negative policies of 
recession and unemployment. 
 
They shared a letter with me, Mr. Speaker, a letter they had sent to their MLA, and a letter they had 
made public. With a straightforward eloquence they sum up why they’re disappointed in him, his 
leadership, his policies, and his government. That letter said: 
 

Our members are very disappointed (the letter says) with your action on the election promises 
that you made to us during the election campaign. We see no indication whatsoever of your 
government creating jobs. In general you  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

336 
 

are treating people as if they were just another commodity. You invited people home to 
Saskatchewan. They’ve come home to find themselves jobless, facing poverty and social aid. 
 

You may recognize the letter. I say to the member from Thunder Creek, you may . . . from Estevan, 
sorry . . .you may recognize the letter. 
 
A bitter disappointment, Mr. Speaker, a bitter disappointment by the people of Saskatchewan that a 
Premier and a government who have promised so much, but who on Bleak Thursday neglected so many. 
 
The throne speech was quite unremarkable for what it did contain. Oh, it contained the horse-racing 
commission — with all deference to the member from Rosthern, that’s not going to cause rioting in the 
streets in my riding — a host of government regulatory legislation, and the announcement of some 
amendments which were utterly housekeeping in nature. There has been a bill, which has come before 
this Assembly for every year since I have been associated with the Assembly called the teachers’ life 
assurance act, or some such variation thereof — it’s done every year. This year the act, for the first time, 
made it into the throne speech. That was the kind of trivia which bloated that throne speech. 
 
It was, however, Mr. Speaker, remarkable for what it did not contain. It did not, for example, contain 
any recognition that misguided Tory policies are aggravating a very serious economic recession. It did 
not contain any acknowledgement of provincial government leadership in, and the provincial 
government’s responsibility in addressing the major social and economic challenges facing us. And it 
did not contain a single reference to the larger issues of concern to Saskatchewan people: social justice, 
human rights, and the elimination of ignorance, fear, hate and want. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the full extent of this government’s consistent, nay-saying approach is revealed by 
major themes which were not present in the throne speech. The speech is notable for what it did not 
contain. 
 
There was no mention of native people, no mention of any plans, any determined method by the 
government to address the very real and increasing problems faced by Indian and Metis, no recognition 
of the embarrassing rate of incarceration of Indian and Metis people in our jails, nothing said about the 
rate of unemployment which would embarrass any civilized society. One would have expected to see 
some attempt to deal with racial tension, which must be one of the most serious problems in our society. 
One would have thought there would have been some initiatives to eliminate the discrimination that 
native people undoubtedly face, but, Mr. Speaker, there was no mention of it. 
 
Senior citizens — scarcely a passing reference to senior citizens. No reference with respect to the 
honourable pioneers of our province — the generation that built Saskatchewan and which is not being 
ignored by a government for whom ‘Open for Business’ is not only a slogan, but a style of dealing with 
people. Somehow or other, Mr. Speaker, I guess senior citizens just don’t fit into the open-for-business 
philosophy, and so they are shunted aside. All across Canada, public and private sectors and authorities 
are vigorously debating the best ways to improve the lot of senior citizens . . . all across Canada, except 
in Saskatchewan. 



 
March 28, 1983 

 

337 
 

Women — there was nothing in the throne speech about women, nothing in the throne speech 
suggesting any ways of dealing with the discrimination which women undoubtedly face in the 
market-place. We know now why that was. We know now, because this government, far from intending 
to do anything for women, was planning to take an extremely retrograde step. I want to say to members 
opposite that this now is the only province west of the Maritimes (and I don’t know about the Maritimes 
— I’m not sure what the Government of Prince Edward Island has), but this is the only province west of 
the Maritimes which does not have a women’s division in the Department of Labour. Even in Manitoba, 
under the government of Sterling Lyon, which was not known for being in the forefront of feminist 
issues, even Sterling Lyon kept the women’s division. You have now placed yourself further back than 
the, even the other Conservative governments in this country. 
 
The minimum wage, I suggest, is another failing of this government that strikes directly at women. By 
far the majority of people earning minimum wage are women. At a time when the incomes, incomes of 
women in Saskatchewan are less than half the incomes of men and falling as a percentage, this throne 
speech contained not a single reference. Indeed, the action of the government on Friday told us why . . . 
because they are abolishing what little there is. 
 
Disabled — not a single reference in this speech — in this long, dreary, barren and bleak throne speech 
— for the disabled, despite repeated assurances from the Minister of Labour that he would be soon 
introducing legislation. Indeed, he practically guaranteed me that he would be introducing legislation to 
deal with the disabled — the so-called accessibility legislation. Not a single reference to that in the 
throne speech. There was room in the throne speech for the horse-racing commission, and for the 
teachers’ life assurance act — nothing, not a word mentioned about the accessibility legislation. 
 
Working people — perhaps the group who were dealt the harshest blow in the throne speech was the 
working people. And again, it was what was not said. Nothing about injured workers, apart from a single 
cryptic reference to The Workmen’s Compensation Act, which the Minister of Labour has told us will 
be a pale version of the Muirhead report. No mention of improving health and safety standards. No 
mention of the health, of the health hazards posed by video display technology, of particular concern to 
women. No mention of plans to implement the full range of valuable recommendations on workers’ 
compensation made to the Devine government by the Muirhead report . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Moore. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Muirhead report. Indeed, the Minister of Labour has said that we will not see most 
of those recommendations. 
 
A good deal has been said about the minimum wage. I’m not going to repeat it all. I may say a Thursday 
was ‘Bleak Thursday,’ then Friday was ‘Black Friday,’ for those who are on minimum wage. It was a 
very bad day, indeed. First, StatsCanada reported that Regina had the highest CPI increase in February 
of any Canadian city. Bad news for working people, and particularly bad news for minimum wage 
earners. Then, StatsCanada reported that slumping wage income in the private sector is hindering 
Canada’s economic recovery. I read . . .The headline says it all: ‘Pay Slump Threatens Recovery.’ What 
is needed is not a reduction in consumer spending, but an increase in consumer spending, exactly the 
kind of thing we won’t get from freezing minimum wage. 



 
March 28, 1983 

 

338 
 

Finally, late in the day when the minister was out of town, the government — and when the opposition 
was out of town — the government announced a second one-year wage freeze in the minimum wage. To 
the credit of the Premier, you did produce the Minister of Labour to answer questions in the House. 
 
I may say as something of an aside that I wished you would undertake to produce the Minster of 
Government Services as well. If there’s some charitable reason for her absence during this entire 
session, I will not mention it again, but if there is no charitable reason for her absence, it’s soon going to 
become a subject of discussion. There are some questions we want to put to her. That, as I’ve said, is 
something of an aside. 
 
This government’s harsh and heartless minimum wage policies, Mr. Speaker, are absolutely 
unjustifiable, morally and economically. The decision to freeze minimum wage for 12 months is just 
unconscionable. It’s in sharp contrast, I may say, to the almost $90,000 which you pay your top official, 
the $20,000 paid to the Premier . . . by the Premier to his chauffeur, the 19 per cent increase in Sask Tel 
rates, the shocking increase in SGI rates, the increases in the CPI and the increases in average wage. 
 
A minimum wage freeze would be particularly severe for those who are least able to deal with the 
recession: the unorganized workers — their working conditions are poor and unsuitable; women, many 
of them whom are single parents — many struggling to raise a family and dependants on an income of 
$8,000; students who rely on the minimum wage income to put themselves through school. 
 
The minister made reference to Manitoba, and said that Saskatchewan’s is higher than Manitoba. I 
would remind the minister that while Manitoba’s may be lower than ours it has been increased by 35 per 
cent since the Pawley government took office, and I would suggest to the members opposite that you 
may look to Manitoba for leadership in the area of minimum wage. 
 
I would suggest to the . . . I would ask the members opposite to ask themselves how you can in all 
conscience ask those at the bottom of the economic ladder to bear the brunt of economic recover, to 
have their wages frozen so that we may create more jobs? The most striking feature about the throne 
speech was the failure to say anything about unemployment. This government simply does not recognize 
that it has any responsibility for taking a leadership role in the creation of jobs. This government fails to 
recognize that its negative, nay-saying approach, and its snappy election campaigns, and the slogans 
which you used therein, do not create jobs and do not stimulate the economy. The evidence is 
overwhelming. It’s consistent, and again it’s consistently bleak. Over the past 12 months the 
Saskatchewan economy has lost 9,000 jobs — 9,000 jobs gone. Over the past 12 months there has been 
a 63 per cent increase in the number of persons who are able to work, who are seeking work, and forced 
by this government to go on welfare. As a consequence, we now have 58,000 Saskatchewan people 
dependent on welfare, and that, Mr. Speaker, is a post World War II record. 
 
In conclusion, I want to say, Mr. Speaker, last Thursday’s throne speech was indeed a significant 
statement of this government’s overall policy. Indeed it was made clear to us and the people of 
Saskatchewan that this government has a consistent policy  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

339 
 

approach. It is consistently reactionary. It is consistently harsh and heartless. It is an approach that has 
been an insult to the people of Saskatchewan, and a very bitter disappointment to them. For these 
reasons, Mr. Speaker, I shall be opposing the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise and speak to a throne speech that is 
responding to the times. I may, however, Mr. Speaker, petition you to improve the public address system 
here in the chamber. Judging by the comments made by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition and his 
colleagues the other day and today, many significant points in the throne speech were not heard. 
 
Today I will elaborate on a throne speech which includes initiatives that are being brought forward only 
after consultation with knowledgeable people, and the people affected by these changes — the people of 
Saskatchewan. I believe these initiatives are truly responding to the times. If the House is quiet, and I’m 
sure it will be, the Leader of the Opposition will have a better opportunity to hear, and perhaps he will 
even rethink his catalogue of movie titles. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition has been fond of saying that when our government took office there were 
no indications at all of the recession that was affecting the rest of Canada. Did the hon. member think 
that abnormally high interest rates were stimulating the economy? Did he think that home-ownership 
and, therefore, construction and investment would naturally follow those high interest rates? Were 
excessive gas prices cutting costs? Was the fact that our children were leaving this province because 
jobs and opportunities were unavailable a good thing? 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1982 Saskatchewan was the only province in the nation to record employment growth –
the only one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, I’m particularly proud to point out that women fared well in Saskatchewan 
in 1982, Mr. Speaker. Five thousand more women were employed over the year than during 1981. We 
credit our incentive programs and tax relief for this positive result. 
 
In February of this year, there were 4,000 more people employed in the construction industry than in 
February of 1981. Seventeen thousand new workers have joined the Saskatchewan labour force over the 
past 12 months. This is one of the largest increases in years. Our seasonally adjusted unemployment rate 
is 7.6 per cent, and is more than 2 full points lower than that of the next closest provinces of Alberta and 
Manitoba. There were 6,000 more jobs in February of this year than in January. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Six thousand more jobs, Mr. Speaker, were created in the dead of winter. That is 
more jobs for a January to a February period than have ever been created since statistics recorded the 
province’s employment rate, ever. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 28, 1983 

 

340 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — As well, in February of this year, there were 3,000 more jobs filled than in 
February of 1982 . . . 1981, pardon me. During the same period, national employment has declined 
substantially. So we went against the flow, Mr. Speaker, because we decided not to participate, because 
we decided to be different — to create jobs rather than lose them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Our job-creating measures are working. Our housing initiatives alone have 
generated 2,500 jobs. Job creation expenditures by the provincial government, as a whole are estimated 
to have generated 15,300 jobs. I’m proud to say today that our children are coming home. Our 
population is increasing, and we still have the lowest unemployment rate in Canada, and one of the only 
provinces attracting people. 
 
And the future and the prospects for the future look good, Mr. Speaker. Wednesday of last week the 
Leader-Post carried an article centering on the 25-year survey by Manpower Temporary Services. The 
survey of Regina firms found a 20.8 per cent net increase in hiring projections — 20.8 per cent increase. 
The survey results were called ‘a healthy turnabout.’ The survey indicated there were 27.7 per cent of 
the respondents expecting to hire additional staff in this April of 1983. May, June, and July of this year 
will be the same, while only 6.9 per cent of the firms surveyed indicated reducing staff. The net gain of 
over 20 per cent is very encouraging, particularly since cities like Calgary and Edmonton are both 
expecting a decrease in hiring in the second quarter. I believe the Speech from the Throne addresses 
unemployment, and brings forward initiatives that will not only create jobs for today, but create 
opportunities and training for work-force for many years to come in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that prices and markets for many of our major exports have declined. The 
potash industry has experienced weak demand. The international petroleum markets have adversely 
affected the industries of both Saskatchewan and Alberta. If we had the advantages, if we had the 
advantages of the previous administration with ever-increasing oil revenues and strong potash markets, 
we would not have wasted them, Mr. Speaker. I would be standing before you today proudly discussing 
a province that was fulfilling its potential in every dimension. But such is not the case, Mr. Speaker. I 
believe we are responding to the challenge left to us by the former administration, and we are 
responding well. 
 
Housing starts in Saskatchewan rose 14 per cent in 1982 over 1981, while in the rest of the country starts 
were down 29 per cent. That was a difference of 43 per cent, Mr. Speaker. For every 100 housing starts 
in 1981, last year in 1982 there were only 71 starts nationally, while here in the province of 
Saskatchewan there were 114 starts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Exciting government housing programs have played a part in this activity — 
programs initiated by this administration. Following the introduction of the $3,000 grant program, over 
1,500 units have been constructed with grant assistance, and as has already been mentioned, 2,500 jobs 
have been generated. The latest figures for the value of building permits are for, from November of 
1982. In that month, there were $25,931,000 worth of residential permits issued. In November of 1981, 
there were only $16 million worth. The November ’82 figures represent an increase of over  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

341 
 

56 per cent over the 1981 figures. 
 
Our mortgage interest reduction plan has assisted home-owners and home builders and have provided 
mortgages that, in some cases, are close to 10 per cent lower than rates imposed by home-owners by an 
unfair economy. The net result has been that in 1982 Saskatchewan recorded an increase in housing 
starts of 850 units over those of 1981. We respond to difficult times and move quickly to protect our 
citizens, Mr. Speaker, and we’re proud of it. Allow me to quote from the Leader-Post, from the 
November 3,1982 edition. And I quote: 
 

So eager is this government to ease the pains of recession that it is moving to create work to the 
public sector at a pace not consistent with the ponderous ways of government. (End of quote.) 
 

Mr. Speaker, during these times of falling income, we’re holding the line on government spending, 
reducing costs to our citizens by way of reducing the tax burden. Our removal of the provincial sales tax 
on gasoline has done much to cut both direct and indirect costs to our citizens. In 1982-83, we returned 
over $122 million to the Saskatchewan economy. In 1983-84, removal of the gas tax will inject a further 
$145 million into the Saskatchewan economy. Smaller measures, like eliminating senior citizens’ fishing 
license requirements and allowing private ownership of residential extension on phones, also contribute 
to lower costs and to improve the services to our citizens. In an effort to reduce consumer costs, the sales 
tax on children’s clothing is exempt under legislation enacted this last fall. 
 
Upon assuming office our government imposed a freeze on all utility rates. The establishment of a 
public utilities review commission will ensure reasonable costs for services, and prevent government 
from raising taxation through unwarranted utility rate increases in the future. Some of these cost 
controls, Mr. Speaker, along with new government efficiencies which I will refer to later, have assisted 
us in making real progress in reducing inflation. The rate of growth in the consumer price index has 
come down more than 4 percentage points compared with a year ago. The inflation rate in Saskatoon is 
the lowest in the country at 5.9 per cent. 
 
Through the efforts of our hard-working citizens, and with the encouragement from government, our 
industry is holding its own. Since April 26, Saskatchewan has about 90, 90, Mr. Speaker, additional 
manufacturers. These firms have directly created over 500 additional new jobs, and indirectly, at least 
1,000 new jobs. In January of this year alone there was an increase of 32 per cent over last year’s 
incorporations in this province. There was an increase of 88 per cent in business names registered. At 
the present time, the Department of Industry and commerce is actually working on the establishment of 
86 new industries in the province of Saskatchewan. These industries carry the possibility of creating an 
additional 3,000 new jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Bankruptcies for small businesses in Saskatchewan were half the national rate in 
1982. The national rate was 1.55 per cent, while ours was 0.83 per cent. We have the lowest rate in the 
country. I think it’s an interesting phenomena that we should point out, Mr. Speaker. Not many 
jurisdictions can say that they lead the fight against inflation, and also lead the fight in terms of creating 
jobs. 
 
The value of the programs initiated by the Minister of Finance and other cabinet  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

342 
 

ministers in this jurisdiction are that for the first time in decades, Saskatchewan can say that exactly: that 
it leads the fight against inflation and leads the fight in the creation of jobs at the same time. It’s a record 
I’m sure that many provinces look to with envy. 
 
Last Friday I announced a reorganization of government departments. The reorganization was designed 
to meet three key objectives: one, to improve government productivity, overall effectiveness and 
efficiency; two, to consolidate related functions under single departments: and three to improve public 
access to government by simplifying communication and reducing confusion. 
 
Reducing government costs and stabilizing expenditures will be assisted to the reorganization program 
— something the citizens of the province of Saskatchewan has asked, have asked for, for a long time. 
Already a number of productivity gains have been made by various departments, and I want to 
congratulate them today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This year continuing education will process 9,000 student aid applications, a 30 per cent increase over 
last year with no increase in staff. I would add the dollar value of the quest, request processed increased 
by 38.5 per cent over the previous year. And, again, Mr. Speaker, no increase in staff. 
 
Between January of 1982 and January of this year, the social assistance plan case increased by 28 per 
cent per month, and again this increased workload was accommodated within existing staff resources. 
And I want to congratulate that staff. 
 
In regards to education, our government through new systems and competitive bidding has reduced the 
cost of producing a major educational publication from 2,300 to $3,000 a copy to 1,200 to $1,400 per 
copy, a measure which has cut costs by more than half. The Department of Education has also absorbed 
a 50 per cent increase in enrolment in the correspondence school with only a 35 per cent increase in 
teaching staff, and no increase in administrative staff. This has been done by the prudent use of 
computer technology and through redesigning programs. 
 
The department of consumer and commercial affairs has been working on improving its public profile. 
Its achievements to date: one, a 10 per cent increase in consumer product information requests without a 
single increase in staff; two, by mid-April a 3,000-case backlog from as far back as 1981 will be cleared 
up by the Rentalsman’s office; number three, business incorporation registrations used to take three to 
four weeks to be completed — they now only take one to two weeks because of improvements in the 
system; four, same day, emergency, over-the-counter business incorporations service has been 
implemented — one day. 
 
The Department of Health has also improved its performance: $7.4 million has been saved by the 
medical care insurance commission due to more thorough assessment process of claims. A reduction in 
administrative costs for the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan, from 12 per cent to 10 per cent of the 
expenditures, has been achieved. A decrease in the waiting list under the hearing aid program has also 
been achieved. A decrease in the waiting list under the hearing aid program has also been achieved, been 
achieved, and a broader range of services are now provided under the aids to independent living 
program with the advent of such items as super-phones. 
 
On October 20th of last year a regulatory reform group was formed within Executive Council to review 
and recommend the repealing of obsolete and cumbersome, cumbersome regulations. I’m pleased to 
report that 516 regulations have been repealed based on the initial report from the committee. 



 
March 28, 1983 

 

343 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Many of the regulations were to have been phased out through sunset clauses, 
however, no attention was paid to them and the paperwork was never completed. Therefore, these 
regulations remained in force and perhaps, in fact, contradicted the act in legal terms if not certainly in 
spirit. I would like to make it clear that none of the regulations repealed had been any way decreased the 
protection of the public health or public safety. I believe this common-sense approach to the elimination 
of red tape would be well received by the public, and certainly it’s been requested for a long time. The 
initial report of the committee concludes that Saskatchewan is the most heavily regulated province in 
Canada next to Ontario, with the largest population. 
 
The new department of economic development and trade will involve major industrial and trade 
expansion in the development of new national and international markets for Saskatchewan products. 
Overall export and trade promotion will also centre on this department. This department will 
complement the newly assigned mandates in areas of small business and tourism and advanced 
education and manpower that I announced this last week. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition correctly stated we are a province of traders. We do indeed consume little 
of what we produce and produce little of what we consume. It is our goal to diversify our economy and 
produce more of what we consume and create jobs in line with our great resources and world demand. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We do not set the economic rules in isolation. We cannot legislate prosperity. We, 
as traders, must respond to economic times, and respond we will. There’s a strong and vital role for the 
crown corporations in this activity. The crown corporations in the resource sector couldn’t help but 
succeed with growing world demand. The test now is to be competitive an capture a market share 
through inventiveness and flexibility when the world market demand is not as strong. 
 
For those crowns that operate primarily within our borders, we believe there needs to be a better balance 
between the public sector and the private sector. And balance we will have. We are responding to the 
imbalance in the directing the crowns so they complement rather than compete with our citizens. And 
there’s a significant difference, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The world is embarking upon a new industrial revolution, and we are going to be part of it. We are not 
intimidated by it. We are developing a major high-technology development strategy, partly in the public 
sector and partly in the private. That strategy will build upon that which is good in the new technology. 
Through research and financial services, we hope to integrate technology into our society to provide 
opportunities for as many citizens as possible. 
 
Now more than ever we need the harmony of creators and risk-takers, of inventors and entrepreneurs. In 
concert with high technology is the training of highly skilled manpower, and that’s part of our industrial 
strategy. Our government is committed to training highly skilled, a highly skilled work-force. We will 
attain this goal through both new and expanded opportunities for young, particularly at universities, at 
technical  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

344 
 

schools, and through job retraining initiatives. 
 
We need to build strong, competitive private sector industries in order to create steady employment, and 
the longer term should not be neglected in the rush to deal with current crises through short-term job 
creation schemes. The need to rapidly adapt our skilled work-force to an ever-changing economy is 
critical, is critical. And we must be sensitive to the shifting demands for skills. The match of the 
demands on the one side and the skills on the other is imperative for a province like Saskatchewan. 
However, because of the complexities of the new technology, many job retraining programs may require 
two- or three-year commitments, but we’re prepared to make those commitments. 
 
The effective implementation of technology to serve Saskatchewan is an important part of our strategy. 
We wish to take international calibre technology and make it work in and for Saskatchewan enterprises, 
so that it is relevant and useful to Saskatchewan industry. Water resources research is one of the areas 
that can benefit greatly from advanced technology. We believe our high technology strategy is 
responding to the times, and planning for the future. 
 
We have created a new department of small business and tourism. We believe a new focus on small 
business is appropriate at this time, because it was failed, it had failed to been recognized by the 
previous administration. Small business creates more jobs than any other sector of our economy — more 
jobs, certainly, than the Saskatchewan family of crown corporations. 
 
We believe small business will be assisted by the operation, or the creation of the new department of 
supply and services from the old departments of government services, and revenue and supply and 
services. The new department will provide a single contract agency for private sector firms wishing to 
provide supplies or services to the Government of Saskatchewan. Our government has a strong belief in 
the entrepreneurial spirit which is fostered in the small business climate. We will encourage that spirit. 
 
In responding to the times, Mr. Speaker, our government has made changes in the royalty structure 
concerning oil — one that did not fall with favour with the opposition. These changes came at the right 
time to stimulated exploration and drilling. That activity continues today. Without such incentives, and 
in the face of declining world oil prices, our oil industry would have quickly evaporated. Indeed, we 
were at 40 per cent slack capacity. Today, Mr. Speaker, oil production has returned to full capacity, and 
exploration is up sharply. 
 
In January and February of 1982, only 87 wells were drilled in Saskatchewan. This year, during January 
and February, there were 202 wells drilled. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — A staggering increase in 11 months of 232 per cent in economic activity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We have entered into an agreement with the United States which involves 
coordinated laboratory activities in evaluating heavy oil recovery processes. The sale of crown 
petroleum and natural gas rights continues its upward swing. These  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

345 
 

increased sales are tangible evidence that our oil industry recovery program is working and working 
well. 
 
We are watching the world situation carefully. We are prepared to act to preserve our industry. I know 
that the Leader of the Opposition belittled our rural natural gas program. I challenge him to take his case 
to the people of rural Saskatchewan. I challenge him to present his case, his case to farmers, who will, 
for the first time, have an inexpensive and reliable source of energy to warm their barns and dry their 
grain. And I challenge him to take his case to the numerous small contractors who will be involved in 
the construction of that service. I challenge him to take his case to the unemployed who will find jobs 
installing pipe and connections. I also challenge him to take his case to students who will be part of that 
work-force this summer and the summers to come. And I challenge him to take his case to smaller rural 
communities who will now be able to compete with larger centres in attracting small businesses to 
establish within their areas. And I challenge him to take his case to the people and ask if it is wrong that 
their fuel dollars go towards development of Saskatchewan natural gas reserves or whether we should 
leave them in the ground. 
 
It is this government’s policy, Mr. Speaker, to stimulate our economy through public works that have 
long-term benefits and pay-offs that fulfil real needs. The natural gas distribution program will provide 
approximately 400 jobs in any one given year, with approximately 300 man-years of work per year over 
the course of seven to ten years. That’s a major project, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In responding to the times, our government is pursuing new market opportunities for natural gas. Also, 
as a part of a general deregulation process which will make government less cumbersome, we have 
begun a process of implementing a much simplified tax system for freehold oil production. And we will 
soon introduce a new, simplified system for the taxation of Saskatchewan’s other mineral resources. 
While we will simplify procedures for both private operators and government, we will not reduce 
revenue to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
With dwindling sales volume, our government is responding to the times with a renewed emphasis on 
marketing our natural resources. We support key marketing initiatives such as the Saskatchewan-China 
agronomic development program and initiatives in Latin America. 
 
PSC recalled 1,000 miners at its four mining divisions in February. Our ability to sell 220,000 metric 
tonnes of potash to China, in a weak world market, is a large part of the reason for the recall. 
 
A word or two about agriculture, Mr. Speaker. I noted with great interest the Leader of the Opposition’s 
omission of any mention of the farm purchase program in his remarks the other day. He was well 
advised not to address the subject. I would not . . . It would not have been good politics on his part. It is 
well known that this program is a tremendous success and has surpassed all expectations. It is well 
known that this program is helping many parents transfer the family farm to their children. Many senior 
citizens who want to retire, now can in dignity, because of the Saskatchewan farm purchase program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — It is well known that this program allows other first-time farmers  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

346 
 

to buy land from anyone, anywhere in the province and be protected from uncertain high interest rates 
until they have established a viable operation. The farm purchase program is probably one of the most 
successful programs introduced by any government anywhere. By the end of this month, loans to 1,200 
farmers to purchase 2,350 quarters of farmland worth 150 million will either have been approved or will 
be nearing final approval under the program. 
 
During the first three months of this program 5,655 farmers have been interviewed. Almost half of these 
farmers are considered eligible for the program for over $300 million in loans. Almost 60 per cent of the 
purchases are within family transfers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Saskatchewan heritage of the family farm is being kept alive by this program where under the 
former administration, it was dying. I will compare our program at any time to the former land bank 
which in 10 years turned only 151 tenants into owners. Our program will ensure that our farm industry is 
composed of family farm units which are efficient and productive and held by the families, not owned 
by the government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Amendments to The Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Act will assist the farming 
community further by eliminating unfair competition from out-of-province, limited partnerships and 
corporations that will bid up the price of land. 
 
I would agree with the Leader of the Opposition that farmers are facing a cost-price squeeze. Everybody 
is. There have been many media reports concerning farm bankruptcies were up significantly last year. In 
January of this year alone 33 farmers went bankrupt in Canada but just one was in the province of 
Saskatchewan. I believe that this is a direct result of the programs our government has implemented to 
safeguard our programs, our farmers. 
 
Last April the farmers of Saskatchewan overwhelmingly said we understand their needs. It was seldom 
that they ever heard now, the Leader of the Opposition discuss agriculture and they heard even less from 
the previous administration about planning for the future needs of agriculture. We will be taking new 
initiatives, Mr. Speaker, in the area of agricultural research and market development. We will do so in 
consultation with producers and commodity groups, the people that know the markets. Again we will 
respond to the needs of our people, people that count. 
 
We will also present amendments to The Horned Cattle Purchases Act. I noted that the interest, with 
interest remarks made by the Leader of the Opposition concerning the Crow rate. In his reply to the 
throne speech, he decided to give us a scolding for our position on the Crow, Crow rate. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the people of Saskatchewan how we got into the position we’re in 
today . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . I want to . . . I want to go back . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to a time, I want to go back to a time 
when we had a minister of transport and a minister of the wheat board  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

347 
 

from western Canada, Mr. Mazankowski. And we had a minister of energy from this province, a federal 
minister of energy, Mr. Hnatyshyn. And, Mr. Speaker, we had a prime minister from this part of the 
country, a prime of Canada from the West — from the West. And, Mr. Speaker, five, five members of 
parliament from the province of Saskatchewan held the balance of power in that minority government 
— five Westerners, Mr. Speaker. Five Westerners held the balance of power. And those five, Mr. 
Speaker, those five Westerners voted against, voted against a prime minister from the West, a minister 
of transport and a minister of the wheat board from the West, a minister of energy from the West, Mr. 
Speaker, those five NDP members from the province of Saskatchewan betrayed Saskatchewan and 
indeed western Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, they betrayed, they betrayed this province to give us the government 
we have today in Ottawa, that designed the Pepin plan and all these proposals. Five Westerners, Mr. 
Speaker, five NDP members of parliament are responsible for that betrayal and putting those people 
back in power today. The people of Saskatchewan are not soon going to forget that. 
 
It was shortly after Christmas last year that members opposite, for the first time in a long time, became 
greatly interested in agriculture, and particularly the Crow rate. Some cynics suggested they felt their 
support softening in the rural areas. Well, I guess maybe it did. Quickly then, the government tried to 
work out a program which they hoped would convince farmers that the government understood the 
issues. Well, farmers were quick to see through the former administration, but farmers had no trouble 
determining where we stood, Mr. Speaker. Farmers knew that we did not support spending imaginary 
Saskatchewan heritage funds to buy the CPR. 
 
A few days ago, Mr. Speaker, I showed to this House a copy of ‘Pocket Politics,’ a PC policy guide that 
was used before and during the election campaign. It clearly stated our position on the Crow rate, Mr. 
Speaker, and I would like to quote from it today. And I quote: 
 

Prior to the election and after the election, the Crow rate must remain. Any shortfall must be paid 
for by the federal government. 
 

And I must say, Mr. Speaker, that farmers certainly agreed with that next sentence in our manual. ‘Keep 
the Crow, let Trudeau and Blakeney go.’ 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Throughout the first few months of our government, the Minister of Agriculture 
and other members of this House met with agriculture leaders and groups to refine and articulate a 
common strategy to defend the prairie farmer’s position. We worked diligently to establish some degree 
of consensus on a strategy to deal with the federal government. Again, the policy of this government, 
which is quite distinct from the previous administration, is that we’re willing to consult and listen to 
those groups, those farmers, those individuals in the province of Saskatchewan that count. The result of 
our ongoing discussion were the motions presented in this House at the end of last session — motions 
that were unanimously agreed by both sides of the House. Since then, we have been spreading the 
message across the country. We believe that the Crow rate is as sacred to western Canada as language 
rights are to the province of Quebec. 



 
March 28, 1983 

 

348 
 

As was indicated in the throne speech, if required we will place before this Assembly measures to ensure 
that our grain and livestock farmers are competitive with those in the rest of the country, and the people 
of this province know that this administration keeps its promises. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — After consultation, Mr. Speaker, with individual members of society, particularly 
co-ops, recently, and co-op organizations, we will be introducing a new co-operatives act. Our 
government has great belief in the consultative process. We as government admit that we don’t always 
know what is best. We consult, therefore, with and respond to the people who do know — the citizens of 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Our government has a strong belief, Mr. Speaker, in education. We recognize it as 
one of the four corner-stones of our society. It was our hope that education would work with business, 
labour and government for the betterment of our community. Education is basic to the advancement of 
our citizens: those that are in the work-force today and our children to come. Four new high schools 
announced by our government and the Prince Albert technical school — technical institute — are 
examples of our commitment to education. 
 
While many areas of this country are making cut-backs in education, our government is increasing 
funding, and we’re proud of it. This year we have provided over 6 million in student aid, which is 2 
million increase over amounts budgeted by the previous administration. The new department of 
advanced education and manpower is designed to combine within one department the responsibility for, 
one, post-secondary education; two, occupational skills, training, and development; and three, labour 
and market forecasting analysis and co-ordination. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan, there will be a mechanism to match the demands 
of the market-place on one side and the skills of the labour force on the other. This integrated approach 
will ensure economic development is not constrained by a lack of appropriately skilled residents. As 
well, better information and more choices will be provided for individuals trying to upgrade their skills 
before entering the work-force. Already we have entered into an agreement with the federal government 
to meet our skilled manpower needs of the next three years, at a cost of $90 million. 
 
We believe in providing opportunities for special-need groups such as natives. The Speech from the 
Throne outlined several measures our government will be undertaking in the area of education to meet 
the needs of tomorrow. Education and skills acquisition will assist native people to escape from the trap 
of short-term paternalistic programs, so favoured by the previous administration. The record of the last 
10 years, Mr. Speaker, falls squarely on the laps of the members opposite. The previous administration 
dealt with native education in a way that was devoid of planning and co-ordination, and that led to 
frustration and disappointment. 
 
Changes to The Education Act. The Teachers’ Superannuation Act, The Teachers’ Life Insurance Act 
will all be brought before this House. Again, the consultative process was  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

349 
 

adopted, and we’ve responded to the needs of the education community by meeting with the people. 
 
Our education initiatives in the development of contemporary education, and training programs targeted 
for single parents, and a need . . . is a move that is in the right direction. As women make up the majority 
of single parents, it is hoped that this group will take advantage of the new programs designed for them. 
 
The hon. member opposite suggested students have been asked to bear the burden of recession. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure the Minister of Finance will address student employment needs in his budget 
which we expect tomorrow. I have already reviewed some of our educational initiatives, and I stand 
behind those programs. I would like to point out to the hon. member, there has been a substantial, in 
fact, drastic increase in the number of students attending our universities this year. 
 
Generally, in the area of health care, we’ve done the same. This government made a commitment to 
improving health care services in Saskatchewan, and as the people know, we do keep our promises. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The Minister of Health has carefully reviewed the present system, and has 
personally visited many of the hospitals in our province, and he has met with various groups and 
individuals involved in the health care system. Our November budget allocated $26 million more than 
had been budgeted by the previous administration for health - $26 million more, Mr. Speaker. A number 
of specific steps have bee taken in response to immediate and clearly identified needs by the people of 
the province. These include implementation of an improved construction grant formula for community 
and regional hospitals. Substantial grants totaling over $2 million have been made available to the city 
of, City and St. Paul’s Hospital in Saskatoon to meet pressing capital needs. Funding has been approved 
for major hospital construction projects in Lloydminster, Nipawin, Melfort, Yorkton, and Cut Knife, 
Saskatchewan. These projects have a total estimated cost of almost $43 million. A hundred and 
fifty-three thousand has been approved for a non-invasive cardiac care services in Regina. Special 
arrangements were made to insure continuing medical coverage in Uranium City. An extra $500,000 
were provided of municipal ambulance services, and this was an addition to the establishment of a 
member . . . Pardon me, in addition to the establishment of the member of Moosomin’s committee. 
 
I am sure that the Minister of Finance will be announcing a new initiatives tomorrow. We have 
announced the transfer of continuing care from the Department of Social Services to the Department of 
Health. This will establish one agency, Mr. Speaker, one agency responsible for the entire range of 
programming in the health care field. 
 
For the first time in the history of Saskatchewan, senior citizens will have only one agency to deal with 
concerning such items as nursing homes, home care programs, a drug plan, and other matters concerning 
their health — and they’re appreciated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — In responding to their needs, our government will take several steps to strengthen 
the ambulance program. As the hon. member from Moosomin  



 
March 28, 1983 

 

350 
 

mentioned in his remarks, a government committee was formed to work with members in the health care 
field, and with members of the ambulance industry to come up with a program that would best, best 
serve the needs of our population. 
 
At the beginning of next month, responsibility for this program will be transferred to the Department of 
Health. A new funding approach will reduce the inequities regarding cost for rural residents and senior 
citizens, particularly in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
This year we are spending approximately $7 million on long-term care facilities. I will compare that 
figure with the previous administration’s commitment to seniors in the 1981-82 budget year, which 
amounted to $792,000. Probably the most distressing aspect of that figure, and lack of concern shown by 
members opposite, was that it was part of a trend, as the previous year in 1980-81 they had spent 
832,000 on long-term facilities. Their support, Mr. Speaker, their support of seniors was slipping and 
dropping on a continual fashion. 
 
Our job creation programs are administered by the Department of Social Services, and they’re being 
implemented smoothly, Mr. Speaker. As of March 18th, the Canada-Saskatchewan program has created 
1,663 jobs out of a projected goal of 2,300 plus; $15 million has been allocated for this program. The 
provincial jobs program has added another 1.5 million to job creation, which should created in excess of 
another 200 jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in response to the times and the needs of our citizens, our government is willing, even in 
the face of great difficulties, to co-operate with federal and other government’s — the best co-operation 
we’ve seen for years between federal and provincial administrations. Each success at this level, such as 
the royal, royalty tax reductions and job program, is a great step forward from the confrontational stance 
adopted by the previous provincial administration. This is not to suggest we will fight any less 
vigorously for Saskatchewan’s interest. It is to suggest that we will work to resolve our difficulties 
rather than stand apart. 
 
I believe in my initiatives to develop close contacts with representatives of the Midwestern states. The 
discussion of issues on common concerns such as water, agriculture and tourism are important, and 
finally, for the first time in the province of Saskatchewan, the negotiations are going on. We are willing 
to talk about differences and not just promote an identical mediocrity. We will not ignore our southern 
neighbours and live in a vacuum, when they are competitors as well as neighbours. 
 
An expanded and emphasized Department of Rural Affairs, now to be called the department of rural 
development, will enable us to focus on numerous areas of concern to rural residents. The rural residents 
of the past — in the past — have been forgotten. 
 
Communications, economic development, water problems, and educational concerns will be targeted in 
the new department. The farming community, which lives in rural Saskatchewan, will benefit greatly 
form this new department. A new planning and development act will be presented in the legislature for 
consideration; 149 written submissions were received and 24 meetings were held with various 
municipalities, as well as seven meetings with special interest groups, to ensure the legislation had broad 
support. Again, our government is responding to the needs of the citizens, Mr. Speaker, by listening. 



 
March 28, 1983 

 

351 
 

The Northern Municipalities Act was introduced in the last session, and after consultation with 
interested parties it will be introduced in revised form for your consideration. 
 
I am proud of your, our government’s record relating to water concerns. For years, people of 
Saskatchewan brought water concerns to the previous administration, year after year after year, but to no 
avail. It fell on deaf ears. I am proud of our government’s record relating to water concerns. A swift and 
well-thought-out proposal to deal with Regina and Moose Jaw water problems is part of the 
development of an overall strategy to deal with the problems associated with water supply and water 
quality. Water management requires vision and intensive planning. It is a responsibility we have to 
future generations, and we’ll meet that challenge today. A special cabinet committee on water concerns 
has been formed, and successful meetings have been held in many centres throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan; 250 written and oral briefs have been received, and the public was delighted, for the first 
time, that cabinet members could go out across the province of Saskatchewan and get information on a 
firsthand basis on their concerns with respect to water. The committee is listening to the concerns of our 
people, and we will respond with appropriate measures, because we do keep our promises. 
 
Revenue sharing is important to our municipalities, and similarly, our officials have met six times with 
representatives of SUMA and the SUMA executive, and have met twice with ministers to discuss 
problems and solutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition was unable to see the benefits to our senior citizens that were 
outlines in the Speech from the Throne. I should like to point out to him that it is the seniors who take a 
great advantage of the best health care system that we are creating. Unfortunately, many seniors are 
disabled through strokes and other crippling diseases. The throne speech made mention of our 
commitment to improve independent living opportunities for disabled and disadvantaged people. It is 
seniors who, perhaps more so than any other age group, that will take advantage of our improved 
ambulance service, thanks to the member for Moosomin. It is this government which has allocated 
approximately 7.2 million to the building and expansion of long-term care facilities in the current fiscal 
year. As mentioned, this compares most favourable with expenditures made by the previous 
administration. 
 
While on the topic of our seniors, it should be noted that for many seniors living in rural area, the 
advent, Mr. Speaker, of inexpensive natural gas in their homes will help lower their costs and provide 
them with improved standards of living. 
 
Seniors with mortgages on their dwellings, Mr. Speaker, have also been able to take advantage of our 
mortgage interest reduction plan. Perhaps as importantly to seniors, the mortgage program has assisted 
younger buyers to enter the market-place and create a demand for housing. Senior home-owners who 
desire to move to smaller more manageable accommodations find they are now able to obtain a fair 
price in the market, because it’s been improved by our program. 
 
The farm purchase program, as I mentioned, has provided the opportunity for many seniors living in 
rural Saskatchewan to retire in dignity. Hopefully, no longer will we witness the sad scene as a parent 
must sell his land to provide himself with a retirement income and then watch his son or daughter work 
in rented government land and be wards of the state. 



 
March 28, 1983 

 

352 
 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that the Speech from the Throne presents a balanced package, and facilitates the 
working together of the four main sectors of our society; the four main important areas: labour, 
education, business and government. 
 
I would like to close by quoting from our two major newspapers. The Regina Leader-Post had this to 
say about the Speech from the Throne in their March 19th edition, and I quote: 
 

This, it seems, is a moment of promise — the promise of a busy session for MLAs and the 
promise that the Devine team can truly shine as government. 
 

The Saskatoon Star-Phoenix said in their March 18th edition, and I quote: 
 

By and large, this throne speech has more scope than most, at least in the range of government 
functions and acts it discusses. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I will be more than proud to support the motion before the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division 
 

YEAS — 40 
 

Devine 
Birkbeck 
Taylor 
Andrew 
Lane 
Rousseau 
Muirhead 
Sandberg 
Hardy 
McLeod 
Klein 
Katzman 
Schoenhals 
Smith (Swift Current) 

Boutin 
Hampton 
Weiman 
Bacon 
Tusa 
Sutor 
Sveinson 
Sauder 
Petersen 
Glausser 
Meagher 
Schmidt 
Smith (Moose Jaw 
South) 

Martens 
Rybchuk 
Young 
Maxwell 
Embury 
Dirks 
Hepworth 
Myers 
Zazelenchuk 
Johnson 
Baker 
Dutchak 

 Folk 

 
NAYS — 7 

 
Blakeney 
Thompson 
Lingenfelter 

Koskie 
Lusney 
 
 

Shillington 
Yew 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by my seatmate, the Minister of Health, that the 
said address be engrossed and presented to His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor by such members of 
the Assembly as are members of Executive Council. 



 
March 28, 1983 

 

353 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by Mr. Taylor, member from Indian 
Head-Wolseley, that this Assembly will at the next sitting resolve itself into the committee of finance to 
consider the supply to be granted to Her Majesty and to consider ways and means of raising the supply. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, just so we understand what the nature of that motion is, I wish to 
address a couple of comments. I think if this motion is passed, then the, the order paper will show the, 
the committee of supply as, as the first order of business, if I am not in error. And then, and that has 
priority of place on the rues and that the effect will be to have tomorrow a day when the committee of 
supply is considered rather than the, rather than a private members’ day pursuant to the, to the resolution 
we passed a couple of days ago. And I think what we intend to do is to have the, the private members’ 
day pursuant to the resolution we passed a couple of days ago . . .We intend to have government 
business. Then, then perhaps, perhaps my comments are not well taken. And in, in that event, in that 
event, it would be up to the government to decide at what time tomorrow that they call the committee of 
supply, and we could proceed with the arrangements previously understood, which I understand to be 
that, that that would be called tomorrow evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I would refer the hon. member to rule 84 that reads: 
 

The Committee of Finance shall be appointed on motion, without previous notice, at the 
commencement of every Session, immediately after the adoption of an Address in Reply to the 
Speech of His Honour The Lieutenant Governor. 

 
And it’s really a matter of putting the committee of finance on the agenda. That’s what this motion does. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:36 p.m. 
 
 
 


	ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
	ANNOUNCEMENTS
	QUESTIONS
	Affirmative Action Program for Women
	Positions in Women’s Division
	Reactions to MacPherson Report
	Funding for Non-Government Organizations
	Surface Lease Agreements for Northern Saskatchewan
	ORDERS OF THE DAY
	That ended part of that quote. But little did the Leader of the Opposition know at that time that he would be asked the same question. Well, on April 26th, 1982, another question was asked. This time the people of the province gave the answer and the ...
	Mr. Speaker, during these times of falling income, we’re holding the line on government spending, reducing costs to our citizens by way of reducing the tax burden. Our removal of the provincial sales tax on gasoline has done much to cut both direct an...
	The Committee of Finance shall be appointed on motion, without previous notice, at the commencement of every Session, immediately after the adoption of an Address in Reply to the Speech of His Honour The Lieutenant Governor.



