






















































Hansard: April 25, 1983


(1394) 1395 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 25, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Communication 
 

Assistant Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the standing committee on communication, presents 
the fifth report of the said committee which is as follows: 
 

The committee has given further consideration to the matter of television in legislative 
committees, and recommends that an in-house system of television for the standing committees 
on public accounts and crown corporations, similar to the television system in the House, be 
approved in corporations, similar to the television system in the House, be approved in principle 
subject to approved funding by the board of internal economy. 
 

Mr. Katzman: — I move that the fifth report of the standing committee on communications now be 
concurred in, seconded by Mr. Lingenfelter. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with a great deal of pleasure that I introduce to you, and through 
you, approximately 20 students from the National Honor Society of Montana. They’re seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery. The students are from Dawson County High School, Glendive, Montana. They 
represent the honour students in the top 10 per cent of their high school. They range in the ages of 17 to 
18. They are on vacation and requested a tour of the Legislative Building. I will be going into Estevan 
right after the question period so, as a result, the Hon. Gary Lane will be meeting with the group and 
having refreshments and some pictures. And I would just like to extend a very warm welcome to our 
American neighbours for the province of Saskatchewan, and hope they have a nice trip. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the Premier in welcoming this group of 
students from Glendive who are with us here today as part of their vacation. I must say the school 
agenda must be a little different than here in Saskatchewan. Our students are busy in the classroom 
today, but maybe you could inform the Minister of Education as to how you get a holiday at this time of 
the year. I’m sure students would appreciate that kind of information. But having been working very 
closely with people in Montana as a customs officer for a number of years, I have found it that your 
system of school, where you get three months off in the summer-time rather than two, is much 
appreciated by the students. And we welcome you here, and I’m sure you’ll enjoy your stay. Thank you. 



 
April 25, 1983 
 

 
1396 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and to all members of the Assembly 
this afternoon two groups of students from two schools located in the constituency of Regina Rosemont. 
 
Seated in the east gallery are 32 students attending from St. Francis school – grade 8 students – along 
with their teacher, Mr. Gerald Small. And I’ll be meeting with you at 2:30, immediately after question 
period, for pictures, and then later on for refreshments. 
 
Also with us this afternoon are 55 grade 8 students from the Ruth M. Buck school seated in the west 
gallery, along with their teachers, Mr. Al Chase and Mr. Dale Keller. And I will be meeting with them at 
3 o’clock for pictures and refreshments. And I would ask all members of the Assembly to join with me 
in giving them a hearty welcome here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Sir, I’d just like to extend greetings to the students from Ruth M. Buck, Mr. Chase 
and Mr. Keller. They had me over this morning and I appreciate their hospitality. I have two children 
that have attended that school throughout their educational career and I will say that it’s at least as good 
or better than any other in the city. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUEST 
 

Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, it is with great pleasure that today I introduce to you and 
through you to this Assembly the High Commissioner of Sri Lanka. His Excellency Rodney Clement 
Austen Vandergert, seated in the Speaker’s gallery. Mr. Vandergert has held foreign postings in London, 
Islamabad and the United Nations in New York. His journey to Saskatchewan is to further his 
knowledge of our province and country, specifically in cultural areas. 
 
I shall be meeting with Mr. Vandergert tomorrow during lunch to discuss our various cultural concerns. 
I would also like to mention that Sri Lanka is one of our customers in the potash business in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
At this time I ask the House to join me in crossing economic and cultural lines and welcome His 
Excellency, Mr. Vandergert. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Very briefly I want to join with our colleagues in 
government caucus in welcoming our distinguished visitor from Sri Lanka. I am delighted that you’re 
able to be here at this time of the year. You may wonder whether the weather is always this nice; it isn’t. 
you’ve chosen the right time of the year to come. We are delighted that you came at this time of the 
year. I hope you enjoy your visit and you find it educational and interesting. 



 
April 25, 1983 

 
1397 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Proposed Increase in SPC Rates 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to direct a question to the Minister of Labour, the 
minister in charge, responsible, chairman of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Mr. Minister, it has 
to do with your announcement this morning that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation wants to, in fact, 
extract $85 million more out of the pockets of the Saskatchewan consumers this year, with rate hikes at 
more than 21 per cent, both electrical and gas. My question is this, Mr. Minister: can the minister justify 
taking $85 million out of the pockets of Saskatchewan consumers at a time when increased consumer 
spending is commonly held to be the key to economic recovery in this country? How can you expect 
Saskatchewan consumers to spend more to fuel the economic growth, and at the same time, the 
exorbitant increase of $85 million that you’re taxing on to the consumption of gas and electricity? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, yes we can justify our request, and we are just explaining to the 
people of Saskatchewan what is needed to put Saskatchewan Power Corporation at a break-even, or 
slightly in a loss, position. We have to run our corporation the best way possible, and all we’re doing is 
laying out what is required. It will be up to the public utilities review commission to decide whether we 
are correct or not. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A supplemental, Mr. Speaker. I ask you, Mr. Minister, in view of your government’s 
inflation-minus-one guide-lines, which applies to the working people, the school boards, the universities, 
the municipal councils . . . I ask you why then are the rates requested by SPC today three times the 
inflation rate, and several times more higher than that in respect to your guide-lines? Surely, Mr. 
Speaker, if it’s good for the working people, universities and municipal councils, your guide-lines, why 
isn’t it good in the application of your crown corporations? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Well, Mr. Speaker, all you have to look at is that there was no increases in 
1982. When you looked at the 1983 and you divide it by two, we’re at 10 or 11 per cent. And the other 
thing is that you have to look at, is that we have major capital projects under way. The cost of money is 
there, and we have to keep our debt-equity ratio at a reasonable guide-line that the people of 
Saskatchewan to the PURC (public utilities review commission) decide that we operate as a deficit. That 
will be up to them to come and tell us so. It’s in the hands of the people of Saskatchewan to decide right 
now. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A further supplemental, Mr. Speaker. As the minister, you indicated that you put on a 
freeze for one year. Will you now admit to the people of Saskatchewan that that was a farce only to 
support you in getting elected? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, that is not true. We wanted the opportunity to review, which we 
did, and if you want to look at your past record, you had a loss last year of 3.5 million or 3.4 million. We 
also had a 3.5 million loss. We were projected at the beginning of the year of a $37.4 million deficit, and 
I would like to commend the workers of Sask Power, the management, and our board of directors for 
doing a job in bringing it down to the level that we did this year. 



 
April 25, 1983 
 

 
1398 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the current Premier has referred 
to deficits as deferred taxes. Using that analogy, SPC is going to impose upon the public of 
Saskatchewan $13 million in deferred taxes, because that we are told is the deficit, even with the rate 
increases which you’ve requested. My question to the minister is: are there any bounds to this 
government’s ability to mismanage crown corporations? Specifically, is there any timetable within 
which you expect to have SPC running at a break-even point and these deficits repaid? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, there’s many, many factors come into any projection, or any 
budget, and I go back to 1976 when the decline started as far as your debt equity ratio is concerned, and 
it’s been deteriorating for the last six, seven years. We’ve come to the point where we’ve got to try and 
start bringing it back a little bit. And the fact that we’ve started the Nipawin, and it was a conceived plan 
of yours as well, and our natural gas program – we’ve got capital funding to look after, which is 
requiring borrowing and the interest rates in there. But I’m sure the people of Saskatchewan want to 
have power, they want to have natural gas, and they’re going to approve whatever the PURC (public 
utilities review commission) application people or the commission decide is reasonable as far as our 
request is concerned. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, if the position of SPC had been 
deteriorating as you claim, how on earth do you justify the freeze in the rates which you promised 
during the election? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to tell the members opposite that the people of 
Saskatchewan have had a reprieve for the amount of cash that they’ve been paying out, and I think they 
are appreciative of the fact that their cash flow was helped during the rougher time of 1982. We can see 
it starting to rise now and will be in the ability to be able to pay extra for our power and our natural gas. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’m wondering if the minister is going to make any conceivable stab at answering 
the question which I asked, and that is: do you have a time frame within which you’re going to put SPC 
in a break-even position and pay back the deficits, or are you, like the Minister of Finance, just running 
on, hoping that you get lucky someday and are able to balance it? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to tell the member opposite that we already have a 
10-year plan in place as far as Saskatchewan power is concerned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — You’ve really whetted my curiosity, Mr. Minister. Is it the kind of thing that you 
can enlighten us on in the space of a few minutes in question period, or would you like to table your 
10-year plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, we are planning the projection of the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation to get back into at least an 80:20 debt-equity ratio. We are a little bit over that now. This 
year it may drop a little more. But the demand has dropped, the potash mines haven’t been working, our 
Ipsco (Interprovincial Steel and Pipe Corporation) hasn’t been working, the farm machinery 
manufacturers haven’t been working, the oil industry hasn’t been working, but all this stuff is starting to 
come back and I’m sure we’re going to see that we have the revenue starting to increase to cover a lot of 
these areas. 



 
April 25, 1983 

 
1399 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the minister. A large number of people in this 
province have been affected by decisions made by your department and your area or the crown 
corporations you are in charge of. You will know that you restricted the income of people on minimum 
wage – for two years. You are now telling them that they will have a 23 per cent increase in natural gas 
and power. Can you tell me whether or not you have made any special arrangements to take care of 
those people who you’ve frozen their income, saying they had lots of money? You’re now telling them 
that this government is going to be charging them 23 per cent more for two basic utilities. Have you 
made any arrangements to take those people into consideration in terms of a cut or a reduced rate? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, I think what we, or I know what we are doing as a government is 
to get the economy going in this province, to get the jobs out there so that people can afford to pay the 
rates and whatever is required to run our province. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The annual report states that there are two reasons for this deficit. One is the rate 
freeze and the other is the abysmal failure of your government’s open for business philosophy. Will you 
at least confirm, Mr. Minister, what your own annual report states, and that is that the problems this 
government is having with SPC are self-induced? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll take note of those remarks, and we’ll see in the next two or 
three years whether they hold water or not. 
 

Nuclear Arms Race Protest Rallies 
 

Mr. Shillington: — A question to the Premier. As I think the Premier will know, over the weekend 
thousands of Saskatchewan people attended mass rallies to protest the escalation of the nuclear arms 
race by the Reagan administration in the United States, and to speak out against the use in Canada, of 
Canada as a testing ground for the American cruise missile. My question, Mr. Premier, is: why was there 
no official government representation at any of these rallies? Why did you not attend or send some 
representative on your behalf to speak to this rally? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the concerns about mutual disarmament run right across not only 
Saskatchewan, but indeed, all of Canada and North America and likely the free world, and perhaps even 
behind the Iron Curtain. Our position has been on e that’s been stated several times. With respect to 
disarmament, we are concerned about mutual disarmament, but have some reluctance to encourage 
unilateral disarmament. We have some concern that the representation coming out of Ottawa and 
coming out of Moscow and coming out of Washington is one that deals with mutual disarmament all 
across the world. And for the province of Saskatchewan or the state of Montana or anybody else to be 
talking about unilateral disarmament probably isn’t going to have much impact on either Washington or 
Ottawa or the Soviet Union, indeed, Moscow. 
 
With respect to our own representation, let me please turn for additional comments and reply to the 
Attorney-General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, the matter had been turned over to me. I was  



 
April 25, 1983 
 

 
1400 

unfortunately unable to attend because of a prior commitment. We have expressed, as I have indicated in 
this Assembly in the past with regard to the general question of nuclear disarmament, that, as opposed to 
the NDP position that there be unilateral disarmament, we are of the opinion that disarmament should be 
mutual. 
 
Secondly, with regard to the cruise missile, I have stated several times in this Assembly that the question 
of national defence is that of the Government of Canada, and we have made that clear. That is also the 
position articulated by my predecessor, the former attorney-general in this province that that was a 
matter for national defence. 
 
I remind all hon. members as well, that under the constitutional law of this country, that in an area such 
as this, that the federal position is paramount to any provincial position under that doctrine of 
paramountcy. 
 
Finally, I remind the people of Saskatchewan and all hon. Members that I have before me the lease 
agreement signed for the Primrose testing range, part of which is in the province of Saskatchewan, 
which was signed by the former CCF government, giving the federal government exclusive use of that 
territory for weapons testing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — A supplementary to the Premier, Mr. Minister. By way of background, let me 
suggest to you that that rally was not about unilateral disarmament. That movement died in the early 
‘60s. That rally was an attempt to bring to the attention of all nations the concern felt by the public for 
the dangers in which the world stands. 
 
I would remind the Premier that I was preceded at the podium by the deputy mayor of Regina, the 
archbishop of the Anglican Church, the archbishop of the Catholic Church, and one member of 
parliament. 
 
My question to the Premier is: why did you or a representative of yours not add your voice to the 
expression of concern to all nations with respect to the danger in which our civilization stands? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the Attorney-General has already answered that question. He was to 
be there but was unavoidably detained, so I can’t add any more than that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, a question to the Attorney-General. You have the largest caucus in the history 
of the province. Why didn’t you send some other representative to attend at that rally in your stead? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I suggest to the hon. member: one, the responsibility for attendance was mine and 
I’ve already given an answer. Secondly, I would remind the hon. Member that in fact the actions taken 
by past governments, particularly with regard to cruise missile testing in this province, are damning of 
the practice of you and your predecessors. You signed the agreement giving the federal government 
exclusive use of the Primrose testing range in the province of Saskatchewan; you and your predecessors 
signed the agreement. And if anyone has a moral responsibility, and  



 
April 25, 1983 

 
1401 

perhaps a legal responsibility, it is the members of the CCF-NDP – as you proudly referred to them as 
the former CCF members that were in this Assembly – your predecessors. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. I would remind the Attorney-General that I was not in 
school when that agreement was signed and I don’t take responsibility for it. Neither does anybody in 
this caucus. My question to the Attorney-General is: will you confirm that the government sent no 
representative to that rally because, as the Premier stated initially in his reply, you do not share the goals 
of that peace rally? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I have made it quite clear. One, the responsibility was mine. Secondly, I have also, 
and the Premier has made it clear, the concerns that this government has with the mutual disarmament 
throughout the world. And we, I think, share the concerns of all. We do not share and don’t take the 
argument that unilateral disarmament is dead because many of your party propose that there be 
unilateral disarmament. So don’t try and convince anyone that in fact that movement is dead. The 
concerns, I think, of all people in Saskatchewan are there, that in fact people are concerned about 
international disarmament. As I say, I take the responsibility. 
 
I do however, remind members opposite, you will have an opportunity this summer when you try and 
divorce yourself now from the CCF, you will have an opportunity of the 50th anniversary of the signing 
of the Regina Manifesto which I believe you’re going to make a big production. And I really hope, and I 
sincerely hope that there is a motion of condemnation of your predecessors who signed this exclusive 
lease for missile testing and weapons testing in the province of Saskatchewan. And I really hope, Mr. 
Speaker, as well . . . And they may ridicule a position but they’ve got an ample opportunity this summer. 
The hon. Member says that he wasn’t even in school at the time that was signed. If he is at that 
anniversary celebrations of the 50th anniversary of the Regina Manifesto, I hope he moves such a 
resolution of condemnation. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thanks you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to direct my question to the Premier of this 
province. Just to be clear, can you please state for the record in this Legislative Assembly: is your 
government completely opposed to the testing of the cruise missiles in Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I just reiterated our position. We favour mutual disarmament. We 
don’t favour unilateral disarmament. But in those negotiations, we say that the responsibility lies with 
Washington and with Ottawa and with Moscow and the Soviet Union. Everybody across Canada, and I 
would suspect each and every solitary person in the province of Saskatchewan fears the build-up of 
nuclear arms, but knows if one side is much better prepared than the other, then it may not lead 
necessarily to peace or protection, so it’s mutual disarmament. As long as it is mutual, we would endorse 
it 110 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yew: — New question, Mr. Premier. I’m speaking about a specific jurisdiction, a jurisdiction called 
the province of Saskatchewan. You are given the responsibility to look after this one specific area in 
Canada. I want to question your position with respect to the cruise missile testing agreement. Are you 
opposed to the cruise missile testing in Canada for Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I have no idea what the relationship is between our  



 
April 25, 1983 
 

 
1402 

defence capability and the United States’ defence capability is, compared to that of the Soviet block. I 
don’t know. That’s not really my responsibility. I have no access to the defence information, defence 
records. For me to be commenting whether we should be flying a plane, or whether we should be 
building some tanks, or whether we should be doing something else, testing some equipment, is not my 
responsibility because I don’t even have the information. 
 
I could add, Mr. Speaker, the agreement is here in Saskatchewan because the former members’ party 
signed, so we live with that. Given that impact that it may have on today’s society, because they may 
have some concern about mutual disarmament, they’ll have to bear the responsibility for signing it. But 
for general defence, that is not the responsibility of the province. It’s the responsibility of the federal 
government. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Speaker, a new question. I want to state initially for the premier and his cabinet that I 
was a resident of the Primrose bombing range area at the time of the signing of the Primrose range 
agreement, and there was no such thing as a cruise missile in existence in those days. And I want to 
question the Attorney-General as well as the Premier of this province, seeing as how they are shrinking 
away from stating their position one way or . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please! Does the member have a question? This is not a time for advising, but 
rather a time for asking questions. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thanks you, Mr. Speaker, and my apologies. However, getting back to the basics of the 
question. I want to question the Premier again, once more: are you in favour or are you opposed to the 
cruise missile in testing in Saskatchewan, in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I just want to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, you directed the question to me 
or the Premier – was the way you prefaced it. As I have made it clear on numerous times, we have 
expressed our concern to the federal government about cruise missile testing. We are concerned about 
the safety of the people of Saskatchewan. We have taken what I believe, all action that we can take 
given the exclusivity of the federal national defence power. And the hon. Member says that 20 years ago 
cruise missiles weren’t even thought of when the CCF signed this agreement. Let me refer to the 
agreement . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 30 years ago. The province, Mr. Speaker, agrees to reserve the 
area for the exclusive use of Canada for military activities. Canada will, in the event . . . (inaudible 
interjections) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order please. Would you give the minister the opportunity to answer your questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — . . . ‘Canada will, in the event that any form of fuse shells, missiles, etc. be used in 
or over the area, Canada will make all necessary precautions with respect to the demolition of 
unexploded shells, missiles, etc.’ 
 
I suggest to you that missiles of any form, and not technologically limited to what was known at the time 
or contemplated by this agreement, and I suggest to you, I suggest to the hon. Member that the true 
positions of members opposite will be known during the debate and the celebrations that they are going 
to hold on the celebrations of the Regina Manifesto. I suggest to you that this government has at least 
expressed its concern to the federal government, far more than what that government opposite did when 
it was in office. 



 
April 25, 1983 

 
1403 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yew: — I want to raise a supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I want to find out what date – time and date 
of the signing of that agreement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The agreement, I believe, was . . . Oh, I can’t find it. I’ve got it under the staple. It 
would be 1954. I do have, however, an addendum to the agreement signed in 1981 by the then minister 
of intergovernmental affairs, Mr. Roy Romanow, extending the agreement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Speaker, I want to raise a supplementary. I want to know what the government of the 
day, the Conservative Government of Saskatchewan, what their position was in those days. Did they 
raise any objections to that agreement, and following that, what is your position today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, my reading of history at the time indicates that the Conservative Party has 
always stood for peace in the world, Mr. Premier, that the Conservative Party of Saskatchewan I have no 
doubt stood for it at that time, and I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that the Conservative Party at that time was far 
stronger in its support for world peace than the then CCF government, if this agreement means anything, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Congratulations to Notre Dame College Varsity Hounds and Regina Pat Canadians 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Before orders of the day, I would like all members of the Assembly to join with me 
in congratulating Notre Dame College in the village of Wilcox for capturing the Canadian Juvenile 
Championship yesterday in Nepean, Ontario. Mr. Speaker, the Notre Dame Varsity Hounds defeated the 
Nepean Raiders to win the Colonel Sanders Cup by a score of 3 to 2. To the head coach, Barry 
MacKenzie, assistant coach, Phil Ridley, and manager, John Weisshaar, along with all members of the 
team in the college, I’m sure that all hon. members will wish to join with me in congratulating the Notre 
Dame College Varsity Hounds for winning the Canadian Juvenile Championship. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to ask all hon. members to join with me in 
congratulating the Regina Pat Canadians for winning the midget championship. I’m told that it was 
pretty exciting, that in fact the team was up and down, according to the news reports, Mr. Speaker. And 
I’m sure that all people in the province share with me in congratulating both of those teams. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with hon. members here in also extending a 
congratulations to the Notre Dame Hounds, the juvenile team that won the championship. I just want to 
indicate that the initial tournament was held in Humboldt where Notre Dame competed against 
Humboldt and North Bay and a team from  



 
April 25, 1983 
 

 
1404 

Winnipeg, and they were successful during that tournament — excellent hockey, real gentlemen — and 
certainly we want to extend our congratulations. 
 
Also I had the opportunity to watch the Regina Pat Canadians, and as our hon. friend said, it was an up 
and down game. They were down some two goals in the third period, and came on remarkably well, and 
to them our congratulations. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

EDUCATION 
 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 8 
 

Item 1 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Is the minister ready? Would you introduce your officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Chairman, at this time it’s my pleasure to introduce some of our officials. 
Sitting to the left of me is deputy minister, Mr. Ray Clayton; and behind is the executive director of 
administration and support services, Mr. Gil Dumelie; and immediately behind me is the director of 
administration, Mr. John Moneo; and sitting in the rear, from this direction to this direction, is Mr. Phil 
Schalm, who is the executive director of development division; and next to him is Mr. Ken Horsman, 
who is director of policy; and next to him is Mr. Lou Jule, who is the director of OMLO (Official 
Minority Language Office); and next to him is Mr. Wally Sawchuk, who is the director of the 
superannuation plan. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Sorry, Mr. Chairman, one more official to introduce, and that is Mr. Peter Dyck 
and he is the executive director of regional services. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, the Premier and your government have 
consistently been making statement indicating, reiterating his government’s commitment to education, 
as sort of being one of the corner-stones of life in our province. And what I’d like to ask the minister: 
whether, and as I say, the Premier is reported to having said at the recent teacher’s meeting here in 
Regina that education is a corner-stone of life in our province . . . And what I want to ask the minister is, 
first of all, does he essentially agree with that statement? And if he would explain to me the full 
meaning, as he and his government view that statement: the corner-stone of life in our province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Chairman, I’d be pleased to attempt to answer that. It’s a very, very broad 
question and a very philosophic one. But, yes, I would concur with the Premier’s position that education 
is one of the key corner-stones in the whole process  



 
April 25, 1983 

 
1405 

of economic recovery. And in that regard, I would think that what we have attempted to do during the 11 
or 11 and a half months that we have been government is to take a look at the short-term and the 
long-term objectives in this regard. And really what we are attempting to zero in on is to bring about the 
development of the human resources. 
 
It would seem to me a pretty logical thing that in addition to development of the natural resources that 
exist out there, that is, oil, potash and uranium, the mineral resources that we have, plus agriculture, and 
in addition to those very, very important developments that impinge upon economic recovery for our 
province, that perhaps even more significant (in my way of thinking) is to bring about the development 
of the human resources. And so, therefore, one of the first things that we attempted to do was to take a 
reading on where we stood in regard to our human resources, looking at it from perhaps training, 
development and growth right from birth until death, because that is the expectation as far as training 
and education is concerned in the latter part of the 20th century. 
 
So, in this regard, what we did try to do was to assess where things were in pretty good shape and where 
we needed more emphasis being placed in that area from the development of more attention, or more 
changes to take place, or else just economic resource development in these areas. And so, when we take 
a look at the different components in the whole scheme of things educationally, we take a look at the 
situation from K to 12, and what the real needs are in that regard. And then we go on into the area of 
adult basic education and what the needs are there in community colleges, and technical institutes, and 
technical training, and university training, and distance education. And we take a look at the problem 
that we have with regard to accessibility of education and training, with regard to mobility, and in an 
attempt to try to dovetail all these different facets in the whole process of education, we have attempted 
to come up with some forward thinking and a long-range plan in regard to education. 
 
And it’s in that context, Mr. Chairman, that we are attempting to bring about the development of our 
human resources, and just to illustrate one or two illustrations, I would say that one of the things that 
we’re going to place a tremendous amount of emphasis on is to develop in that area where people are in 
arrears educationally. And I speak about one out of every five to six people in our province who have 
grade 10 or less education. And as long as that fact exists, and as long as alongside of that, we have 
something like 74 per cent of the people who are on social assistance today have grade 10 or less 
education, to me there is a message there that economic recovery will be extremely difficult if we don’t 
place a great amount of emphasis as far as attention and financial resources are concerned in that area. 
 
The same thing would apply in this area of technical education and skill training and making 
opportunities available for those people in that particular area. But it’s in this overall planning – it’s in 
the context of overall planning that we decided to make the distribution of funding in the area of 
education in the attempt to bring about the overall development of our human resources. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, thank you, Mr. Minister. I think it is the contention of many people and educators 
throughout Saskatchewan that the educational system in Saskatchewan was second to none in Canada 
throughout the past years. And I know I recall a principal who went on leave to the armed forces into 
Germany from the home community of Humboldt, and I want to say that I spoke to him and he indicated 
that the educational system of Saskatchewan was viewed as being, as I say, second to none, a  



 
April 25, 1983 
 

 
1406 

high quality of education, and was indeed looked upon, although they used the Ontario system, the 
armed forces at that time indicated that in view of the overall strengths of the Saskatchewan scene that it 
was in fact one of the best in Canada. 
 
I want to say that I don’t think that the statements really add a great deal, because I think that the 
corner-stone of life in our province has, in the past, been education. And I think that the government in 
the past demonstrated that indeed education was of a top priority to this province. What I am concerned 
about is whether or not we have a lot of rhetoric in respect to the utilization of this resource development 
in some other new and innovative way which you are alluding to, or whether it’s just words, because it 
seems to me the commitment of the province to educational system is really the end product of 
determining whether or not that commitment is there. 
 
I want to ask you also about another statement which . . . I don’t know if it bothers me or not, but again 
— the Premier speaking — Premier Grant Devine thinks that Saskatchewan schools need to be run 
efficiently and with a business-like approach. I would like you, as Minister of Education, to comment on 
that particular statement, because certainly I haven’t had the benefit of knowing exactly what the 
Premier means by more rhetoric. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can assure the member from Quill Lakes, the hon. member 
from Quill Lakes, that what we are saying in regard to our commitment in education is not sheer 
rhetoric. It is something that we believe in; it is something that we are committed to as a very important 
part of the whole package of economic recovery. 
 
Now in regard to running schools efficiently, if the Premier did state that then certainly I would concur 
with him. I do believe that it’s incumbent upon those of us who are running educational facilities today, 
educational programs today, to be as efficient as we possibly can and to realize savings wherever it is 
possible, because of the tremendous amount of cost that is involved in education today, because the 
expectations are so great on the part of people, and for which reason costs continue to escalate. So that, I 
see really nothing wrong with that, and there is not the inference — I feel confident that there is not the 
inference, nor was there the inference intended by the Premier — that that should have anything to do 
with effectiveness in education, because we are concerned about running schools in an effective manner, 
and just because we’re running them efficiently should not be a barrier to attaining that goal. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, the part that concerns me with the statement which you haven’t addressed 
is that implied in that statement, and I’ll read you what it says here. It’s an article by Jane Bradley: 
 

Premier Grant Devine thinks Saskatchewan schools need to be run efficiently and with a 
business-like approach. 
 

It seems to me that there is implied in that that the school boards throughout this province are not in fact 
running it efficiently and in a business-like manner. There can be no other interpretation, Mr. Minister, 
to that other than a slur on all of the boards across the province, because if in fact they are running them 
efficiently and business-like, then why would the Premier or anyone want to allude to the necessity of 
running them efficiently and business-like? If it is a fact already that that is achieved, then you don’t 
have to request that they be run efficiently and business-like. 



 
April 25, 1983 

 
1407 

And so what I’m saying to you is that while we have local autonomy and we have boards throughout 
Saskatchewan spending a tremendous amount of time for very little remuneration and, I want to say, 
have built in this province an outstanding educational system . . . And it seems to me that what is 
implied in that statement is that in fact they are doing less than what the Premier . . . And I want your 
comments in respect to how you view the operations as directed by the various boards and local 
autonomy throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think that there’s some degree of misunderstanding, wither 
on the hon. member’s part or else on my part. But as far as running schools in a business-like fashion is 
concerned, as I said before, I see not a thing wrong with that. In fact I see that as a very, very . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . All right, all right, look, I was involved in education until I came into this 
House. There are five or six people sitting in our caucus who were involved in education. We felt very, 
very confident about the quality of education that we had in our province and we were a living part of it. 
And personally, I was very, very proud to have been associated with the teaching profession in this 
province. I was very proud to have been associated with the teaching profession in this province. I was 
very proud to have been associated with the boards of education with which I was associated. I know 
that I speak for my fellow members that they felt the same way, and they still do. And I was very proud 
to have been associated with the people who worked in the Department of Education, and to me it was 
an honour to have the opportunity to assume the role that I have in this portfolio, because of that. And 
there was no way on earth that our Premier, or anybody on this side of the House, was intending a slight 
upon mismanagement of school boards and the manner in which they were handling their day-to-day 
problems. 
 
What we’re talking about, when we’re talking about running schools in a business-like manner, are such 
things as energy conservation programs, so that we can save money in regard to that kind of thing. 
We’re talking about and analysing such things as bus routes in order to realize savings. We’re talking 
about proper maintenance for schools in regards to anything from roof repairs to upkeep in schools, and 
things of that nature and a host of many, many other kinds of things. We’re talking about business 
education being taught in our schools, which it is in almost every secondary school in this province. 
We’re talking about shop work, the vocational and technical training that occurs in a large number of 
our secondary schools. All these things require very careful management, and through that, we have a 
greater opportunity to give more benefit to more students through efficiencies. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That’s all very good, Mr. Minister, but I want to say that there’s nothing else can be 
taken out of that statement other than that the province is looking at greater interference with the boards, 
local boards, or questioning the manner in which they are operating the schools under their jurisdiction. 
Because simply enough, I’m saying to you that if we have the efficiency there, then it need not have 
been commented on. And the very nature of commenting on it obviously is of concern to the Premier. 
 
I want to go on in respect to the thrust of education in the future. And again I want one final comment, 
because this is number one of the province making some statements to a group of teachers. And the 
statement that I want to address to you is this: 
 

While he reaffirmed his belief in the need to teach students the basics of traditional subjects, he 
suggested schools would have to place greater emphasis on how those subjects would relate to 
the work world. 



 
April 25, 1983 
 

 
1408 

I ask you, is that a new direction in your view, that the Department of Education or the concept of your 
government is viewing education? Or was it in fact, being done in prior? I’ll let you answer that and I 
may have some follow-up there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Chairman, first of all, I want to assure the hon. member from Quill Lake that 
there is going to be no attempt on my part or this government’s part, as long as I am Minister of 
Education, to have more interference in the running of school boards and school board affairs. I can 
assure you of that. As a matter of fact, I think that when I did speak to the trustees association, that that 
was the one point that I made abundantly clear. And philosophically, I just don’t see that we can run the 
affairs of education from a central office in Regina, by a Minister of Education together with a 
Department of Education, as well as the people in the local areas can run their affairs. The people in 
Esterhazy and the people in Humboldt and the people in Moose Jaw and the people in the different parts 
of this province understand their issues, their local issues, and their educational needs much better than 
we do in the central office. And that is the basic principle that we will uphold. 
 
In regard to many of the problems that have arisen in the 11 months that I have been Minister of 
Education, we have been very, very careful to respect, to completely respect the jurisdiction of the local 
school boards. 
 
Now, with regard to your question about the changing emphasis of making our curriculum and our 
school programs more related to the working world, I can see some benefits for doing some of that. But, 
as I mentioned to you I think, when you asked the first question about last year’s estimates . . . I think 
you posed that question to me: what was my thinking about education – philosophy of it? 
 
I believe that education should have a balance, that there should be a basic core of education. And 
around that basic core, where you have your skills in mathematics and in English and in social studies, 
around that you build some very, very important components, such as physical development, such as 
aesthetic development, vocational training and many, many other kinds of things, including a good basic 
philosophy of life. 
 
Now, one of those components is this thing that we call vocational training. I see nothing wrong with us 
giving maximum advantage to our students who, at the same as they are taking this basic core of 
education with a balanced approach to the overall development educationally, to at the same time learn 
something that is going to be of value to them and give them a head start insofar as job opportunities are 
concerned. 
 
That is what is meant by the Premier when he makes a statement like you had mentioned, and that is 
what I concur with. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, basically what I hear from the minister, that there is likely, under your 
stewardship, a changing of direction or emphasis within the educational system from what was there 
before. Is that correct? Are you changing the emphasis as suggested by the Premier, that will in fact be 
more related to the work world? Is that the direction in which the educational emphasis is being 
directed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — No, not exactly the way that you said that, but more in terms of making students 
more aware of what opportunities there are vocationally, more in terms of career counselling and 
orienting them towards the opportunities that are available, so that they can do some degree of 
exploration during the time that they are  



 
April 25, 1983 

 
1409 

taking their secondary education. That’s what it really amounts to. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I just want to indicate to the minister that there would appear to be some change 
in emphasis in respect to the educational system. And what I would like to indicate is that: to what 
extent has he had consultation with the various interest groups in developing this change of emphasis? 
And the reason I ask you, Mr. Minister, is that there would appear to be a fair amount of different views 
in respect to the present educational system. 
 
We hear the pluses and the minuses of the public school system discussed by a panel, and Bill 
Hawrylak, vice-chairman of Regina school board education, said: 
 

The current school system is adequate. Schools must meet the needs of a wide variety of 
students: thus they cannot always provide for wants of special interest groups. 
 

That’s his. 
 
I read over here where a Wayne Zimmer makes a comment. He’s a parent involved in the special 
children education, and he said that: 
 

The public school system wrongly emphasizes the kind of school built and the amount of 
information taught, rather than emphasizing values. The value system is basic to developing a 
thinking individual (Zimmer said). The smaller classrooms in an alternative school offer students 
the necessary individual attention, which creates independent thinking leaders rather than 
followers. 
 

I think just reading a couple of those statements, we have certainly a variation of opinions in respect to 
where the educational system is at today and the evaluation of that system. And so what I’m asking you 
is: if you are really launching off on this here new course, apart and different from what we had 
traditionally established in Saskatchewan, which I say was well received and respected, I ask you, have 
you done a thorough communication with the various groups – the universities, the teachers, the trustees, 
and the various boards across the province? Because certainly here there is a wide divergence of 
opinions and, accordingly, I ask you: to what extent have you had meaningful discussions on launching 
your new economic order and tying education to the open for business philosophy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Well, Mr. Chairman, yes, I think that we’ve had ongoing communication with 
most of the groups that the hon. member has made reference to, and I speak about the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation; I speak about the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association. Through our 
department we have program development committees, and we have ongoing consultations with the 
major players in the area of education, constantly. 
 
In addition to that, I could point out that it was our decision to continue with the review of the whole 
curriculum of Saskatchewan, with the idea of trying to arrive at what the goals should be, whether we 
were attaining these goals or not, what were the shortfalls or the short comings up to this particular time, 
and giving as much as possible public input into determining where we should be heading in the future 
is concerned. We will be listening, we will be listening to what the people have had to say, and 
sometime in  



 
April 25, 1983 
 

 
1410 

September of this coming year the report should be ready to be passed on to the minister, following 
which time we will make some decisions with regard to directions in education. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I would like to ask the minister a specific question and that is: what single most 
important contribution, in your view, could the government make to guaranteeing a well-run educational 
system in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — I would say – and maybe it’s not a very good answer, because there are a lot of 
things that come into my head when you ask that question – but I would say, honestly. I think the most 
important thing would be to listen, to listen, because education is everyone’s business. And as far as it is 
humanly possible, to try to accommodate as many people as it is possible to accommodate. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I think that is a legitimate answer. I guess I go to the second most important, and 
I’ll give you a hint, that it seems to me that in order to run a strong educational system in the province, 
one of the primary dependency is funding from the provincial government. It seems to me that that is 
very important, and with sufficient funds, I think that the guidance of the educational system will be 
very well handled by the local autonomy within the school boards, school division boards and the local 
boards. 
 
While the province can listen, it seems to me that listening without being able to put sufficient funds into 
the system becomes rather a hollow action on behalf of the government. And I guess I want to get to the 
crux of the estimates, and while we hear a lot of rhetoric again from this government about education 
being a major corner-stone in the new utopia that we are being offered in this province with open to 
business, I ask you, from what you have indicated – your commitment to education – I specifically then 
say: why such a meagre amount of funding in respect to the operating grants throughout Saskatchewan? 
I think that no one can legitimately say that they are whole-heartedly supporting the educational system, 
and at the same time cutting back the funding, the like of which has never been seen in this province tot 
he extent of this budget that was brought down. 
 
And so, I want to get into this question, but I really want sort of a statement by the minister that you 
can’t have it both ways – that you’re supporting education, you want to see the growth of education, and 
at the same time you’re cutting back the funding for operating grants. And I want to say that throughout 
this province the impact of those cuts are being felt and we’ll get into that. And I want a general 
statement of how you can try to justify your government’s strong support of education, and at the same 
time, undermine it as you have with this here meagre funding base that you’ve provided to the schools. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ll try and keep this answer short, but about the best way 
that I can respond to your question with regard to funding, or financing, is, it is a fact that the grants that 
we gave in education, that is from K to 12, were 7 per cent, which is more than the overall government 
expenditures, and that indicated putting education on a high priority. I could remind the hon. member 
that this was not the case in the number of years prior to the time that we became the government, 
because in the early ‘70s the percentage was 33 per cent and it declined to 22 per cent by 1982. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I want to elucidate on sort of the history of school grants and the property 
improvement grants, which was initiated by the New Democratic Party. 



 
April 25, 1983 

 
1411 

I want to say that it was the policy of the New Democratic government to provide the school system and 
the educational services of highest quality. This was done in encouraging and supporting locally elected 
school boards, and particularly by providing substantial increases in direct operating grants to schools; 
by providing significant property tax relief to ratepayers, through the increases in the property 
improvement grants; by providing appropriate capital assistance; providing leadership and development 
assistance in services from the Department of Education in staff; providing leadership and substantial 
support for the special education needs in the North; providing special programs and funds for those 
urban school boards with special problems. And I want to also say that in the grant structure we 
provided special assistance to rural schools which had declining enrolments. 
 
And if one looks at the historical record, it bears out these policies of the previous government’s support 
to education. From 1971 to 1981, the CPI rose in Saskatchewan by 135 per cent. And during that same 
period, 1970-71 to 1980-81, operating grants to schools, exclusive of those in the North, increased by 
218 percent. Moreover, during our term of office, local property tax payers were further assisted by a 
steady pattern of increases in the property improvement grants. 
 
And thus, from 1970-71 to ‘80-81, while inflation increased 135 per cent, the combined total of school 
grants and PIG (property improvement grant) grants increased by 253 per cent – just about double the 
rate of inflation. And I want to say that whereas school grants and the PIG grants combined accounted 
for 57 per cent of the school expenditures in 1970-71 – 57 per cent – I want to say that they climbed in 
the last year we were government, in 1981-82, to over 70 per cent of the school expenditures. 
 
And so what you have, I think, is an obvious history here of the previous government putting up the 
dollars to support the growth of education. And I want to say that what you have done here is to transfer 
the educational costs and shifted the educational costs to the local municipalities. I want to ask the 
minister how, in fact, when over the 10-year period we had annual increases on the average of over 13 
per cent over the 10 years, we get a Tory government, and the first year they come into office, 7 per cent 
of less? And as a consequence what has happened is that there’s been a massive shift of the cost of 
education to the local municipalities. And I want to say, I want to ask the minister: how can he 
demonstrate to the people of Saskatchewan his concern for education when he doesn’t even come close 
to the record of the previous government’s commitment to education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Chairman, once again I’ll try and keep this short; but once again, I would try 
to refer to some of the facts. First of all, I think that the hon. member is being very selective when he’s 
picking out certain years that he’s using to advantage. Once again I would remind him that if this was 
such a high priority for the previous government, why on earth did the share of the provincial budget 
decline for education, spent on education, why did it decline from 33 per cent in 1972 – from the early 
1970s – to 22 per cent in 1982? That doesn’t make sense, if you placed education on such a high 
priority. And, also, that the grants in 1978 covered 56.7 per cent of the cost of education – the provincial 
grants. By 1982, they were down to 52 per cent – 52 per cent, sir. So I don’t know where you’re getting 
your ideas about having put education on such a high priority. And this, I want to remind you, is during 
times of economic prosperity. 



 
April 25, 1983 
 

 
1412 

Mr. Koskie: — I want to agree with one thing that the minister indicated – that Tory times are hard 
times. I agree with that. And there were good times and sufficient funds for education under the New 
Democratic government. I want to say in respect to student-teacher ratio, from 1970-71 to 1980-81 there 
was an 18 per cent reduction in the number of students, and an overall increase in the number of 
teachers. Thus, in 1970-71 there were almost 22 students per teacher. In 1980-81 under the last 
administration, the NDP government, we had reduced this to approximately 17 students per teacher. 
 
In respect to grants per student, the positive financial effect of these policies can be demonstrated by 
these figures, I say to the Minister of Social Services. The CPI increased by 135 per cent from ’71 to 
’81. School grants increased by 218 per cent – same time frame. And grants per student increased by 
277 per cent from 1971 to ’81. 
 
And I want to say that the record is there, that the previous administration committed dollars to provide 
a sound educational system here. Unfortunately, Mr. Minister, what has happened under your 
stewardship is that the funding of the province has gone down, with the consequences of local 
municipalities having to pick up the deficits. As a consequence, I suspect that there will be indeed a 
deterioration of the educational services, because, many of the local school boards in order to try to cut 
their budgets, many of them are operating at 9, 9.5 per cent, and certainly in the cities here they’ve 
demonstrated that to you. They can’t, without cutting massively the services, keep it under 9 per cent, 
but still you give them only a miserable 7 per cent. And so what I want to say is: how can you 
legitimately indicate that you have education as a corner-stone to the development of this province when 
indeed you are moving in the opposite direction with the outstanding record of the government that 
predecessed this Tory government? 
 
And I want also to say one other thing. Yes, there was good economic times when we were here, but it 
wasn’t just luck, it was by the actions of the government. And today we find ourselves in one of the . . . 
and sliding fast in every area that this government touches. We are sliding downhill in resource 
development. In the operation of the crown corporations, they’re in a state of a mess. And so what I 
want to ask you is: try to tell us here today how you could defend such a miserable increase and a 
cut-back of services in teachers from the educational system in a time when you’re saying that you have 
to expand it. There are no jobs, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister. Many young people are out of jobs. And if 
you look at universities, and you look at high schools, people, rather than going out into the work-force, 
are continuing their education and preparing themselves for the future when we do get an economic 
recovery, probably under new government. 
 
But I ask you . . . I think that you really have to try to justify why you are transferring so much of the 
cost over to the municipalities and why you are not concerned that as a result of the transfer you’re 
going to be cutting services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Chairman, I’m having a little difficulty in understanding how we are the bad 
guys in transferring so much of the burden on to the local school boards. All you have to do is take a 
look at what the previous government did with regard to the sudden escalation of mill rates. Go back one 
or two years, and in 1981 the mill rate went up 15.9 per cent in rural and 9.6 per cent in urban – 
throughout the province, 12.9 per cent. And, you know, that’s kind of an indication of how much 
pressure is being applied to school boards. 



 
April 25, 1983 

 
1413 

In 1982, the mill rate went up: rural, 18 per cent; urban, 16.9 per cent; an average of 17.5 per cent 
provincially. This year, under this government, the mill rates went up: rural, 6.8 per cent; urban, 9 per 
cent; provincially, 7.7 per cent. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Quite a difference there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Yes, a decline of over 10 per cent from the previous year, or 10 mills, I’m sorry. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — First of all, two things that he doesn’t take into account. One is that the inflation rate 
and the interest rates during the ‘80-81 were at the highest this country has ever witnessed, and the 
inflation rate has indeed come down. But here, Mr. Minister, you’re bragging about your funding. The 
separate school board may raise tax 27 per cent. The provincial grant to the separate system will grow 
by only $139,000 in 1983, an increase of about 1 per cent form last year. Now they have doctored 
around and worked around, and then you may come back and say that they haven’t had to go that high. 
But what I’m saying to you is that if the rates haven’t been increased, that many of the . . . What has 
happened is that surpluses that have been built up are being absorbed in maintaining a reduced tax rate. 
 
For you to stand up and indicate that services aren’t being cut . . . I want to read here from L. Hicks, 
with her tongue firmly in cheek, said: 
 

This year’s provincial grant was not divine at all. In addition to drawing on their reserve funds, 
trustees cut some planned spending to keep mill rate increases as low as possible. Some repairs 
to older schools, acquisition of playground equipment, development of new programs have been 
deferred. 
 

This is the statement of responsible people running the public school board here in Regina. And how can 
you say that your funding is maintaining the divisions? I can indicate further to the minister that the 
provincial budget raises serious concerns about the loss of teaching jobs and pupil services, especially in 
rural areas. 
 
Mel Lofstrom, general secretary of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, said Wednesday: 
 

Lofstrom told the federation’s annual meeting that the level of provincial grants announced last 
week will force some school boards to reduce the number of specialists they employ, either 
cutting existing programs or staff. 
 

That’s the direction that you’re going. And I want to ask the minister: are you denying that as a result of 
your miserable funding to the school boards that there will not in fact be cut-backs in services, in repairs, 
and also that there will not be a savage decrease in respect to the number of teachers that are let go 
because of the reduced funding? You know it very well. Just admit it and we’ll get on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Well, Mr. Chairman, once again I think that the hon. member from the Quill 
Lakes is being selective. He’s picking out this and that and so forth but he’s not taking a look at the 
overall picture, as far as financial condition is concerned, of the school boards. And I might cite some 
statistics of my own here. I have here a list of the mill rates that were assessed in 1982, and then the mill 
rates and what impact our budget had upon those same divisions: Arcola, 1982 – 17 mills, 1983 – 2 
mills; Assiniboia, 1982 – 20 mills, 1983 – 3 mills; Battlefords, 1982 – 22 mills, 1983 – 5 



 
April 25, 1983 
 

 
1414 

mills; Battlefords, 1982 – 12 mills, 1983 – 5 mills. I’m sorry. The first one there should have read Battle 
River and the second one Battlefords. Estevan, 1982 – 20 mills, 1983 – 6 mills. I’m sorry that should 
read Eston-Elrose. Estevan, 1982 – 16 mills, 1983 – 2 mills. Humboldt school district 47, 1982 – 9 mills, 
1983 – 4 mills. Kamsack, 1982 – 16 mills, 1983 – 6 mills. Kindersley . . . Kerrobert, sorry, 1982 – 13 
mills, 1983 – 5 mills. 
 
It goes on and on and on. And you make reference to one school board complaining, and right below 
that article, Moose Jaw trustees say they are proud of the mill rate. They’re proud of it. 
 

The ratepayers will be asked for 6.1 per cent more money this year to operated Moose Jaw public 
schools. Trustees were in a self-congratulatory mood Thursday as they set a new tax rate 
showing one of the lowest increases in recent history. 
 

Saskatoon – 5.9 per cent. You know, you can go on and on and on. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, you can go on and on and on and I imagine that you’re hearing a fair number of 
the school boards contacting you. I want to say in respect to the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You got 
a problem? 
 

The hour of reckoning has come and gone for the Regina tax payers, with city council and two 
school boards last week setting their 1983 mill rates. Again, it is the school board pointing an 
accusing finger at the provincial government for grant cut-backs that led the pack by imposing an 
8.97 per cent, 11 mill level of increase. The city has kept the municipal portion of the tax tab 
increased to 7.75 recommended by the administration in its preliminary operating budget 
presented to the council last month. The combined effect of all of this, along with the library 
levy, is to raise Regina’s tax rate between 23 and 24 mills. 
 

That’s what your great funding has done, Mr. Minister. And I want to say that I ask you: will you stand 
up here and indicate and deny that there will not be a large number of teachers lose their positions 
because of a decrease in funding? Will you predict that there’ll be no teachers losing their jobs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Well, first of all I would like to address myself to the statistics and the information 
that you gave about the Regina Public School Board, was it? 
 
Now, once again, if you’d be careful to listen to the facts, the Regina Public School Board received a 
grant increase of $2.2 million over 1982, which represents an 8.32 per cent increase. Now in time of 
recession I think that’s pretty darn good. Now, what they chose to do . . . If they chose to go ahead and 
spend more money, more local money, then that’s up to them, you see, because perhaps they weren’t as 
concerned about their responsibility to look after the inflationary process. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I ask you a specific question, Mr. Minister: can ;you assure and guarantee to this House 
that as a result of your lack of funding whether or not, indeed, many teachers will not lose their 
employment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Well, I think that the member knows very, very well that those decisions are not 
made by the Minister of Education. They are made by school boards. 



 
April 25, 1983 

 
1415 

Mr. Koskie: — I know that very well, Mr. Minister, and you know what I’m getting at. Part of the need 
for the reduction in teaching staff is a result of a lack of provincial funding. And what I want to say, 
generally here, is that the funding has been cut back substantially, that the costs have had to be absorbed. 
Many of the municipalities, what they have done in order to keep the mill rate at a reasonable level at 
this time – in this tough, Tory times – is that they have gone to the reserve funds, and you know that as 
well as I do. So for you to stand up and say that, you know, the mill rate is such and such for a given 
area, you don’t address the entire subject matter because in fact . . . For instance, in Regina, what they 
have done is certainly go to the reserve fund, and to decrease the amount that the rate would have to be 
increased. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to reiterate what I did say, that the Regina Public 
School Board, which the hon. member used as an example, got $2.2 million increase this year, which 
represents an 8.32 per cent increase over last year . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, the point is, I 
think that they were pretty well treated, and as a matter of fact, my officials tell me at the Department of 
Education – and these are by and large the same officials who were there under the previous government 
for years – they tell me that they’ve had less complaining from school boards this year than in perhaps 
any other year. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, big deal, less complaining. I mean, there’s not much use of complaining to a 
government that is bankrupt. I mean, you’re $537 million in the red. There’s not much use coming to a 
government that can’t even support and pay for the programs as we were doing in the past. We had 
balanced budgets all the time during the course of our operation, and now you have a government that 
has no money. Obviously who’s going to pick it up is the local school boards, because what would be 
the use of coming to you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, you have a deficit of $537 million in less 
than a year’s operation. 
 
What I want to indicate is that Mel Lofstrom, the general secretary of the STF, has indicated his concern 
with the loss of teaching positions. You aren’t prepared to indicate or, apparently, to appraise the impact 
of this, and obviously are shifting the consequences of teacher cuts onto the local division. I’m asking 
you: have you no concern that a massive cut in the number of school teachers and the cut in services 
which are being proposed by some of the school boards, is this not in fact a concern to you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Well, yes, I would be concerned about massive cuts as far as staff or teachers are 
concerned, but I don’t see that that is necessarily forthcoming, as you indicate. What I see is that where 
there is declining enrolments it dictates that there should be a cut in staff, or else you’ve got people who 
really, in effect, haven’t got a job to do. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, in respect to the funding in a declining enrolment problem in rural Saskatchewan, 
has the grant previously, the grant formula previously, made some allowances to help them to maintain a 
reasonable level of funding? And what I want to ask the minister is: has he in fact, in essence, made a 
modification in the general formula for providing and determining the grants which will give some extra 
funding to the rural schools? One of the major concerns that I receive is in respect, while there may be 
some declining enrolment, that the costs do not necessarily go down proportionately. I know in the past 
we did have a system which would in fact provide further finding to the rural school divisions. 



 
April 25, 1983 
 

 
1416 

Hon. Mr. Currie: — Yes, my officials will look up the information, but as I remember we have 
increased that factor – the small schools factor – which I think is what you’re talking about. We have 
increased the small schools factor, that this year we’ve extended it to division 1 and 2, so that we’ve 
actually in the overall we’ve increased it by 47 per cent. Is that right? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 47 
per cent, to look after those problems that are peculiar particularly to the rural areas. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, I’m glad to hear that, Mr. Minister. And it was a concern, as I indicate, to a large 
number of rural schools. And, as I said, we introduced that change, and I’m glad that you’ve carried on 
at least in some extent the wise policies that we initiated in the past. 
 
I just want to say in another area, which is not directly related to your department, that part of the 
method of ways in which we helped to support it (the educational cost) was by the increase in the 
property improvements grant. And you know very well that in the 1981-82 budget, the last budget, 
‘82-83 I guess, that we introduced in March, that there was to be a substantial increase of property 
improvement grants which would help to alleviate at the bottom. I just want to say that I’m disappointed 
also that in support of the funding of education in Saskatchewan, which is primarily through the local 
tax base and provincial funding, that one of the ways that we did help to alleviate the rising property 
taxes was to increase the property improvement grants. Regrettably, one of the actions of the Tory 
government in getting into office was not to give the total grants as we had proposed to apply to all 
citizens who are paying taxes. And we had done consistently throughout out term – as education costs 
rose, we increased the property improvement grants. 
 
I want to ask: in respect to the student population, has your department done any analysis as to the likely 
student population for the coming year and for the next five years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Chairman, in regard to enrolment declines, my officials tell me, according to 
their analysis, that the enrolment decline has started to level off, particularly in the urban areas. An 
example of that is that in Saskatoon that the enrolment is actually increasing. And as far as the rural 
areas are concerned, the main problem as far as decline in enrolment is concerned is at the high school 
level. They project that even there, at the high school level, that enrolment should stabilize in the next 
three or four years. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, the former administration had initiated some very 
significant programs in northern Saskatchewan, and they had demonstrated quite a significant 
commitment to northern people in terms of education. I’ll just name a few here as an example. The 
former administration had earmarked $42 million for school capital projects, the inclusion of eight new 
schools in communities that had never before been served by such facilities. And also, it established a 
northern teacher training program. Thirdly, they initiated the successful establishment of community 
colleges in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I wondered, Mr. Minister, at this point in time, what your administration is proposing to do with those 
three areas. What is your government’s commitment and policy with respect to those programs? 



 
April 25, 1983 

 
1417 

Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Chairman, in reply to the member from Cumberland, perhaps I could just give 
a very brief overview, and that might be satisfactory. If not, I would zero in on specifics, as he chooses. 
 
But, first of all, the La Ronge office and the staff in La Ronge were retained so that the northern 
concerns in the province could be reflected in any decisions that are made by our department. Although 
the federal government has not made a commitment as far as the regional economic expansion to . . . I’m 
sorry. The Department of Regional Economic Expansion has not made a commitment to extend the 
Northlands agreement. Nevertheless, our department has decided to continue the payment of the 
northern educational opportunities grant. We also have agreed to continue and to support the northern 
teacher education program known as NORTEP, and have actually expanded this program to a four-year 
program. We are presently looking for expansion of that program by finding more accommodation for 
the officials, and for the office complex, and using a building called the upper Atco building in La 
Ronge as a classroom-library-administrative complex, so that we could convert the present NORTEP 
building into a student residence facility. 
 
And then, as far as the curriculum is concerned, we have retained the northern curriculum development 
personnel, and we have added support from our own department to give further support to curriculum 
development. 
 
As far as special education is concerned, we have retained support personnel, and we have supplemented 
this personnel by giving additional office staff assistance through our department. 
 
We have taken up the issue of construction of teacherages in northern Saskatchewan where it is 
necessary to have teacherages in order to attract quality teachers, and a plan is being discussed with the 
school boards in northern Saskatchewan to allow these items, perhaps, even to be recognized as 
expenditures in the foundation grants formula. 
 
We have been in discussion with the people of Uranium City, the officials of Uranium City, with the 
hope of addressing ourselves to the issues as they arise in that city. 
 
And we have a unit for planning of our facilities located in Prince Albert, and we’re looking to giving 
the school boards in northern Saskatchewan the same degree of autonomy and responsibility as we have 
given to the boards of education in all the rest of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, getting down to specifics in terms of the existing 
NORTEP (northern teacher education program) facility in La Ronge, Mr. Minister, I noted that you 
mentioned some facility in your presentation, and I couldn’t quite grasp what the intent of that 
suggestion was. But in getting back to specifics, in terms of the existing NORTEP facilities, was there 
any new plans to provide a new facility for the group? Was your suggestion indicating that you will 
proceed with the new facility for the people that are currently taking studies, or are you suggesting that 
that existing facility will be renovated shortly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Chairman, what I indicated was that we are looking at the existing facility 
(and this is just in the consulting stage right now with the officials in the La Ronge area), to be that that 
present facility to become a student residence, and that we would have the library and the classroom and 
the administration part in another  



 
April 25, 1983 
 

 
1418 

building. That’s what we’re looking at at the present time. 
 
Mr. Yew: — With respect to another specific topic, Mr. Minister, I raised a question with the minister 
responsible for northern Saskatchewan the other day, and the question was then again referred to the 
Department of Education, and at this point in time I’d like to raise the question of the North East 
Community College facility. It was my understanding, and still is my understanding, that the area 
residents had proposed through the board to have this facility built in Sandy Bay. But I understand now 
that that has been changed. The directive now is to establish this new facility in Creighton. And I 
wonder, Mr. Minister, at this point in time, if you can elaborate on the circumstances leading to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I could answer that question. Community colleges does 
come under Advanced Education and Manpower, I could ask it at that time, or I could try to give you a 
very brief answer right now. 
 
Actually, there’s Sandy Bay and Creighton and the other location that was being considered – 
Cumberland, that’s right. So, you see, the community colleges are run by community college boards. 
And so there are seven members on the boards. There are, as I recall from memory now, there are two 
from Creighton on that board; one from Deschambault; one from Pelican Narrows; one from Sandy Bay, 
and . . . Okay, I forgot the other. But this board met and they had representatives (what I’m trying to 
point out is from the different geographic areas there), and this board met and made the decision that 
instead of the administration office and headquarters being at Sandy Bay, that it would be better located 
at Creighton because of cost-efficiency and because of servicing to the area. And they had a meeting and 
the decision wasn’t made in the first time that they met, and then in the second meeting they had the 
vote, and they voted 6 to 1 in favour of that, and they sent the report in to our office, and that is what I 
remember of it. I’d be pleased to make that report available. I have a copy of it, and I’d be pleased to 
make that report available to you if you want to see the details of the report. 
 
Mr. Yew: — With respect, Mr. Minister, to the question that I just raised, I’d be pleased to receive a 
copy of such report. I was a bit concerned because my understanding initially was that the original board 
has proposed to establish such a facility at a centralized community, as well taking into consideration 
that that community lacked . . . a very low economic base aside from being centralized, and the fact that 
it was easier access to the surrounding communities. But anyway, I’ll get on with the other questions. 
 
With respect, Mr. Minister, to the bursary program in northern Saskatchewan, there was brought by the 
former government, I believe, a recognition that the North had very special educational needs. I wonder, 
Mr. Minister, at this point in time, if you could relate to us whether or not you will be placing special 
emphasis with regards to your bursary program for northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Chairman, could I ask the hon. member if . . . Are you referring to the 
NORTEP (northern teacher education program) bursary, or bursaries generally for students coming from 
northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Yew: — That’s right. Students coming in from northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Well, that fits into the area of continuing education, but we certainly are going to 
be giving special consideration to those people who need special  



 
April 25, 1983 

 
1419 

support. They will be treated on the same basis as all other students in this province, as far as the base is 
concerned. But then, in addition, we’ve written into it the opportunity to deal with people who need 
special support, and that would include students from northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Yew: — In last estimates, Mr. Minister, you provided to us – and I want to commend you for it . . . 
You know it’s quite confusing for us in northern Saskatchewan to try to define clearly what your 
government’s objectives and policies are with respect to various program areas, and specifically 
speaking with respect to educational needs and program objectives. You supplied to me at the last 
estimates, a copy of program allotments in terms of funding – money allotted for adult basic education, 
basic skill training development, learning centre, northern careers program, native outfitters, the trapper 
training program and finally, the program funding allotments for the community colleges. 
 
I wonder, at this point in time, Mr. Minister, if I could ask you for your program array in terms of dollars 
and cents for these various programs in northern Saskatchewan – if you could provide that to us – so that 
we, at this side of the House can relate this information to the people of northern Saskatchewan with 
respect to these various programs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Chairman, yes, I’d be pleased to make that information available to the hon. 
member. Once again, it is in the area of Advanced Education, and if it’s in order, perhaps we could wait 
until that time and I could make that information available along with the others. But I’ve made note of 
it, and we’ll make that information available to you as soon as possible. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, my question is regarding the school at La 
Loche that was burned down. And I wonder, could you indicate to the House at this time just how far the 
plans are, and when you could expect to start construction of that new addition? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Chairman, in reply to the hon. member from Athabasca, I can’t give you word 
right now when it will go to tender. But right now, it’s in the board’s hands. They have commissioned an 
architect, and they are presently drawing plans for that school, so that precisely when it will go to tender, 
I’m not certain at this point. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, then plans are not complete then for the addition of this new school. 
Do you have plans or is it the department’s plans to have that school out on tender and completed for 
September for the fall session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Chairman, we have been dealing with the approvals as quickly as we possible 
can. There is no way that it would be completed for September of this year. What we would be hoping 
for is that it would be ready for opening in September of next year. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well, Mr. Minister, this seems quite odd that that school was destroyed by fire 
approximately 18 months ago – going on two years. That is a facility that is needed in La Loche where 
we have a large number of students. It seems quite odd that you stand up in this House today and you 
indicate that that facility will not be available until September of 1984. I think that the priorities are in 
the wrong place. There’s just no reason there. Maybe you should bring Batoni in from Alberta to build 
the  



 
April 25, 1983 
 

 
1420 

darn school, because you’re going to build an 18,000–seat arena in Saskatoon in four months, and here 
we’re waiting two and a half years to get a facility for education in northern Saskatchewan. I just think 
it’s unfair that the department would not proceed at a faster rate with this facility in La Loche. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Having been in La Loche, I understand the degree of urgency that there is there. 
All that can I say is that we can’t take credit for waiting for the two and a half years. Somebody should 
have been doing something about that prior to the time that we came on the scene. And as I said, we’ve 
just been around for 11-plus months, so that we can’t really take the credit for that. I was rather 
surprised, closer to being shocked, that there wasn’t something in place dealing with that prior to the 
time that I made my visit to La Loche to take a look at the facilities situation there. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — That’s fine, Mr. Chairman. You indicate that you were quite surprised that that 
school wasn’t started when you took power, but you have to take credit for that. Your government has to 
take credit for that now. We were in the process of getting the architect to draw up the plans and put that 
school out for tender. It’s your government that put the hold on it for a year. And, by your own 
admission, you stand up in the House and indicate that you were quite surprised that it wasn’t under way 
when you took power. And I think that’s an admission on your part, and you’ve also admitted that it is a 
needed facility. And, in closing, I would just say that somehow you put a red tag on this thing and get it 
going as fast as possible. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Well, I can assure the hon. member that is precisely what we have been doing, but 
it takes time. You know, we’ve got . . . Saskatoon has two schools which they say are urgently needed 
and Regina has two, and it just takes time for them to go through all the processes that have to happen. 
We’ve been trying to clear it away as quickly as possible, so that it doesn’t get bogged down in red tape. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In respect to the capital grants, if you take a look at the 1982-83 NDP budget, DNS, the 
educational capital grants, was 6.4555 million; and education grants, capital, 13.112 million. So in 
1982-83 under the proposed New Democratic Party government budget was $19.567 million; that’s 
what we were proposing for capital funding in 1982-83. In 1982-83 under your government, DNS was 
cut back to 4.313 million; and education, for the rest of the province, was maintained at 13.112 million. 
So there was a cut-back from 19.567 million to 17.42 million. 
 
And what we find today in the ‘83-84 budget is there’s all lumped together, and you have cut back still 
further to $13.640 million. And what I am asking the minister: how can he justify having a cut from the 
1982-83 NDP government budget of 19.5 all the way down to 13.6? You have cut it back from your 
‘82-83, and you cut it back further in ‘83-84. If you have a commitment to education, why are you 
cutting the capital grants? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in regard to capital construction, maybe this indicates as 
quickly as anything would indicate what happens with school construction. It doesn’t seem to have 
rhyme or reason, or at least it didn’t have over the period of the last few years. It’s up and down and here 
and all over the place, and the only way that I can explain this sudden escalation here it that it was an 
election year. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, why don’t you give us the advantage of your insight, Mr. Minister, and indicate 
why you have cut back from ‘82-83 from 17 million to 13 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — You know, we could get into a lot of games here right now in  



 
April 25, 1983 

 
1421 

throwing things back and forth, but how come then, I could say to you, how come you cut back from 
‘76-77 to ‘78-79? Look at the extent of the graph there on the decline. Why did you do that? You know, 
it’s . . . 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That’s precisely the point. You have stood up here in your commitment to education 
and you have slashed the capital grants for education. What I would like to know is why you cut it back 
from 17.42 to 13.64. Obviously you don’t intend to support education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Chairman, we intend to support education. First of all, the $17 million that 
was earmarked for capital construction by the previous government was done during the time of an 
election year, and they picked out spots and places – whatever it was – picked out all the places they 
could throughout the province to do the building. And this year we have picked those areas which are 
considered to be emergency areas, and we have put the others on hold, because it’s a time of economic 
restraint, and responsible management dictates that that is what we should be doing. That’s the only 
answer I can give you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Tory cuts are called efficiency. Anybody else’s cuts is inefficiency. I want to say, Mr. 
Minister, that the educational system is not very pleased with the amount of the drastic cut in the amount 
of the capital budget, from 17.42 in your first budget to 13.64. And that’s a very substantial one. 
 
And I would like, if the minister could provide us, a breakdown of all of the various capital expenditures 
which you are proposing in the year under review, ‘83-84, indicating a breakdown of the amount 
designated for each of the particular projects. Could you provide that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Yes, we’ll be pleased to provide that information. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’ve heard that song before, and I’d just like . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Yeah, I 
know. I’d like to have it as soon as possible because we have had a lot of problems getting the 
information from this government. And in respect . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . We have, in respect to 
any notice of motion that they put on or any question, and in respect to the Estimates. So I’d appreciate 
it if the minister would provide that as soon as possible. 
 
I want to turn to another peripheral issue, and that is the noon hour supervision. I want to say that there 
are a large number of school divisions that have written to you, Mr. Minister, have written to me, and 
are concerned in respect, or are requesting, and have requested, that you review The Education Act for 
the purposes of allowing the question of noon hour supervision in, to be a negotiable item in respect to 
negotiations with the teachers. As the minister will be aware there was a court case, I believe, in Moose 
Jaw and Tisdale, if I’m not mistaken. I just would like to know whether the minister can comment as to 
the direction that he and his department are proposing to go in respect to the question and the 
controversy over noon hour supervision. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Chairman, what we are doing is that we’re proposing to maintain the same 
legislation that was in place when the previous government was in power. It is an issue that is to be 
bargained locally, and that’s what we are maintaining. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — The other question, Mr. Minister, is in respect to the destruction of SaskMedia by this 
government and the complete phasing out of it. I would like to ask  



 
April 25, 1983 
 

 
1422 

you: can you guarantee to the teachers of this province that you will be providing the same educational 
support that was done by SaskMedia before, and which I say many teachers in this province supported? 
And without consultation of any of the teachers of this province, and many of the school boards which 
endorsed the SaskMedia, this government ruthlessly, without consultation, destroyed it. And what I want 
to ask the minister: can he stand up here and give a guarantee that the so-called private-sector section are 
going to be providing the same type of services as was provided by SaskMedia and which was 
appreciated by the educational system in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I can assure the hon. member that we will be guaranteeing 
that all those services that were there before for education will continue to be there. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I would like the minister then, that he says ‘all the services which were there before,’ 
would he outline all of the services which he is including, indicate to us a detailed list of all of those 
services which he intends to provide? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Chairman, those services would include a film and tape library of educational 
programs; this is a service that’s offered free of charge to all Saskatchewan groups and residents. In 
addition, a tape duplication service for clients who wish to have their own copies of any of the programs 
in the library; also, a complete audio-visual production house, including an editing suite, studio, mobiles 
and operators, for the production of educational programs. The only significant changes as far as the 
educational sector is concerned is that there will no longer be producers and graphic artists on staff. The 
private sector producers and artists will be invited to produce all of the programs and the graphics for 
those programs in the future. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to turn to the issue of property tax. And as the minister will be aware, the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities have passed a resolution indicating their support for 
the proposal that the property tax for support of education be essentially removed. I would like to 
indicate whether the minister has a position on this, and whether he has in fact had any discussions with 
that large body representing elected officials all across Saskatchewan in respect to their approval of the 
resolution supporting the removal of property tax. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Well, Mr. Chairman, our position has been that we’re in favour of local autonomy, 
and that means that if we are that it goes without saying that those who have local autonomy must have 
some degree of fiscal responsibility. And so, in keeping with that principle, we have upheld the position 
that the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association has wanted us to uphold, or ahs favoured, I should 
say, and that is that the school division should have the opportunity of collecting money from the 
property tax. To complete the question, I suppose you were asking about whether I’d me with – would 
you mean by that SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities)? I have met with SUMA; I have not met to this date with SARM. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Is it the contention of the minister, or I understand his position, that adopting the 
position of SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) supporting the removal of 
property taxes as a funding mechanism for education as it is now, are you indicating that that, in fact, 
would of necessity remove the local autonomy of the local boards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Yes, I believe that there would be danger of that taking place. They  



 
April 25, 1983 

 
1423 

do need a tax source is the position that we have at the present time, and having said that, perhaps it’s 
time that we took a look at the whole method of funding for education which would involve input from 
all of the people who end up paying for the cost of education. So it doesn’t rule out the possibility that a 
change could occur, or should occur, in the next year or five years. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Shortly after you assumed office, one of the first actions that you took, and that was the 
elimination of the ward system for the schools. At that time you indicated to me that you would, while 
you acted I think in haste and destroyed what I think would have been a more democratic system, you 
did indicate that you had not entirely closed the door to the concept of a ward system. I would like to ask 
the minister if he could update us as to whether he has explore any further the possibility of having at 
least ward systems in the large cities. And I want to say that I have received letters from the president of 
the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, and other groups in Saskatoon, which indicated that it was 
really a very, very difficult time that the electorate had in voting in their school board because of the 
large number of individuals that are on a given ballot. And, obviously, that’s what the previous 
government was attempting to resolve. I think we had resolved it in respect to the ward system being 
introduced to the municipalities, of the city election of councillors, and I guess I ask the minister: is he 
still following the directions of the Saskatchewan trustees association, or is he openly reviewing the 
possibility of a ward system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in all honesty, no. For one thing, I suppose, I haven’t taken 
the time to start a review, personally, on my own, but also I would say this: that I haven’t received 
pressure from people, from groups or individuals, since that time, to do so. Yes, I am open to something 
that would be an improvement, but I felt rather than that we had acted in haste, as you had indicated, that 
the previous government had acted in haste. And this is what we were told, particularly by the school 
boards concerned, and that was the reason that we rescinded that legislation at that time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, it’s heart-warming to find that the minister apparently will only look at matters 
which are raised to his attention by a particular group, because that’s apparently what he says. But I 
expect that the ward system will have to obviously await the return of the election of a new government 
in three year’s time. 
 
I want to ask the minister if he could indicate whether the number of possible school closures for the 
coming year . . . Are there any intended closures of schools? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Well, our list indicates that there are nine pending. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Could the minister provide me with information – it doesn’t have to be now – as to the 
particular schools that are pending closing? 
 
I want to . . . Mr. Minister, we’ve got the member from Moosomin talking from his seat again. No one 
listens to him – the windmill. 
 
In respect to your personal staff, have you added any additions to your personal staff? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Chairman, I assume that means in the minister’s office? No, not since the 
previous estimates. 



 
April 25, 1983 
 

 
1424 

Mr. Koskie: — You have a Bill Barry as a special assistant and the last information was that he was 
paid, I believe, $50,000 a year. Has there been any increase in Mr. Barry’s salary since you provided the 
information before, and is $50,000 correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Yes, I think it’s continuing education that he’s assigned to, but there hasn’t been 
an increase in his salary, no. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Okay. You have also a Ron Mitchell which is a special assistant. Could you indicate the 
salary of Ron Mitchell? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, his salary is $50,000. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And you have a Marilyn Rice, EA, constituency. We would be pleased to know the 
salary of your EA doing your constituency work. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Her salary, Mr. Chairman, is $35,000. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to, Mr. Minister, turn to a number of items, and I think we can just run through 
them faster rather than going from item to item. But there’s a number of them that I am concerned with, 
and in the area of policy planning and special projects and program development. I am particularly 
concerned, Mr. Minister, that there certainly appears to be some de-emphasis in respect to the policy 
planning and program development. If I do an analysis of the . . . I know there has been a split there and 
a new subdivision, program development, I believe, but checking the figures it would appear that the 
overall expenditure has gone down somewhat, and I was just wondering whether you could explain the 
basic reason for the decrease. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the decrease has been . . . has not been great. WE did have a 
fairly heavy expenditure during the past year because of the work of the curriculum review committee, 
and although that work is still to be continued the expenditures will not be as heavy as they have been 
for this past year. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Also, in respect to consultative services, Mr. Minister, I note that there is a decrease in 
the size of the staff and a substantial decrease in the amount of funding. It seems to me that if you are 
cutting back on the consultative services that there’s going to be felt throughout the educational system, 
but I’d like you to explain the major decrease in both staff and funding. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Chairman, this is an internal transfer that has taken place from the 
consultative division to the development division. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Similarly, in special education, although you’re maintaining the same size of staff, I 
note that the total amount being spent has been decreased. I wonder, what are you trying to achieve by 
cutting other expenses, and what will be the impact in respect to those? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there is a slight reduction in administration. The other factor 
is that there is one fewer students attending Brantford, Ontario. That accounts for the reduction in that 
area. 
 
As far as special education is concerned, we have substantially increased it as far as grants are 
concerned. 



 
April 25, 1983 

 
1425 

Mr. Koskie: — The question of provincial superintendents came up previously. I would like to know 
the status in respect to Humboldt Rural School Division where there were complaints in respect to the 
heavy-handedness of the officials in the department, and also the Sturgis School Division, where they 
were less than impressed, Mr. Minister, with the way in which the department and presumably through 
your instructions, were in fact almost literally directing that there be a change from a provincial 
superintendent to a local director of education. Can you give me the status in respect to those particular 
units, because they have been in contact with me and I want to know whether they have been forces to 
comply or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all, there wasn’t heavy-handedness, as has been 
inferred by the hon. member. However, in regard to the Humboldt rural division, they have been notified 
that if they choose to use a provincially hired superintendent, they’re free to do so, and I just assume that 
they are going to. As far as Sturgis is concerned, they have also been informed of that fact, but there is 
still a committee that is negotiating with regard to . . . They still haven’t made up their mind one way or 
the other in Sturgis. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could send to me a complete list 
of all the grants to various schools in the province, separate and public, with the increases or decreases. I 
don’t want that today, but if you would give me an assurance that you will send that to me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Yes, I can assure the member from Shaunavon that that will be forthcoming. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — As well, do you have any information compiled on the numbers of schools that 
would see a decrease and the number that would see an increase at this time, that you could give me off 
the top of your head? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Not off the top of my head, but I could provide you with that information when I 
give you the detail that you were asking for. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me how many schools in Regina at the present time – I 
understand that there are four that are closing at the present time – where there may be negotiations 
going on with the department as to whether or not they will close? Is four the number that there are 
closing at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, that’s right. There are four, but they are not negotiating with 
the department at the present time. That is purely a local matter, and we leave it to the school boards 
involved. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I understand that there was a petition taken up in the Hillsdale area, and the reason 
that I’m aware of that is because, being a constituent of yours from time to time, I know that there were 
people knocking on my door and apparently they were going to present you with a petition. I wonder if 
you did receive a petition, and if in fact you have responded to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I did receive a petition. I did receive a request, first of all, to 
meet with the committee that was organizing the petition, and I did do that, following which time they 
presented a petition to me and asked for a reply, and I did give a reply to them, yes. 



 
April 25, 1983 
 

 
1426 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I think that what we are seeing in the province is a large number of 
school boards – and you will of course come back and say that it’s a local responsibility and they will 
decide which schools they close and which teachers are laid off, but I think ultimately the responsibility 
of education lies with the Department of Education and the grant formula that you have. And here again, 
if you are saying the grant formula is the same that we used, it seems that there are problems that are 
arising now with the school closures and staff lay-offs that weren’t around when we were in 
government. 
 
And if the formula is not working in the best interest of the school units and the schools, then I would 
recommend that you very quickly set in place another structure that will see the abatement of closures 
and staff lay-offs, in particular in rural schools. I know a number of K to 12 schools which are relatively 
small schools, and I suppose you can use places like Admiral, Saskatchewan, where they are facing 
very, very tough decisions as to whether or not to lay off staff, or cut programs. And I think either way 
you look at I the student in those rural schools, when they graduate, if in fact they do, and come to the 
universities, face a very difficult time. 
 
And I would encourage you to use the powers that you have to see that the proper funding will come 
into place in the next budget cycle, which I don’t think was there this time. Many of them may be able to 
survive one devastation like that, but another one . . . I think we will see a large number of staff laid off 
and a large number of small schools closed in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think the very basis of many of those communities is the school. If you allow them to close, and if 
you allow staff to be cut, you start the process of the death of many communities. And I would 
encourage you to look very closely at getting the funding that those rural communities need, that those 
rural schools need. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the member from Shaunavon for his 
advice, and I concur with him completely. It isn’t a thing that has just happened this particular year. It 
has been a thing that has been happening and escalating. And I would agree with him that I think it’s 
something that’s going to continue to escalate as far as a real problem and a real concern is concerned. 
And as a matter of fact, what we have been doing over the past three to four months is discussing this 
with different groups who have vested interests in this. And, as a matter of fact, I’ve asked my deputy, 
Mr. Ray Clayton, to formally to get in touch with the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association and 
we’re going to be sitting down and trying to, not overhaul necessarily, but review the foundation grant 
structure and the different kinds of factors that have been built into it. Because I agree with you that 
sometimes things just . . . Circumstances change, conditions change, which warrant a review of 
something that’s as important as our equalization formula is. So, we certainly do plan on going through 
– not just going through that exercise, but perhaps if there are ways that we can improve and try to do 
the maximum amount of good for the maximum number of children. 
 
As far as the dealing with it specifically this year is concerned, it’s part and parcel of the small schools 
factors, and we have increased that by something like 47 per cent, as I recall, for this particular year. But 
it’s still a problem and we’re still going to be looking at it in the context of what you have said. 



 
April 25, 1983 

 
1427 

Mr. Koskie: — In respect to the superintendents item – item 11 for your convenience – there’s a 
sizeable decrease in the number of personal services, from 44.3 to 31.3. And could you advise me of the 
reason for the rather substantial decrease there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Chairman, as an explanation, four of the superintendent positions have gone 
locally employed, and one small and private school superintendent and one other redundant position has 
been deleted. And that’s the explanation for the decline in that amount. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, there’s a decline from 31.3 to 44.3. I don’t think that . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Yes, from 44.3 to 31.3. I don’t think that you explained the full deletion of positions in respect to it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Chairman, we had expected that it was probable that all the superintendents, 
or the divisions, would opt for locally employed superintendents, and so we took all the superintendent 
positions out of this particular subvote with the exception of two that deal with small schools and private 
schools. And so we budgeted this money for these superintendent positions in the grants formula, and so 
as it becomes clear exactly how many of these will opt for continuing provincial superintendents we will 
then transfer those moneys into the superintendent subvote. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, how many did you calculate or estimate would in fact be opting for a director 
from the provincial superintendency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we had initially budgeted for all of them opting to go locally 
employed, but it looks as though there are going to be approximately six of them who will go locally 
employed. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — If all were to go, as you budgeted for, how many would that be? I guess that’s the 
question I’m asking. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — That would be 12. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In respect to the educational media services, a new subvote. I note that you have 
person-years, 33 there, Mr. Minister. And what I ask is: first of all, were any of these people that were 
employed, formerly employed by SaskMedia . . . of those 33? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, they all were. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You’re saying all 33 of them, Mr. Minister? Okay, fine. 
 
In respect to item 17 – and we’re winding down here – to provide a net expenditure recovery from the 
Saskatchewan Book Bureau revolving fund (statutory), and this is a new innovation by the government 
opposite. As the Minister of Finance said, all accountability would be available and that we should, in 
the particular estimates, if we wish, to get a full disclosure of the nature of the revolving fund. And so 
what I am asking you is: can you give me the details and the breakdown of the purpose of that revolving 
fund in vote 17? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Chairman, if I could ask the hon. member: did you mean for me to send it to 
you, or to give it to you right now? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — If you have it and can send it to me, that’s fine, Mr. Minister. 



 
April 25, 1983 
 

 
1428 

Hon. Mr. Currie: — I’d be pleased to do that. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — One other item that I mentioned just a short time ago . . . When we went through these 
Estimates, it seems that one almost overlaps the next estimates with this government. But in respect to 
the correspondence school, there was some significant increases in the fee schedule, and you indicated at 
that time it was an adjustment because they hadn’t been increased sine ’57 or thereabouts. What I’m 
asking you: have you made any further adjustments so that the individual will be . . . so that you’ll be 
passing on further of the costs to the individual taking correspondence courses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — No, Mr. Chairman, we haven’t made any further adjustments. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — The grants to educational agencies and organizations . . . Here again I would 
appreciated if you would send me a copy of the breakdown of the particular grants to the educational 
agencies and organizations if you don’t have that at the present time. Will you do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Yes, I will do that. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — There’s only one other item that I want to raise, a concern which I have previously, and 
that is in respect to the grants to the schools. As I indicated, your grants that you’re proposing to schools 
this year is down considerably from about 17 million last year. I want to say that that is of some 
considerable concern to the education community, that this government deems fit to reduce its 
commitment to providing an upgrading facilities in education. 
 
I think what I want to say in closing, Mr. Minister, is that we have gone through the Estimates, a short 
time ago in January-February, and many of the questions I have received answers from. I doubt if they 
have changed in respect to school population and the number of teachers. I want to indicate that I have 
received many of the answers from you, and for that I thank you. It’s somewhat unlike the Premier, who 
has not provided that information. So I think I want to thank you and your officials, and I think I have no 
further questions. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Just a couple of brief questions, Mr. Minister. Is there any plans for the expansion of the 
school at Cumberland House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Chairman, we have no specific plans at this moment, but our officials are up 
there at the present time, today, and they’re meeting with regard to the overall needs in that particular 
area. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, I understand as well that there is a joint effort being made to construct a 
school at Wollaston Lake post. Could the minister provide to me some information as to what input the 
province will have in this respect in terms of funding and in terms of employment of people in the area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Chairman, we are aware of the needs in Wollaston and the problem at the 
present time is that the federal government hasn’t firmed up its decision and it’s negotiated between the 
federal government and us. But they’re the main player in regard to what happens at Wollaston. So it 
largely depends upon their decision-making. 



 
April 25, 1983 

 
1429 

Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, in terms of that negotiation between the feds and the construction of that 
school, is the community of Pelican Narrows involved in some way with respect to the educational 
facility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, Pelican Narrows is in the same category as Wollaston at the 
present time. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you very much. I have no further questions. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 14 

 
Mr. Yew: — Just a brief question here, Mr. Minister. In terms of the current dispute between the 
Northern Lights School Division and the federal government, is this portion in any way to be used to 
cover the interim expenses that are incurred by the school board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — No, this is not to be used for that purpose. This is operating. This is not to be used 
for that purpose. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you very much. 
 
Item 14 agreed to. 
 
Items 15 to 22 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 8 agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:03 p.m. 
 
 


	ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
	WELCOME TO STUDENTS
	INTRODUCTION OF GUEST
	QUESTIONS
	Nuclear Arms Race Protest Rallies
	Mr. Yew: — I want to raise a supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I want to find out what date – time and date of the signing of that agreement.
	Hon. Mr. Lane: — The agreement, I believe, was . . . Oh, I can’t find it. I’ve got it under the staple. It would be 1954. I do have, however, an addendum to the agreement signed in 1981 by the then minister of intergovernmental affairs, Mr. Roy Romano...
	Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!

	ANNOUNCEMENTS
	ORDERS OF THE DAY
	Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 8
	Item 14

