






















































Hansard: April 07, 1983


607 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 7, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Communication 
 
Assistant Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the standing committee on communication, presents 
the fourth report of the said committee, which is as follows: 
 

Your committee has considered the reference of the Assembly of March 2, 1983, namely, the 
recommendations of the public documents committee under The Archives Act, contained in the 
retention and disposal schedules comprising sessional paper number 83 of the first session of the 
20th legislature. Your committee recommends to the Assembly that the recommendations of the 
public documents committee on schedule numbers 229 to 235 be accepted as amended. 
 
Your committee has also considered the matter of television in legislative committees, and has 
referred this matter to each respective caucus for further consideration. 
 
Your committee has also reviewed the still photos taken by the news media in the legislative 
Chamber for the trial period during the address and reply and budget debates of the current 
session. Your committee recommends that the taking of still photos by the news media in the 
Chamber be permitted on an ongoing basis; that the photos be taken only of members on their 
feet speaking; and that the photos be taken without the use of flashes, and only from the press 
gallery location. 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the Assembly, I move, seconded by the hon. 
member for Shaunavon: 
 

That consideration of the fourth report of the standing committee on communications be taken up 
later this day. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s indeed a pleasure and an honour to introduce to you and through 
you to the Assembly, a group of 18 young people from the Cadillac CGIT. These young people are 
made up of individuals from the communities of Cadillac and Admiral, and they have taken time out of 
their holidays to arrange a trip to the Assembly to come and listen to the debate that goes on here today. 
They are accompanied by Bev and Harold Gray as well as Bert and Faye Jordan, and Lorraine Oliver. 
And I would like all members to join with me in welcoming them here today, and I  



 
April 7, 1983 
 

 
608 

look forward to meeting with them at 3 o’clock for pictures and drinks. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like you and all members of the Assembly to join 
with me in welcoming the junior Canadian curling champions for 1983 who are with us in the Speaker’s 
gallery. All four members of the team are from the community of Kronau, and I would to introduce to 
the Assembly the individual members of the championship team. Lead is Kelly Vollman, a grade 11 
student from Greenall High School in Balgonie. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Steven Leippi is grade 11 at Greenall in Balgonie, from Kronau. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The third is Danny Ferner, first year arts student at the University of Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And the skip is Jamie Schneider, grade 12 student, Greenall High School. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — With the team members is the coach of the team, Mike Schneider, Jamie’s father, 
from Kronau. Mike, stand up. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’d like to, if I may, personally acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, a, a silent member of the 
team, and that is Mike’s wife, Lorraine, and Jamie’s mother. Her health does not permit her to join with 
the team today, but I’d just like to acknowledge her contribution, but in supporting the team and curling 
in Kronau over the years, and, and her support for the community of Kronau and the surrounding areas. 
It’s been appreciated by many, many people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I and the Premier will be meeting with the team members for pictures right after the 
session, and then I’ll be meeting with them for drinks shortly thereafter. Again, I would like to 
congratulate the team, the community of Kronau, and Mike for all the work done. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would just, very briefly, like to add the 
congratulations of the opposition to what was said by the member from Qu’Appelle. We are equally 
proud of your achievements. I don’t know that Saskatchewan has a provincial sport, but if we did, it 
might well be curling. And to have excelled in Saskatchewan’s primary sport is something to be very 
proud of. 
 
I’m sure your communities . . . I’m sure your families are proud of you, I’m sure your  



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
609 

communities are proud of you, and I can tell you that all Saskatchewan people share that sense of pride. 
Congratulations. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you, and through you, to the members of 
the Legislative Assembly, Brent Allin and his father Keith from Weyburn, sitting, seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery. Brent is a student at the Weyburn Comprehensive High School, and he has a very 
specific interest in electronic technology and made the trip here today to the legislature to view 
especially the TV facilities here as part of the electronic Hansard, and as well they’ve had a tour of the 
legislature itself. 
 
Brent has distinguished himself in the city of Weyburn and the community as well. Whenever groups, 
associations or clubs need a person to provide some sound technology, Brent has always been there to 
unselfishly give his assistance, and in fact, was a key person in Weyburn’s first ever TV communithon 
to raise funds for the United Way. So very much he has distinguished himself in Weyburn, and he is 
indeed a junior citizen of which we are very proud. I will be meeting with Brent and his father after 
question period today in the rotunda to take with them and have refreshments, and I would just ask all 
members of the legislature to join with me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Funding for Education 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to direct a question to the Minister of Education. In 
recent days, Mr. Minister, the many people in Saskatchewan are in fact indicating that the amount of 
funding for education is insufficient. I have here a concern expressed by a member of the public school 
board in Regina. I want to read to you a portion of that: 
 

The public school property taxes in Regina will have to be increased by more than the provincial 
government’s anti-inflation guidelines if present programs are to be maintained, board chairman 
John Beke indicated. As things now stand, a 7 per cent mill rate increase would leave school 
boards 2 million to 2.5 million in the hole for its 1983 operation. 

 
I ask the minister, in view of the statement expressed by the chairman of the board and others in 
Saskatchewan, will you now admit that your operating grants to Saskatchewan school boards this year 
are, in fact, inadequate, and that they will lead to a tax shift or decrease in programs or deficit budgeting 
at the local level? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Speaker, in reply to the hon. member from the Quill Lakes . . . He is saying 
something that I have heard ever since the time that I was involved in education, which was a period of 
about 35 years. But that’s an eternal thing that there is underfunding in education, particularly . . . And I 
think I left the scene even administratively (of education), just about one year ago, and the hue and cry 
out there, for the past four, five, six, seven years, was underfunding in education and the decreasing 
proportion of money allocated by the provincial government to the local  



 
April 7, 1983 
 

 
610 

boards. 
 
We have, I suppose I would have to admit, fallen into the trap, into the pattern set by the previous 
government, and have virtually imitated what they have done. But, but as far as the funding, as far as the 
operating funding is concerned . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The hon. member, as I recall, was 
minister of education — the member from Regina Centre — and was partly responsible for continuing 
education. However, I think that really what the hon. member is, is actually zeroing in on is not the 
amount of funding per se; what he is really zeroing in on is the, the grant system that is in existence for 
operating costs for schools in this province. And that grant system has been in existence for a large 
number of years. And that grant system is called ‘the foundation grants formula,’ and it’s based upon . . . 
It’s simply this, that it’s based upon the principle of equalization, which means, which means in effect 
that what we’re trying to accomplish is to give equal opportunity for all students in the province of 
Saskatchewan to go to schools and get the same kind of education, in this province. Now . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — There . . . I would add that there are a number of, there are a number of variables 
or factors involved in this, in this formula. One of these is debt retirement. That’s the amount of money 
that a school board has to still pay off. Another of these is the overall revenue that the board obtains. 
Another is the assessment. Another is the enrolment factor. Then you can add to that such things as 
sparsity, such, such things as, as, as small schools enrolment, declining enrolments, and, and, and, just to 
name a few. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Do you remember the question, Gordon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — The answer. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr., Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there’s one attribute that the hon. member from 
the Quill Lakes does not possess and that is the attribute of patience. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — However, having said that, in, in the case that you’re referring to, there are a 
number of factors that I think our, our officials are prepared to discuss with that particular school board 
which have caused, which have caused a picture to be presented that there’s an unfairness there. One of 
these is, one of these is the fact that, in that particular situation, the enrolment is down. Another is the 
fact that, that there is an equalized assessment basis, up, in that, for that particular school division for, 
for, by $5.3 million. Another is that there was an overstatement in 1982’s budget — in other words, an 
overpayment upon which the base was, was established for the 1983 revenues. And, another is the, is the 
whole concept of secondments, which they can take advantage of, and that would take another five or 
six minutes, and I don’t think that’s necessary to, to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister. I want to indicate to the minister that this is 
a very serious concern to the people of Saskatchewan, and I’d like it  



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
611 

to be addressed in that light. I want to read, again, to the minister here, an article say: 
 

Loss of Teaching Jobs Seen: The provincial budget raises serious concerns about the loss of 
teaching jobs and pupil services, especially in rural areas, Mel Lofstrom, the general secretary of 
the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation indicated. (It went on to say:) The level of the provincial 
grants announced last week will force school boards to reduce the number of specialists they 
employ and either cut existing programs or staff. 
 

I want to ask the minister: are you prepared, with your miserable funding towards education, to allow 
the standard of education in Saskatchewan to deteriorate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not, I’m not sure that I was hearing right. Did you mention the 
name Mel Lofstrom? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Well, I happened to be in Saskatoon yesterday speaking to the Easter council for 
the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, and, and I was, I met, but I met with the executive secretary of 
the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, Mr. Mel Lofstrom. We, we discussed many things, but he did, 
he did not indicate, he did not indicate a message of that nature to me. Now it seems very peculiar that 
you would get that kind of a reading, and I’m sitting with him. I’m the Minister of Education, you’re in 
opposition, he’s sitting . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . I would be pleased to read it, yes. But if, if he 
was that concerned about it, why didn’t he take that up with the Minister of Education, rather than the 
member of the opposition? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — I’ve, I’ve, I’ve tried to get this through before. In one breath you’re saying, ‘Don’t 
have a deficit budget.’ In the next breath you’re saying, ‘How come you’re not spending more money?’ 
You know, I’ll tell you what we’re doing in Education. We’re trying to establish some sort of a plan, 
some sort of a plan, short-term and long-term, which looks, looks after the real basic needs of the people 
of this province in terms of growth and development, training, education. That’s what we’re trying to do. 
At the same time, we recognize that there is a shortage of funding at the present time, or at least we have 
to be most responsible about the, the use of the funding that we do have available, keeping in mind all 
aspects of government and their needs. And so, in keeping with that basic philosophy, I don’t think that 
we’re going to sell education short, nor do the people out thee basically really feel that at all. As a matter 
of fact, I think that education will continue to prosper in this province, not just from K to 12 but in areas 
where it was in great need of an additional thrust. And I think that, by and large, if you take a look at the 
overall spending in education that, that this government is presenting, has presented in this budget, you 
will see that it has exceeded the guideline rather than being below it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Minister of Education, and I listened to 
his first answer in response to the hon. member for Quill Lakes, raising  



 
April 7, 1983 
 

 
612 

an issue with respect to the Regina Public School Board, and I heard his answer dealing with the sparsity 
factor and small school enrolments and other aspects of the formula which presumably he was relating 
to the Regina Public School Board. 
 
I, I want now to turn to the Regina Separate School Board, and, and ask him whether or not, in his 
opinion, the, the Regina Separate School Board can maintain the level of its educational offerings 
without a substantial increase in mill rates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is: yes, I do. And I . . . I apologize, Mr. Speaker. I 
thought it was the Regina Separate School Board’s figures and factors that the hon. member from Quill 
Lakes was making reference to. And, and, and those, those were the, the factors that I had mentioned 
that had caused it to appear as though the Regina Separate School Board was not getting, in effect, a 7 
per cent increase. It’s because of those other factors that I had just previously mentioned. Do you want 
me to repeat those? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr., Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the Minister of Education. The answer 
(as I understood it), was in answer to my question: no, you do not think a substantial increase in the mill 
rate will be necessary in order to maintain the educational offering. I think that’s what you said. My 
supplementary then is this: if in fact there is a substantial increase in the, in the mill rate by the Regina 
Separate School Board, do you attribute that to, to mismanagement on the part of that board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize for the Hon. Leader of the Opposition. I didn’t, I didn’t 
think that he, that he would ask a question of that nature, of that calibre. 
 
As far as the mill rate is concerned, that’s, that’s entirely a local fee. It’s, it’s, it . . . That’s a decision 
that is made by the school board and, and city council, but if you’re talking about a substantial increase 
in the mill rate, if I remember correctly, last year the mill rate increased higher than it had at any other 
year in the province’s history (if I’m not mistaken), and the year prior to that was a very, very 
substantial increase in the mill rate. I don’t expect that the mill rate will, will have to increase as 
substantially as it has under the previous government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. . . . May I ask the minister whether or not it is the plans of his government 
to institute substantial increases in the property improvement grant to offset mill rate increases, as was 
the case under the previous government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Speaker, I, I don’t think that I’m able to answer that question because I don’t 
think that I would have the . . . That’s, that’s not in my area of jurisdiction, quite frankly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr., Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question to the minister. Do I understand 
from that that the Minister of Education has not informed himself as to whether the budget contains any 
increases in property improvement grants? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Well, maybe, maybe that is so. Maybe that is so, yes. But I just don’t feel that I’m 
capable of answering that question. I think I’m . . . I think I would answer questions relative to education 
per se. 
 

La Loche School 
 



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
613 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my question to the Minister of Education. I 
noticed in, in your answer here, you talked about individuals being patient. And I want to say this to the 
Minister of Education, that there are several hundred students in La Loche who have been very patient 
for getting close to two years now since their school burned down, since the school burned down in La 
Loche. Could you indicate to this House, Mr. Minister, whether or not that school will be ready for 
students in September, this, for the fall term? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Speaker, as a matter of fact I did make a trip up the western part of the 
province, and the north—western part of the province, and one of the places that I did visit was La 
Loche, one of about five of the communities up there. Another was Green Lake. And I’m very, very 
pleased to mention to, to, to the hon. member that, that our facilities division, from the Department of 
Education, have decided to build an addition to the school in La Loche because of the needs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — This, this, this, this, this as I recall will amount to $4.4 million. And also, because 
of the need that existed and was very apparent when we visited Green Lake, something . . . an addition 
to their school, something in the neighbourhood of $3.3 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Supplementary, Mr., Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Education. The question that I 
asked you, and I didn’t hear the answer, was: will that school, the new school, be open for the fall 
session in September? And I want to also say that plans were under way to have that school constructed 
last summer for last fall. You guys, you guys have studied the situation, and in simple, simple language, 
will that school be open for the students in La Loche in September? 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Speaker, I, it just . . . I would, I would assume that it is just virtually 
impossible for the time frame that you’re asking for. It’s just not realistic to expect that a school could 
be approved as of now and be constructed and ready for occupancy by September of the same year. But 
it, it, it could be hat maybe there is some magic way that they have of constructing schools that I am not 
aware of that they, that they could have it ready. So I’m not going to guarantee that that isn’t going to be 
ready. We will get it ready as soon as it possibly can be ready. 
 
As far as the plans, I’m not sure whether you inferred that there were plans on the part of the previous 
government to have a school planned from last year that were in, that, that were in the offing. Because I 
have heard of none of those nor did my officials inform me of any plans. We went up there to 
investigate the situation to see what the reality of the situation was and, and we decided that there was 
need for that school and that’s what’s happening. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — We sure know what the priorities are with that government. Mr. Speaker, I direct 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — And it most certainly isn’t with the students of this province in  



 
April 7, 1983 
 

 
614 

northern Saskatchewan. 
 

Saskatchewan Forest Products 
 

Mr. Thompson: — I direct my question to the minister in charge of Sask Forest Products. Could the 
minister inform this Assembly how many employees, both permanent and part-time, that have been 
dismissed by the Saskatchewan Forest Products since Mr. Lloyd took over management of this public 
crown corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t tell you for sure but I’ll take notice and bring the 
information back for the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the same minister. Could you also indicate to this 
House how many personnel that you plan to lay off in the Big River sawmill in the next month? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t tell you. I’ll take notice and bring it back to the hon. 
member. 
 

Gas and Oil Exploration in Grasslands Park 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the, to the minister in charge of the grasslands park 
operation. I would if he could, could tell the Assembly and the people of south—west Saskatchewan and 
the many other interested people whether or not there is money available in his budget for the gas and 
oil exploration in the grasslands park in this coming year and in fact this coming winter. Can he inform 
the people of Val Marie and Killdeer area whether or not that money will be available? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr., Mr. Speaker, first of all there obviously isn’t money available, in the, 
in the, in this department for gas and oil exploration. That’s number one. Number two, that’s been, it’s 
been announced and I have announced to the people there and to the people of the province that the 
priorities, the spending priorities of the province are, are so many of the things that you have raised 
although you don’t seem to be raising them in question period. But you have raised them elsewhere it 
seems: things like job creation; things like putting students to work in the summer time; things like the 
problems my colleague, Mrs. Smith, deals with in Social Services. Those are the priorities. 
 
As I told the hon. member once before, or your colleague from Assiniboia—Gravelbourg, the situation 
or the eventuality of, of the area around Val Marie going under cement and concrete within the next two 
years is rather remote. And, but we still are well within the time frame that was as per the agreement of 
June of 1981, and that park will be going ahead. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the minister. Am I to be led to believe that the 
exploration of oil and gas in the grasslands park area would not lead to job creation from his previous 
answer? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what the member may be led to believe, because 
you’re never sure of how he interprets what you say, so I don’t think it merits an answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
615 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, new question to the minister. I would like to ask of him whether or 
not he will reconsider in light of the fact that the federal government will be looking at the possibility of 
withdrawing funding for the exploration which is a joint project between the provincial and federal 
government, as I understand it, with this announcement today that the minister is not ready to put the 
money in. Will he look further at the possibility of getting funding arrangements made, so that we do not 
lose the federal money that would have flowed into that part of the province and created a good number 
of jobs? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, what I have said in reply to the hon. member today is not a new 
announcement. It’s the same position we’ve had for some time, and as for the, as for the position of the 
federal government in terms of them withdrawing funding . . . their, their portion of funding, we have no 
indication of that being the case. In fact we have just the opposite. They, they know that the program is a 
7—year program, as it was laid out in June of 1981. We’re well within the terms of that agreement that 
was signed by your administration with the present federal government, and we have no indication that 
there’s any change in their attitude toward, toward the park and towards the oil and gas exploration. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a final supplementary. Is the minister, in saying that there’s no 
hold—back or withdrawal of federal moneys, that the federal government will be going ahead with gas 
exploration this summer, that he has indicated? If they are not holding back, and are in fact spending, are 
you then announcing that the federal government will be going ahead with the gas exploration and 
creating jobs where you’re backing out? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, you will now understand what I meant in my previous answer, one 
prior. The federal government, as the hon. member well knows, or well should know, will not be going 
ahead with oil and gas exploration on their own. As he said earlier in this same question period, it’s a 
joint-funded and a program which will be carried out by the provincial government. We’re well within 
the terms of the agreement, as I have said before, and we have no, we have no indication whatever that 
the federal government has changed their position with regard to the park. 
 

Results of European Trip 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. The question to the minister of industry and commerce, the . . . I may 
say by way of background, the House Leader has been asking us to ask him about Bulgaria. We are 
getting around to asking the minister about his European trip, and eventually we’ll get to your successes. 
 
My question to the minister of industry and commerce. Last fall you and a number of your officials 
visited Europe on a 17-day trip. Immediately following that trip you told reporters that at least two 
European companies had decided to open up shop in Saskatchewan as a direct result of your visit. 
Would the minister please name those two European companies, where they decided to locate, and when 
they will be under way in, in their Saskatchewan location, and how many jobs there’ll be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Mr. Speaker, announcements may be made in due course. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think any of us would want to,  



 
April 7, 1983 
 

 
616 

want to recall that either. 
 
Immediately following the trip you talked about a West German high-technology firm which wanted to 
expand into Saskatchewan. Could the minister tell us where that firm has decided to locate and how 
many jobs will be created as a result of that success? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — When I’m ready to make the announcement, Mr. Speaker, he’ll be one of the 
first to know about it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The minister told, told the public of Saskatchewan that a high-technology firm, not 
from Germany but from the Netherlands, was about to open a manufacturing plant here. Could you tell 
the Assembly where that plant is going to be located and how many jobs will arise out of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Same answer, Mr. Speaker. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

World Youth Friendship Baseball Series 
 

Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week in the House, in your absence, my 
colleague, the Minister of Education, gave a rather concise and exact ministerial statement on 
Opportunities ’83 which the member from Shaunavon found a little difficult to follow. In the interests of 
brevity I would like to read a press release which was released this morning in Saskatoon, which has the 
essentials of an announcement regarding the awarding of the world junior baseball championships. 
 

The Canadian Federation of Amateur Baseball is proud to announce that the 1984 World Youth 
Friendship Baseball Series has been awarded to the Kindersley, Saskatchewan, host committee; 
Mr. Earl Berard, chairman. 
 
The youth friendship series, to be played by 18-year-olds and under, will involve 8 to 10 
countries, including Canada, United States, Japan, Korea and Cuba. The series will take place in 
late July 1984. This series is sanctioned by Baseball Canada and the International Association of 
Amateur Baseball. 
 
The host committee has secured the support of local authorities, the provincial Government of 
Saskatchewan, and the Saskatchewan Baseball Association in their bid to host this major 
international event. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I might add that apart from the co-operative nature of the bid one of the key things about 
the bid was the direction it took in terms of housing the athletes and the experiences they will have while 
they’re in Saskatchewan. 
 
The primary opponent in the bid was the city of Windsor. Windsor’s attitude was that they would house 
all the athletes in university dormitory, transport them to the park, transport them back. In Kindersley, 
the athletes will be billeted out to individual satellite communities in the Kindersley area. Each team will 
become the occupants of one of those small communities. Obviously, there will be some major cultural, 
major international understanding, developed from this. And I think the house committee from 
Kindersley is to be roundly applauded for the approach, and certainly applauded for achieving this, this 
bid, which will have major impact in the athletic and cultural  



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
617 

scene in this province in 1984. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The approach taken by the community of Kindersley is 
not a new one. It has been used before, and I think quite successfully. And I would applaud the 
community of Kindersley for adopting it. 
 
I think one of the primary benefits of these amateur sporting events is, it gives the athletes a chance to 
display their excellence, and that’s worthwhile. But perhaps an even more important benefit is the 
opportunity it gives young people to meet, and to get to know young people with very different cultural 
backgrounds. And that of course, does this. 
 
This event, taking place as it does in a small community, gives the, gives the students an opportunity not 
just to meet other students, but to meet the people of Kindersley, and to see a rural Saskatchewan 
culture. So I want to say, on behalf of the opposition, that we applaud the decision, and we wish them 
every success with the tournament in July. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 

Length of Answers 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order today during question period, the Minister of 
Education and the member for Wascana, in answering the first question of question period, went on at 
great lengths in what we in the opposition had a hard time relating to the question asked. In fact, in 
watching, Mr. Speaker, in fact, in watching the clock, the answer approached nine minutes in length, and 
in our opinion, varied over a large area of topics. 
 
On page 131 of Beauchesne’s, section 358, there is a, a comment on answering questions which says, in 
part, ‘Answers to questions should be as brief as possible, and should detail with the matter raised, and 
should not provoke debate.’ 
 
I would ask of Mr. Speaker to look at this and see if we can have some guidance as to how ministers 
should answer questions in terms of the length of the answers. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I listened with great interest today as the question period progressed, and I have 
listened very carefully for the last number of days, and it’s a bit difficult sometimes to make a decision 
as to who’s really abusing the question period. I think that if we were to look at all the rules of the 
question period, I might start by indicating to you that a question should not be an expression of an 
opinion, a representation, an argumentation, nor debate, and the question should be brief and the 
preamble should not exceed one carefully balanced sentence. 
 
And when you put that in context with the type of question that was asked, and then you come to the 
citation that you are given which says: ‘Answers to questions should be as brief as possible, should deal 
with the matter raised, and should not provoke debate,’ I think that both sides, sides of the House were at 
fault. The Minister of Education was lengthy; the question was very lengthy; and I would encourage 
members on both sides of the House to watch their type of question, and to be specific in the answers. 



 
April 7, 1983 
 

 
618 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE (BUDGET DEBATE) 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Andrew that the 
Assembly resolve itself into committee of finance and the amendment thereto moved by Mr. Shillington. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. First of all before I comment on the 
specifics of the budget, on behalf of the people of the constituency that I am always pleased to speak on 
on behalf of here, the people of the Meadow Lake constituency, I’d like to congratulate my colleague 
and my friend, the Minister of Finance, for the fine job he has done in putting together a budget which 
addresses the task of job creation in our province. 
 
We are indeed taking a leadership role in the country’s efforts in creating the employment opportunities 
that our population is asking for. In my mind, Mr. Speaker, the initiatives introduced in the budget 
address represent a positive and constructive response to the economic realities facing the citizens of this 
province. In it are programs that will do the job that Saskatchewan people deserve and expect from their 
government. 
 
In spite of the constant doom and gloom attitude created by pessimistic forecasters and those like the 
members opposite who choose to sit back and complain, this government has chosen to step out and 
meet the problems head on with a solid, common-sense approach. This budget, this Progressive 
Conservative budget, recognizes the role of the citizen of Saskatchewan and the private sector in 
economic recovery. 
 
For years, Mr. Speaker, the private sector have recognized their value in the Saskatchewan economy, but 
the NDP administration that dominated the political scene in the past, did not. That’s where we differ. 
We are placing confidence in the private sector, confidence in their role as the key to economic recovery 
and confidence that, with government playing the part of catalyst, a relationship between government 
and business can benefit the province as a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the opposition suggests that our government, in setting out a nine-point job creation 
program, redirecting our economy and streamlining government operations, is catering strictly to the 
private sector, I think the people of Saskatchewan should take exception to it. To kick the private sector 
in this Assembly, as has been done repeatedly by the NDP, both while they were in their prime and now 
when they’re facing tough times themselves, is to kick at the heart of every Saskatchewan community. 
 
Look down the main street of a Saskatchewan town. What makes it alive and what makes it tick is its 
business community. The families of this province look to the private sector of our economy for not only 
the goods and services they provide, but for employment. 



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
619 

Despite years of effort by the former administration in building big government, the small business 
sector continues to provide more jobs than any sector in the economy. So, Mr. Speaker, we make no 
apologies for encouraging the private sector to work with government in job creation initiatives. It 
makes eminent sense. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn to a couple of other things. I’ll be coming back to a discussion of 
the private sector and about a particular program that I know the hon. members opposite have been 
waiting for for some time, and I will be coming to that. But first of all, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to turn to, 
more specifically, to another area of my responsibility in this House and in this government and that is 
the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I believe that the March 29th budget, delivered by my colleague from Kindersley, augurs well for both 
the Department of Northern Saskatchewan and the Department of Tourism and Small Business. The 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan, once an all encompassing bureaucracy created and fed by the 
former government, has been extensively restructured and streamlined to meet new goals and a new 
mandate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, despite the temptation to dwell on the past failings of the NDP (and I can assure you that 
the temptation was great), and describe the lunacy of what was allowed to develop, let’s look at our 
approach to development, at our approach to development in the North. And I can tell the opposition and 
the former minister of DNS (wherever he is) that we are not going to repeat your mistakes. The new 
mandate of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan is to promote economic self-sufficiency and 
self—reliant municipal government in the North, and also to address the problem of unemployment, 
which has plagued the North for many years. 
 
To carry out this new mandate, two new divisions have been created from the portion of the department 
remaining, following the realignment process begun earlier this year. An economic development 
division will support, foster and encourage economic development, and work toward building a sound 
economic base. A second division, the municipal development division, will be responsible for 
developing and supporting effective municipal self-government. 
 
Within the economic development division, a major thrust toward economic growth in the North will be 
led by a new business development branch. This branch will identify potential business opportunities 
and bring together new business or product ideas, with investors and entrepreneurs. In addition, an 
employment and opportunities branch will work with users and developers of renewable and non—
renewable resources in the North to foster northern employment for northern people. 
 
A field operations branch will provide assistance to existing entrepreneurs or potential business 
developers in the area of proposal development, ongoing monitoring, management support, and locating 
business financing. 
 
With regard to the economic development loan fund, after review, after a review of the continuing need 
for the department to provide commercial lending in the North, we anticipate that the fund will be 
operational early in this fiscal year. However, it would be more closely aligned to private lending 
operations. Our objective is to have the loan fund available where and when private financing is not 
available but on the basis of sound lending criteria and loans administration procedures. 



 
April 7, 1983 
 

 
620 

This represents our government’s commitment toward accountability and responsible use of 
Saskatchewan tax dollars being invested in northern development. At the same time, the department will 
make a special effort to persuade banking and credit union institutions to expand their services in the 
North. And I know that’s been an ongoing process, attempting to get private banking institutions in 
there, or credit union movement in there. I believe we may be moving well in that direction, and we’re 
hopeful that something in that order can happen soon. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, in order to stimulate development of industry in the North, the department 
will manage an economic development grant fund of $1.4 million, which will assist projects generally 
benefiting large numbers of people rather than individuals. The emphasis will be on assisting 
community-initiated development projects, co-operatives, and agricultural developments. This grant 
fund will also support the federal-provincial cost-sharing Special ARDA (Agricultural and Rural 
Development Act) program aimed at improving the economic and social well-being of native people. 
The department also acts as an implementation agency for Special ARDA (Agricultural and Rural 
Development Act). 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned earlier that the new DNS will be made up of an economic development 
division and also a municipal development division. I want to inform the House and the people of 
northern Saskatchewan that the department is responding to the needs of municipalities in northern 
Saskatchewan. In the area of municipal capital programming, five major sewer and water construction 
projects will be in progress or completed during 1983-84 at Air Ronge, at La Loche, at Denare Beach, at 
Pelican Narrows, and at Turnor Lake. 
 
Planning and design work on sewer and water systems for six more communities will be carried out this 
year. These public utilities, together with the recently completed electrical and extension at Missinipe, 
will receive approximately $4 million from the department during the 1983-84 fiscal year. 
 
A new community sewer and water upgrading grant program will provide assistance to northern 
communities for expansion of existing sewer and water systems. This year the department will 
contribute a total of $845,000 to expansions at Pinehouse, Sandy Bay, and Cumberland House. The 
department will also this year contribute $162,000 towards programs which will provide several 
northern communities with much needed fire halls and fire-fighting equipment. These community 
utilities and facilities are cost shared through various agreements with the federal government and with 
the communities. 
 
With respect to northern local government, Mr. Speaker, a new northern municipalities act will be 
reintroduced during this session of the legislature. This will mark the culmination of a lengthy 
consultative process between our department and various local government representatives throughout 
the North. This piece of legislation, when passed by the Assembly, will have the effect of restructuring 
local governments and strengthening their self-reliance and accountability. Again, the emphasis is on 
responsibility, and with that responsibility comes accountability. 
 
Along with the implementation of the new northern municipalities act, a new northern revenue-sharing 
program, amounting to $4.915 million, will be introduced. This program will, as requested by northern 
local governments, provide operating grants significantly greater than those received under the former 
administration. Second, and also relating to the new act, a northern capital grants program has been 
designed to  



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
621 

make available capital grant funding to northern local governments. It is envisaged as a northern 
equivalent of the community grant fund administered by my colleague, the Minister of Urban Affairs. 
However, it will be richer, in recognition of the developing nature of northern communities and of the 
lower tax base there. Mr. Speaker, I will be speaking in much more detail on the new act when it is 
introduced later in this session. 
 
To further zero in on northern issues, a new research and policy evaluation unit will coordinate and 
monitor provincial initiatives in the North. The budget for this new unit includes provisions for $50,000 
to the Northern Saskatchewan Native Outreach Association to extend job referral and job placement 
services in the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also, I want to point out that we intend to ensure that northern residents receive the 
maximum benefit from all current and future cost—sharing arrangements with the federal government. 
An example of this is the approval gained under the Northlands agreement for a $4.5 million power grid 
expansion by North-Sask. Electric that will add five northern communities to the northern power grid. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we, as a Progressive Conservative government, are working toward removing the stigma 
attached to the former unwieldy department of northern Saskatchewan. By bringing forth positive 
changes and addressing the problems we recognized while we were in opposition, an honest effort is 
being made to develop northern Saskatchewan to its potential. 
 
The North is not merely an experimental plot irrigated with Saskatchewan tax dollars, as it was with the 
former administration. We will be encouraging the development of viable projects and business 
opportunities in the North. However, at the same time, we recognize that we are accountable for the 
funds allocated. This is what the people of Saskatchewan asked for and, more recently, this is what the 
people of Prince Albert-Duck Lake endorsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — We are optimistic that our common-sense approach in northern Saskatchewan 
will augur well for Northerners, both in terms of employment and increased economy in the operation of 
their municipal government structure. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to turn to my other area of responsibility, the new Department of 
Tourism and Small Business. I welcome the opportunity this afternoon to outline the nature of my new 
responsibilities, and also announce the details of the small business employment program unveiled by 
the Minister of Finance in his March 29 budget address. In establishing the new department we highlight 
the distinctive contribution that the small business community makes to our provincial economy, both in 
terms of providing goods and services, and also providing employment opportunities to our citizens. 
Small firms in Canada and the United States have traditionally created nearly 80 per cent of all new 
employment. The small business community in our province providing incentives to the private sector 
has to be a major consideration of any job creation package. 
 
The new Department of Tourism and Small Business has been established to work toward two main 
objectives: first of all, to increase the growth and profitability of the small business sector of the 
province; and secondly, to increase the revenues generated by the private tourism sector. Our Premier 
and our government have identified the need to be responsive to the small business community of the 
province,  



 
April 7, 1983 
 

 
622 

and assume the role of business advocate in order to generate increased economic activity within 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The linking of tourism and small business in one department will both heighten awareness as to the 
economic value of tourism, and as well, encourage the small business sector to get involved with 
tourism as a means of increasing the volume of their own activity. The major beneficiary of tourism is 
the small business sector of the province. Given the value of the Saskatchewan economy, any 
development of tourism is most properly carried out through the small business sector. Tourism benefits 
small business, and small business benefits tourism. 
 
In order to facilitate the accomplishment of our two main objectives the department will employ a 
variety of activities. In general terms these activities will involve promoting the province as a 
competitive tourism destination, encouraging the development of the tourism industry in the province in 
co-operation with the private sector, providing a range of services and programs to encourage and 
support the growth of small businesses in the province, and assisting Saskatchewan communities to 
pursue increased economic activity and realize their vital function in the economic development of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be commenting further on the mandate of the department when enabling legislation 
dealing with its establishment is brought forward early in the legislative session. However, as a first step 
toward achieving the mandate of the new Department of Tourism and Small Business I am pleased to 
announce details of one more facet of this government’s nine-point program aimed at making more jobs 
available for Saskatchewan people, both now and in the years ahead. Our new small business 
employment program has been established to address the problem of unemployment, and is targeted 
specifically at the small business sector. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — This program arises out of the realization that government has a role to play as a 
catalyst in assisting small businesses presently reeling from the effects of the current recession. At a 
time when not all small businesses are in a position to increase their workforce, we are acting to tailor a 
job creation package specifically to their needs as has been done for the public sector and non-profit 
organizations with our jobs program administered by my colleague, the Minister of Social Services. 
 
The two main objectives of the small business employment program are: number one, the creation of 
permanent job opportunities and number two, the assistance of small business in getting through the 
current recession. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to, to go through in some detail, the, the, the program itself. The background to it is 
based on unemployment being recognized by this government as one of the, Saskatchewan’s most 
serious socio-economic problems. That’s agreed by every member of this House. However, many small 
businesses have been hurt by the current recession and are not in a position to increase employment. 
Existing job creation programs are better suited to the public sector and non-profit organizations than to 
small private businesses. 
 
The objectives of the program are intended to assist small businesses, through permanent job creation. 
The program will provide some temporary assistance, through  



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
623 

refundable tax credits to small businesses, for getting through the current recession. Businesses pay a 
variety of taxes to all levels of government and this program will serve to offset those costs. At the same 
time, this program will assist Saskatchewan people by increasing permanent employment opportunities. 
 
The program targets, Mr. Speaker: the program is targeted to approximately 35,000 small businesses. 
The program will have the capacity to assist in a generation of 4,000 jobs with a total budget . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — . . . with a total budget of $20 million. 
 
The program benefits: the program will provide a one-time incentive payment through a refundable tax 
credit of $5,000 for each additional job created for 12 continuous months. The limits are on that for 
employers established to do business prior to April the 1st, 1983. The program will assist benefits to 10 
payments based on a ratio of one payment of $5,000 for each job created. 
 
For new employers establishing businesses on or after April the 1st of 1983, the program will limit 
benefits to 10 payments based on a ratio of one payment for every three jobs created — the thinking 
here, Mr. Speaker, being that a new business just starting after the 1st of April would have an undue 
advantage given the same situation as the established business who has been on Main Street and been 
struggling. So we don’t want to give an undue advantage, but at the same time we do want to encourage 
new businesses to establish and we believe this will do that. 
 
The eligibility for employers: to be eligible for this program, an employer must be registered to do 
business in Saskatchewan. In order to ensure that benefits are directed to small businesses, employer 
eligibility will be tied to a business limit of $200,000 annual taxable income averaged over three years. 
The exclusions will be tax-exempt organizations . . . Because of the targeting of the, specifically targeted 
nature of the programs, the exclusions will be tax-exempt organizations; farm and building construction 
employment, although a contractor is eligible to hire office staff or support staff; employment activities 
where the employer earns, employee earns more than 50 per cent of his or her income from 
commissions. 
 
The employee eligibility: any resident of Saskatchewan legally entitled to work in Canada is eligible. 
Any exclusions to this will be individuals possessing more than 5 per cent ownership in the business 
applying for program benefits, directors of the business applying for program benefits, or the immediate 
family. Those would be the only exclusions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The process — and I might say about the process, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we’ve identified in 
our discussions, prior to the establishment of this program, with the private business people in 
Saskatchewan and with chambers of commerce and so on, is that they want something that’s, that’s 
manageable. They don’t want a large bureaucracy dealing with it so that they have forms to fill out that 
are coming out of their ears, and we responded to that by making the process as, as simple as possible, 
very straightforward, very common—sense approach, and we think it will be well received. 
 
The application forms will be available within the next two weeks. Sufficient promotion  



 
April 7, 1983 
 

 
624 

will be generated to ensure that all interested employers may easily acquire an application form. 
Employers need only to complete this simple form and mail it in to the program administration. 
Application processing and feedback of results to employers will be performed expediently, as I’ve 
mentioned. And the application period is from April of, April the 1st, from now until August the 31st, 
1983. 
 
The payment process. The program will provide successful applicants with a form on which the 
employer may provide details with respect to individuals hired under this program. This reporting form 
will be completed by the employer at the end of the employee’s 12 continuous months of employment. 
Upon receipt and, and some verification of this reporting form, the administration and our department 
will promptly make full payments to the employers. 
 
I should say a word about penalties, and I know the hon. member from Regina Centre, who was waiting, 
who was waiting with some concern yesterday, but I notice he’s not here to, to listen to this, and I 
thought he would be with bated breath, but he’s asking about the possibility of, of abuse of the program, 
and so on. 
 
I should say, Mr. Speaker, we, we have addressed that as, in order to discourage possible abuses of the 
program, appropriate penalties are being prescribed. We believe it’s not a major factor. We believe that 
people in the small business sector out there are, are looking forward to a co-operative attitude with the 
government, and they’re not out there to take us, and it’s, it’s a, it’s a breath of fresh air in this province, 
I must say, for the small business people. It’s a breath of fresh air for them to know that their 
government, their government trusts them, which is something they haven’t been used to in this 
province. 
 
But the loss of any . . . the penalty on this program would be for abuses, would be the loss of any and all 
program benefits, plus a fine equal to the benefit claimed, up to a maximum of $50,000, which is the 
maximum benefit that’s payable. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I believe, as I said before, that the program is simple. It’s straightforward, 
it’s workable, which is very key, and it brings common sense to small business, citizens of this, of this 
province of Saskatchewan, which is something that we’ve attempted to, and in fact have brought 
common sense to all facets of governments since taking power. 
 
And we would say to hon. members opposite: it’s something that you should watch carefully. It’s 
accessible to a wide group. It reinforces our government’s Open for Business theme. It demonstrates this 
government’s commitment to be an advocate of small business in the province. It increases economic 
activity benefits for the entire economy, with the injection of $20 million directly into the economy; 
improves productivity. 
 
Segmented or targeted approach to developing programs means tailoring according to the needs of 
citizens, Mr. Speaker, and according to the needs of the specific sectors. And this is targeted directly, as 
I’ve said once before, and I want to emphasize once again, targeted at a very important group in our 
economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now that the program has been announced and initiated, I would ask that all members on 
both sides of the Assembly join with our government and with the small business community in 
supporting and encouraging participation in this program. 



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
625 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The program has been developed and is being offered in a spirit of co-operation, 
and is focused on a widespread problem facing each one of our constituencies. It’s a problem that hits 
home to many of our people. And we believe that through the small business employment program and 
through the mandate of the entire Department of Tourism and Small Business we are well on our way to 
achieving this government’s purpose in setting out its nine-point program for job creation in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again, I appreciate the opportunity to address the Assembly and the people of 
Saskatchewan on behalf of, first of all, of the department that I’m honoured to have responsibility for, 
but most importantly, I believe, on behalf of the residents of Meadow Lake constituency that I represent 
here. And I never like to stand in this House without, without pointing out to them and to every member 
of the House that that’s who I’m here to represent, those members of my constituency. And I certainly 
look forward to my new responsibilities as Minister of Small Business and Tourism, and minister in 
charge of the small business employment program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with those positive notes about a positive program, I certainly will not be supporting the 
doom and gloom, and very negative amendment presented by the member from Regina Centre. And I 
will certainly be supporting the motion presented by my colleague, the Minister of Finance. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pickering: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to state that it is a great pleasure for me to 
again take part in the budget debate. I would say, Mr. Speaker, that it is even more rewarding to speak 
on a budget that has been presented to this Assembly by the Progressive Conservative government. And 
I will add, a budget which thankfully has none of the jiggery-pokery, balancing tactics that we saw in the 
last NDP budget. 
 
I congratulate my colleague, the Minister of Finance, on the presentation of this fine document. This 
budget, Mr. Speaker, illustrates that he, as well as other members of the government, are truly in touch 
with the needs of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. We see this budget as the commencement 
of a new era, a new beginning. The people of Saskatchewan are excited to see in this budget a new 
direction in government. They see a government which is responsive to their needs; a government that 
listens; a government that knows its responsibilities and is prepared to act accordingly. 
 
I wish to take a few minutes to outline some of the very positive aspects of the budget as it relates to the 
riding of Bengough-Milestone, which I proudly represent. My constituency has one major industry, and 
that is agriculture. There are no large urban centres. The largest town in my riding is less than 1,300 
people. 
 
The population in my constituency has dropped consistently since the 1940s. More and more of the 
young people have left Bengough-Milestone, have been forced to leave the farm and seek employment 
elsewhere. The previous administration did nothing to correct the problem. In fact, Mr. Speaker, they 
attacked the very base of our economy by attempting to destroy the family farm. They even tried to 
make sharecroppers out of our young farmers. And while they attempted to, to destroy the family  



 
April 7, 1983 
 

 
626 

farm, they provided more and more funding for their own family, the family of crown corporations. 
 
They built an even bigger and bigger bureaucracy which fed like leeches on the taxpayers of the 
province. They got so comfortable hiding behind the red tape that they forgot to listen to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and they certainly paid for that in April of 1982. 
 
At this time, I would like to point out, as it relates to the recent by-election in Prince Albert-Duck Lake, 
where the Leader of the Opposition went roaring around the constituency for about three weeks telling 
the people: now is the time for you to prove to the rest of the province that we made a mistake last April 
. . . Well, I would like to congratulate the new member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake, who sits on the 
opposite side of the House to what I do, because there isn’t enough room on this side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pickering: — And I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that the only reason that he won by a large 
majority, the people in Prince Albert-Duck Lake realized they had a government in power they could 
trust, along with a positive and optimistic future. And they had the access to open books as they relate to 
the Department of Finance, not cookbooks, which we experienced in the last 11 years. 
 
And also, the Minister of Finance has listened to the farmers. He listened, and he has provided the 
people with a budget that reflects the attitude of a two-way communication. He knows that young 
farmers want security and stability and the pride that comes with owning a farm. More money has been 
provided for the farm purchase program to allow this excellent method of transfer of farm holdings from 
generation to generation to continue. 
 
We can compare the cost of the previous land bank to this new and more productive program. The last 
budget for the land bank estimated the administration costs for one year at over $2 million — $2 million, 
Mr. Speaker, to administer a program that only enabled 151 farmers to buy their land over a period of 10 
years. 
 
The budget for the farm purchase program, Mr. Speaker, only estimates $406,000 administration cost for 
all of the 1983-84 fiscal year, and we will probably process more than 1,500 applications. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is what the people of Saskatchewan want from this budget: better programs, lower costs. And 
that is what they are getting. 
 
The farmers in my constituency are concerned about our future. The minister in charge of the wheat 
board has announced that initial payments for cereal grains will be substantially lower in the next crop 
year. When you add this to the rising costs of fuel, fertilizers, chemicals, machinery and equipment we 
know that the agricultural community is in some very difficult economic times. 
 
To further compound their plight, we have in Ottawa a government that is determined to remove the 
only fixed costs that the prairie grain producer has enjoyed — the statutory Crow’s Nest freight rate. 
This government has committed all its resources to fight the implementation of this potentially 
destructive legislation, more commonly known as the Pepin plan. 
 
This government has continually requested Ottawa to remove the 55 per cent gallon 



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
627 

tax which they have applied to farm diesel fuel, a most repressive and totally unacceptable method of 
taxation. 
 
It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg took it upon himself 
to tell my constituents how we should remove the provincial tax on farm fuel. Well, as usual, Mr. 
Speaker, the member didn’t have his facts straight. There is no tax in the province of Saskatchewan on 
farm fuel. In fact, we have removed all of the excessive gasoline taxes that the NDP used as a means of 
gouging the people of Saskatchewan. But what is more noteworthy is that the members attempt to cover 
up the real reason that farmers in Saskatchewan are faced with these problems today. 
 
I quote from Mr. Engel, member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg’s letter to the editor of The Big Muddy 
Round—up, dated March 4th, 1983. And I quote: 
 

Farmers do not care who’s to blame for the ever-increasing price of their fuel. They just know 
that the price increases are driving them out of business. 
 

That, Mr. Speaker, is what the member opposite would like to believe. But the people of Saskatchewan 
know who is to blame. They remember a western transport minister who was sympathetic to the western 
agriculture. They remember a finance minister who suggested 18 cents per gallon would be fair tax on 
gasoline and farm fuel. They remember that government (and I refer to a Progressive Conservative 
government) and that five NDP members from this province took it upon themselves to join forces with 
Pepin and Lalonde and all the rest of Trudeau’s crew, and those five NDP members brought down the 
only government we had in Ottawa in the last 15 years that would have helped the western farmer. 
 
And I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that the only way that we can assure the farmers of this province that 
they will not be taxed into the ground is to make sure we remember who is to blame for that situation. 
As a result I hope that we elect no Liberals in the next federal election, and that we elect none of their 
bed partners, the cause of all our problems, the NDP. 
 
I said at the outset that my constituency had in the past only one major industry, Mr. Speaker, which is 
agriculture. There are, however, in my riding, substantial reserves of both oil and gas. Their existence 
has been a known fact for many years. Under the NDP regime, we saw varying degrees of activity out in 
the oil fields, ranging from very little to none at all. Their socialist philosophy was simple and 
devastating, devastating as related to resources. They wanted all the resource revenue. The private sector 
could take all the risk, provide all the technical expertise, and when it, when it came time for, to start the 
producing, along came the NDP and took all the revenue, as a result driving all industry out of the 
province. 
 
This government undertook to change this situation, and we have, and I am pleased to say that there 
have been as many as 50 new exploration crews at work at one time in my constituency since last April. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn to the Leader of the Opposition, who has had the nerve to state to 
this Assembly that our policies regarding resource development are not in the best interests of the people 
of Saskatchewan. Well I would like to see him try and tell some of the people in my riding, such as the 
hotel keepers, cafe owners, or any other service industries in rural Saskatchewan, that, I would like to 
have him explain to the farmers and the residents of those small communities in rural Saskatchewan who 



 
April 7, 1983 
 

 
628 

have received natural gas as a result of our $340 million rural gasification program, and I would really 
like to have him explain to the people in the oil service industry who are back to work, thanks to the 
vision and foresight of this government. 
 
We see in this budget a new direction for our heritage fund. We were told by the members opposite, 
when you were government, about a million dollars was in the heritage fund. They led this Assembly, 
and the people of, of the province, to believe they were investing the surplus revenues from our 
resources into good, high-dividend securities. And they had the revenues, Mr., Mr. Speaker. The world 
oil price went from $2 a barrel to $30, and the NDP said: ‘We want all the revenue from Saskatchewan.’ 
 
Well, what, what did they do with the billion dollars? Well, true to form, they invested the majority of 
this money into their family; long-term, low-interest loans to their family of crown corporations — 
money that will be tied up for years with no real return on investment to the people of Saskatchewan — 
money that should have been put aside to cover the reversal in the resource industry as we now face. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this government has changed that philosophy. We will use the resource revenues of 
the heritage fund to help rural families to help cushion the effect of this depressed economy, and ensure 
that the people of Saskatchewan, not some crown corporation, can continue to enjoy economic growth 
and stability. 
 
I mentioned that my constituency has had a continual outflow of its young people, not only to the large 
urban centres of this province, but also to our neighbouring province and states where the atmosphere 
for job creation has been traditionally brighter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see in this budget some hope that this trend is about to be reversed. We see a new 
nine-point program for job creation, money to build new homes, funds for new recreation facilities — 
facilities were, that were so badly neglected by the past government. Jobs for young people. 
Employment opportunities in rural communities so that our youth can stay in Saskatchewan. Tax relief 
for small businessmen who would join with the government to create more new jobs. Not hand outs or 
give-aways, as we’ve seen in the past; rather, firm measures aimed at creating permanent employment. 
Positive steps to ensure the villages and towns, like those in my constituencies, will remain, maintain 
their population, and in fact, show growth over the next few years. 
 
And what is more important, Mr. Speaker, we have set up a course for the youth of our province which 
will enable them to receive the best available training in the new high-tech industries of the future. The 
finance minister announced $120 million over the next four years to finance a 60 per cent increase in 
training facilities. New courses in high technology and service occupations: this program will help 
provide the province of Saskatchewan with the most skilled and best trained labour force in Canada, and 
I know when new industry looks at looking, locating in Canada, they will surely see Saskatchewan as a 
most favourable of all possible locations. This, Mr. Speaker, is simply because this government under 
Premier Grant Devine has changed the direction of the province with this budget. We are now going 
ahead into the future, working with and not competing against the private sector. 
 
This budget also addresses one of the most fundamental problems facing governments today: that is 
uncontrolled spending. As a part of the overall program of more efficient public sector, a more efficient 
public sector, a major reorganization of government  



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
629 

departments was announced. The past administration, in its haste for an even bigger and more powerful 
government, created several departments which, in fact, duplicated services already provided. We have 
committed ourselves to eliminate this waste. We will remove the bureaucratic run arounds that we have 
characterized with the NDP administration. We’ll make government departments not only more cost 
efficient, but also more accessible to the public. 
 
As the minister responsible for the new Department of Rural Development, I am looking forward to 
changes which will take place in the coming weeks and months ahead. The Department of Rural 
Development will maintain its present level of both funding and services to rural municipalities. In these 
times of restraint, I find it gratifying that this government places such a high priority on rural 
development that it saw fit to increase our budget by a full 7 per cent, in addition to which new 
programs and services are planned that will emphasize numerous areas of concern to rural residents. 
 
I might add that the member for Pelly questioned me yesterday in the House about this increase. The 
cost of the ambulance service, included in last year’s estimates, has now been transferred to the 
Department of Health, and when that is considered, the actual increase is 7 per cent. 
 
This new department will provide many benefits to our farming community, which it has sadly been 
neglected on in the past. During their last election campaign, it became increasingly obvious that the 
NDP had become . . . begun neglecting health care in this province. We heard numerous cases where 
people were forced to wait for months to receive proper home care and nursing home service. We stated, 
during our campaign, that we would make Saskatchewan number one in health in Canada. The NDP 
tried to mislead the public, Mr. Speaker, stating we would destroy medicare, and we would institute 
deterrent fees. Well, the voters didn’t buy that and neither did we. 
 
The budget, which provides $978 million for health and a combined increase in expenditures for health, 
education and social services of nearly $50 million, proves that we are firmly committed to improving 
and enhancing those fundamental services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was most pleased with the announcement of a new crown corporation to show the 
growing water requirements of the province. The previous NDP government had left us with many 
problems, problems that they refused to address. But nowhere, Mr. Speaker, did the last administration 
fail so miserably as they did in the most vital of all — the issue of water. 
 
Irrigation, as an example, Mr. Speaker. One farmer told me of the nightmare that he went through, just 
trying to simply get a permit to irrigate. He first went to Agriculture. They took a look at his application 
and sent him to another department. Then he was sent to Environment. Then Environment sent him over 
to another government agency. And after he’d been through three or four or five different bureaucracies, 
he went . . . he was instructed to go back to Agriculture to get his permit. By this time, he told me, he 
said he was so sick of the red tape and all the running around that he just gave up and went home and 
prayed for rain. 
 
This government took a logical and common sense approach to this problem. This government went out 
to the people of Saskatchewan and we listened to their concerns. The ministers of Environment and 
Urban Affairs, the hon. member for Arm River and myself, travelled this province on behalf of the 
government. We went to 10 cities in two weeks, and we received over 300 briefs from concerned 
individuals and organizations. 



 
April 7, 1983 
 

 
630 

We are still receiving these ideas today and we still welcome any and all presentations. 
 
Another interesting comparison comes to mind when I think of water hearings. I think of how the last 
administration might have handled this very, very big issue. Instead of asking the public for input, 
instead of going out to the grass roots for advice, as this government has, instead of listening as we have 
to ensure that any changes truly reflect the wishes of the people . . . I think we can speculate on how the 
NDP might have made the former minister of agriculture responsible for these hearings. They 
undoubtedly would have spent thousands of tax dollars designing an ad campaign to highlight their road 
show. I think they likely would have made a mail-out to all the householders in Saskatchewan — maybe 
a little brochure showing a crow drinking water. Then the former minister might have, would have 
carried his little crow around the province telling people, people what should be done, instead of 
listening to them. Finally, they would probably have called an election on the issue, assuming that the 
Conservatives would take a stand against good drinking water. Well, Mr. Speaker, just as they never . . . 
it’s just as well they never got around to it because they would have lost that one too. 
 
As I stated, we went to the people and we heard their concerns, and we will continue to do that in the 
future. The people of this province were excited, and still are, even thrilled, Mr. Speaker, at the very 
thought of being asked to provide input into their government — something that hasn’t happened for he 
past 11 years. It is the sense of co-operation and of new direction and future potential that makes this 
budget truly the beginning of a new era. I am pleased to add my support to the presentation of this 
budget for 1983-84, and I will be supporting the motion and opposing, strongly, the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure for me to stand here today 
representing the people of Saskatoon Centre, and to make my comments on the, on the budget address of 
our finance minister. 
 
On March 29, Mr. Andrew presented this government’s budget. I believe the budget was a major 
achievement during these touch economic times. Prior to the budget address, our members wondered 
whether any way could be found to stimulate small business. The finance minister, of course, announced 
the, the stimulation program for small business, and just a few minutes ago, the Minister of Tourism and 
Small Business announced the details of that program, and I heartily endorse the program as he has 
outlined it. I’m sure the businessmen, the small businessmen of Saskatchewan will also. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, our caucus had hoped that the budget would preserve existing services in 
this province. A concern of mine was that taxes might have to rise to balance the provincial books, 
resulting in a drop in consumer spending. And the last big question on my mind before budget night was 
on the subject of education: would this important vehicle for growth be preserved in this province? And, 
of course, there were many other questions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I guess I’m feeling very proud of what our finance minister did for the people of Saskatchewan. I know 
the future for everyone in this province is worth sticking around  



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
631 

for, and it’s a bright future. I’m proud to be part of Premier Devine’s optimistic Executive Council and 
caucus, rather than part of Blakeney’s Bad News Bears. You know, they day after day, go around 
preaching their message of doom and gloom. 
 
It takes me back many years, Mr. Speaker, to the days when I used to read the Dick Tracy comic books. 
And thee used to be an addendum to Dick Tracy called Fearless Fosdick. And within Fearless Fosdick 
there was a character known as Joe Btfsplk. I don’t even know how to spell it, but that’s the way I 
pronounced it. Joe Btfsplk used to walk around with a little black cloud over his head with a raindrop or 
two consistently falling on his head. And the member for Quill Lakes reminded me of Joe Btfsplk the 
other day, as he was delivering his budget address. And he and his seven fellow—colleagues over there, 
consistently march in and out, out of this Assembly with a black cloud over their heads. And each and 
every time they stand up, that black cloud is standing there. Well, it’s time that they realized that the 
people of Saskatchewan, on April 26th last, removed the black cloud of doom and gloom from the 
province of Saskatchewan when they swept them out of office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — We’re doing things differently from the previous administration in three 
important ways: we’re communicating with the public, as my colleague alluded to here just a few 
minutes ago; we’re building confidence with the public; and we’re acting on our promises. 
 
By having the year of government, people are finding they receive a better deal these days. The budget 
itself came from the finance minister’s consultations with various economic groups in Saskatchewan. 
That is communicating. And I believe it’s showing positive results. Our Premier’s desire to build 
confidence in Saskatchewan’s economic future requires us to rethink existing operations. We’ll build the 
confidence of the people by showing them a fair return for their tax dollar. In other words, we’ll 
continue o put an end to the, to government’s wasteful ways. 
 
Building confidence requires us to act on our promises, and we’re doing this. Building confidence 
requires us to communicate. The three ways we differ from our opposition interrelate. No institution can 
survive without: number one, communication; number two, confidence; and number three, trust. And I’ll 
talk more on these factors later. 
 
Before they, that is the NDP, were beaten at the polls, they were talking about more public investment in 
Saskatchewan, more nationalism, more socialism. I have always questioned the wisdom of investing 
public dollars into competitive business operations — for example, the lumber industry. Is there a more 
cyclical business than wood products? I don’t think so. But that’s here they put the taxpayers’ money. 
They spent and invested so poorly and so aimlessly in the crowns of this province, that now we’re struck 
searching for the hard times cushion, or the heritage fund, as we call it. 
 
Next door to the west, in Alberta, they have a heritage fund. Why? Because they allowed industry to 
develop on its own. They didn’t badly manage crown corporations and pour money into crown 
corporations like the NDP did before April 26th. 
 
A tremendous variety of businesses best left to the private sector were all within the grasp of the NDP 
— such businesses as Norcanair. They were even talking about going into the body shop business, into 
the insurance industry, and Lord knows how many more. These areas where private individual and 
citizens will risk personal fortunes,  



 
April 7, 1983 
 

 
632 

should be left alone. That has been established in a free enterprise society in the Western world. 
 
We’ve gotten some odd lines of questioning from the opposition. During the last sitting there was noise 
about dismantling rural affairs. Another NDP script for ‘Fantasy Island’ made its way into question 
period. 
 
We have great hopes, and greater plans, for this rurally based economy, and we intend to do it right. As 
the minister has announced under reorganization, he has renamed the department the Department of 
Rural Development and is revitalizing it, because he and this government realize the importance of rural 
affairs and agriculture to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The land bank arrangement is phasing out, and young farmers now have a future as independent 
businessmen. They have earned this right each year, and this government is prepared to pay up rather 
than to punish them. 
 
This government will allow businesses to profit. Business is welcome in any competitive sector and 
wherever they offer something to our people, Premier Devine’s government wants to see productivity 
and challenge in the hands of our people. We believe small business can play a greater role here. Again 
looking next door to the west we see home-grown small business turning into big businesses. It might 
have happened here, but for the intellectual largesse of the NDP who, thank goodness, are the opposition 
now in this province. 
 
People here want government to give direction, to foster freedom and justice, and people of 
Saskatchewan don’t want meddling and incompetence coming from their elected officials. If we as 
government have altered positions, cut back on the size of payrolls and changed a few players, we don’t 
apologize for that. We keep our promises and deal honestly. We’re not cutting jobs; we’re creating jobs, 
while reducing the government’s drain on the taxpayer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province want progress. We want a place for our children to feel free, 
and a place for them to work in the future. This requires an eye to the future, and planning. 
 
The NDP feathered the nest for the economic downturn. Since the hatch of socialism in Saskatchewan, 
their sort of government has driven youth away, and it got progressively worse. No dynamics could be 
fostered amid towering crown corporations and socialist stagnation. Young ideas fled to greener 
pastures. No adventurers would take a second look here. Even farmers began to fear for their birthright. 
Now a Progressive Conservative government and Premier Devine have reversed this regression. We 
want industry with technology to create reasons for staying t home. We invite adventurers to take the 
risks, invest the dollars for profit, and supply the workforce with challenging alternatives. 
 
The Bad News Bears opposite recently used two arguments relating to the economy. They said the 
deficit is too big and, number two, government spending, needed to stimulate economy. About the 
deficit, comparatively speaking, Saskatchewan has a solid fiscal position. The deficit is approximately 1 
per cent of the federal figure. It is considerably less than either neighbouring province’s deficit. Nor 
does this government spend foolishly, as the previous NDP government did. We have seen the finance 
minister contain the increase in government expenditures to less than 7 per  



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
633 

cent. If we had chosen to increase taxes and thus bring down the deficit, this would decrease consumer 
responsiveness without purpose. A healthy business environment alone will increase government 
revenues. 
 
About the idea of increasing government spending, we inherited a system now straining to meet basic 
services such as health, education and social services. The deficit would needlessly get out of hand if 
government decided to spend its way out of recession. The governor of the Bank of Canada urges 
governments to refrain from the impatience behind public spending. 
 
Economic realities must be faced by everyone. Nothing is free. There just ain’t no free lunch anymore. 
And more government spending would mean a further burden to the taxpayers of this province. 
Eventually government would have complete control over the daily lives of proud and freedom-loving 
people. 
 
A government trying to dull the thud of economic reality, Mr. Speaker, raises the expectations of people 
and soon welfare is no help at all. Public spending stagnates economies, whereas private spending 
stimulates it. Private dollars are spent wisely. Businesses invest for profit and invest for growth. Let the 
risk-takers do the risking, for they know what they are doing. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan needs a fresh flow of private dollars. Money must be attracted to our 
economy. Whereas bureaucracies expand for control, businesses simply expand. But the government of 
today is not afraid of present economic stirring around us. We believe we can participate in the Canadian 
economic scene instead of building a big wall of crown corporations against invaders. If we’re going to 
live with existing institutions and crown corporations then we intend to do it right. We’re going to make 
them viable operations, Mr. Speaker, and meaningful operations. The budget showed clearly support for 
the crowns, but we will expect returns from those crowns. If we’re to increase spending we will see the 
spending go where people need it most. 
 
Within Mr. Andrew’s 6.8 per cent increase in spending, there’s an increase of 10 per cent to health and 
related services. The government created jobs of service to the people. More nurses, more researchers — 
more dollars to find ways of improving people’s lives in this province. 
 
This government will continue to trim and streamline its operations. In the first 11 months this 
government, the finance department saved $30 million, which was going on needless spending. After 11 
years of NDP government, we may require another 11 months to put things in shape, and, Mr. Speaker, 
we will do it. 
 
Because of fiscal responsibility (a credit to our finance minister and his staff), the government was able 
to improve the educational choices offered to our youth. This will enable our young people to stay closer 
to home and embark on a chosen career path without having to leave the province. This government is 
committed to upgrading education and giving students a wide choice of opportunities. And now, this 
government is providing the entire, or the environment, rather, where business can come in and employ 
our educated youth. 
 
The Andrew budget, Mr. Speaker, is a masterpiece in these times. It shows, number one, job creation — 
6,000 and more. It shows, number two, fiscal responsibility. It shows that technical training is very 
important and we intend to expand our technical training facilities. And it shows moderate stimulation 
which is the wise course in these  



 
April 7, 1983 
 

 
634 

economic times. The opposition will watch under their cloud of doom and gloom these days, but job 
creation is under way. 
 
They will envy our initiative in letting business lead the way in this province. Instead of trying to put up 
barriers, we will invite the world to Saskatchewan. We will show potential investors fiscal 
responsibility, as Mr. Andrew has done with the 6.8 per cent budget. We will also show them crown 
corporations that are managed properly. We will offer investors the sort of environment they require to 
do business here, as the nine-point business development plan shows. We are now showing just how 
much more we can be. 
 
We are building trust and coming through with our promises. We are coming through better than any 
provincial government in Canada, as the sole government to show a positive increase in jobs created last 
year. We have earned the trust of the people by coming through on the promises and so much more. 
 
We communicate with our people on water hearings, and with the establishment of the public utilities 
review commission. We are not afraid of doing challenging things. We have talked to the people about 
our budget. We are communicating with other governments at all levels and jurisdictions. We have a 
growing relationship with North Dakota because Premier Devine took the initiative to communicate 
with those people. We have support from other provincial governments on the Crow issue, because the 
agriculture minister took the message to those people. 
 
We are working with the native people of Saskatchewan so that they can show growth, achieve growth, 
and achieve progress. All Canadians want the native people to find self-realization within our society. 
This government believes they’re embarking on new directions, positive directions, and this government 
continues to provide a working environment for native issues. We wish them every success, and we will 
co-operate. 
 
I am sure by now that everyone here knows the details of the budget. I can let Mr. Andrew’s budget 
speak for itself, and I can assure this House of my full support for the measures contained therein. I 
should also express my thanks to the finance minister for a job well done. 
 
The Premier recently announced a reorganization. Health care programs and social service programs 
will better serve the needy by a new distribution of responsibilities. Because of this government’s 
creation of a well-defined ministry, small business in Saskatchewan will no longer be neglected, as Mr. 
McLeod indicated. The new Justice Department will be better equipped to handle law administration. 
Government operations will receive hands-on attention from the Hon. Joan Duncan’s new Revenue and 
Financial Services ministry. Positive changes to the rural affairs department give farmers the assurance 
of a government committed to their well-being, and of course it’s now being changed to the Department 
of Rural Development. These alterations reflect the Premier’s desire to have us living up to our 
obligations. We’ll continue to place priorities into proper perspective. 
 
As a member of Executive Council I have several areas of responsibility: Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs; Co-operation and Co-operative Development; the Saskatchewan Research Council; and the 
liquor board. 
 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs offer a variety of services to the citizens of Saskatchewan. These 
services will be maintained while the government trims  



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
635 

expenditures. Within Consumer and Commercial Affairs, program services, budgets have been reduced 
across the board. There is one exception; the rent appeal commission receives 30 per cent more funding 
to supply their services. The overall reduction of spending in this department equals well over a half a 
million dollars, Mr. Speaker — quite a savings from a small department, without cutting services. Still 
in Consumer and Commercial Affairs, we anticipate some legislative changes, some of which are minor 
changes to The Religious Societies Land Act in concert with changes to The Non-profit Corporations 
Act. This will serve to deregulate the procedures of churches holding land. 
 
We’ll have amendments to The Business Corporations Act, and we’ll also be regulatory reform in 
nature, following the lines of the Canada Business Corporations Act. We’re working to streamline the 
procedures a corporate management must follow in doing business here. I might add, the Saskatchewan 
Bar Association’s corporate law committee endorsed these forthcoming amendments. 
 
In Co-operation and Co-operative Development, services are tailored to meet the needs of co-ops in this 
province. This government intends to make the suit fit properly. The finance minister managed a small 
savings from this department, again with no effect on program services; indeed, we are providing more 
and better services. As well, there are legislative changes proposed for the department. The co-op act 
will bring co-ops into focus with these changes. They have asked for change, and we will meet their 
desires. 
 
Co-ops are run by three basic principles: equality, equity and mutual self-help. Our legislation will 
combine The Co-operative Associations Act, The Co-operative Marketing Associations Act, and The 
Co-operative Production Associations Act into one act. This move will create uniform legislation 
governing co-ops in Saskatchewan, plus measures to deregulate and streamline services and operations. 
 
The Credit Union Act. The consultative process was used extensively to bring about changes in credit 
union legislation. The amendments will be protection oriented, with measures designed to bring credit 
unions more into the financial mainstream of Saskatchewan commerce. Much could be said of these two 
legislative priorities, but there are other topics to cover. 
 
Co-operation and Co-operative Development is promoting a co-op home-building program to help 
stimulate activity in the housing industry. It is also a great help to those lacking cash on hand, because 
sweat equity can be applied to the down payment. 
 
As I said, co-ops were involved in the designing of legislative changes. We have developed ongoing 
communications with the co-operatives of Saskatchewan, and I can say, without fear of contradiction, 
that these communications are working very, very well. We view co-ops as a vital sector within the 
provincial economy. To us they are dynamic business operations. 
 
The Saskatchewan Research Council will receive practical new direction from my ministry. Spending 
for the research council was increased by 7 per cent, slightly higher than the overall 6/8 increase in 
government expenditures. Appointment of a new chief executive officer for the council will occur 
shortly, with the retirement of Dr. Tom Pepper. 
 
Liquor board integration is proceeding smoothly, Mr. Speaker. I previously stated there  



 
April 7, 1983 
 

 
636 

would be immediate savings of $200,000-plus annually from integration of the liquor commission into 
the liquor board. The need for integration is apparent from these immediate savings. Because of this 
government’s revenue requirements for the fiscal year 1983-84, Mr. Speaker, I have instructed the liquor 
board to raise an additional $9 million. This money will go to general revenues, to be used on programs 
such as health care, education and social services. No major changes in The Liquor Act are forthcoming, 
but there will be changes to the special liquor vendor policy of limiting their numbers. The 135 ceiling is 
to be removed. Other progressive alternations to liquor policy may result from the liquor law review 
committee report. It is forthcoming. 
 
I want to restate my remarks of earlier. I sincerely believe that Mr. Andrew’s budget is a major 
achievement in the present economic climate. People’s services were protected; businesses were offered 
incentives; crowns were stimulated; taxes were left alone, in the main, and education for the future was 
keynoted. 
 
I neglected to mention the Saskatchewan Research Council’s role in the future. We intend to use the 
research council as one vehicle, bring the province into the next century. The direction taken by the 
council will, from here on, be practical. They will receive from the Premier priorities to pursue. 
 
Premier Devine leads a progressive group of members here. He is leading this province into a new era 
where freedom and productivity will be more than just a hope. He’s making Saskatchewan a place for 
young and old alike. Very soon, youth will look twice before packing their bags for any reason. They are 
doing that now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our senior citizens will enjoy growing old surrounded by their family and loved ones. Their children 
will no longer leave. Premier Devine is making good things happen for the people of Saskatchewan. 
And with those words, Mr. Speaker, I don’t support the amendment, but I do support the main motion. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Folk: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to rise in the House today as 
the member for Saskatoon University, to enter the debate on the 1983-84 budget. During the campaign 
of the 1982 election, and indeed, since that memorable day of last April 26th, I’ve repeatedly made the 
statement that two of the main responsibilities of any government is health and education. These two 
areas of responsibility are very prominent in the constituency I have the honour of representing, 
Saskatoon University. 
 
In the area of health, the 1983-84 budget shows an increase of $70 million over the ’82-83 budget. It is 
an increase of 9.6 per cent even during this period of economic restraint, and certainly, a positive 
commitment by our government to improving our health care system. 
 
Seventeen million dollars over five years is committed to the Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation, 
including $10 million for the construction of a new cancer clinic in Saskatoon; $650,000 is included for 
the establishment of the much needed paediatric intensive care unit at the University Hospital. This will 
provide a valuable new treatment centre for the high-risk paediatric cases. Also committed is $2.7 
million over three years for the construction of a new children’s rehabilitation centre, also in Saskatoon. 
This project is in co-operation with the Kinsmen Foundation. 



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
637 

Overall, capital grants for the constructions and renovations of hospitals in Saskatchewan will total 
$22.25 million, an increase of 24.8 per cent over 1982-83. This all adds up to a positive, concerted effort 
to moving Saskatchewan health care towards number one in the country, not number eight, as was the 
case by the previous NDP administration. 
 
In the field of education, I am once again delighted to see the emphasis placed in this area by our 
1983-84 budget. The Minister of Advanced Education and Manpower has announced $120 million 
program over for years, which will increase our technical training capacity by about 60 per cent. This 
program will be province-wide, and more proof positive that our government is sensitive to the needs of 
the day. Once again, quite a marked change from the previous administration. 
 
Also in the budget, there’s a commitment to maintain the quality of education in our universities. Our 
two universities will receive $126.2 million to operate this year, which represents a 7 per cent increase 
in funding over last year; 4.3 million is allocated for capital construction needs. 
 
Myself, I am extremely happy to see that $1.2 million is devoted this year towards a new geological 
sciences building at the University of Saskatchewan. In 1974, the need for this building was not only 
identified, but put on a priority basis. I am pleased to see that our government has acted on this much 
needed capital project in less than 11 months after taking office, in comparison to the previous NDP 
government which did nothing in eight years, except include it in their 1982 election budget. 
 
I would like to personally commend the Minister of Finance, and the Minister of Advanced Education 
and Manpower, for their efforts in moving towards placing more priority on university funding. In 1970, 
the total university expenditure as a percentage of the total provincial budget was 8.3 per cent. In 1982, 
the NDP administration had that ratio down to 4.8 per cent; 4.8 per cent of the total budget, and their 
term of office was during very prosperous, very good economic times. 
 
Another example of our government being sensitive to the present day needs of the people of 
Saskatchewan is the establishment of the nine-point job creation program. Programs such as the 
extension of the Build-A-Home program; Opportunities ’83 for youth employment; a $32 million 
program for construction and renovation of cultural and recreational facilities; continuation of the 
Saskatchewan JOBS program; and the imaginative job creation program for small business, are just 
some of the examples of the fact that our government does not only recognize the unemployment 
problem in our province, but is willing to act in a positive manner. 
 
The 1983—84 budget has favourably responded to three major factors: the weakening government 
revenue position, due mainly to weak potash markets and the decline and instability in international oil 
prices; number two, pressures to increase expenditures (in essential services, expenditures have grown 
by 10 per cent under this new budget); and number three, the need to stimulate our economy. 
 
Our government has reacted with a course of action which identifies and acts on the immediate needs of 
our province as well as a direction which will be beneficial in our future. In the past year, our 
government has brought forth popular policies such as establishment of the public utilities review 
commission, the mortgage interest  



 
April 7, 1983 
 

 
638 

reduction plan and the farm purchase program. As well, the removal, removable, the removal of the 
provincial sales tax on gasoline will generate tax savings for the people of Saskatchewan, estimated 
$145 million in 1983-84. This is a relief in definite, difficult economic times when it is needed most. 
 
I have listened to the members of the opposition lament the fact that we have a deficit budget, while at 
the same time criticizing some expenditure reductions and calling for various other expenditure 
increases. 
 
In order to have a balanced budget and increase expenditures, as the NDP seem to be promoting, they, if 
they were the government, would have to increase taxes for the people of Saskatchewan to a large 
degree. The gas tax would probably be returned and added to. Personal income tax rates would likely 
increase and perhaps the sales tax would be increased. That would be the NDP’s solution. 
 
I congratulate the Minister of Finance for bringing to the people of Saskatchewan a sensitive, sensible, 
realistic and workable budget for their benefit. On behalf of the constituents of Saskatoon University, I 
will be supporting the budget motion and certainly opposing the amendment. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to have the opportunity to get into this budget debate. 
And I find it very interesting listening to the members of the government. When they get up, I have 
heard very few of them that have made comments regarding the budget. It seems that the budget was 
something they didn’t really want to talk about. Only some of the ministers that have spoke in this 
House referred to what was, what was in the budget, but the reset of the members, Mr. Speaker, seem to 
want to avoid what was in that budget. 
 
They call us a very ineffective opposition, and this is what has been mentioned yesterday. They say that 
the media is the opposition. Now, I believe that was the case when they were in opposition, and the 
media does play quite a role in what gets out to the public. The media does play a large role in what gets 
out to the public. And the minister of consumer and corporate affairs today said that we are the Bad 
News Bears. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think we probably are, as far as the government’s concerned. When 
they continue to criticize us, and they are concerned about what we are saying, then, yes, we are getting 
to them, and maybe we are the Bad News Bears, as far as they are concerned, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — And we will continue to be the Bad News Bears for the next three years. 
 
The member from Arm River, yesterday in his speech, seemed to think that there was a real problem 
regarding salaries in the former government; salaries paid to members of the Executive Council, to 
employees of Executive Council. Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to go through some of the salaries that 
are being paid to members of the Executive Council now, or employees of Executive Council. And I can 
go to one where there was no such position under the former administration, and that’s director of 
communications, the Executive Council, and that’s Sean Quinlan, at $55,000. And the special assistant 
to the Premier, in communications, another position that did not exist under the form administration, and 
that’s Garf Spetz. Just under $60,000, Mr. 



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
639 

Speaker. And this is supposed to be a government that isn’t spending as much money as the former 
administration did. And there’s much more. We can go to the cabinet press officer. The present one is 
Ron Shorvoyce, formerly with CBC. Just under $49,000. And, Mr. Speaker, we can go to the chief, or 
the assistant chief electoral officer, Keith Lampard. The former chief, or assistant chief electoral officer, 
got $27,000. Keith Lampard gets 48,000. He has since been promoted to chief electoral officer for 
54,000, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Senior administrative assistant to the chief electoral officer. There was no such position. Grant 
Chamberlin, $39,000. Cabinet secretary, Mr. Speaker (and that’s one that I think everybody would like 
to hear about — cabinet secretary), and that’s Derek Bedson. Bedson was formerly with the Rt. Hon. 
John Diefenbaker. I believe he worked for Lyon in Manitoba, and now he’s with the Saskatchewan 
government at $85,000, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These are some of the so—called Saskatchewan people that they brought in from Alberta, from 
Manitoba, from Ontario — from wherever they could get ‘em. But there are a few from Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. There are a few from Saskatchewan. But when they want to talk about the amount of 
money that was being spent in Executive Council under the former administration, they should look at 
this list of today, and you’ll find that it’s going to be a lot higher than was ever spent under the former 
administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a few comments on some of the things that were in this year’s budget, 
and I haven’t found too much that was all that good in this budget, but I’d like to refer to one 
department; that’s rural affairs. I think it was a big disappointment in this budget. There was just a paltry 
little increase for rural affairs, or so now called Rural Development department. And the Department of 
Rural Development received only about 4.6 per cent increase. And the minister says that if you add in, if 
you add in, add the ambulance service that has been taken out and put into Health in order to try and 
make the Department of Health number one, we could put in Social Services in too, and a few others 
(about the only way they can make any department number one). But if you take that out of rural affairs 
he says, ‘Well, it would be, when you added that in, it would be at least 7 per cent.’ Well, Mr. Speaker, I 
think what the councillors of rural Saskatchewan and the R.M.s are concerned about is what they 
actually get, and they are not getting 7 per cent; they are getting more like 4.6 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this was a department that was supposed to be somehow, I suppose, made better and bigger than 
before. To begin with, they were going to scrap that department until somehow the media or somebody 
found out about the fact that they were going to do this, and it got into the news — and what happens, 
Mr. Speaker? They changed their mind. They changed their mind, and they say then that they are not 
going to scrap that department. If that news had not gone out, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that we 
would probably see a budget for rural affairs that would have been even more niggardly than it is. When 
this, when the news came out, the department then, or the government, decided to say that, ‘No, we’re 
not going to scrap it. We are going to improve this department. We are going to strengthen it.’ 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think there are too many people out there that think that they have strengthened it. 
And when you look at what has been said by the president of SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities), Charlie Phelps — and I think he 



 
April 7, 1983 
 

 
640 

summed it up quite well — he said that money set aside in Tuesday’s budget won’t fulfil the 
government’s promise to strengthen rural development. 
 
He also pointed out that money for Rural Development was certainly not very much of an increase. 
That, Mr. Speaker, is the opinion of the president of SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities). He also pointed out that the 4.5 per cent increase in revenue sharing, which accounts for 
some 85 per cent of the department’s budget, is far short of the 7 per cent increase which has been 
promised by the minister at the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) convention. 
Increase averages something like $6,400 per municipality, and that’s an average, and I would say that 
many of them are going to get a lot less, Mr. Speaker. And if the government wants to strengthen the 
department all they would have to do is reinstate a couple of the programs that were promised by the 
former administration. 
 
When this government took over they had dropped a good number of programs. They had dropped the 
rural capital fund program which had allocated some $1.5 million to rural affairs. They had dropped the 
Qu’Appelle scenic route which had allocated $407,000 last year. But, Mr. Speaker, I suppose the 
government must offer the municipalities some consolation by pointing out that they have put into a 
fund $25 million in the municipal financing corporation. So they can get the, or allow the municipalities 
to borrow money to borrow themselves out of this short or niggardly budget that they have put forward. 
And as things stand I think there is no way that the municipalities can avoid a tax increase, and already 
the word coming out from many of the R.M.s is that they are going to have to increase their mill rate 
substantially in 1982, or ’83, if they’re going to continue to provide the services that they had in 1983. 
This, the new Department of Rural Development, Mr. Speaker, becomes nothing more than a name 
change. It is an empty shell; it has no terms to provide the municipalities with any benefits. It is nothing 
more than a name change with no funds in it. That, Mr. Speaker, is what this budget has provided to 
rural Saskatchewan and rural municipalities. 
 
Another area, Mr. Speaker, is Sask Tel. And, if you look, the realities of life are coming home to roost to 
this government. Before they were elected they were highly critical of the increases in Sask Tel rates. 
They left the impression that somehow they would do something about that, that they would keep those 
rates down. And, at no time, Mr. Speaker, was there any suggestion that they would be the first ones 
when they got into government . . . that the first thing that they would do was ask for an increase of 
about 19 per cent. 
 
And this comes about, this comes about, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the mismanagement of that 
government; 1982 operating profits were only 7.8 million — 7.8 million which we don’t have in a report 
as yet. But they have let out the figures to PURC (public utilities review commission); 1982 operating 
profits of 7.8 million in 1982 compared to 24 million in the former years, Mr. Speaker, the previous year 
which had $24 million. And, if they don’t get an immediate increase, Mr. Speaker, if they don’t get an 
immediate increase, and they’ve got an interim increase provided to them by PURC (public utilities 
review commission) today, it’s going to cost this government a lot more money. You’re going to see 
Sask Tel going into debt even further. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any amount that Sask Tel goes into debt will be not because it is a poor corporation, it will 
be because this government has removed some of the profitable parts of Sask Tel and gave it to the 
private sector. They have removed the profitable parts of Sask Tel, and they are now asking the people 
of Saskatchewan to make up that loss by increasing the Sask Tel rates. Mr. Speaker, all I can say is that 
that is  



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
641 

mismanagement on behalf of this government. That corporation was managed well in the past under the 
former administration. It did not lose money as is proposed it is going to do now. 
 
The Tory record after one year is a disaster, and it could get a lot worse. Their bungling has jeopardized 
the well-being of a public utility which has provided a good service to the people of this province for a 
long time. It has provided that service since 1908, Mr. Speaker — 74 years of good service; a service we 
can be proud of. But, one year of bungling and threatening to undo this fine record by this government is 
no longer going to leave this corporation as it has been in the past. 
 
And this, Mr. Speaker, they are going to do at the expense of the people of Saskatchewan. They are 
going to do it at the expense of the people of Saskatchewan to benefit their friends, the multinationals. 
 
If Sask Tel . . . Mr. Speaker, Sask Tel is not the only corporation that they are trying to destroy. SGI and 
PCS, and I don’t know how many other crown corporations they are going to try to destroy the same 
way. But, Mr. Speaker, you can be sure that slowly and surely they are going to erode every crown 
corporation that provided a service and made a profit to the people of Saskatchewan — a profit that they 
are going to give to the private sector, to their free enterprise friends, Mr. Speaker. They have to 
somehow pay these people for the funds that they provided them for the past, the last election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area that this government continues to work in a way that is going to, to provide no 
good government for Saskatchewan, and I’d like to refer to the liquor commission. And that’s some, 
been some very curious changes going on there. First, you see that they have appointed a former 
Conservative member of the . . . or I should say, a Conservative leader as chairman of the liquor board. 
 
A former Conservative leader as chairman of the liquor board, Mr. Speaker. For the first time in 40 
years, a political personality has been placed in this highly sensitive post — for the first time in 40 years, 
Mr. Speaker. Liquor affairs are always difficult to manage, Mr. Speaker. But putting a known political 
personality, however respectable he may be, in this post, can only lead to trouble, and it can only be 
interpreted as a bad sign of how liquor affairs are going to be managed in this province. 
 
Next, they decide to amalgamate the liquor licensing commission and the liquor board. Surely these are 
two distinct function, Mr. Speaker. One is running the business and selling and distributing liquor 
throughout this province. The other is the handling of licences for selling liquor. Whatever fictitious 
claims are made by this government about cost saving, it is important to note that these matters should 
be handled very carefully, Mr. Speaker. There are, they’re mixed up, I think, that this government has 
made . . . And I think if I could suggest what their next step was, it was to appoint a senior civil servant 
to manage the liquor board. So now we have Martin Pederson as chairman of the liquor board, and 
David Bock as the manager. This can only mean that Mr. Bock is supposed to run the business, and Mr. 
Pederson will look after the licensing and other affairs dealing with the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a totally political move on behalf of this government, to give licences to people that they 
think are favourable to their party, are sympathetic to their party. They have put people in place that are 
nothing more than former politicians. 
 
The government has indicated it’s going to lift the ceiling of 135 special liquor vendors  



 
April 7, 1983 
 

 
642 

in this province, and it appears at this point that there is going to be no limit on that. And there is always 
pressure from the public regarding liquor vendors, and there may be some need to increase that figure, 
Mr. Speaker. But what they should be doing is very carefully evaluating what the result is going to be of 
that increase, what that increase, or how large an increase there should be in it. To this point we haven’t 
seen any figures, and we will be looking to see what’s gong to happen in the months ahead when they 
reintroduce the legislation that they had brought in in the last session, to see just what they are going to 
do with liquor vendors in Saskatchewan. 
 
Other things are happening too — things like allowing liquor at Taylor Field, and allowing other things, 
liquor in other places. Possibly in . . . We don’t know what’s going to happen with their new liquor law. 
Maybe in grocery stores, Mr. Speaker, some of this may be acceptable by the public, to the public. It 
may be asked for by the public. But I think what this government should be doing is going out there to 
the public and seeing just what it is that the public wants, and what direction they should be going in. 
They seem to be asking the public about many other things, but when it, when it gets to something like 
liquor it seems that they don’t have to ask the public about that. 
 
The Minister of Highways the other day stated that he was going to, that he was going to get tougher on 
drinking drivers, even to the point of asking for body fluid samples, and while on the other hand the 
minister is saying one thing, on the other hand the government is saying that we are, that we are going to 
increase the consumption of alcohol. Mr. Speaker, this government is trying to go in both directions at 
the same time. One minister tells the public one thing; another minister tells the public something else. 
And sooner or later if they keep that up they are going to run into one another when they come around 
that bend, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one other area that’s very concerned, or interesting to me, and that’s the Department of 
Highways, and I know the Minister of Highways wants to hear all about highways. Soon after this 
minister took office he proclaimed that his major emphasis was going to be on four-laning the major 
arteries in this province, No. 1 and the Yellowhead. And there is no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that some f this 
is required. Some of this is needed. We have to maintain our main trunk roads. But as I have previously 
expressed, I have some concern that such programs like the four-laning should not be at the expense of 
the total network of roads in this province, highways in this province, that provide an acceptable level of 
service to the people in Saskatchewan. And I was pleased to note that the minister didn’t go overboard 
in his regard when he announced his 1983-84 project array. I suspect what happened was that when he 
first got elected, he didn’t spend that much time talking to the people. I suspect that he made a quick 
decision at that time that he was going to four-lane every highway, every main highway — the two main 
ones, the Yellowhead and the Trans-Canada in Saskatchewan. But, subsequent to that announcement, I 
think his backbench MLAs finally got to him and said, ‘Look, you better get back to reality here. The 
people of Saskatchewan are not going to accept you deleting all the other highways in Saskatchewan.’ 
And it’s very peculiar that the minister continues to complain about not being . . . not enough money 
being left in the budget, from the former NDP government. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if this government, this minister had spent the amount of money in Highways as had 
the previous government, as was announced in the budget just a year ago, then, Mr. Speaker, I think this 
minister could have built many more roads in the province of Saskatchewan. The NDP capital 
expenditures just a year ago, in their budget for 1982-83, were something like $137 million. The 
November Conservative budget cut this figure to something like 112 million, Mr. Speaker. In the 
1983-84  



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
643 

spending, it is cut back even more to 110 million. In, in previous years, some of this spending was under 
DNS; now it is all in Highways. The highway budget this year, of course, includes sums formerly 
included in DNS, the highway traffic board and the Transportation Agency of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I heard the minister, in his speech yesterday, when I heard him referring to all 
the projects that he was going to be working on this year, for a while there it sounded real good. I 
thought, this minister is going to do a good job. And the more I listened to him, the more familiar this 
project array of his sounded. For a while there, I almost thought it was the former Bob Long, the 
minister of highways, that was putting this forward. And when you look, Mr. Speaker, at this year’s 
project array, and when you look at the project array from last spring introduced by the former minister 
of highways, you can go down the list and you see the Moosomin scale site in the former project array, 
and in the previous, or the current project array, you can look at the south of Regina, shoulder widening 
— that was in the former project array. And the highway north of Moosomin to Rocanville, the U.S. 
border to junction 18; Manitoba border to Redvers; junction no. 9 to Melville; south of junction 14 to 
Alberta border; north of Kerrobert; east of junction 47 to east of Candiac; junction no. 4 to Loon Lake 
grid; south of Spiritwood — Mr. Speaker, every one of those roads was in the former project array of the 
minister of . . . the then minister of highways, Bob, Minister Bob Long. 
 
For a while I thought that we were going to get some new roads, and the minister says the only 
difference is that now they are going to build those roads. Well, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that they do 
that because they’re now a year late from building those roads. And, if you look at the total, and I looked 
at both projects array, and I left out the carry overs. And if you leave out the carry overs and you add up 
all the figures, Mr. Speaker, from the project array that was introduced a year ago and the project array 
that is introduced, that was introduced yesterday, I found that there is a total of grading and oiling, a 
shortfall in this year’s project array from the last one that’s something like 359 kilometres, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And here this minister tries to make it look s though he was really going to spend some money on 
highways, that he was introducing some new programs that never existed before, Mr. Speaker. He 
almost got away with it, too. But I think when the people look back at that, they will realize that all they 
are getting now is roads that they would have got a year sooner. 
 
Over the past year, Mr. Speaker, I have used a number of titles to try and describe the Minister of 
Highways and his inability to convince his cabinet colleagues that the highway system needs to e 
expanded I’ve called him the minister of signs for his decision to put up signs along the Red Coat Trail 
rather to, than to make improvements. I’ve called him the minister of news releases for his ability to 
churn out more paper and PR than pavement. And I’ve called him the minister of pot holes because that 
is what the minister will be known at, known as in another year or so when the roads continue to 
deteriorate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, after yesterday’s budget, I’m afraid that I’m going to have to find a new title for that minister, and I 
haven’t decided just what it’s going to be, Mr. Speaker. This is going to take a little bit of thinking 
because he’s changed his mind so many times that when I come up with a title I want it to be appropriate 
to the Minister of Highways and to the kind of job that he is doing in his department. 



 
April 7, 1983 
 

 
644 

One thing we’d have to say, that the minister at least admits that he has changed his mind on a number 
of issues. He has changed his mind on seat belts. He has changed his mind on safety-related issues. He is 
a recent convert, Mr. Speaker — I’d say a convert to sanity — because some of the comments that came 
from him when he was in opposition were totally against seat belts, were totally against the safety 
program, but now he is a convert. 
 
Now, if we could only bring another conversion, Mr. Speaker, and if we could convert this minister to 
somehow construct more highways, get more money out of his Minister of Finance, if we could only 
convert that minister from being a talker to being a doer, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The cuts in the traffic safety program particularly concern me, Mr. Speaker. Last year’s NDP budget had 
some $2.93 million in it, and this year’s PC budget has $2.41 million. And this minister that’s so 
concerned about the safety of people on Saskatchewan highways is the same minister that allows his 
budget to get cut. He lets it, he allows it to get cut in the construction of highways; he allows it to get cut 
in the area of safety. 
 
This, I find, Mr. Speaker, very surprising in the view of how concerned the minister appeared to be 
yesterday, regarding safety. It seems like another case, Mr. Speaker, of where this minister and this 
government should be putting their money where their mouth is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the area of agriculture, I think agriculture and the amount of money put into the budget 
for Agriculture concerns everyone in this province, not only the farmers. I think it concerns everyone. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m shocked at the cut backs in the agricultural budget. After all the great words 
about agriculture in the budget of November last, I thought we might see some good news for the 
farmers in this budget. Instead, we see a 13 per cent drop from the NDP budget of March. The 1983-84 
Conservative budget provides $79 million for Agriculture. Comparable figures in the NDP budget last 
March would be about $91 million, Mr. Speaker. And if the Conservatives had placed the same priority 
on agriculture as the NDP had, they would have at least 100, or over $100 million in their budget for 
Agriculture. 
 
I’m disappointed that the Conservative government eliminated the farm, the FarmStart start-up program, 
the start-up grants. They talk a great deal about the family farm. They appear to be continuing the 
FarmStart program itself, judging by the grants, or the capital that’s in there. But the start-up grants gave 
young farmers an opportunity. It gave them, it gave them some capital with which they could get started. 
And that would make a big difference to a young farmer, Mr. Speaker. But they decided they would cut 
that out. Young farmers, and the start-up that they would get, the ability for them to survive on the farm, 
is not that great a concern for this government. 
 
I was also disappointed that not one cent appears in this budget to back up government statements about 
how they were going to fight, fight the Crow. They keep saying that they will go to the wall for farmers. 
They will spend $10 million or $15 million if necessary. And if you remember, Mr. Speaker, about a 
year, a little over a year ago, this same government, when they were in opposition, complained about the 
$180,000 that the former government had spent, spent to try and save the Crow, and get the issue out 
before the people. 
 
There’s a Crow retention, a number of Crow retention committees in this province that have been 
working hard, working hard at their own expense, trying to save the Crow.  



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
645 

But what assistance has this government given them? None, Mr. Speaker. They have asked for 
assistance, but they wouldn’t give them a single dollar. And you would think that this government, if 
they are concerned about saving the Crow and saving agriculture in Saskatchewan, would at least at 
least put up $50,000, which is a small amount. They were prepared in the debates a couple of months 
back to spend millions, but they can’t give these groups a small amount to keep them working to allow 
them to do some research, and to present their case before Ottawa. 
 
What the members, what the farmers of Saskatchewan want is action, and not words, Mr. Speaker. If we 
lose the Crow rate, the responsibility will fall on this government, the Conservative Government of 
Saskatchewan, and on the Conservative government of Ottawa because neither, or Conservative 
opposition of Ottawa, neither one of them, both being Conservative, both being Conservatives have 
done very much to try and save the Crow. And they are . . . And they want me to come and . . . And 
what will happen when the Conservative government may be in Ottawa? Well, Mr. Speaker, I will get to 
that eventually. 
 
But I would like to say that what they are saying because they don’t form a position, they are saying that 
we can’t form a position yet. They have been saying that for a long time. The farmer can’t pay more, but 
we aren’t going to get out there and fight on his behalf because they have organizations like the Pallisers 
in this province who say that the farmer will benefit if the Crow is disposed of. We do away with the 
Crow and the farmer will benefit, Mr. Speaker. That s what the Palliser says. And I believe the Minister 
of Agriculture is a member of the Palliser group. 
 
But I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, how do the Pallisers suggest that the farmers will benefit at a time 
when we see out grain prices going down? And they have just been announced yesterday. We see a 
decrease in the price of grain for the farmers, something that he has no control over. We see increased 
input costs for fuel, chemicals, machinery, repairs, and other things that the farmer has no control over. 
How does the Palliser group . . . How can they say that somehow if the Crow is done away with, and the 
farmer has to pay even more to ship his grain to export position, that the farmer is going to benefit? 
 
Mr. Speaker, all I can say to that is: that the Palliser group is not in touch with the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. It’s a small group, a small group that is only interested in their own self. They are not 
concerned about all the farmers in Saskatchewan. All I can see coming from this government is a lot of 
words, and I don’t know what those words are going to lead to other than nothing, because to this point 
that’s exactly what has happened. 
 
I know some of the members have been saying that they have been going to the Crow meetings 
throughout the province. And they say that we are behind the farmers. At every meeting that they’re at, 
they say we’re behind, behind the farmers. The farmer cannot afford to pay a penny more. But that 
appears that it’s only some of the back—benchers that are saying that some of the farmers . . . And I 
would suggest that these back—benchers should be getting to their minister and saying: ‘Look, as a 
government, you better get out there and help the farmer,’ because what we have seen, there’s one thing 
coming from the back—benches that attend these Crow meetings . . . And they tell the people at the 
meeting that they will go back and they will press their government to take action. 



 
April 7, 1983 
 

 
646 

But what has the Minister of Agriculture been saying, Mr. Speaker? The Minister of Agriculture when 
he was in Melville says that the farmers can afford, or are willing, to pay a little more to move their 
grain. That is what the minister is saying. He’s saying something totally different from what some of his 
members in the House are saying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this government is going to keep some of the promises that they have been making to 
agriculture, and if they are going to keep the agricultural industry strong in this province, they should be 
a little more sincere in what they tell the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have been the telling the Minister of Agriculture and the Premier for some time now that they had 
better talk to their friends in Ottawa. They had better talk to the Conservatives in Ottawa, and we know 
that the minister has been in Ottawa and he has been talking to the Conservatives in Ottawa, and he has 
been talking to the government in Ottawa. But we also know that when the minister talked to the 
Conservative members of government, or in Ottawa, that he was not prepared to come back here and say 
that they are going to support us because he knows they will not. He knows very well that when the 
Conservatives were in government in Ottawa they were planning to do away with the Crow, the same as 
what Pepin is doing now. They know that that was in the plans, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why we don’t 
see too much action coming from the Conservative government or the Conservative opposition in 
Ottawa. We don’t see anything coming from the Conservative government in Saskatchewan. We see no 
opposition to getting rid of the Crow coming from the Conservative Government of Alberta, Mr. 
Speaker. That is not happening because the Conservatives were planning to do exactly what Pepin is 
planning to do now. 
 
And all this time the Minister of Agriculture in this House is trying to somehow say that the NDP and 
the Liberals have some alliance, and they are the ones that are to blame for the Crow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that there is no alliance between the NDP and the Liberals in Ottawa, nor 
anyone else anywhere else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to have to see a little more action on behalf of this government. We are going 
to see a little more action if we are going to convince the farmers that they are going to do something 
about trying to save the Crow. 
 
And one item of interest, another item of interest in this budget, Mr. Speaker, is the virtual 
disappearance of the role for the grain car corporation. Last year there was some $9 million in the 
budget for the grain car corporation. This year we see something less than $200,000, and that’s only for 
administration. 
 
And what’s going on, Mr. Speaker? The Minister of Finance says it’s only a bookkeeping change. Some 
bookkeeping change, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan grain cars were a major contribution to the grain 
handling transportation system. They also gave the province some clout in dealing with the situation of 
grain movement. The $55 million in capital came from the heritage fund. That fund the Minister of 
Finance described as a cash cow for the crown corporations. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that cash cow was for the benefit of farmers when it was spent on grain cars. 
Financial arrangements were made at the time for the heritage fund to be paid back with interest and 
necessary funds came from the regular budget through the vote I mentioned, and everything was above 
board, Mr. Speaker. 



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
647 

But now there is a change and we need to know what is going on. We need to know what is going to be 
done, what happened to the grain car corporation. We have received no explanations from this 
government, Mr. Speaker. And what concerns me even more than the bookkeeping is the question of 
whether this change means that there is no longer a grain car fleet. Are they going to sell them? Are they 
going to give them away? Are they going to wrap them in mothballs, or what are they going to do? 
Those are answers, Mr. Speaker, that we would like to have. 
 
And this week’s announcement about the 1983-84 grain prices shows just how serious this farming, or 
the agricultural situation, is in Saskatchewan. There’s a particular concern about the steadily increasing 
costs in the face of declining prices. Farm fuel prices are one of particular concern. Increases since the 
Conservative government took office are as high as 23 per cent more. We urge this government to 
introduce a farm fuel rebate program. All they have to do is copy the Alberta program — the Alberta 
fuel rebate program of some 32 cents a gallon. The government could have acted. Instead, Mr. Speaker, 
they did nothing. 
 
Other areas of farm costs also require study, Mr. Speaker. The cost of farm machinery, together with the 
cost of service and repairs, and the adequacy of service and repair facilities deserves study. Both farmers 
and machinery dealers are facing trouble, problem, Mr. Speaker. This matter should be studied to 
determine what action can be taken by this government. 
 
It is not only the farmers that are suffering. It is also the dealers, the small towns that are suffering. The 
cost of fertilizers and chemicals and other supplies are of concern to the farmers. In fact, a complete 
study of farm costs would be of value and should be pursued by this government. 
 
Since the agricultural sector determines to a large degree the buoyancy of the provincial economy, and 
even with normal crops this year, I think it would appear that we are going to see a large decline in farm 
income. In fact, it’s going to be very likely the lowest since 1972. And I find it very difficult to 
understand why this government would decrease the agricultural budget at a time when it should be 
increasing it, unless, of course, they feel that the oil companies and the potash companies and the CPR 
are more important than the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the direction that this government seems to be going. They are not providing more 
money for an industry that has kept this province going, that is a major industry in the province of 
Saskatchewan, but they are prepared to cut the royalties to the oil companies. They are prepared to get 
more money for the potash companies, the private sector potash companies, and they are prepared to let 
the Crow go, Mr. Speaker. This is the direction that this government has been going in. They are 
prepared to allow everything pertaining to the farmer and to agriculture — they are prepared to allow 
agriculture to die in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I can say one thing. When the farmers start to suffer, when they start losing their land, they will get 
back to this government, they will be on your doorstep, and they will tell you exactly what should be 
done, and they will put you, in three years time where they think you should be. And, Mr. Speaker, I will 
suggest that that time they will probably put you back in opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re all, all the deficiencies in this budget. I find it very difficult being  



 
April 7, 1983 
 

 
648 

able to vote for a budget like it. So I think it is very obvious that I will be voting for the amendment and 
against the main motion. 
 
Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I wish to address the legislature on a few points 
relating to the stimulating and the confidence-building budget delivered by our dynamic and innovative 
Minister of Finance, bountiful Bobby Andrew. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what did . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Alibi Andrew. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Deficit Bob. 
 
Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my remarks today I was not — I repeat, not — going to get 
into any arguments with the NDP opposition over on this side. No, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was not going 
to waste any valuable time because we don’t get an awful lot of time on our fee in the House. I wasn’t 
going to waste any valuable time arguing or exchanging insults with this negative disappearing party, 
the NDP over on my right. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this gap, this gap we have between us, maybe four or five feet at the most — 
five feet maybe in distance, Mr. Deputy Speaker — but I want to say about 5 million miles in 
philosophy and intent. And a dynamic intent to finish off the job we were elected to do last April, 
because that little gap there of five feet means absolutely nothing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you 
compare our ideas and the kind of initiatives that went into our budget, compared with the kind of 
balderdash that they have been throwing at the public of Saskatchewan for 11 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Maxwell: — And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had not intended to spend any time on this negative kind 
of stuff in answer to the balderdash we’ve been hearing over here, but I didn’t start it, and I didn’t start 
this whole argument that picked up just now. But I’d like to get the last word on it, and I’d like to say 
that the kind of budget that was brought in by Bob Andrew just a short time ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
represented a kind of a spirit, a new idea in Saskatchewan and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was a spirit of 
youth and a spirit of optimism and a spirit of looking ahead. 
 
Now that spirit of youth — perhaps some of us are the 40-year-old mark, and I know one or two are a 
little more than that, so when I talk the spirit of youth I’m talking an attitude and I’m talking about 
what’s between our ears and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, measured on that criteria, they were a bunch of old 
men the day they were born. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Maxwell: — . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Somebody’s saying I should have stayed in Ireland 
over here. Now that’s sarcasm, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and sarcasm is the lowest form of wit. But not even 
sarcasm is low enough for the low wits over there. 
 
Now we can keep this exchange of insults going, because I’m having a very good time, if that’s what the 
members want. I’m glad, I’m glad I had this opportunity to get up and rankle a few nerves on the other 
side, Mr. Speaker. Welcome back to the chair, sir. It’s good to see you back. 



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
649 

What I wanted to say when I initially set out this afternoon was that people were happy with our budget. 
They were happy to see there were no increases in income tax or the sales tax. And yes indeed, Mr. 
Speaker, no gasoline tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Maxwell: — And this was reflected by the comments in the press. I’d like to quote a couple of 
them, Mr. Speaker. I’m looking at the Star—Phoenix of March the 30th and the heading says, ‘Business 
Sector Reacts Favourably’. 
 

The initial response from the Saskatchewan business community to Tuesday’s budget speech has 
been favourable. 
 

Terry Ennis of the Saskatchewan Construction Association in his comments said: 
 

There were some highlights for our industry. 
 

Barbara Morrison of the Canadian Federation of Independent Business said: 
 

The budget is welcomed by small business because it calls for no tax increases and provides 
some measure of stability. Morrison said although the deficit is high, it’s not alarming because 
the province has the resources to pay it off. It’s better to have the deficit rather than higher taxes 
because businesses don’t have the money to pay for a tax increase. 
 

And there are other very favourable comments there. Another example, Mr. Speaker, an editorial in the 
Star—Phoenix of March 30th and the heading, the heading — what does the heading say? The heading, 
gentlemen to my right, says, ‘Budget Delivers.’ Budget delivers: 
 

In drafting his first full-fledged budget, finance minister Bob Andrew appears to have come up 
with a rational blueprint for the province’s economy which accurately reflects the mandate given 
the new Conservative government. (At the end:) Andrew’s attempts at pre-budget consultations 
through a series of community meetings criticized by some as only window-dressing (and if I 
may interject, we know who would criticize as window-dressing, Mr. Speaker) have yielded a 
budget which responds to the wishes of the Saskatchewan electorate. 
 

And outside the cities, the Prince Albert Daily Herald, ‘Budget Shows Bounce.’ 
 
An Hon. Member: — Outside the cities? 
 
Mr. Maxwell: — Outside the cities of Saskatoon and Regina. Again, again having a little competition 
from the side over here. We’ve got Tweedledum and Tweedledee on my right. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
when I say Tweedledum and Tweedledee over here, I want to get the record straight. This guy’s Dee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
April 7, 1983 
 

 
650 

Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, people by and large were delighted to see the thrust of this budget was 
aimed at alleviating what is perceived to be, perceived to be the major problem of today: unemployment. 
This program was addressed in the budget by a nine-point job creation program. Personally I was 
impressed by four of the initiatives in particular because of their immediate relevance to my own 
constituency. 
 
I’d like to make mention of these four programs. First, the very successful Build-A-Home program 
which is being extended to August the 1st. I come from a rural northern constituency that was still 
covered by now — we were snowmobiling on the weekend. He extension means that more people will 
be in a position to take advantage of the $3,000 available to them by beginning construction in what 
would normally be our traditional construction period this spring. And I know, judging by the calls I’ve 
received from my constituents, including one at about 2:30 this afternoon, that this program will 
continue to enjoy huge success and popularity. 
 
Second, the youth employment program. Opportunities ’83, providing an employer a subsidy up to $350 
per month for each student job. One of the most exciting concepts of the program is that it is available 
not only to such potential employers as municipalities and other local government bodies but also to 
private businesses and farmers. By including these groups, the target is to create 3,000 jobs. This 
program represents very real help to the students in my constituency. 
 
Third, the rebate of $5,000 will be directed to small business that has hired a new employee for a 
permanent position. This is an attractive initiative to small businesses, and I’m certain full advantage 
will be taken by our business community. 
 
And fourth, the new five-year $32 million program for the construction and renovation of cultural and 
recreational facilities. Under this program each municipality is eligible for a base grant of $5,000 plus 
$25 per capita. By enabling each community to upgrade its facilities, we are guaranteed an increase in 
construction and employment and related activity in sales of building materials and supplies. These 
funds are not only a contribution to job creation and economic stimulation, it’s also a commitment by 
our government to community life. I know that many small communities in my constituency will make 
excellent use of the funds soon to be made available to them. 
 
These four highlights I have selected from the Minister of Finance’s nine—point program are examples 
of our government’s concern for and our commitment to the people of Saskatchewan. And I stress these 
are only four of the points; the others are equally as exciting and rewarding, but there are other areas of 
the budget on which I wish to touch, so I shall move on to discuss a couple of other important features. 
 
As a member from a rural constituency, I was pleased to welcome the establishment of an agricultural 
division of the heritage fund. This division will support future initiatives in the promotion of our primary 
industry, agriculture. An example of one such worthwhile and important initiative is the family farm 
purchase program which will assist 2,800 farmers to buy land in the first two years of the program. 
 
Turning to another topic, I’m sure all residents of the province were impressed by the announcements 
under Health and Social Services. As a member of the government, I am especially proud of the 
improvements that will be implemented by this budget, a budget which allocates $978 million for our 
health care system. 



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
651 

Among the measures that are included is a 25 per cent increase for construction and improvements to 
our hospitals. In 1983-84, 9.5 million will be made available for construction purposes to hospitals and 
health centres. 
 
During the 10-year period from 1972 to 1981-82 inclusive, the previous administration spent a total of 
19.8 million for projects outside of Regina and Saskatoon, an average of 1.98 million per year. That’s an 
average of under $2 million per year. In 1983-84, expenditures outside of Regina and Saskatoon with 
our administration will exceed $8 million. In one year, $8 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Since coming to government in 1982, the present administration has approved expenditures exceeding 
$50 million in total construction value, in addition to those scheduled for Regina and Saskatoon. Yes, 
the government is committed to the retention of a progressive hospital delivery system in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In 1983-84, Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan budget includes approximately half-a-million dollars 
to assist small hospitals in the implementation of pilot projects intended to extend, enhance the small 
hospital role. 
 
With regards to hospital staffing, we will be, be providing 120 new nursing positions throughout the 
province, plus 20 new positions for open heart surgery in Regina, and providing over $700,000 to 
expand open heart surgery, including intensive care and operating room nurses, physiotherapy, 
laboratory staff. A further 20 new staff positions will be created to cope with the establishment of a 
paediatric intensive care unit at University Hospital in Saskatoon. This represents a major addition to our 
child health services. 
 
While on the subject of health care, I must make mention of the major funding commitment to the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation. That commitment is for $17 million over five years, including 10 
million for the construction of a new cancer clinic in Saskatoon. This is a most welcome and timely 
announcement in the ongoing war against this dreaded disease which has, which has touched so many 
families in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that we are very, very fortunate indeed to have a Minister of Health of 
the calibre of the member from Indian Head-Wolseley. And I want to compliment him . . . 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


	ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS
	QUESTIONS

