






















































Hansard: May 26, 1983


(2592) 2593 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 26, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. DIRKS: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and to all members of the Assembly 
today, a group of 30 very fine grades 7 and 8 students who are attending here. They are from the St. 
Patrick School in Regina, which is in my constituency. I would like to welcome them here today. I’ll be 
meeting with them right after question period for pictures and refreshments, and I would ask all 
members to join with me in welcoming them here today. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and to the members of this 
Assembly, the students from the Wolseley and district Development Centre. They’re seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery, along with their most excellent staff: their teacher, Mr. Carol Hammond; the aides, 
Mrs. Lola Gardiner, Grace Magel, and some of the parents, my wife Isabelle, and Cheryl Aston, and my 
youngest son, Peter. I hope you enjoy the deliberations today and I hope this visit will be enjoyable for 
you. I think I should have some type of a treat for you after question period. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Proposed Changes to The Trade Union Act 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to welcome back to the 
Assembly some ministers we haven’t seen in some time. The attendance this morning is exceptionally 
good. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Exceptionally good because half of them are here. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Yeah, that’s right. Almost half the ministers are here. The question is to the 
Minister of Labour. I want to express the hope initially, Mr. Minister, that you’ve recovered from your 
jet lag. I won’t be so unkind as to make the obvious suggestion that there are those who feel that your 
condition didn’t originate with . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — This is question period, and if the member has a question I would like him to get 
directly to it. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — My question to the minister has to do with, Mr. Minister, your proposed 
changes to The Trade Union Act. It’s now the 48th sitting day of the legislative session. By far the most 
controversial piece of legislation, The Trade Union Act, has yet to be seen. When, specifically, Mr. 
Minister, will you be introducing your amendments to The Trade Union Act in this legislature? 



 
May 26, 1983 
 

 
2594 

HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just tell the member opposite that I had an excellent 
sleep last night. The Trade Union Act amendments are coming in due course. My understanding is that 
the session can normally run for 75 days and we’ve still got lots of time to introduce it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — While I thank the minister for that lesson in the history of this Assembly, 
that wasn’t my question. My question to you was: when will you be introducing this legislation in this 
session? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, there’s been, as I said yesterday, a couple of weeks that I’ve 
been away. I’m getting briefed on where we stand in the whole drafting and legislative process, and we 
should be making an announcement very shortly. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister, I suggest to you that’s precisely the problem. 
This government doesn’t know where it stands on The Trade Union Act. Will you confirm that we 
haven’t seen it because you can’t make up your mind what you’re going to do. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, that is not true. We have our amendments in place. We’re just 
going through it point by point with my briefing people, and they say in due course we’ll get it tabled. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, if you have it ready to go and you’ve made up your mind, why 
don’t you share it with the Legislative Assembly so the work of this session can proceed? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve already said that we’ll be doing it in due course, and the 
specific day I don’t know just yet, but you’ll see it when it’s tabled. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I want to ask the minister what groups you have consulted with, if any, and 
whether or not that in any way explains the delay in introducing this legislation. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s going to be a bit unique that we will be discussing 
it with a number of groups prior to tabling, and that will be scheduled, and we always had to wait till it 
was in second reading when I was out in the boondocks before we knew what was going on out here. 
We have intentions, we are scheduling meetings with the people that have submitted briefs including the 
unions and the business side, as soon as we can get it put together. 
 

Legislative Program for the Session 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the House Leader who I would like to ask a 
question about the legislative program of this Assembly, which leads from the questions asked by my 
colleague from Regina Centre. We have on the order paper today about 16 second reading bills. I 
believe 6 of them will be dealt with today. The other 10 are not printed. We have words coming from the 
Minister of Labour that we are awaiting. The Trade Union Act, amendments to it. What I would tell the 
minister or ask him, is when he will get his act together to the point where we can get on with the 
session; to the point where we will not be taking Thursday nights off this late in the 



 
May 26, 1983 

 
2595 

session — which I understand is the case that we’re not sitting tonight. When will you get the program 
together to the point where we can get on with the legislation, and complete this session of the House, 
and in completing the session save the money of the taxpayers of the province? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Well, I’m delighted to see, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition have totally 
endorsed the ethnic communities of the city of Regina. When I told you yesterday that we were — and 
part of their responsibility, Mr. Speaker, I understand is to slight the ethnic communities of Regina — 
we are taking this evening off to afford the opportunity to all members of this legislature to participate in 
Mosaic and I would have hoped to have seen the members of the opposition there but obviously we’re 
not going to. I know that we’re going to see a great number of our people there. 
 
As it relates to getting our act together, perhaps what we should do is call a recess of two or three years 
to give you guys time to get your act together. And we are today on day number 48 of the legislature of 
this particular session and if it weren’t for the fact that it’s not our intention to in any way slight the 
ethnic community, I would sit here and I’d stop the clock and go around until the cows came home, but 
we’re not going to do that for the reasons that I’ve just stated. And as it relates to when the labour bill is 
going to be tabled, with the same degree of precision as my colleague, the Minister of Labour — due 
course. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I had asked another part to the question, that being about the 
10 bills that are not printed yet. What I would like to know from the minister, in light of the fact that we 
have had Mosaic for many years, it has been well attended and we have found time to go on Friday 
afternoons or Saturdays, how can you use that as an excuse for not sitting tonight, when very simply the 
fact is that you don’t have the bills printed and you don’t have the bills ready to bring in the House? 
Your phoney excuse that we have to adjourn to go to Mosaic when Friday afternoon is the traditional 
time we go, and Saturday is the traditional time that we go . . . When will you get on with getting these 
bills printed so we can do the work of the Assembly and the work that the taxpayers of the province 
expect us to do? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — We’ll stay here as long as there’s work to do and as long as members 
opposite want to keep us here. I kind of suspect that it won’t be very long, though, because our budget 
has passed the earliest it’s ever passed, primarily because of two reasons: it was an excellent budget, 
number one, and difficult to criticize, and number two, you really didn’t have a great deal of depth in 
your questioning. So it slid through kind of quickly. As it relates to this evening, why are we going this 
evening instead of tomorrow or Saturday or some other day? Well, the reason we’re going this evening, 
Mr. Speaker, is this is the evening that the ethnic community in Regina, the Mosaic committee, invited 
us all to attend and I thought we would oblige them by showing up on the night that we were invited. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I’d like to ask a question to the Deputy Premier, Mr. Deputy Premier. I think all will 
agree that we are here to carry out the work of the people of Saskatchewan in the most efficient manner, 
and I want to indicate as my colleague has indicated that there was insufficient work last Friday and we 
had to adjourn early. Tonight there’s insufficient work, and you are building up an excuse. In respect to 
all of your back-benchers who are very fed up with your attitude, I’m going to ask you: can you put a 
legislative program together for this here Assembly, or are you prepared to resign as 



 
May 26, 1983 
 

 
2596 

House Leader? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Bob Hope, Mr. Speaker, at 80 years old still does a far better job. There’s 
no threat, quite frankly, from the member opposite. I point out to the member opposite, last Friday — 
he’s sitting over there blatting away — but last Friday, Mr. Speaker, we did in fact adjourn early, and we 
adjourned early, Mr. Speaker, after consulting with the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
In fact it was a long week-end and a lot of people had travel arrangements set out for the long weekend, 
and we have been here a while. I thought it was the decent and human thing to do to allow the people to 
in fact get on with their travel plans and get home for the weekend to spend it with their families, and I 
think it was the right and proper thing to do. As it relates to my resigning, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be here long 
after you’re gone. 
 

Federal Crow Rate Legislation 
 
MR. MULLER: — A question to the Minister of Agriculture. When is the federal committee going to 
sit on the Crow rate issue? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Well, I have not the foggiest. The legislation has been stalled in second 
reading by the combined efforts of the opposition parties down there and I just don’t have the foggiest 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . By some of the NDP, Mr. Speaker, the ones that show up and the ones 
that are concerned enough to care about the West. And so until the legislation gets past second reading, 
we have no idea when it will appear before a committee. 
 
In any event, Mr. Speaker, we have asked the federal minister, the chairman of the transportation 
committee, to include us on the agenda when that particular legislation gets to the committee. As of yet, 
we have received no response from the chairman of that committee, so we will . . . you know, continue 
to pursue that course of action in hopes that we will in fact by heard before the committee. 
 
MR. MULLER: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I want to congratulate you on the stand you’ve 
taken so far. You have invited the NDP caucus to join you in your drive to try and save the Crow in 
Ottawa, and I was wondering: have they accepted your invitation to go to Ottawa with you to lobby for 
no change in the Crow rate? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, the answer to the question is: they haven’t turned the 
invitation down, nor have they accepted it. So I still wait in eager anticipation to have my hon. 
Colleague, the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, accompany me to Ottawa. And I’m sure that he 
will; I have every confidence. I also, Mr. Speaker, want to congratulate the member for Shellbrook for 
helping the members opposite fill up the half-hour of question period, and it will prevent them from 
being embarrassed further . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. 
 

Lake Diefenbaker Pipeline 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — A question to the Minister of Urban Affairs with respect to any invitations 
you might have received to attend in the national capital. It has to do with the foul-water season, which 
is once again approaching this city and Moose Jaw. My question is: Mr. Minister, have you received 
confirmation of a meeting date with the 



 
May 26, 1983 

 
2597 

federal government to discuss the federal financial support for the construction of the Lake Diefenbaker 
pipeline? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, as of 10:15 this morning when I was in contact with my 
deputy, the answer is no. The request has been made. We expect an answer today or tomorrow at the 
latest. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Will the minister confirm then that the delegation from Saskatchewan to 
Ottawa will contain all of the players in the act — representatives of the province, Moose Jaw, Regina, 
Ipsco workers, and Ipsco management? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, I will confirm that it will be excellent delegation, and it 
will go down there and present the case very well. And we’ll definitely include the members from the 
city of Moose Jaw, the city of Regina, and the provincial government. There will be some other people 
go along as observers. Ipsco may in fact be one of those. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, are you aware of the comments 
made by Bill Baker of Ipsco, that the company is concerned that you’re going to Ottawa, feeling them 
out about financial support without having a detailed, comprehensive financial proposal to take to them, 
and that without a detailed, comprehensive financial proposal, you are unlikely to succeed under the 
special programs? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, obviously Mr. Baker is certainly capable of reaching his 
own conclusions on that. I would contend that we are working towards a complete proposal. We will not 
be making that public prior to going to Ottawa. Once again, I can only indicate to this House as I have 
on many times that in a very short period of government, we have taken some major steps on the path 
towards solving this problem — a problem that has existed in Regina and Moose Jaw for many years 
and was obviously here during the 11 years that the opposition were in power. I indicate one more time 
that we will solve this problem a lot quicker then they even moved on it. 
 

Resignation of Dave Barrett 
 
MR. WEIMAN: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the Deputy Premier. I’m wondering 
whether the Deputy Premier has any plans to send a letter of accommodation to the Leader of the 
Opposition in the province of British Columbia, Mr. Barrett, on his wise decision to resign from the 
party leadership, as well as to include in that letter of accommodation, a letter of condolence over the 
past defeat in the provincial election in British Columbia. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Well, I don’t know that he had resigned, Mr. Speaker. This is my first 
knowledge of it, and if he has I would be prepared to send a letter of congratulations for doing the 
honourable thing. I would invite all members to join me. 
 

Saskatoon NHL Franchise Application 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Now that there is no more government members standing, I can ask a question. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
May 26, 1983 
 

 
2598 

MR. KOSKIE: — I want to ask a question to the Minister of Culture and Recreation. I want to ask a 
question in respect to the pre-lobby of the NHL board of governors. I want to remind the minister that on 
page 2458 of Hansard, when questioned in respect to the lobbying, you had this to say: 
 

We had some informal discussions with other provincial governments, but the lobbying of the 
members was left to the parties involved, Ralston Purina and Coliseum Holdings, and in fact that was 
at their request. 

 
Subsequent to that, on page 2483 of Hansard, you told the legislature a different story: 
 

In specific terms (you say), the Premier of this province had contact with each of the NHL owners and 
board of governors prior to the presentation. 

 
I wonder if the minister can in fact indicate to the House which version represents the truth? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, I missed the first part. I don’t think anything that I 
indicated in answering those questions was incorrect, and I will stand by the statements in Hansard. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I specifically asked you which statement was true — whether or not there was no 
pre-lobbying, or in fact was the Premier involved in pre-lobbying? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, I was asked initially if I had done any pre-lobbying. I 
think the answer was no. The Premier, as I indicated, did in fact write letters to the various owners and 
members of the board of governors. We indicated that. We indicated as well that it was the 
recommendation of the Ralston Purina Co. who were in fact making the proposal asking for the transfer, 
that the pre-lobby should be left with them, and it should not be carried on in any great degree. We 
respected their requests and went that direction. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Supplemental, Mr. Speaker. It seems to me, Mr. Minister, that in respect to the 
pre-lobbying that the minister did — that he put the office of the premiership of this province on line, 
the prestige of that office, and indeed the reputation of this province. I would like to know whether or 
not you are prepared to indicate what form the Premier’s lobbying took, and whether or not you will file 
before this legislature, the nature of the lobbying that the Premier undertook in locating the team here in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, I continue to be amazed at the calibre of the questioning 
that we’re hearing today. I indicated the pages in Hansard where you and your colleague from Regina 
Centre indicated that this government was at fault because they were too involved in this endeavour. 
Now I am hearing arguments that we’re not involved enough in this endeavour. I will quote from a letter 
that I received from a member of the board of governors. Modesty prevents me from reading it all, but I 
will read a couple of lines: 
 

The presentation made by you and the others involved was well made and received. As proof, it was 
the first time I have ever heard the governors applaud at such presentations. In all, it was an excellent 
example of the kind of co-operation which is possible between the two levels of government in 



 
May 26, 1983 

 
2599 

Saskatchewan and private enterprise. 
 
And I think that indicates fairly clearly what type of presentation was made. It was the type of 
presentation recommended by a fellow member of the board of governors, Ralston Purina. We believe it 
was an excellent presentation and we stand behind it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Obviously the minister is somewhat confused because the presentation fell flat on its 
face and every source . . . and every board of governor, practically, rejected it. But I ask the minister, as 
a result of the pre-lobbying done by the Premier of this province with the board of directors, can you 
indicate at the time that you went to make your presentation how many board of governors were in fact 
committed to your cause? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, I can speak only for two — the two who were involved 
in the proposal, or the two obviously that I’m aware of. I would suggest to the member opposite that 
Vancouver took two attempts to get in. Winnipeg took two attempts to get in. The WHA took at least 
four. I believe we may get in in at least that short a time. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Funding Cut-backs to NGOs 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the Minister of Social Service, and it has 
to do with an incredible speech she gave to the Family Service Bureau of Regina. And I would like to 
quote from a news report which came out of that meeting, and in part it goes: 
 

‘With case loads going up and revenue going down, the government is providing preventive and 
crisis intervention programs, but non-government organizations should fill in the gaps,’ she said . . . 

 
I wonder if the minister is not aware of the fact that her government and she, herself, have been involved 
in . . . Here are some headlines: ‘Deafness Council funding eliminated.’ ‘Programs for natives get grant 
cuts,’ (it won’t get any money next year), ‘Government pulls the cord on Community Switchboard.’ ‘No 
provincial grants for senior citizens programs.’ Can the minister tell me how she expects the 
non-government organizations to take up, on her insistence, that they fill the gap when she has, in the 
last couple of months, cut back in the programming and funding of many of these non-governmental 
agencies? 
 
HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Speaker, I guess I can only return it with a question and ask the hon. 
member from Shaunavon if he realizes who writes the articles in the Leader-Post. I assure you that it’s 
not me. If you would like to know what was said in the speech, I have it for you today, and I assure you, 
once reading it, you will wonder if the same article in the Leader-Post is the same meeting that the 
speech was said at. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Well, send it to us. 
 
HON. MRS. SMITH: — I will. 



 
May 26, 1983 
 

 
2600 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the minister whether or not, in her speech, 
she said that the non-governmental agencies should fill the gap. Was that part of your speech? 
 
HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Speaker, I would have to go through the speech, word by word, to see 
what was said in it, and I will share the speech with the member from Shaunavon to see if we said that, 
that they shall fill the gap. I would like to state to the member and to this House that the gaps, per se, out 
there are best filled by the local community and the agencies — not the government, provincial or 
federal. But the local people do a much better job of delivering the service from what big government 
does. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Final supplementary. I wonder if the minister . . . And in phrasing my 
question I will say that I agree that the non-governmental agencies can do a much better job than her 
department, but is it not a fact that they also need some money to do that job and it is not true that you 
have cut back in many areas so that they can’t do the job? How can you expect both from them? 
 
HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Speaker, when I was talking about service that the agencies deliver to the 
people in need in the local communities, we were talking about direct service, and no, the direct service 
element has not been cut back. We’ve gone through the budget in estimates and the member knows full 
well that on the direct service there was an increase — at least 7 per cent. Some may be held the same 
but not a cut-back on direct service. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 87 — An Act to amend The Horned Cattle Purchases Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading of a bill to amend The 
Horned Cattle Purchases Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 88 — An Act to amend The Animals Products Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend The Animal Products 
Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 89 — An Act to amend The Provincial Lands Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move the first reading of a bill to amend The Provincial 
Lands Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 90 — An Act to amend The Cattle Marketing Voluntary Deductions Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend The Cattle 



 
May 26, 1983 

 
2601 

Marketing Voluntary Deductions Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Bill No. 69 to Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, at the request of members opposite 
and in a spirit of co-operation, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Finance: 
 

That by leave of the Assembly, that order for second reading of Bill No. 69, an Act to amend The Beef 
Stabilization Act, be discharged, and the bill referred to the standing committee on non-controversial 
bills. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 54 — An Act to amend The Business Corporations Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister introduce his officials? 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my immediate left, deputy minister 
Michael Crosthwaite; behind Mr. Crosthwaite is Phil Flory, the director of the corporations branch; next 
to him is Allan Higgs, the executive director. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Clause 4 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, I have read the section; I have read the explanatory note. I 
have to confess I still don’t know what problem we’re trying to solve here. Perhaps you can give me 
some assistance. 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — Mr. Chairman and the hon. member for Regina Centre, this amendment 
will, for example, permit a proposed new corporation to insert in its articles of incorporation, at the time 
of incorporation, provisions which would restrict the ownership, the issue of transfer of its shares to a 
specific maximum level of non-Canadian shareholders. This would be done initially in anticipation of 
the corporation qualifying for certain specific grants or incentive programs which require specific levels 
of Canadian ownership by the national energy program. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — So the section and other similar sections simply give a company 



 
May 26, 1983 
 

 
2602 

the ability to restrict the sale of its shares or restrict its shares to Canadians or give a company the ability 
to set out in its articles that only a certain percentage of its shares can be owned by non-Canadians. Is 
that what I understood the minister to say? 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — Yes, that is right. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’m not sure, Mr. Minister, that I know what was in the act before which 
constrained the company from doing this. What was there before which stopped the company from 
simply saying, ‘Only 15 per cent of our shares are going to be owned by non-Canadians? I would have 
thought that would’ve, could’ve been part of the articles of a company in any event. 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — Mr. Chairman, it’s explained by . . . Under the old act you could only 
constrain the transfer of shares. Under this new legislation . . . Rather, you couldn’t constrain the 
ownership under the old act either. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Under the old act you could constrain transfer but not ownership. Okay. 
Now, the final question, Mr. Minister, is: what is it about the national energy program that we are 
attempting to meet? Does the national energy program have as a requirement of qualifying for certain 
grants that a company’s shares be so restricted? Or is it an attempt to allow companies to guarantee that 
they will not run afoul of the regulations? Or why specifically is it being done? 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — Well, in order to qualify for the national energy program incentives a 
corporation must be 50 per cent Canadian-owned. And it’s the only program in Canada that you have to 
qualify at 50 per cent Canadian ownership. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — But does the national energy program say that a company’s shares must be 
so structured? Or is this an attempt to give a company the ability to guarantee that it will not run afoul of 
the laws? 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — It’s a minimum qualification of 50 per cent. It can be more. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — But is it a requirement of the national energy program that a company 
include this in its articles, include such a constraint against the ownership of shares? 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — Well, if it’s an all-Canadian company now, it doesn’t have to change its 
articles, but if it wants to qualify, it will have to change its articles. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — So is the minister saying it is a requirement of the national energy program 
for companies not incorporated in Canada? Is that what you’re saying? I’m just . . . 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — The company, Mr. Chairman has to be incorporated in Canada and the 
majority of the shareholders have to be Canadian in order to qualify for the program. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’m going to leave it in a moment, because it doesn’t matter that much. But 
my question is: you are, by this legislation, giving a company the mechanism by which it can guarantee 
to all concerned that not more than a certain percentage of the shares will be owned by non-Canadians. 
That’s the effect of this legislation. My question is: why? Why can’t a company simply sell its shares all 
to Canadians, so 



 
May 26, 1983 

 
2603 

qualify, and not worry about this mechanism? Why is this mechanism needed? 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if you didn’t have this restriction, the shares 
outstanding could be sold to anyone, not necessarily Canadians. This restriction, therefore, provides the 
authority for companies to sell shares to Canadians in order to meet the requirements stipulated under 
the national energy program. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Yes, and it deals only with publicly . . . This really would only apply to a 
publicly traded company in effect. Well, would this have some bearing on the activities of a privately 
traded company? 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — Yes, only if the private company wanted to qualify. 
 
Clause 4 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 5 to 24 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 25 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — A question, Mr. Minister. This legislation affects the manner — I’m 
referring to section 20 — affects the manner in which a company may be served. What steps are going 
to be taken to draw this to the attention of interested parties? I think particularly of members of the law 
society. 
 
If I might, Mr. Minister, I have no quarrel specifically with the provision. I think it’s a good one. And 
I’ve often wondered in the past why we haven’t done it. 
 
I just wonder what steps you’re going to be taking to bring this to the attention of members of the law 
society and others who have occasion to serve documents, and companies. How about television? Unlike 
elected members, most attorneys don’t have time to watch television in the middle of the afternoon. 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — Well, it’s worth noting, Mr. Chairman, that all of the amendments have 
been supported by the corporate law subcommittee. So it will be circulated through them. 
 
Clause 25 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 51 — An Act to amend The Oil and Gas Conservation Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister introduce his officials? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Myron Sereda, from Energy and Mines. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — If there aren’t any objections from the minister or members opposite, I’m 
going to try and deal with all the questions under subsection (1) because they don’t neatly fit into any of 
them. 



 
May 26, 1983 
 

 
2604 

Mr. Minister, I understand what you’re attempting to do here, I think. If I’m wrong, please correct me. 
You are attempting t accommodate the sale of natural gas to institutions and individuals other than SPC, 
which has been the sole purchaser in the past, if I understand it correctly. So I understand what this is 
intended to accomplish. What I’m afraid I don’t follow is why we need it. Cabinet has always had the 
power, has it not, to set natural gas prices, or has that only been done through instructions to SPC as to 
what they pay? I’m just wondering what the old mechanism was. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — As I understand the old mechanism, in reality it was set between informal 
negotiations between the Minister of Energy and Mines and SPC. They would work out that formula. 
What this would do is, rather than doing that, do it through the cabinet process instead. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Apart from the obvious advantage in that sort of open government and 
allowing everybody to know what the price of natural gas is going to be — apart from the advantages of 
open government, is there any other reason why this route is being followed? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — One of the reasons is: if we were fortunate enough to be able to get into the 
export market with natural gas, the government really doesn’t have the authority to set that price. This 
would allow in effect the government to have that authority if we were to deal with the export price. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I suppose that’s true. If anyone other than SPC bought the gas, the 
mechanism might be more awkward. Alberta has a body — you will know the name of it; I can’t think 
of it at the moment — but Alberta has a commission or an agency which in fact sets prices for oil and 
natural gas. Has this government ever considered delegating this . . . This is not a political decision, Mr. 
Minister; this is a technical decision based on markets, costs and so on. Has the government considered 
setting up a pricing mechanism similar to Alberta’s? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The oil price, and to that degree as well, the natural gas price, is set of 
course by the Saskatchewan-Ottawa, Alberta-Ottawa energy agreements. That’s where you basically set 
the bulk of your pricing. Alberta has a rather complex marketing board concept to regulate the industry, 
but their industry is far larger than ours. We would tend, to the point that there would be too much 
confusion, not to want to move to that type of option, but allow the flexibility that we would have now, 
rather than getting into the Alberta Energy Conservation Board, is what I believe that you’re talking 
about, and tends to be a far more . . . You know, it was at the heart of the problem with the shutting 
down of production of oil, along with government, etc., and I would question really whether we need 
that type of functioning thing. It’s really an arm of government, if you like, the way it works in Alberta 
and I would question whether we’d really want to get into that. It just sets up another structure that I 
don’t think is needed. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Are you saying you don’t thin it’s needed because you don’t think the export 
industry in Saskatchewan is large enough? Obviously, it isn’t. It scarcely exists at the moment. Are you 
saying that you don’t think it’s needed because of the size of the industry or because of inherent faults 
within that type of mechanism itself? 



 
May 26, 1983 

 
2605 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Okay. There’s two elements to the Alberta board I’m advised. One is the 
marketing arm of it, which we really don’t need. I mean the marketing of natural gas let’s say, for 
example, into the U.S. market. It doesn’t exist for us now. We have to go through the various 
mechanisms, the national energy board, etc. to get their permission to do that. 
 
With regard to the conservation end of it, or the regulation, that is now done by the department and we 
would see that as a proper function for the department to do as opposed to delegating it to an energy 
conservation board. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Clause 4 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Chairman, we have one brief question. What penalty is provided for 
failure to comply with the regulations? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — There are penalty sections for the hon. member. There are penalty sections 
within the main act and I could dig those out, but they are sufficient penalty sections to be able to 
control the industry. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — That was my concerns, that the penalties might be a maximum fine of $500 
which is an insignificant small sum. It wouldn’t be worth paying someone to go down to the court-house 
to pay the fine. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — We found the penalties that were in the existing act when you were 
government to be fairly stringent and we’re not changing those. 
 
Clause 4 agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The printed bill goes from 1, 2, 3, 4 and then back to 3. It should have read: 
5 instead of 3 in the coming into force section of the act. I think we’d make that adjustment. It would be 
in order, I take it, to change that 3 to a 5. 
 
Clause 5 as amended agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended on division. 
 

Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Public Utilities Companies Act 
 

Clause 1 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — We are proceeding to deal with these bills with such dispatch that we’re not 
getting explanatory notes. And I’ve just checked with the page, and I’m informed the explanatory notes 
still are not available to members. I’m thus having some difficulty fitting this into the jigsaw. So, if you 
could fit this into your jigsaw, we’ll probably deal with it. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — This bill has been out for some time. The new Bill No. 50 is 



 
May 26, 1983 
 

 
2606 

simply a consequential amendment to the last bill that we just completed, and it has to have the 
adjustments into the Local Government Board’s original authority to go down setting these particular 
rates; that hasn’t been exercised since 1950. By moving that authority into cabinet you have to then 
correct consequentially the previous act dealing with Local Government Board, and it’s a complete 
consequential amendment as a result of the energy conservation bill. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Just as explanation, I was unaware the Local Government Board played any 
role at all in setting natural gas prices, and I guess they did only with respect to public utilities owned by 
municipalities. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill on division. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 54 — An Act to amend The Business Corporations Act 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I move the bill now be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 51 — An Act to amend The Oil and Gas Conservation Act 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I would move that the bill . . . There is an amendment to this 
particular bill in the changing of the number of clause 5 —it read clause 3 — to clause 5. I would move 
that the amendment be now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, with the kind indulgence of the House, and the consent of the 
House, I move that the bill now be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Public Utilities Companies Act 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the bill be now read a third time and passed under 
its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 83 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased today to move second reading of 



 
May 26, 1983 

 
2607 

an amendment to The Income Tax Act. This bill contains a number of rather technical amendments 
which are required by the federal Minister of Finance, in the administration and enforcement of the 
Saskatchewan Income Tax Act. 
 
The hon. members will be aware that our income tax is administered by the federal government, by 
Revenue Canada on the basis of the Canada-Saskatchewan tax collection agreement. I won’t dwell on 
these technical amendments except to say that they will ensure that our Income Tax Act will remain 
consistent with the federal act, thereby making the Saskatchewan residents’ filing and payment 
responsibility as uncomplicated as possible. Now having said that that makes it as uncomplicated as 
possible, that’s not to say that it’s not complicated, because I think we all know that that act has built up 
over a fair period of time. It has become very complex, and a difficult act for most average citizens to be 
able to deal with. 
 
This bill does contain two other amendments which are necessary to offset administrative problems 
caused by the November 1981 federal budget. As we all know, that is the famous MacEachen budget 
that brought that minister down. The first of these two amendments required to ensure that 
Saskatchewan individuals will not be unfairly taxed as a result of the application of the federal 
government’s new forward-averaging measures. The new federal measures allow individuals the 
opportunity to spread out unusual or lump sum sources of income over a number of years, thereby 
reducing total tax owing. In return, the individual is required to pay a refundable tax withholding when 
the income is initially earned, equal to the highest federal and provincial marginal tax rates. 
 
Our present legislation would impose the surtax as part of refundable tax withholding. In our view, this 
would be grossly unfair to Saskatchewan low- and middle-income earners who receive large one-time 
incomes such as resulting from the sale of a farm. These individuals wouldn’t normally be required to 
pay the surtax if allowed to average that income over a number of years, or bring it back to income at the 
time of retirement. We therefore propose to eliminate the application of the surtax to the 
forward-averaging amount. This should be noted however that this amendment will still allow for the 
surtax to be applied against high-income earners once the forward-averaged amount if returned to 
income for tax purposes. 
 
The second of these amendments is also required as a result of the new federal forward-averaging 
provisions. As I’ve already mentioned, the federal measure provides the taxpayer with unlimited ability 
to spread out unusual or lump sum incomes into future taxation years. The flexibility of this deferment 
process has been an adverse effect on the administration of Saskatchewan capital gains tax rebate 
program since the payments of the rebate according to the current legislation must directly offset the 
payment of the Saskatchewan tax owing. 
 
We therefore propose that commencing with the 1982 tax year, payment of the capital gains tax rebate 
be based on a fixed percentage of the eligible taxable capital gain where the gain is forwarded-averaged 
or not. This payment would be made in respect of the year the farmer or the small business person 
disposes of a farm or small business property and incurs a taxable capital gain. 
 
Further, this government proposes that a fixed percentage of 12 per cent be applied to the taxable capital 
gain. This percentage is representative of what the average applicants for the rebate has paid in 
Saskatchewan income tax in relation to the eligible 



 
May 26, 1983 
 

 
2608 

taxable capital gain as determined over the first three years of the program’s operation. We would 
continue to monitor the normal tax status of applicants to ensure that the fixed percentage of 12 per cent 
continues to be a representative figure. 
 
As I indicated, Mr. Speaker, in my opening statement, these are I think what most people would see as 
technical, and rather a complex area for al of those except the tax accountants, or the odd tax lawyer. It 
tries to make the system a little easier, particularly for the farmer, the small farmer, the small business 
man who has not had a high income over a number of years, but does sell either his farm or his business 
and finds himself in an extremely high tax position. Now this will allow him to average that farm better. 
It does not provide, as the hon. members might like to suggest, to the average person who is in a higher 
tax bracket, would not provide that particular taxpayer with an advantage, but would provide the 
advantage to the lower income taxpayer who does have that once lifetime increase of capital gains tax. 
That’s the prime purpose of it. It is a complex piece of legislation only in the sense The income Tax Act 
is a complex piece of legislation, and with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move second reading of Bill no. 
83, An Act to amend The Income Tax Act. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This piece of legislation, as members who have 
some experience in the House will know, comes before the House virtually every year. Virtually every 
year, our Income Tax Act has to be amended to ensure that it complies with the federal Income Tax Act. 
The federal income tax department collects our tax, and if our act doesn’t comply with their act, they 
won’t collect it. 
 
This act appears to go somewhat further than that. I noted the minister’s comments with respect to the 
flat rate on capital gains, and I note what he says with respect to its application — that it is progressive 
rather than retrogressive. I want the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to assure myself that that’s accurate, and 
it is with respect, I think, to that provision, that we have some interest. I will not at this point in time 
raise it to a level of a concern but I have some interest in what he said. 
 
We want, Mr. Speaker, the opportunity to investigate that further, and we are therefore going to . . . We 
may find other things when we’re looking at the act; we might find other things in his comments that are 
of concern to us, but that didn’t leap out at me today. But these comment son the capital gains tax did. 
We want an opportunity to investigate his comments in the light of the bill further. We therefore beg 
leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 81 — An Act respecting the Operation of Vehicles. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — I hope, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite will be just as willing to pass 
second and third reading of this bill later on in this Assembly, because I think this is one of the most 
important bills coming before this Legislative Assembly to save lives in the province of Saskatchewan. 
The members of this Assembly are fully aware, Mr. Speaker, this bill is long overdue. The present 
Vehicles Act was passed into law in 1939 and in 44 years since it has not been revised or updated in a 
meaningful way to reflect the changes that have taken place in transportation, in transportation services 
throughout not only the province of Saskatchewan, but North America. You can understand why we 
refer to this bill as the new Vehicles Act. The need for a major overhaul of this act is not a discovery this 
government uncovered when we took office. For the last 11 years, the new Vehicles Act gathered dust 
on the shelf while the previous 



 
May 26, 1983 

 
2609 

government looked for the courage to bring forward the needed changes to the motoring public in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s unfortunate in one sense that the people of Saskatchewan have been saddled with this tired, 
worn-out act; but in another way it is fitting that this government has done the job — the job others 
could not and would not and were afraid to do. The people of Saskatchewan realized that this 
government, under the leadership of Grant Devine, is looking forward to the future — the future of 
Saskatchewan, the safety of the travelling public in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, it amazes me this 
afternoon that that we hear members opposite saying ‘who; who.’ I remember them back in ’77, ’78 and 
on, talking about the invisible man. Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly here today we have a government 
that is working for people, listening to the people under the leadership of Grant Devine. 
 
I am not going to go into the gutter of politics, as the members opposite would like to do, Mr. Speaker, 
whatsoever. I think they realize that they have been reduced to the gang of eight. And, Mr. Speaker, 
after the question period we witnessed in this Assembly this afternoon, it looks like the lights are out on 
the NDP in Saskatchewan. The people of Saskatchewan realize that under Grant Devine the future for 
the motoring public is going to be taking a great step forward with this new act. Mr. Speaker, this bill 
before you today is a fine example of the kind of the kind of forward-thinking leadership the people of 
this province are coming to know and respect. 
 
The direction this bill has taken, the style in which it was written, and the kind of issues that we tackled 
in an up front manner are fine examples of how this government carries out its responsibilities to the 
people of Saskatchewan. When I say ‘direction,’ Mr. Speaker, I need only say much has changed since 
1939; and I might add, all of it has been for the better. 
 
When this legislature was enacted, travel by horse was more popular than by car, Mr. Speaker. And for 
those who travelled by car, 40 mph was top speed. And, most important, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan need legislation that is going to take them into the next century, and into that next century 
will go, without a doubt, Mr. Speaker, a Progressive Conservative government in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — And now, Mr. Speaker, there are over 850,000 vehicles registered in this 
province. The days is not too far away when there will be one registered vehicle for every man, woman, 
and child living in the province of Saskatchewan. It only made good common sense that in preparing 
this bill that we consulted the people who will have to abide by its contents. 
 
Last year we released a white paper containing proposals for the new Vehicles Act. We 



 
May 26, 1983 
 

 
2610 

also conducted a survey through the media and asked the people of Saskatchewan how they felt about 
some of the more important changes that were being considered. Mr. Speaker, I received thousands — 
thousands — of letters, briefs, and phone calls from every corner of this province. Never in the history 
of this province have the people been given an opportunity to contribute to the decision-making process 
of a bill that affects them as much as the new Vehicles Act. I just can’t imagine what kind of legislation 
would be presented today had we not taken the opportunity to ask the people first, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think this is a prime example of why the NDP, the gang of eight, are in opposition and we are the 
Government of Saskatchewan. It’s without a doubt, Mr. Speaker, that legislation . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, could we have some order in this Assembly so that we could continue, 
please? 
 
I am confident that the people of Saskatchewan now have a Vehicles Act that is worthy of their support 
and well qualified to meet the challenges of today, as well as the opportunity that the future holds. Mr. 
Speaker, another example of the kind of leadership this government provides has to do in the way this 
bill is written and organized. Instead of following the traditional methods of preparing this legislation, 
again it made good sense to organize the contents in a way that both lawyers and laymen could 
understand. And to make it even easier to follow, this bill has been written in an everyday language. 
That, Mr. Speaker, is a minor change, but it means a lot to the people of this province who want to know 
what this bill contains. 
 
I want to refer to the nuts and bolts of this legislation. As I said, we have tackled the issues in an up front 
manner. We did not shy away from those areas where the timid were afraid to tread. Some of these 
issues we have provisions for are receiving national attention, Mr. Speaker. Some affect only a few, and 
there are some that will be addressed later by way of amendments. And, Mr. Speaker, I am quite 
prepared to accept those amendments. 
 
But I can honestly say, Mr. Speaker, that by and large the contents of this bill takes into account the 
main concerns facing the people of Saskatchewan today and for the future. No other government in the 
history of this province can challenge the facts and I look forward to the defence of members opposite 
who must shoulder much of the blame for having this act gather dust for so long while they were trying 
to be government of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In wrapping up my general comments on this bill, I want to emphasize that the new Vehicles Act is an 
important part in providing safe and efficient transportation service to the people of Saskatchewan. If we 
want it to be effective, we must know what the travelling public expects. I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, 
that the new Vehicles Act means those expectations. 
 
I would now like to turn my comments towards some of the major provisions this bill contains. When 
we first released our white paper last year, the one concern that touched the hearts of the people of 
Saskatchewan is the driver impairment. I wish I could table all of the letters we received on this issue so 
that the members of the Assembly could appreciate how dear it is to thousands in Saskatchewan. To 
make my point, Mr. Speaker, I would like to paraphrase one letter from an accident victim so that those 
who don’t believe me can understand that the people of Saskatchewan feel very deeply about this issue. 
A letter, Mr. Speaker, from Regina, Saskatchewan: 



 
May 26, 1983 

 
2611 

Dear Sir: (dated January 7, 1983) I strongly agree with 80 per cent of the listed white paper proposals. 
Many people are hurt daily by the unthinking, irresponsible actions of numerous drivers. Something 
has to be done in regard to these drivers. If stiffer fines, added jail terms, and long-term licence 
suspensions are part of the possible solutions, then so be it. My husband, his father’s sister, brother 
and our daughter were involved in an accident in May of 1978 and my husband was severely hurt, 
being unconscious for several days. In June of 1981, my husband and I were returning home following 
a church meeting when we were again hit by another vehicle. My husband and I are still suffering the 
results of that accident. 
 
Many people do not realize the consequences of car accidents. As well as physical pain and suffering, 
there is the anxiety, frustration and isolation it puts you in. There is additional stress on marriage, 
along with financial set-backs. Occasionally, you even lose a job due to medical leaves of absence . . . 
(inaudible) . . . 
 
The above-mentioned does not take into account a death from an accident which we, by the grace of 
God, have not had to deal with yet. Several months ago I caught a news brief that stated that 
mandatory sampling for alcohol and drugs would infringe on the freedom guaranteed by our new 
Canadian charter of human rights. What about the freedoms that the actions of negligent, irresponsible 
drivers take away from their victims? 
 
Thank you for reading my letter. Our family has been hurt by the actions of drivers. I wish people 
would think before they act, and perhaps others would be saved. 
 

When we first released our white paper, Mr. Speaker, late last year, the one concern that touched the 
hearts of the people of Saskatchewan is that of driver impairment. I wish I could table all the letters we 
received on this issue, so that members of this Assembly could appreciate how dear it is to thousands in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
To make my point, Mr. Speaker, I would like to paraphrase . . . I don’t know whether members opposite 
would go along with it, Mr. Speaker. No, I think we’ll save that for later on when they’re a little more 
aware. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a few stats that I would like to share with members opposite, and I guess this is one of the 
reasons why we’ve decided to take the new Vehicles Act off the shelf, dust if off and implement it. If 
you were to line up 100 young boys between the age of 6 and 20, one of them would lose his life before 
the age of 10 in an alcohol-related accident. Mr. Speaker, this is a tragic loss of life. I cannot and I will 
not accept a loss of life to statistics like this. The statistics tell us that drivers whose abilities are 
impaired are believed to be seriously over-represented in injury and fatal accidents. The results of 
autopsies tell us that approximately 40 per cent of all drivers who die in traffic accidents are legally 
impaired at the time of death. 
 
So what can we do to stop this needless loss of life, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, the provisions in this bill 
make a three-prong approach. For one, this bill provides for strong deterrents by standardizing licence 
suspension for those convicted under the Criminal Code. First offenders will receive a six-month 
suspension; second offenders will receive a one-year suspension; third-time offenders will receive a 
three-year 



 
May 26, 1983 
 

 
2612 

suspension of their licence. Furthermore, a fourth conviction within five years will result in a five-year 
suspension. Another measure aimed at the drinking driver is increased penalty for driving while 
disqualified, Mr. Speaker. First offenders will be subject to a $500 minimum to $2,000 maximum fine. 
Second or subsequent convictions will result in fines of minimum of $500 to maximum of $2,000 and/or 
jail terms up to two years, at the discretion of the courts. Second, it is not enough, Mr. Speaker, to 
toughen existing laws without offering a solution to the problem. Therefore we will be expanding a 
program called Driving Without Impairment. The goal of this program is to educate those first-time 
offenders by helping them to understand the responsibility they must share when they drink and drive. 
As a measure of our sincerity and belief in this program, first-time offenders will be given the 
opportunity to enrol in the DWI program and have their suspensions reduced from six months to three 
months. The third and final measure has to do with obtaining blood samples from injured drivers 
suspected of being impaired. Mr. Speaker, this bill grants authority to injured drivers suspected of being 
impaired. Mr. Speaker, this bill grants authority to our law enforcement agencies to request the 
necessary evidence and at the same time provide legal protection for the medical personnel who must 
carry out this request. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last provision will have two very important effects. First, those suspected of 
impairment can no longer hide behind the veil of injury. In the past this prevented the police from 
obtaining the necessary evidence from drivers who were injured or who pretended to be injured. Just as 
important, for those who need more accurate information to aid in preventing drinking and driving, 
better enforcement will lead to a better understanding of this problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this approach does not pretend to be a cure, but it will lead to greater awareness and 
improved prevention, something that is badly needed to stop this needless loss of life on our provincial 
road network. 
 
I would now like to comment on a number of major changes in the new Vehicles Act that will affect 
nearly everyone in the province. I know that school will soon be finished for the summer holidays, but 
when students return next fall, those riding buses will be affected by the new Vehicles Act. Presently 
school buses are required to activate their flashing lights when loading or unloading children outside of 
the corporate limits of cities, towns and villages. Vehicle drivers approaching from the front or rear are 
required to stop until the children have reached a place of safety and the flashing lights have stopped. 
 
Unfortunately this is not the case within the corporate limits of cities, towns and villages, unless local 
by-laws are in effect. By standardizing this requirement, Mr. Speaker, drivers will know that they must 
stop when a school bus is loading or unloading regardless of where they are travelling. Although we 
expect this will be accepted by the majority, we realize that there is a need for exemptions, and therefore 
local councils through by-laws can prohibit the use of lights at selected locations within urban areas. 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s at this time that I would like to share with the members of the Assembly today, 
for their knowledge we did have today I think . . . A very tragic accident took place in the province of 
Saskatchewan today. We lost a five-year child and a 52-year-old male bus driver. It is the first loss of 
life that we have had in the province of Saskatchewan of children or an adult travelling on a school bus. 
It is without a doubt not a very heartening thing to discuss. We are taking steps, and part of these steps 
are in the new Vehicles Act with activating the flashing lights to try and prevent this. It is a sad loss, Mr. 
Speaker. I have informed SSTA that I will be meeting with them to discuss all safety aspects and 
safety-related issues for school buses and children travelling on school buses in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 



 
May 26, 1983 

 
2613 

So the new Vehicles Act does not maybe cover all aspects of this, but, Mr. Speaker, without a doubt it is 
a step in the right direction. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, the summer season is upon us and brings another provision to mind to that 
which the public should be made aware of. 
 
Passengers will not be allowed to travel inside a trailer. The only exceptions to this are farm trailers, 
emergency services and fire-fighting, just to mention a few. This provision is contained in the old act, 
but is obscure and difficult to locate. 
 
Another fact the travelling public will have to become aware of is that gasoline tankers will be required 
to stop at uncontrolled railway crossings, whether they are full or empty. This change will provide a 
further safety measure by recognizing the potential danger of empty gasoline tankers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at present time, there is an information gap in existing legislation when it comes to the 
requirement to carry flares and to use them for the proper illumination of stationary vehicles. Right now, 
only commercial and public service vehicles are required to carry flares, although all vehicle operators 
are required to use them. This bill provides that all vehicles 80 inches or more in width will be required 
to carry flares. As a consequence, all vehicle operators meeting the standard will be better equipped in 
emergency situations. 
 
Regarding, Mr. Speaker, the level of fines: although specific fine levels are set for specific cases, the 
present Vehicles Act contains a general penalty for use, and specific fines are not provided. The general 
fine on the maximum has been increased to $1,000 for an individual, and $2,000 for a company, at the 
discretion of the court. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is one more change that will affect the operation of the highway traffic board. At 
present, the issuance of public service registrations is discretionary. This means that a carrier is required 
to receive specific board approval before licensing any vehicle. This bill provides for the separation of a 
vehicle registration from the discretionary issuance function of economic regulation. This bill provides 
for the registration of all public services vehicles in the same manner as all other classes. In addition, an 
operating authority licence will be created to assist with the economic regulation activity of the board. 
 
I should remind the public that, at this time — the enforcement of the new Vehicles Act — those 
companies and individuals now holding public service certificates will automatically receive certificates 
of operating authority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this concludes my comments on the new Vehicles Act. We have listened when the people 
responded to our request for their input, and have presented legislation that everyone can understand, 
Mr. Speaker — I even believe the members opposite. This bill is not the product of a few, but takes its 
direction from the people, the people that are affected by its contents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, above all, the approach we take in preparing this legislation proved to be a very valuable 
learning experience. What the people have said to me, by way of letters and phone calls, is they want 
legislation that recognizes that driving is a privilege, not a right, Mr. Speaker. I think the bottom line to 
the new Vehicles Act, the position of this 



 
May 26, 1983 
 

 
2614 

government, that our concern, our major concern, with the new Vehicles Act, and what we’re trying to 
accomplish by the new Vehicles Act, Mr. Speaker, is not political in nature at all. The bottom line is we 
just want to try and save more lives in the province of Saskatchewan, and have the roads a safer place 
for the tourists and the people from within this province to travel upon. With that, I move second reading 
of Bill No. 81. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to say a few words on this bill before I adjourn the 
debate. My colleague from Pelly, who is not in the House at the present time, and others, will want to 
have a chance to dissect the bill as well as the words spoken by the minister because it is a very 
complicated bill which includes many things, I think, that the people of Saskatchewan will appreciate. I 
know that our government was in the process of bringing in a vehicles act and many, many hours, by 
many of the same staff, I’m sure, has gone into preparing this bill and it is complicated and it will take 
some time. 
 
There are other things in the act, I think, that are not as acceptable and will be controversial and we 
would like the time to analyse and prepare for doing an analysis of Bill 51. I would like to join with the 
minister in expressing sympathy for the two families who were affected by the terrible tragedy — I 
believe it was at Strasbourg — where two lives were lost in a school bus and grain truck accident. And 
we will be looking at the act and at the accident, in fact, to see whether or not provisions have been 
made for seat belts in school buses, something that I think should be included, and possibly a House 
amendment would be in order, Mr. Minister, and we will see whether or not that will be an option, 
whether or not a loss of life possibly could have been prevented had we gone to that route — and 
possibly for future that is an option that we should be looking at. And so with those few words, Mr. 
Speaker, I would beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 84 — An Act respecting the Provision of Financial Assistance for Capital Works Projects 

 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the March budget address I announced that the 
government intended to create a new $30 million special projects fund to help finance investments in the 
public sector. Reading from that, just to refresh the memory of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I am 
announcing the government’s intention to create a new $30 million special projects fund to help finance 
future productive investments in the Saskatchewan public sector. I am particularly pleased to explain the 
source of this $30 million. Through careful management of expenditures proposed in our November 
budget we estimate departments and agencies of government to be able to turn back to the treasury a 
further $30 million in 1982-83. This is over and above the significant administrative economy that is 
already built into the November budget — $30 million generated by a government becoming more and 
more productive, now able to turn back to the economy for productive investments. 
 
This piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, is the legislative arm of that statement from the March budget as 
part of our nine-point program to deal with job creation in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Section 6 of the bill outlines the financing arrangements. Thirty million dollars is to be appropriated 
from a fund for fiscal year 1982-83. This retroactive appropriation is 



 
May 26, 1983 

 
2615 

proposed for two reasons. First, our analyses show that expenditure levels for ’82-83 would be $30 
million below our November ’82 blue book figures. This was largely due to greater government 
productivity, and I’ll come to further details on that in a minute. Because this money could be used to 
finance useful capital projects that we might not otherwise be able to afford in 1983-84, a retroactive 
appropriation has become necessary to set up the fund. 
 
It should be clearly pointed out that the fund will be operated in a highly accountable way. Any future 
additions to the $30 million fund, or any expenditures from it, will be subject to appropriation by the 
legislature. In addition, the Provincial Auditor will annually audit the fund with the financial statement 
appearing in the Public Accounts. In short, the fund has resulted from increased government 
productivity, and I see a very responsible way to extend our job creation potential through the additional 
capital projects. 
 
What happened, Mr. Speaker, is that our government, I suppose, came under moderate attack from the 
opposition in the November budget because we weren’t spending enough money, because we had 
whittled down the previous NDP election budget significantly in November. And we felt that we did a 
fairly good job of paring that particular budget down to the point where it was viable and valid, and no 
significant programs were cut. What we were able to do from the time of November through to the end 
of the fiscal year ending March 31 of 1983 is that collectively all the departments of government were 
able to, through productivity measures, through good management by the ministers and good 
management by the officials of the various departments, save $30 million. Very, very seldom do you see 
governments, Mr. Speaker, that in fact can save money. Usually what they do is have to spend more. 
We’ve been able by that means of in fact saving a significant amount of money. 
 
One of the main areas that we were able to save that money through was because of our ability to not fill 
some of the vacant positions, or positions that were budgeted for further hiring of people within the 
public sector. We heard the community out there and the people out there basically saying -government 
could do a little bit more, that government had become a little too fat relative to the consumer, relative to 
the business community, relative to the local government. So our managers went to work and by and 
large saved a significant sum of money. 
 
One of the other areas that led to this savings of dollars, Mr. Speaker, was that we brought in a mortgage 
interest reduction program. We believed at the time — last April during the election — that one of the 
great problems that were faced by the average citizen out there was a genuine concern in that particular 
household as to whether or not they were going to be able to maintain their home. Previous government 
advanced their theory. It didn’t wash. It was a complicated system that basically said . . . I suppose one 
could describe it as a Roy Romanow solution to a problem: pick a fight with the banks, but don’t put any 
money into the pockets of the average consumer. And the consumer saw through that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We delivered a 13.25 per cent mortgage program that was very well received by the rank and file voter 
out there. And what did we hear from the opposition? ‘You bought your way into government. 
Extravagant expenditures, and you bought your way into government.’ That program, Mr. Speaker . . . 
We were able to save almost $10 million from that program, because interest rates went down, Mr. 
Speaker. And, while we anticipated that interest rates would go down, we hadn’t anticipated that they 
would go down quite that far and, as a result, a significant saving was made from that. 



 
May 26, 1983 
 

 
2616 

And I would like to hear, Mr. Speaker, now, those grave critics of the particular program that said, 
‘You’re going to bankrupt the province with it. It’s way too expensive. It’s going to force the 
government to bring in deterrent fees and sell off the Crown corporations.’ It didn’t do that, Mr. 
Speaker. I believe that cost in the year ’82-83 was $22 million out of a $3 billion budget; not a big 
expense, Mr. Speaker. We were able to do it as well because the department was able to function well 
with the private-sector lending institutions, the banks, and the credit unions across this province. They 
delivered a very good program to it when able to deliver that program. 
 
Enough said about the way we were able to save that money, Mr. Speaker. I suppose we could have 
done two things. We could have used that money that we didn’t spend to cover off that deficit, in which 
case we would have come in with expenditure down $30 million, which we have done. But we also 
think it’s appropriate to take that $30 million now, Mr. Speaker, set it into a fund, and be able to use that 
fund to deal with some capital projects through the year that we see as worthy and important. And as 
those capital projects are announced from that fund, it will be made public to the entire population. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, what this will allow us to do is the legislation will allow accountability to it. It’ll 
be accountable to the legislature; it will be accountable and registered in the public accounts committee 
and it would be audited by the Provincial Auditor. We hope this money can be used for some good 
capital projects — projects yet to be announced, but that will be announced over the course of the next 
fiscal year. 
 
And, with that, Mr. Speaker, and prior to moving second reading, I am very proud to be able to 
announce this $30 million program. I was proud to announce it in the budget. I am proud of the ability of 
the managers and the various ministers who have been able collectively amongst themselves — and it’s 
been collectively across the board — to be able to save this kind of money. I think it’s responsible 
government. I think it is good government. We have delivered the programs, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve 
delivered them cheaper than we said we could deliver them, and I think we’ve delivered them more 
effectively. And with that, Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to move second reading of Bill No. 84, an act 
to set up the assistance to capital works. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to add a few words in this debate. I’ve not had an 
opportunity to peruse the bill which has not been available except for a few hours. I’ve not had an 
opportunity to see the explanatory notes, and I’m not sure whether they have been distributed. 
Accordingly, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 68 — An Act to amend The Summary Offences Procedure Act 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, in speaking and moving reading of The Summary Offences 
Procedure Amendment Act of 1983 . . . Mr. Speaker, because the federal government has announced 
that it is considering proclaiming into force the Young Offenders Act later this year, many of the 
provisions of the bill are required to deal with juveniles who commit offences under the provincial law 
or municipal by-laws. The present Juvenile Delinquents Act governs these offences now, but the new 
Young Offenders Act ignores them and leaves the provinces to prescribe their own 



 
May 26, 1983 

 
2617 

procedures. In most cases this is most conveniently accomplished by adopting the federal scheme so that 
one set of rules does not exist for the Criminal Code offences, and yet another for the provincial 
offences. We do, however, consider that some of the provisions of the Young Offenders Act are too 
onerous in the context of provincial offences and have therefore made some modifications to the federal 
procedures. 
 
Section 3 of this bill establishes part I of the act, and section 4 sets out the new interpretation section 
which is necessary because of the additions and changes being proposed. The more important parts of 
section 4 to note are the definitions of juvenile offender, open custody, provincial director. These 
correspond closely to those contained in the federal Young Offenders Act. It is proposed that, where 
possible, open custody facilities that are provided for under the federal Young Offenders Act will be 
utilized for custody and detention of juvenile offenders under the provincial statutes and municipal 
by-laws, and that the person or agency that will act as provincial director under the federal act will also 
act as a probation officer for juveniles under the provincial legislation. 
 
Section 5 of the bill establishes part II of the act consisting of most of the existing act. Section 5 also 
provides for new section 2.1 prohibiting prosecution of anyone under the age of 12 for an offence under 
the provincial law or municipal by-law. This also is consistent with the federal enactment. 
 
Section 6 of the bill provides for an amendment requiring notice to be given to a parent, or someone 
standing in the place of a parent, when a juvenile is taken into custody for being found intoxicated in a 
public place and requires that the juvenile not be placed with adults, but be held only in the open custody 
facility. 
 
Section 9 of the bill adds two new sections relating to juvenile offenders that differ somewhat from the 
federal enactment. While it is considered desirable that a parent or guardian of a juvenile be notified that 
this child has been charged with an offence, we consider that the federal mandatory requirement that the 
parent or guardian must be notified too stringent. Under the proposed new section 9.1, a peace officer 
need make reasonable effort to serve notice on the parent or guardian. This new section 9.2 will ensure 
that charges are not unnecessarily thrown out of court because of a lack of strict proof of the notice to 
the parent. 
 
I’m sure for those that have appeared in court on some of these charges that very often the policy force 
are in fact thwarted by what would be called technical defences. And this was an area that we tried to 
correct — a type of situation where perhaps a youngster is charged with an offence and it becomes very 
difficult to locate the parent, find the parent and serve the proper notice, or the parent effectively is able 
to dodge that type of service, and therefore provided a defence to what otherwise would be perhaps a 
straightforward charge before the court. 
 
On the other hand, the new section 10.1 proposed in section 10 of the bill establishes the importance of 
parents being notified by giving the court authority to allow evidence of the effort made to be introduced 
where no parent appears and to permit the court to adjourn proceedings to allow further effort to be 
made to notify the parent or guardian. 
 
With that we believe that we’ve been able to cover off both sides of the problem: number one, Mr. 
Speaker, to avoid the technical argument and yet provide enough safeguards, Mr. Speaker, that the law 
is not abused by police officers that would take advantage of that type of an amendment. 



 
May 26, 1983 
 

 
2618 

Section 10 of the bill also adds a new section 10.2 to protect juvenile offenders from being imprisoned 
with adult offenders. The present provision of the probation of adults are to be found in The Corrections 
Act. These provisions do not apply to juveniles. Upon the proclamation of the Young Offenders Act, it 
is necessary to have provisions for probation and juvenile offenders under the provincial and municipal 
law. It is also considered more appropriate to have probation provisions for adults in The Summary 
Offences Procedure Act rather than in The Corrections Act, since probation is a sentencing alternative to 
incarceration. 
 
Therefore section 11 of the bill establishes part 3 of The Summary Offences Procedure Act, and lifts out 
of The Corrections Act that part of it relating to probation, with amendments to the existing section 
required in order to provide for juvenile offenders. In general, the change made to existing provisions 
recognizes the provincial director under the Young Offenders Act as a probation officer for juveniles. 
 
Of particular note is the addition by subsection 4 of the new section 19, of special conditions appropriate 
to a juvenile offender that a court may require of a juvenile on probation. These conditions are taken out 
of section 23(2) of the Young Offenders Act. 
 
The other change from the existing section of The Corrections Act that I will bring to your attention is 
increasing the maximum fine from $100 to $500 under section 21. This is the maximum fine that may be 
imposed by a judge when a person is in breach of his probation order. 
 
Certain other provisions of this bill are unrelated to the implementation of the Young Offenders Act. 
The amendment proposed in section 7 of the bill will permit a peace officer to charge a person with 
being intoxicated in a public place if he takes a person into custody under section 5 of the act, and then 
discovers that the person has been taken into custody under section 5 on two or more previous 
occasions. This will be in addition to his power to keep the person in custody up to 24 hours. Presently 
once a person is taken into custody under section 5 a charge cannot be laid, and usually the peace officer 
will not know at the time of taking the person into custody about the previous conviction. 
 
Section 8 of this bill repeals the subsection of the act that officials of the Department of Justice consider 
may be contrary to the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms and therefore unconstitutional. The 
section being repealed deems a description of an offence written on a ticket to be sufficient notice of the 
offence charged. This seems to contravene the provision of the charter of rights that a person charged 
with the right to be informed of a specific offence. With the proposed repeal of this section, whether the 
person has received sufficient notice of the offence charge will be a decision for the trial judge to make. 
 
In addition, section 10 of this bill will add a new section 10.3 to the act. This section specifically 
authorizes imprisonment for non-payment of fines. At present this is done under certain provisions of 
the Criminal Code, which are incorporated by reference to the provincial offences. However, this leads 
to some confusion, and it is therefore considered desirable to have this authority stated plainly in the 
provincial legislation. 
 
As well, the maximum period of incarceration for non-payment of a fine under provincial law is to be 90 
days, not six months as in the case of the Criminal Code. 



 
May 26, 1983 

 
2619 

That is the basic thrust of this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. I believe it is primarily of a procedural 
nature, with regard to the practice of summary offences within the provincial court system. 
 
A comment or two with regard to the Young Offenders Act. A Young Offenders Act is an example of a 
federal jurisdiction basically deciding a process of law that should be better in imposing that on the 
provincial governments at a significant cost to a provincial government, Mr. Speaker, without 
necessarily the agreement and co-ordination of effort that one would sometime hope to see under that 
type of thing. 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, it’s indeed a pleasure for me, on behalf of the Attorney-General, the Minister 
of Justice, to move second reading of a bill, The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 1983. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to make a few comments. I had an opportunity 
to review the legislation and the accompanying notes that were supplied. And I think that the provision, 
as the minister indicated, that no person under the age of 12 shall be convicted of an offence under 
provincial or municipal by-law, is a step forward. I think previously it was seven. 
 
And in respect to the section 9(1) and 9(2) and the subsequent section 10, as you indicated that it was 
mandatory in the federal legislation in order to have service of an information made on the juvenile 
offender’s parent or a person that stands in place of the parent. I note that you have not make it 
mandatory; you have however put a protection clause in there that the judge can of course adjourn the 
proceedings and ask for further efforts. I think that may well give protection and certainly protection in 
the event that the individual is represented, of course, by counsel. That provision could be invoked and 
may well be invoked by the courts. However, I am a little surprised that the minister has deviated from it 
being mandatory that the parent or guardian of the juvenile, the mandatory provision for service of an 
information. I think during committee of the whole, I’ll discuss that further. 
 
The increase in the penalty section also, I think, has been increased very substantially as you have 
indicated. And that has been increased from previously a specified number of days — of 60 days and a 
fine of $100 — and here it has been simply indicated that a sentence can be imposed with no limitation, 
that is in the case of contravention of a probation order — and that has sizeably increased to $500. It 
may be indicative of the direction of the new justice minister in respect to the approach that is being 
taken in respect to offenders; one of probably increasing significantly the penalties, and perhaps a 
deviation away — and that’s what we fear — a deviation away from the rehabilitation. 
 
And as you indicated in default of payment, section 10(3), where there can be up to 90 days, now that’s 
a pretty significant incarceration for non-payment. Because non-payment only applies, primarily, to the 
poor and not to the wealthy in society. Paying fines is not much of a problem to the rich, but it is a very 
difficult area in respect to the underprivileged who have occasion to come before our court system and 
often may not, even though they would certainly pay it if they had the income. And so I’m a little 
concerned with the amount of the penalty, because we’re dealing primarily here, I guess, with the 
provincial legislation. But, as I indicated, I want to discuss some of the 



 
May 26, 1983 
 

 
2620 

specific clauses during the committee of the whole. 
 
Overall, I think that there are some steps forward being taken in the legislation. Moving the probation 
from The Corrections Act into the summary conviction . . . I was a little surprised as why it was moved 
from The Corrections Act. The explanation I see in the notes is simply that it’s a sentencing procedure 
and should be therefore tied to the summary conviction act rather than to The Corrections Act. Again I 
just raise a flag of concern with the direction that may be being exhibited here by the government. 
 
Certainly the corrections were in fact with Social Services for a very specific reason — our corrections 
was with Social Services. And the emphasis in the past, I think to a large extent — at least the emphasis 
— was on rehabilitation of young people and for that reason we thought Social Services both from the 
standpoint of staff and the whole outlook would be probably somewhat different than the 
Attorney-General’s portfolio or the Minister of Justice. 
 
But, as I say, I’ve had an opportunity to go through it, and I’ve got two or three concerns with specific 
clauses. I’ll raise those with the minister through the committee of the whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and by leave of the Assembly referred to a committee of the 
whole later this day. 
 

Bill No. 73 — An Act to amend The Corrections Act 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. This is the second reading of The Corrections 
Amendment Act of 1983. With the exception of section 6 of this bill, all of the amendments contained in 
it are consequential to The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act of 1983. Bill 68 is now also 
before the legislature. Section 3 and 5 repeal the parts of The Corrections Act relating to probation, 
which are to be incorporated in The Summary Offences Procedure Act. I take it that my learned friend 
from the Quill Lakes was in support of that particular proposal. 
 
Section 4 make a consequential amendment to section 8(1). That is required because the probation 
provisions of this act will be moved to The Summary Offences Procedure Act. 
 
Section 7 repeals a schedule to the act, which is related to the provisions being moved to The Summary 
Offences Procedure Act. 
 
In the new section, subsection 29(1), in clause (2)(b) of section 6 of the bill, the authority for 
classification of tasks performed by the inmates of a correction facility, for setting the schedule of 
allowances paid to the inmates for performing those tasks, and for determining the classifications to 
which the task will fall is to be clarified. At present these are accomplished by ministers’ orders in a 
rather cumbersome and imprecise way. This proposed amendment will clarify the legal authority for 
prescribing and paying the allowances paid to inmates of correction facilities, and result in the 
publication of the rates as regulations. 
 
The new clause 29(2)(b) continues the existing authority for provisions of clothing transportation and 
money to the inmates being released from the correction institution. 



 
May 26, 1983 

 
2621 

With that, I would move second reading of The Corrections Amendment Act, 1983. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t have many comments in respect to this. This is legislation that’s 
coterminous with the previous bill, and accordingly I do not have any particular difficulty in supporting 
it. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and by leave of the Assembly referred to a committee of the 
whole later this day. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 55 — An Act to amend The Penalties and Forfeitures Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
MR. VICE-CHAIRMAN: — Is the minister ready to introduce his officials? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Ron Hewitt from the Attorney-General’s department. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — The last day that the Minister of Justice introduced this, I did at that time raise some 
concern in respect to the provision of this act, where in fact it says: 
 

Where a pecuniary penalty of forfeiture mentioned in subsection (1) is not more than $300, the 
Attorney General may remit that penalty or forfeiture in whole or in part. 

 
My two concerns: previously, any remission was in fact done by order in council, and that of course 
gave the public accessibility to the orders in council and a full knowledge of what forfeitures or fines 
were being remitted. 
 
The second thing, if you weren’t here the other day, Mr. Minister, the Attorney-General, the Minister of 
Justice, indicated that they were doing this, but in defence of it, I would have thought giving a power to 
a specific minister, it would be because of a burden of dealing with so many of these remissions of fines 
or penalties. I was somewhat surprised when he indicated that over the four-year period there was 
something like 24 in total, and so that’s somewhere in the neighbourhood of about six. I would not have 
thought that if that is expected to be continued, it is justification for going from the order in council, as it 
previously was, to a discretionary ability by an individual minister. I also have proposed an amendment 
to this and he said he would certainly give it very serious consideration. 
 
I wanted to look up his particular remarks, but he indicated that my concerns were not justified, if I may 
use it in that form, because he said there would be a filing before the legislature, or some such filing 
whereby the information would in fact be made public. And perhaps the Minister of Finance could 
enlighten us and alleviate us of these deep concerns and the potential of abuses that could possibly 
emanate by the amendment to this particular bill. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, I think that the member should be aware that there is a reporting 
mechanism now, a reporting system wherein that report has to go to the legislature with regards to 
remissions of taxes now. There’s a report filed in the legislature for all remissions. I take that you are 
aware of. I am advised that that is done 



 
May 26, 1983 
 

 
2622 

now, and what you’re suggesting is that we, I suppose, have an OC and have a gazetting of it as well. 
You know, and what that does I take it just creates that much more paper work to do and that much more 
effort to do, and therefore that would run into cost problems. 
 
The hon. member gets some kind of a view, I take it, and I’m not referring specifically to this but the 
general thrust is that somehow this government is going to be in a sinister way covering something up. 
You are trying to make something out of something that does not exist. You are trying to create an issue, 
trying to raise doubts in the minds of the population that somehow there is some sinister hiding concept 
involved in this government. And as a result nothing could be farther from the truth. We are I would say 
by all comparisons and by all standards, the most open government ever to sit as a government in the 
province of Saskatchewan. I think it is an unfortunate statement, or an unfortunate attempt by the 
opposition to try to colour this government as somehow sinister in trying to be less than open with the 
people. 
 
This is the most open government that has ever held office in the province of Saskatchewan; and I 
believe the population out there right now . . . What the population out there are interested in right now 
is not so much that they government do everything, they want to be part of what the government does. 
They want to be part of doing to make the province go, and not all government to do all the problems. 
So with that, I think your whole attack or strategy or direction is very ill-founded, and I would hope that 
in the interests of the people of Saskatchewan, and in the interests of a better system that you would cast 
that aside and try to find another area to attack the government. I know there is not very many but try to 
look at something that perhaps is a more thrusty attack. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — What a great little political speech but not very much evidence by the minister that 
there’s nothing to fear, because certainly there is quite a considerable amount to fear with this 
government . They pretend to be an open government and they aren’t. They indicated they wanted TV in 
committees when they were in opposition; now they are no longer for it, and hesitating, and thwarting it. 
And now in the appointment of executive assistants, they have devised a new secretive method of 
appointment of EAs. Before it was by order in council. Now they are sneaking them through in the dark 
of night in order that the public may not be informed. 
 
And here now what they want to do is to give to the Attorney-General the power of remission. And I 
want to say that that is a pretty serious situation. Most of the fines and penalties that are imposed are 
done through a court system — court system, judicial system. And here we have one single individual, 
that doesn’t even want to be accountable any longer, wanting to have the power, the power to remit, 
probably to some Tory friend. That’s what he’s getting at. He wants to be able to slide it through without 
an OC so some Tory that runs into a fine or something, that he can quietly slip it through without any 
order in council. 
 
Obviously what they’re doing here is some more political manoeuvring. And what I want to say, this 
utter nonsense about the total cost, it’s just absolute nonsense. And they use it for every direction that 
they go, which they try to destroy the public’s input into the affairs of this government and they’re 
saying it’s done for cost basis. 
 
On the admission of the Attorney-General, there is only 24 of these in the past. Now maybe they 
anticipate there’s going to be more now that he’s got a hold of it. Maybe there’s going to be more. And 
therefore maybe you have to look at the costs. But if you 



 
May 26, 1983 

 
2623 

look at what was going on in the past, there was only 24 in four years — six of them, just six per year, 
on the average. And to indicate that it’s going to be a great savings — and I think he said something like 
$2,400 or $2,500 on individual OC which is absolutely, totally stupid to even put forward in, before this 
Assembly to support it, because obviously that figure has not been documented. 
 
Certainly if the remission is going to be done by the Attorney-General, it seems to me a submission 
would have to be made to him with the factual background in the detail that the whole cabinet would 
look at it. Obviously he’s not just going to have it on a back of a cigarette carton. Or maybe he is. 
Maybe he is. Maybe somebody’s just going to run into his office and say, ‘Look, I’ve had this penalty. I 
want it alleviated. It’s under $300, Mr. Attorney-General, and I’m a good Tory. Can I get that fed back 
to me — remitted?’ And this is conceivably what they’re setting up because they have absolutely no 
justification, because on the basis of the history of the volume, it just doesn’t make sense to change it. It 
just doesn’t. I want to specifically ask the minister if he’s indicating that in respect to the filing of the 
number of remissions and so on is in the annual report, that’s not very assuring in total. Because the 
filing of the report, to my knowledge, with the Minister of Justice is not mandatory. And secondly, it’s 
delayed information that we would be receiving. And like orders in council . . . Before in the past, orders 
in councils were made available to the public shortly after the event — as soon as the order in council 
was passed. 
 
I want to say, more secretiveness in this government. We have two orders in councils that were 
approved on April 20, and they won’t tell us — they won’t put them into the file. They’re waiting until 
this House adjourns, presumably. And don’t tell me that it’s open government. This is not an open 
government. This is a government that is scared — scared to let the public look at their actions. And 
they have done it by the rejection of television, which they supported. They rejected what they were 
fighting for, is comprehensive auditing. They’ve rejected it by a sneaky, sleazy method of appointment 
of EAs. That’s what they’ve done. And now what they want to do is to turn over, turn over, turn over — 
turn over, Mr. Minister. 
 
And something — I tell you, you know, you need something to make you laugh, because you’re so far 
down after your blunder in New York that you can hardly rise your head high enough that we can see 
you over the loudspeaker in front of you. I’m telling you, if you get down any lower, you won’t even be 
noticeable. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Minister, that we have proposed an amendment. The amendment simply provides that 
if there’s a remission, that such remission would be published in the Gazette, and accordingly this could 
in fact be seen by the public and by the opposition. So I want to be more specific on this, Mr. Minister, 
and ask you: can you provide me with the specific information as to the procedure of the so-called filing 
that you sort of washed over, and outline that immediate and more detail? But more specifically, if you 
have nothing to hide, why not adopt the amendment which we have proposed and put it into the 
Gazette? Certainly the public has every right to know it. I don’t think we should take it lightly because 
these are penalties that have been imposed by due process of law, and it seems to me that for one single 
individual minister to have the power of the remission just is, I think, usurping the responsibility and the 
accountability to the public. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, the hon. member raises several points, I think all of them not founded 
on logic and reason and fact. 



 
May 26, 1983 
 

 
2624 

Let’s deal, first of all, with his allegation, that the TV in the committees is not . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The problem with the hon. members opposite is that they are unaware of the fact that 
there’s a board of internal economy, of which they have two members on the committee — two 
members on the committee. Both the members . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Just listen to this one. 
Both of the members don’t happen to be here today, but we had a committee meeting this week, I 
believe. This week we had a committee meeting of which we dealt specifically with the question of 
television in committees. 
 
What we looked at is a proposal . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The members opposite don’t want to 
hear the answer to this question . . . (inaudible) . . . Well, I’ll tell you. He says, ‘It doesn’t make any 
sense,’ and yet that committee represents two members of cabinet, two members of government 
back-bench, two members of opposition. At that meeting there was one cabinet minister — myself — 
two members of the government back-bench, and two members of the opposition — the member from 
Assiniboia and the member from Pelly. And there was a resolve that we look at the whole question of 
television in committees. The suggestion that we will pursue with those received — received, Mr. 
Chairman — unanimous — unanimous — consent. In other words, the two members opposite that are 
not there today forgot to tell the other colleagues, the lawyer colleagues, of the NDP caucus that they 
agreed to this overall proposal to look at in fact delivering television coverage to the committees in the 
Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
We are dealing with that. They’re just not aware of it. Not only that, but they’re not aware that their own 
members voted with the government members in a unanimous resolution in that committee. So they 
raise the point that somehow the government is trying to hide something through this committee. If that 
is the best argument that they can mount, and I think that is the strongest that they can mount that 
somehow that this government is trying to hide something. 
 
Now, I will mention comprehensive auditing. I’d like to go back and talk about comprehensive auditing 
for a minute . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The hon. member now doesn’t want to hear about 
comprehensive auditing, so I won’t go into comprehensive auditing. The hon. member talks and says, 
‘Well,’ he says, ‘it’s only a few thousand dollars. What’s a few thousand dollars?’ Well, I’ll tell you. My 
grandmother always told me a penny saved is a penny earned. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — My grandmother was a wise old lady. And the members opposite are always 
of the view that you spend here, spend there, spend the next place, spend the next place. Don’t worry 
about responsible looking after the dollars. Create more red tape and hurdles to have to go through. 
That’s the way to do it. That’s the way to run a government. They ran one for 11 years that way. They’re 
paying for it now. We’re changing from that system. Now they make reference to somehow of a sleazy 
system that we have for dealing with our executive assistants and ministers’ assistants to the various 
ministers. 
 
The members opposite wrote the book on sleaziness with regard to this subject. Here’s what we have 
done and if somehow, if this is sleazy . . . I don’t know how they define that word. What we have said is 
that where you’re appointing a ministerial assistant who will be doing some political work —and that’s 
accepted by all, including the members opposite —than you put him into an overall blanket OC. 
Consistent. 



 
May 26, 1983 

 
2625 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Chairman, I’m having difficulty fitting these comments within the four 
corners of The Penalties and Forfeitures Act. I wonder if the minister is in order. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Chairman, I simply . . . Response to the point of order. 
 
MR. VICE-CHAIRMAN: — Order, please. My ruling would be that I think both sides were somewhat 
out of order and strayed perhaps a little bit from Bill No. 55. I would like to remind you that we are on 
Bill No. 55, clause no. 1, and if we could kindly get back to the topic at hand. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The only thing I was attempting to do, Mr. Chairman, is when somebody 
refers to my colleagues as sleazy, I think I should only have the right to try to defend and explain that in 
fact it is not sleazy in nature at all. 
 
With regards to the question, is that the annual report has to be filed. The annual report of the 
Attorney-General is filed and in that annual report we must set out the details of the remission which we 
would propose to do. We believe the department has in fact looked at the situation. We are giving 
serious consideration to making an adjustment, making an amendment to this particular bill, Mr. 
Chairman, and I suggest that we will make that particular amendment to the bill. The one proposed by 
the members opposite is, as usual, has gone a little bit too far and we were proposing to move only 
section (b) of that and not section (a) of that. 
 
If you would permit me, Mr. Chairman, I would simply read from the illustrious column of the 
Leader-Post, one Dale Eisler, just to try to bring one’s view, one media view, with regard to the 
functioning of the opposition. It says, and I’ll read . . . 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I thought your ruling indicated, Mr. Chairman, that this line of discussion 
was outside the bill. And I wonder why the minister is being permitted to continue it. 
 
MR. VICE-CHAIRMAN: — I would ask the Minister of Finance to perhaps explain to us how the 
newspaper clipping relates to the bill. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The thrust of the hon. member’s attack with regard to this bill was that it 
was a means by which the government was trying to use the legislation to cover up and to hide . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, he refers to it as potential. Now, that seems to me to be a very serious 
accusation against the government, of cover-up and trying to hide something. I simply want to — and 
this is a political forum — I simply should have the opportunity to try to counteract that argument with 
regard to cover-up. And I would simply try to react to it . . . 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — On a point of order, Mr. Chairman. I wonder if the Chairman could make a ruling as 
to the relevancy of the comments, and that the hon. member should not have the opportunity merely to 
stand up and continue on explaining to you why he wants to go on with non-relevant material. And 
accordingly I’ve asked a specific question into the safeguards in respect to this, and that’s exactly what 
we’re asking for . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Somebody else is on his feet, Mr. Chairman. I have the 
floor, I would have thought. Can you sit him down? 



 
May 26, 1983 
 

 
2626 

I would like to get some order into the committee of the whole in the discussion of this here bill, and this 
principle which is important. And the opposition are not apparently addressing their concerns. I have 
indicated to them that I have an amendment. And the Attorney-General, the Minister of Justice, 
indicated that he would take a very serious look at it — a very serious look — because he understood 
our concern. And that’s the point. And so I want to ask the minister, and I have . . . That’s what I want 
an answer from: what are the safeguards which will in fact replace the safeguards which we had before 
by the OC? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that what we were discussing here was a 
point of order raised by the member from Regina Centre. 
 
MR. VICE-CHAIRMAN: — I would like to remind the member that you can only interject on a point 
of order. Are you making a point of order? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — If I rise now on a point of order, what we’ve got then is three points of 
order on the floor, in rapid succession. If I can speak to the point of order. 
 
MR. VICE-CHAIRMAN: — I would ask the Minister of Agriculture to please take his seat. The 
member for Quill Lakes did have the floor. If we could just hang tough here for a minute or so, I’ll take 
this under advisement. 
 
I would ask the member for the Quill Lakes to continue. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I know that you haven’t been here 
around much in respect to watching the proceedings in the committee, and I appreciate very much . . . 
 
MR. VICE-CHAIRMAN: — I would remind the member for Quill Lakes to continue with the point of 
order. I believe you are straying from the subject at hand. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — The question that I want to ask the substituting minister that’s bringing in this 
legislation is: can he indicate the guarantees that we have as to the information . . . 
 
MR. VICE-CHAIRMAN: — Would you please get to your point of order, please. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Pardon? 
 
MR. VICE-CHAIRMAN: — What is your point of order, sir? 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — My point of order is that the minister wasn’t answering my question, and I thought 
you ruled that he was out of order, and that I in fact had the floor again. 
 
MR. VICE-CHAIRMAN: — I did not rule that, sir . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I will. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak to the point of order. The question 
raised by the Chair, as I understand it, was: what relevance does the newspaper article have to the bill 
that we’re dealing with in committee right now? That was the question raised by the Chair. Well, in 
order to explain what relevance it has, I want to put on the table, Mr. Chairman, the relevant section of 
the article. The relevant section of the article, Mr. Chairman: 



 
May 26, 1983 

 
2627 

It is this rather benign attitude that the problems faced by the NDP are the result of misdirected 
political awareness amongst others, rather than any specific mistakes made by the party, that makes 
it a prisoner of its own self-righteousness. 

 
That is the particular quote that is relevant to this debate, Mr. Chairman, because they are in fact victims 
of their own self-righteousness throughout this whole debate. I think that is relevant to the debate, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
MR. VICE-CHAIRMAN: — All right. The original point of order, the question before us, was: was the 
subject relevant to the bill that we were discussing? My ruling would be: yes, I believe the newspaper 
article is relevant, and I would ask the Minister of Finance to get back to the bill at hand. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I will resist now referring to the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. 
Chairman, to show that in fact this government has listened. What we are prepared to do is the proposed 
house amendment; to accept the amendment to section 2(3) of the printed bill. Part (a) which was 
proposed we would not accept, because it doesn’t make sense. But part (b) we are prepared to accept, 
and the Attorney-General had a similar-type legislation being prepared to draw up for that, so that we 
can show that we are a government that are prepared to listen. 
 
And subsection (b) which we would agree to, would read as follows — by adding after ‘part’ in the last 
line of section 2(1.1) of the act as being enacted by section 2 of the printed bill the following: ‘and shall 
cause to be published in part 1 of the Gazette a notice with respect to each penalty or forfeiture remitted 
by him pursuant to this subsection showing: (a) the name of the person whom the remission related; (b) 
the charge with respect to which the penalty or forfeiture was imposed; (c) the amount or effect of the 
remission.’ 
 
So what we are prepared to do, Mr. Chairman, to show what we are prepared to do — and referring to 
the Hon. Attorney-General’s statement of May 20, 1983, in which he said: 
 

I will consider the amendment proposed by the opposition. I do believe on the face of it . . . 
 
But he did say that he is prepared to look at it, propose to make some changes. We’re prepared to accept 
half of that amendment. That shows to me a government that’s prepared to listen to a reasoned 
suggestion sometimes coming from the opposition. If the member opposite, the hon. member from the 
Quill Lakes, had referred his comment to the bill in question and related to that specific amendment, and 
not had to venture out into the area of television land, and to talk about how proud he is of the fact that 
Saskatchewan were turned down by the Manhattan boys dealing with the NHL franchise, and talking 
about some kind of a sleazy thing that the Executive Council or the Executive Assistants to ministers, all 
hard-working young people, are doing, then we would have got on with this job 15 or 20 minutes ago. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, I can assure you that when a member opposite makes false accusations, or irritating 
responses, accusations against the members of this side, I 



 
May 26, 1983 
 

 
2628 

can assure you that we’re not prepared to sit on our backsides and let that happen. We’re going to fight 
back, and we’ve always done that, and we always will do that. We make no apologies for it. If the hon. 
members wishes to take credit for the amendment, I would simply invite him to move the amendment 
with the section (a) scrubbed out of it, and I would then advise and invite all members of the House to 
unanimously support that amendment and all will be well. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Precisely what I was asking, and I’m glad that the opposition, in a responsible way, 
have come forward with the amendment. I am glad that in view of the responsible way in which we put 
forward our case of the accountability, that indeed the Minister of Finance has in fact accepted the 
opposition’s responsible amendment. I think to be . . . Certainly if it hasn’t been a change of heart during 
the debate here, I am rather surprised that the Minister of Finance did not initially, at the beginning 
indicate clearly to us that he was going to consent to our amendment. 
 
Instead, he opted not to inform us until after we had raised our very serious concerns with what was in 
fact the possibility of accountability. And so I congratulate the minister for following the direction of the 
very responsible opposition. I certainly will, Mr. Minister, proceed with the amendment deleting that 
which you have indicated. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I would certainly be open, and I’m sure the committee would be open, if 
there’s no other concerns with the bill, to move to that particular section and have the hon. member 
move that amendment, and we can then vote on it and away we go. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 
 
MR. VICE-CHAIRMAN: — There has been a proposed amendment. I would seek a little bit of 
clarification as to just what portions of that amendment have been accepted or have been deleted. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Okay, Section (a) is unnecessary, so if we could make . . . Strike out from 
(a) down to (b), and then call (b), (a). Then away we go. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Yes, that’s fine. That’s what I propose to do. I can initial that if you want, but if it’s 
all right, Mr. Chairman, to proceed with that, we’re in agreement. 
 
MR. VICE-CHAIRMAN: — Is it agreed then that we will pass clause 2 as amended with the exception 
of portion (a) being deleted and portion (b) being changed to portion (a)? Is that agreed? Okay, and I’d 
read portion (b). It reads: 
 

By adding after ‘part’ in the last line of subsection 2(1.1) of the act as being enacted by section 2 of 
the printed bill, the following: ‘and shall cause to be published in part 1 of the Gazette, a notice with 
respect to each penalty or forfeiture remitted by him pursuant to this subsection, showing: (a) the name 
of the person to whom the remission relates; (b) the charge with respect to which the penalty or 
forfeiture was imposed; and (c) the amount or effect of the remission.’ 

 
Is that agreed? 



 
May 26, 1983 

 
2629 

Clause 2 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 56 — An Act to amend The Police Act 
 
Clauses 1 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 57 — An Act to amend The Jury Act, 1981 
 
Clauses 1 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 55 — An Act to amend The Penalties and Forfeitures Act 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I move the amendments be now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the Assembly, I move that the bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 56 — An Act to amend The Police Act 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I move the bill be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 57 — An Act to amend The Jury Act, 1981 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I move the bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, because all members of the legislature are anxious to go to 
Mosaic this evening, I move this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:04 p.m. 


