






















































Hansard: April 18, 1983


(1122) 1123 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 18, 1983 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 

 
ENVIRONMENT 

 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 9 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Just a question here on the water review committee or whatever you called that 
committee that went around the province. Was that funded out of your department or was that Urban 
Affairs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — It was out of the Department of the Environment. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, can you tell us whether or not there’s a report coming out of that 
tour that you did around the province in the near future, and as well, will it be made public when it is 
compiled? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I suppose there will be an in-house report done - a pretty 
comprehensive one ‘cause there was about 200 to 300 briefs that were presented. There will also be a 
policy statement, or whatever policy we derive from that will be made public. There won’t be a public 
report made as per se ‘cause many of those there briefs were confidentially done. We had to take that as 
a confidence so a lot of it will not be made public, but certainly there were public hearings and anybody 
that wanted to come to them could have heard them. Our condensation of them or bringing them 
together will be probably for our own use, but the overall report basically will be released. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, what you’re saying then, Mr. Minister, is the taxpayers paid for this tour 
around the province but they are not able to have access to the study that was done and completed. I find 
that a very interesting approach of a government that was elected on the theme of an open government. 
Can you give us an indication when this policy which will result from these hearings will be forthcoming 
from your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, just in regards to that, all the hearings were public. I mean anybody 
could get up and say publicly what they were. We’re making a transcript of all of it and that will be made 
public. I don’t know what else you could do to . . . It’s been open to the public, they were invited; 
well-advertised; everybody come, bring your briefs, present them orally or verbally or written, whichever 
way you wanted. Anybody who’d ask the person for a brief, it would have been presented to him, I’m 
sure, at the time. We just said that how we package it together within department, that will probably be 
for a policy decision-making which is only fair. I’m sure that’s the way it should be. But the rest is 
certainly all public. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, the main part of my question was, Mr. Minister, when do  



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1124 

you expect your policy statement to be forthcoming as a result of those hearings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — As far as a policy statement, Mr. Chairman, as far as the policy statement . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order! Allow the minister to make his comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — So far as a policy statement, I wouldn’t want to say when it was going to come out, 
because I really don’t know. It would depend on . . . There’s been a water utility crown announced. 
We’re looking at an overall water management policy. But in regards to what was put in those briefs, 
that will be made public, I would think within the next short while. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I would hope that your policy statement on water would be 
forthcoming in the near future. I know that there was a great expectation raised during those hearings 
that were carried out around the province. I know that when the government was elected, there was a 
great anticipation that irrigation, in a major form, would be forthcoming from your government, and to 
date the farmers in the communities of Saskatchewan have seen, indeed, very little. 
 
I would like to say, in closing my part of the questioning, at any rate, that yesterday or the last day we 
were doing your estimates on housing, I complimented you on the job you had done with the housing 
program. By the same token, I would like to let you know that as an opposition member, and on behalf 
of the opposition, that we are extremely disappointed in the Environment’s difficulty in keeping staff and 
spending the money needed to keep the environment of Saskatchewan to the level that it had been in past 
years - the best in Canada. And I want to say in the strongest terms that this kind of eroding of the 
environmental department will lead to very grave consequences in the near future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if that’s closing, I would also like to say that I think the 
Department of the Environment has been doing everything possible and necessary to keep the 
environment safe, and that we will continue to do so. And as it regards to staff, I made that point earlier. 
It isn’t the number of staff you have, it’s what the staff does that counts. It isn’t how many 
administration people you have at the top; it’s what the fieldworkers and what the other people do. 
Administration - you don’t need five administrative people at one spot. What we’re saying is that let’s 
streamline it to the point that it’s effective for the people of Saskatchewan, and that it will give them 
service, at the same time not cost them too much. I think we’ve done a good job. I think we’ll continue 
to protect the environment to all its necessary standards, and certainly we’ll work towards any other 
goals that’s necessary. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, before supper break at 5 o’clock I asked you to give 
us the salaries of your personal staff. That is Darryl Blinkley, special assistant, Fay Brunning, EA, Nancy 
Martin, EA. And I would like to know whether the minister has that information available at this time. 
Surely the minister must know what he pays his staff. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I could assume what the staff’s being paid. I wouldn’t know 
exactly what they’re being paid. Certainly I said earlier that we would get the information and send it to 
them. We will do that. I don’t think it’s that relevant today, whether it’s . . . Whatever it is, to the point, 
because they’d be similar to whatever everybody else is getting paid, so I would think with that in mind, 
we’ll certainly get the 



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1125 

information for the member. We’ll certainly send the information to the member. And . . . 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, I think it’s up to the opposition to be able to ask pertinent questions of 
expenditures in the minister’s office. And I am very shocked that the minister will stand up and say that 
those questions are not relevant. I want to say that on the basis of other information, special assistants are 
receiving about $50,000, that executive assistants are receiving about $35,000 from the other ministers 
that submitted it. I want to say, that besides that you have a Legislative Secretary . . . that the personal 
staff in your office, Mr. Minister, I’m indicating is somewhere between $160,000 and $200,000. And I 
want you to indicate, and I say that you have that information, and should make it available to the public. 
I say categorically that on an estimation, that it’s $160,000 to $200,000, and you have had the audacity to 
cut the budget for administration and for the department by a million dollars, and to tack on to your 
personal office somewhere between $160,000 to $200,000. Why won’t you in fact make that information 
available to the public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, in answer to the hon. member’s question . . . First of all, I don’t know how 
many staff any other departments have, but I would just like to draw his attention to what I do look after. 
Maybe that’s the question . . . Maybe that’d answer the question. I have three staff. I have three staff, all 
right. And I’ll tell you what we look after. We look after Parks and Renewable Resources; we look after 
the water supply board; we look after the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, which would be an 
identity in itself; we have the Saskatchewan forest board . . . Saskatchewan Forest Corporation and also 
the Department of Environment. Now I would think that three staff looking after five major departments 
is not too much, and as regards to the amount that you stated, I can say quite clearly that I know none of 
them reach that . . . I can say quite clearly that the special assistant does not reach, does not reach 
$50,000, nor does assistants reach $35,000. I don’t know the exact amount. You asked me for the exact 
amount . . . I don’t know the exact amount, and I’m not prepared to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Right 
now, if you want to, if you want we’ll go get the exact amount and give it to you, right to the penny. I 
don’t know it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say that it’s absolutely impossible to believe that a minister 
would come into the House on estimates, and try to lead us to believe that he in fact, doesn’t know the 
amount that he is paying to his personal staff. I want to say, Mr. Chairman, that the public of 
Saskatchewan is being stonewalled. I want to say that the information that we have been requesting from 
the Premier is now being copied by the other ministers. I want to say to ask the minister. I understand 
that your Legislative Secretary has the use of a pool car. I want to ask you whether the Legislative 
Secretary has, indeed, a secretary assigned to him, and whether the taxpayers of this province are paying 
for a permanent secretary. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, I answered that earlier. In regards to a pool car - yes, he has a pool car 
assigned to him; has he got a secretary assigned to him - no. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I wonder if the minister could, in fact, present to us the total cost of expenses, vis-a-vis 
automobile, vis-a-vis office space, vis-a-vis all expenses in respect to the Legislative Secretary. Have 
you got that detail, or are you going to again tell the public it’s not in their interest to hear this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — In regards to what we’re talking about, the 0’83-84 budget, all we’re picking up is 
this CVA car, right, so that’s all we’re picking up, so that’s only  



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1126 

expense you got. Now we haven’t had a bill yet for the month of April, so I couldn’t tell you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to ask the minister, once again, final time: are you advising us, here in this 
House, that you in fact cannot turn to your official if you don’t know yourself? Are you, in fact, saying to 
this House that you cannot provide to the opposition the salaries that you’re paying to your special 
assistants and your two EAs? Is this the situation that you’re putting forward to this House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — What I said was, that I would supply you with the information in the next day or 
two, is exactly what I said, and that’s exactly what I will do. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I want to ask the minister, why would he not have that information available? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I made it very clear - you asked me to be exact how much the salaries were. I don’t 
know exactly to the penny how much they are. I said I would get it exactly to the penny and send it to 
you; that’s exactly what I will do. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And, if you can’t tell me the exact amount, do you know the approximate amount? I’ll 
accept the approximate amount, and I’ll wait for the exact amount. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — It would be approximately - it would be less than $50,000 for the special assistant, 
and less than $35,000 for the assistant. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, do you have any range of less? A definition of less? You say it’s less than 50,000. 
I put a figure on of 50,000, because all I’ve got is the guidance of one other minister that’s paying 54,000 
for a special assistant. If you know that it’s less than 50,000, tell me the amount. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I will give you an approximate figure if it will satisfy you. My assistants get 
approximately $30,000 each a year, and my special assistant gets approximately 44-something a year. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In other words, without the exact figures, you’re indicating that just with your three 
personal staff that’s in excess of $100,000? That’s what you’re indicating? Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — That’s correct. If you said approximately $100,000 for the three, that is correct. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — When will you provide the exact figures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I don’t know how many times I’ve got to tell you because I could count on my 
fingers, but I said in the next day or two, and when I say the next day or two, that’s when I’ll give it to 
you. That’s what I’ve always done. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have here, Mr. Minister, an article by the Star-Phoenix, 
February the 3rd. One of your ministers stated: 
 

Pollutants from the Saskatchewan Power Corporation coal-fired generators exceed federal 
government guide-lines, but probably not by much. The  



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1127 

minister for Labour, Lorne McLaren, stated that those guide-lines are exceeded, but perhaps not 
by much. 

 
But also, I want to remind the members in government that they also stated when they were in 
opposition, and I’ll read from the Star-Phoenix: 
 

However, Progressive Conservative MLAs sitting in opposition, insisted that all coal-fired 
generators ought to be, should be equipped with scrubbers regardless of the cost. 

 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, in terms of acid rain, what is your government’s proposition: what is your 
government’s status and what is your government’s position with regards to scrubbers in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that’s a very complex question in a sense because, as you 
well know, Saskatchewan emits very little acid rain. The only one that does emit any acid rain is the one 
in Coronach. We have in fact been in contact with the federal government. They want to set out 
regulations in regards to acid emission from . . . (inaudible) . . . coal-fired plants such as that. We are 
consulting with them; we are talking with them to see what they would think would be a safe standard. 
In regards to the area - the area down there can take some acid which has helped a little bit to delete 
some of the area. There is a problem. 
 
But remember, one thing that you’ve got to remember is that problem was there long before we became 
government and at the same time, although we have the responsibility now of trying to make it better, we 
weren’t the ones to create it. At the time . . . And maybe that goes back to some of the things I said 
earlier about a little bit of planning ahead of time so you don’t come into these problems, because the 
problem is there and the problem was there when we took over, and it’s tougher to fix a problem than it 
is to plan first. So, in answer to that, we’re looking at it. I don’t know what we are going to do right at 
the present time, but certainly it wasn’t a problem that we created and one that we’ll probably have to 
resolve down the road. 
 
Mr. Yew: — In other words, Mr. Minister, then I take it at the grass roots level, whereas the provincial 
government ought to advocate and set the guide-lines and the controls and the guide-lines and the 
regulations for the people of this province. I take it that the provincial government of this province has in 
fact, in effect, abdicated, done away with that portion of responsibility that rests solely with the 
provincial government, that is solely supposed to rest with the provincial government and now you are in 
fact putting that onus, putting that responsibility on the federal government. Am I not correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, just in answer to the member’s question, I think he’s . . . You know, you 
must remember firstly, Mr. Member, that who built the plant to start with? Who were the ones that 
didn’t plan for such things as acid rain? Who forgot to look into the future to say acid rain is a problem? 
It’s been a problem down east for many years. And at the same time, if any others is built, you’ll be sure 
that they’re going to be put into the proper perspective. And in regards to the plant itself, I’ve said we 
looked at it, we’ve been looking at it for quite a while. But it is a very major problem because it wasn’t 
designed properly in the first place. 
 
You know, like it goes back to saying, ‘All right. It’s easy to design something. First set out the ground 
rules before you start.’ But those ground rules were never set out. Now you have to go back and try to 
change them. And that’s what we’ve been saying all  



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1128 

along. It’s hard to change. It’s not hard to set them out. Most companies, most industries don’t mind 
ground rules if they know them first. It’s hard and tough and expensive to bring them in afterwards, and 
as you well know, all the members over there were certainly much aware of it. 
 
So in answer to that, certainly we’re concerned about it; certainly we’re going to do what we can about 
it. But it’s a big major problem that isn’t solved that easily. And you well know, when you were the 
government, you would have solved it. 
 
Mr. Yew: — In a sense, Mr. Minister, then you state that you as an official opposition in years gone by 
have not done your job effectively. You had ideas prior to the time when you gained power in this 
province, prior to the time that you took unanimous . . . won a unanimous government in this province, 
you had ideas of your own. You had ideas such as the Magna Charta deal that was initiated by the 
Minister of Supply and Services. You had an idea and I ask the minister why you have not implemented 
that Magna Charta act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, I think it goes back to everything else. Remember full well that we’ve been 
here one year. And we’ve done a great deal in that one year. A lot of the guide-lines that we’ve brought 
in were never brought in before. We’ve brought in a lot of guide-lines. But if these guide-lines had’ve 
been set out first, you wouldn’t have that problem, but they weren’t set out first. And we’ve said that 
with water management. They were just talking a little while ago about going out and setting a 
committee here, as advisory council there, without knowing your whole magnitude of what you wanted 
to do. The same thing has happened here. It wasn’t never planned from the start. We recognize, for a 
while, that it’s a very expensive thing, that it’s very expensive to do. At the same time, we recognize that 
we may have to, down the road, treat it and do something about it, but there may be other alternatives to 
it, and that’s what we’re looking into. We’re going to continue to see what is available, what can be 
done, but at the present time, no, we haven’t done anything. And at the present time there’s nothing in 
the foreseeable future that we plan on doing with it. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would then ask the minister to get down to basics. Let’s 
start talking about the basics. What does your government intend to do with respect to . . . I’m going to 
use this article from the Star-Phoenix as starters, and I’ve got three basic questions, not all pertaining to 
the same article. I’m going to ask your government, your department, seeing as how the Progressive 
Conservative MLAs, when in opposition, requested and insisted that all coal-fired generators ought to be 
equipped with scrubbers, although they are a cost to the companies, to the businesses, in excess of $80 
million . . . I would just read word for word: ‘One scrubber for a 300-megawatt unit costs about $80 
million.’ 
 
Okay, taking that into account, Mr. Minister, what is your government’s position with respect to those 
scrubbers? In terms of acid rain, serious questions pertaining to acid rain in this province, pertaining to 
the seriousness of how the adverse effects are to our environment, what is your government’s position on 
those? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, in answer to the hon. member’s question, you fully realize that 
Saskatchewan produces 10 per cent or less of the same amount of acid rain of any other province in 
Canada, and the only bit that is being produced is down in that one corner. The rest of the province has 
basically none. Now, we have a concern down there, and Environment Canada has initiated a study to 
determine the current cost of control equipment which would be required to meet a guide-line and the 
probable 



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1129 

impact on the utility rates. And a decision on the adoption of the federal guide-line will not be made 
until after the latest study is completed and reviewed. Now, that is the position I suppose that we’re 
taking, knowing full well that it’s very costly, but there may be other ways that we can in fact put 
equipment on there that will in fact reduce the acid rain that’s coming out if it. And you know, to get 
down to basics, as you say, the basics is that it costs $80 million to $100 million for each set of scrubbers 
- and $80 million to $100 million is expensive to the people of Saskatchewan, so what we’d have to do 
is look to see if there’s some way that we can possibly not cost us that much and still do the job. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, seeing as how you have eliminated altogether the environmental advisory 
council, seeing as how you have eliminated the environmental advisory council, Mr. Minister, I want to 
get on with my second line of questioning in terms of the administration as it exists today. 
 
Now, administration as it exists today pertains, in terms of your cabinet, to Highways. I see the hon. 
member, Mr. Garner, looking at me with a profound expression at times when I’m . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Questioning. Whatever it is, it’s not profound. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Not profound. And I see the member for Meadow Lake absent in his seat, always absent 
from his seat. When there are serious questions to be raised with respect to the people of the northern 
administration district it seems that the members opposite are never in their seats. They always seem to 
be absent from their seats, because the northern administration district is not important to them. That is 
the conclusion I arrive at. 
 
When I asked questions about health services, the minister reiterated and reacted in such a way that it 
seemed to lead me to believe that those issues are not as important as the issues in southern 
Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 
 
The member knows full well what I’m talking about. The initial visits into the northern administration 
district . . . (inaudible interjections) . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order. Do you have a question? Order. Do you have a question on 
environmental estimates? You seem to be ranging quite a ways away from Environment. 
 
Mr. Yew: — My apologies, Mr. Chairman, my apologies. I get very personal when it comes down to the 
effects of how those major projects will involve and affect the people in the northern administration 
district, Mr. Chairman. My apologies. 
 
Now getting back to the basics. With respect to the environment advisory council and the abolishment of 
such, Mr. Minister, how do you expect to have local people involvement, participation in that Nipawin 
hydro project development that you have going at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — In regards to the Nipawin project, I thought we had been over it two or three times, 
but I can explain to you again. In 1979, the EIA was done by the former administration. I would assume 
that they did it properly and that it was done right. It was completed. It’s all done. The dam is already 
under way. The people of  



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1130 

northern Saskatchewan, of which we both have a concern, had an opportunity. They were contacted, I 
am told, to take part in the EIA. Cumberland House was the only one that I am aware of that put any 
kind of a presentation together at all. The other communities, although they were asked, I am told, did 
not take part. Now, that is three years ago, almost four. I’m not sure what the member wants from us 
because it was done by the previous administration - unless he is saying to us, unless he is saying to me 
that it wasn’t done well and we should go back and do it again, because I don’t know how much more 
you could have done. But maybe there’s a lot more we can do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yew: — I’m very reassured to see some members clapping in respect of that response, Mr. Minister. 
If in fact the former administration had ideas as positive as they were, how come today you have, in a 
sense, abdicated yourself from those former ideas and former policies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, that’s sort of a nice question to answer. First of all, we certainly abdicated 
ourselves of the policies that weren’t good. I go back to administration within the Department of the 
Environment and I think I explained that a couple of times to you - maybe three, four times. Information 
- you couldn’t get information out of there; it would take a 10-foot pole to get an answer out of there. We 
have made information for the public available. You can get information from the Department of the 
Environment now and if you can’t, contact me and I’ll see that you get that information. If there’s a 
problem there now, I’ll see that it’s corrected. 
 
In regards to the Nipawin hydro dam, if that’s what you’re talking about, if you’re talking about advisory 
councils, advisory councils under the recommendation of the chairman of the advisory council . . . he 
said, ‘I would advise you don’t reappoint it until you decide and give it a new mandate completely.’ That 
is what we’re going to do. That is under the advisement of the chairman of the advisory council - the 
former chairman. You know, you take the advice of those that have the knowledge on it. I didn’t really 
understand the whole policy. I took his advice. I continue to take it. And when we have a mandate for 
them to do, we will reappoint, whether it be advisory council, whether it be advisory committee. I don’t 
know what it’s going to be called, but certainly there will be a representation for the people of 
Saskatchewan to the Department of the Environment. But it will be where they can put their full impact 
into it. 
 
An example would be again that we went around the province this year on water concerns. That is an 
example where they can come directly to us and tell us. We pulled it all together using that to help us 
form a policy. There is input from the people of Saskatchewan. They’ve had opportunities and they will 
have a lot more. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, I want to refer you back then to full public participation in terms of the 
provincial impact on the seven major projects that you quoted here just prior to our break. How do you 
perceive the communities becoming fully involved and becoming fully informed of those projects, if in 
fact you have dismantled the environmental advisory council? How do you see those groups, and the 
communities themselves, the people at the local level - how do you foresee getting them involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I think the hon. member is sort of got a few things confused. First of all, the 
advisory council has nothing to do with the board of enquiry. The board of enquiry is one that’s 
appointed when you have an EIA, so therefore they’re two different things, and there were seven 
appointed, seven boards of enquiry appointed since  



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1131 

1972. Now that’s quite a few years; that’s 11 years. So, only in the last 11 years has there been seven of 
those board of enquiries appointed. So I think maybe you got the two of them confused there. 
 
Mr. Yew: — With respect to future major developments in the province, Mr. Minister, how many major 
developments do you foresee in the next, say three years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, that’s a nice question. I would sincerely hope that there’s many of them. 
Because many of them would mean many jobs, many jobs for all the people of Saskatchewan. We 
perceive, and rightfully so I think, there is going to be a lot of them. And when they come up, we will in 
fact do whatever is necessary to protect the environment. But at the same time we will create jobs in this 
province - jobs that’s needed. And it will create jobs for agriculture and for all the other stuff. So I just 
think, I hope, sincerely hope there’s many, many of them come out our province. It’ll create jobs for our 
young people and will keep them at home. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Okay then, Mr. Minister, if in fact you, your aspirations are, and I share with you in that 
aspiration, are to see as many major developments happening within the next three years, over any 
certain area. I share my sympathies with you in that. I would like to see as many major developments 
happening in this area so as to alleviate the major high unemployment ratings that we have in this 
province to date, after the Devine government took over office. And also to add the high social 
assistance rate that has accumulated after your people took office in this province. It has jumped in 
northern Saskatchewan, and let me remind members opposite, it has jumped 30 per cent. That is a 
significant portion of what has happened in the northern administration district over the last 10 years. In 
the last 10 years it has never jumped, accumulated 30 per cent. Not once, not one fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order! Order! Does the member have a question on environment? 
 
Mr. Yew: — Yes, I’m getting to it. Pardon me, Mr. Chairman. I do admit that I get carried away once in 
a while. When it comes to questions such as unemployment and welfare, I do get carried away. I’ll admit 
that. 
 
Getting back to the basics of the question, Mr. Minister. In the next three years you envisage major, 
major developments happening in the area, major industrial developments in the area. How do you 
perceive having the public involved in a social, cultural and economic input, participation and 
involvement of the people at the local level, when you have done away, in fact, with the public 
participation and information aspect of your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, in answer to the member’s question, it’ll be the same as it was before 
through the environment impact assessment. If it’s a major one, that’s how it’ll be - same as it was 
before. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Can you specify what this initiative will be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I can when I know the project. I wouldn’t know the projects. I couldn’t specify 
until I would know it. But if you have a project then I would certainly . . . (inaudible) . . . to specify. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Okay. Certainly I have specifics, Mr. Minister. I have already, in my 



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1132 

environmental estimates questioning, stated some projects. Now maybe I’ll reiterate those projects. With 
respect to the five-span expansion of the uranium industry submitted by Cluff Lake and also with respect 
to the Nipawin hydro project, with respect to the Qu’Appelle Valley agreement, can you specify for this 
Assembly how you perceive to see public involvement, public participation, public monitoring in those 
projects? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, it was previously done again by the former administration. I don’t know 
what year it was done in, but considerable time ago. It was a complete EIA done. Since then they had 
monitored it as an extension to the EIA. That has been presented to us, each and every thing. The 
regulations were drafted. They were tightened up. And there hasn’t been much change from before, only 
it’s a little tighter. I don’t know what else could be done. There were five pits in one mine. I mean, 
you’re talking about one mine, one area. The regulations are the most stringent in the country. I don’t 
know what else any department could do to protect the environment better than that. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I’m glad that the minister has confirmed that those regulations and those policies were as 
stringent as they could possibly be. My next question, and it may not pertain to your portfolio: why, then, 
does the minister of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan insist that we have a change of policy in 
the service lease agreements? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I couldn’t answer for the minister responsible for the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan. I really couldn’t say what he’s done on surface lease agreements. So I would have to say 
that, you know, his estimates will be up very shortly and I’m sure that he’ll be able to answer you very 
adequately. 
 
Mr. Yew: — It is really unfortunate that one department transfers certain responsibilities to another 
department to the point where people at the local level become so confused, become so disenchanted 
with the administration of this province, as well as the administration of Canada, shuffling around 
certain responsibilities and things that you should be aware of and responsible for, Mr. Minister. It is 
really too bad because that leads me to believe that people at the local level, although I wish that those 
people at the community level, many of them, particularly in my area, would see government - not only 
the provincial government, but as well, the federal government - see administration as a tool for their 
aspirations, for their outlook in life, as a means of some help, some help. 
 
It really distresses me to see that major people at your position, Mr. Minister, people that hold a cabinet 
post, and the minister (that goes for the Minister of DNS) seem to shuffle your responsibilities as it suits 
your need, as it suits your need. This is what is happening. 
 
I take myself, when I was at the local level, trapping for a living - when I had a grievance in respecting to 
hunting or trapping or fishing - I see myself - now clearly, quite clearly, that your people, your 
government, and the people at the federal level, transferring responsibility to another department to the 
effect that really confuses. It puts a smoke-screen to the way that people at the local level ought to see 
the government. 
 
The way the people at the local level ought to see their government is: they are supposed to advocate on 
our behalf. I ask the minister: what is your perception of provincial and federal governments? What is 
your perception of them? Do you see them as advocating on my behalf - on the behalf of a trapper? 



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1133 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, in answer to the hon. member’s question: the surface lease was put 
under DNS by the former administration. It’s still there. It hasn’t been changed. 
 
In regards to smoke-screens, I’d just like to mention, the smoke-screen was maybe the DNS as it was 
before. They buried everything up there under the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, with no 
accountability for expenditures. They actually put the northern people at a disadvantage by doing it, 
because the perception was then, the northern people could spend whatever they want. And it was a false 
perception, but it was there. If they had’ve kept it as one part of Saskatchewan - Saskatchewan as we’ve 
got it now; we’re bringing it back to that - they’d have been part of Saskatchewan, felt part of it. But they 
tried to isolate those people off all by themselves and say, ‘Hey, you’re not part of Saskatchewan. You’re 
a group up there. Stay up there by yourself. We’ll give you some money; stay there.’ The role that we see 
them playing is all Saskatchewan being the same - each and everyone equal. And I think that’s the new 
role that it’s got to be played, and the role that we are going to see that is done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yew: — A final supplementary, Mr. Chairman. In respect to the major thrust that your government 
is prepared to take in terms of industrial development, Mr. Minister, and in terms of the major thrust that 
your private sector is prepared to take for this province, I ask the minister responsible for Environment: 
do you or do you not have any major initiatives to involve the local advisory councils, the local 
community authorities, the three incorporated centres, the native organizations in northern Saskatchewan 
- the Metis, the association of Metis and non-status Indians of this province, and the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indians - into account, with respect to your major initiatives? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, seeing that’s his final supplementary, I would say that 
certainly those native people have the opportunity. I think we just got to relate back to what we’ve done 
in northern housing. We have given them those opportunities now to put their input into it. We went to 
them, to the council, to all the advisory people, to the people - the residents there - to see what is needed. 
And that’s what we’ll do. If there’s a development coming in, we will consult them. We will talk to 
them. We’ll see how they can become involved in maybe spin-off type of developments. There’s lots can 
be done. We can do a lot up there. But we got to do it together. 
 
Mr. Yew: — But, Mr. Minister, I see and from experience I have seen that in order for members of this 
Assembly, in order for this province, and in order for Canada to be a full participant in those major 
initiatives that you have to have something concrete, something concrete in terms of paper, in terms of 
legal initiatives, in terms of formal initiatives, by any government, regardless whether or not it’s 
Saskatchewan, regardless whether or not it’s Canada. There has to be some major initiative in writing - 
legal - provincially or federally. And I ask the minister: are those initiatives in the future . . . Are they 
being contemplated that they will be serious initiatives? And will they involve the people at the local 
level - at the community level - as major initiatives that will be printed in writing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, certainly the people will be involved in any projects we do, I’m 
sure. 



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1134 

Mr. Yew: — They will be involved, Mr. Co-chairman. But how will they be involved? My question is: 
will they be involved in black and white? This is what your administration, this is what the typical 
administration has always advocated - being involved in writing. When will my people be involved in 
writing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I think we’re away from Environment, Mr. Chairman, but certainly we’ll give 
them that opportunity. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman, I didn’t get the response to that question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I just said, Mr. Chairman, I think we’ve got a long ways from the Environment 
estimates, but certainly I’m sure the government will give the native people that opportunity. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 9 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wanted to raise, and I hope that the minister can give me some 
concrete information with respect to item 9. I note that you have transferred that portion of the traditional 
budgetary allowance to another line department, Mr. Minister. Is that correct, or not, for starters? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — If you’re talking about the treaty Indian land entitlements, yes, it will be over to the 
Department of Justice. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Then, is that portion of the budget - the transfer itself - was that done in consultation with 
the native people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, it’s just a transfer of responsibility from one minister to another, that’s all. 
No, there’d be no consultation on that, because I’m sure that the native people wouldn’t really care if 
myself was looking after it, or the Attorney-General, or the minister responsible for Justice, or so on. 
That was just an in-house one. That’s done regular, the transfer of ministerial duties. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I take it then, Mr. Minister, with respect to your response to the question, that you have not 
consulted with the people of native ancestry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, it isn’t in my estimates this year, but I could honestly say I’m not aware of 
any consultation with regard to the transfer of ministerial duties from one department to another. That’s 
been done over the ages by every government, so I don’t think that it’s . . . 
 
Mr. Yew: — Just for the record, Mr. Minister, then I take it that you have not consulted with any major 
political party; in terms of native politics, you have not consulted with the Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indians, you have not consulted with the Association of Metis and Non-Status Indians of Saskatchewan. 
You have, in fact, decided to transfer this form of area to another department within your government - 
the intergovernmental affairs. You have not actually consulted with anybody. 



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1135 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, certainly not myself, because it wasn’t my department, as you are well 
aware. When the estimates were on last year I told you that they had been transferred very early when we 
became government, almost immediately afterwards, and they’re not in there this year. They’re only 
there so you can see what the amount was. We didn’t want to try to hide anything; we left it there. 
Basically, it’s been transferred over to the Attorney-General’s office, which will be the Department of 
Justice in a short time. I understand that he’s probably had ongoing consultations with a lot of native 
people, and in regards to consultation with native people - I lost the slip here - but I have a chief coming 
in to talk to me just in a couple of days - I think May 2nd - he’s coming in to talk to me in regards to 
housing and some environment issues on the reservation up here. My door is always open for that kind 
of conversation, and it will continue to be. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Just a small supplementary, Mr. Chairman. If your door is actually always open, Mr. 
Minister, then, am I to believe that if there is a major issue, such as what exists today, not relevant to 
your portfolio, am I to understand that you will advocate on my behalf and on behalf of the people that I 
represent? Am I to understand that you will fight strenuously to stand up for my rights in your critic 
area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — To be honest with you, I will stand up for the rights of everybody in Saskatchewan, 
‘cause that’s what we’re elected to do. If it is in your constituency, whether it be you, or whatever, you 
can rest assured, and my door has been open if you want to come in; it’s always been open; it will 
continue to be; and I’m sure that that’s the way it should be. If it’s something in your seat or in anybody 
else’s, regardless of who is doing it, certainly, we’ll sit and talk, we’ll do what we can to help them - and 
always have done. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Okay then, Mr. Minister, I’ll take your word on it. I’ll accept your word, because there 
exists today something pertaining to your portfolio, something that pertains to your cabinet post. We 
have then, people that are direly concerned about their environment, Mr. Minister. How far, my question 
is, how far do you see yourself advocating on the people that I am particularly referring to in terms of a 
major adverse affect - and I’m referring to the Nipawin hydro development project - how far do you see 
the people of Cumberland House and Sturgeon Landing, leading in that way of input, involvement, and 
public participation? Do you see them as actual participants of the monitoring committee that you speak 
about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, I’ll answer to the hon. member, certainly if they want to be part of it, they 
certainly could be. I haven’t said what kind of committee, monitoring committee or anything else that’s 
going to be set up there. I’ve said that we’ve had an open door, that if they want to come and talk to me 
about it, we’ll listen and whatever else. In regards to one little comment, you were saying that I was the 
critic for the Department of Environment. I was the critic for tourism and renewable resources before 
April 26th. Now we’re the government, so it does change there a bit, but certainly we’ll have an 
open-door policy. If they want to come, if we set up a commission, we’ll certainly welcome them to join 
it. 
 
Mr. Yew: — One final supplementary, and pardon me, Mr. Chairman, I keep referring to it as 
supplementary. How far does the Minister of Environment see the people of the west side being involved 
in that Primrose bombing range agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, my understanding is that it’s not our department. The agreement is in place; 
it’s under the Department of National Defence of which they  



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1136 

have total authority on there. The best we can hope for (as I told you earlier) that they allow us to come 
on and do some monitoring, that they’d tell us before it happens; that they’ll let us put our input into it. 
But that don’t mean to say they got to listen. They didn’t listen last time we found out they were going to 
do it. We asked them not to; that don’t mean to say that they will listen the next time either. We hope 
they will. I talked to Mr. Roberts about it personally; I phoned him; he assured me that it wouldn’t 
happen again without consultation. I hope that that’s the way it would be. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, the time that the agreement was arrived at, the time the agreement was 
arrived at, and I don’t want to lead the House too far away from its deliberations tonight, but at the same 
time, I see that our responsibilities are pertaining to people, pertaining to people and their concerns. And 
I just hope that I can relate to you, Mr. Minister, my question, my dire concern that is, at the same time, 
felt quite intensely by the people that I know at the local level. 
 
Back in 1953 an agreement was arrived at with respect to the Primrose bombing range agreement. 
People were told that they had to accept of cheque of $246 in payment for the transfer of this portion of 
land to the military, Department of National Defence. And at the time people were led to believe that 
this agreement was temporary. They did not understand that this agreement was perpetual. In fact, people 
in the area had no representative such as what we have today. They did not have the local advisory 
councils; they did not have the local community authorities; they did not have the Metis Society of 
Saskatchewan; they did not have the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians; they did not have the national 
native organizations that we have today. In fact they did not have a member of the Legislative Assembly 
to advocate in a strenuous basis for them . . . (inaudible) . . . What happened was an agreement was 
arrived at between the province and the federal government. Certainly I don’t hold you responsible for 
that. But certainly I hold governments responsible for that act. And today and in the future, you will be 
hearing from the people at the local level and certainly you will be hearing from me. 
 
My question then is: how do you foresee people in communities such as Waterhen, Big Head Reserve, 
Michel village, Dillon, Canoe Lake, Beauval, Jans Bay and Cole Bay? How do you see those people 
being equal beneficiaries of the Primrose bombing range agreement? How do you see them being equal 
benefactors of that agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, I certainly share the concerns of the hon. member but a lot of that falls under 
different departments and I don’t have all the officials here to answer that kind of question. Certainly, as 
I said, we’ll take it in . . . We have a concern about it. We’re going to do everything we can to be sure 
that we protect the environment there. Our hands are very tied, as the member knows. Really and truly, 
there is not much you can do if the national defence wants to override you. So at that point, there’s not 
much else I can say. The benefits - I know there might be some benefits there for trapping. But it would 
have to come under Parks and Renewable Resources of which I don’t have any officials here. So it is 
another department. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Do you propose then, Mr. Minister, that you will answer in detail with respect to my 
question at a later date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, under Parks and Renewable Resources, I don’t know exactly - I can answer 
whatever comes under that. I’ll certainly do it at that time when I have some officials here. 



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1137 

Mr. Yew: — I guess I didn’t get myself that clear in terms of the question, Mr. Minister. If I were sitting 
on your side of the House and if I was responsible for that particular critic’s role . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Get that idea out of your head. You’ll never sit over here. 
 
Mr. Yew: — The member for Moosomin . . . I think I’ve hit a very sensitive spot over there. I think 
maybe in three years time I’ll be sitting on that side of the fence. 
 
No, no. I sincerely believe that because it really hits some sensitive spots whenever I mention that. 
 
But anyway, getting back to the question, I’d like to ask the Minister of Environment, seeing as how you 
cannot come out with a specific mandate of that government opposite with respect to the people that I 
have mentioned from Dillon, Jan Lake, Cole Lake, Beauval, Waterhen, and so on, from Big Head 
reserve, Ile-a-la-Crosse, as to the way that your government foresees them being involved as major 
benefits of that agreement, Mr. Minister, can you advise then as to how you would work it, at this point 
in time, so that those people are being involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Just recently we had a cabinet committee on water concerns within Prince Albert. 
We listened to whatever concerns they had at that time. It was open. I had groups come into my office, 
and certainly letters continuously, in regards to certain things. We address them on a one-to-one basis. In 
the summer-time, the minister responsible for DNS and myself plan to make a tour through the North to 
see what the concerns are. I don’t know what more a government could do to be in touch with the 
people. We intend to stay in touch with the people. One thing that I would hope that would come out of 
it is that the northern people stay in touch with us. We’d like that. And we say, back to coming in and 
making their points known: the door is open. In regards to any environmental concerns, certainly we’ll 
do whatever we can to make them aware of, and let them be part of, whatever is going on. I think that’s 
your concern: jobs, and what it does to the environment, what it does to fishing, trapping, hunting. I 
could go on and on, but that’s certainly what I hope your concern is, ‘cause it is mine. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Now I don’t want to nit and pick with the minister responsible for this particular cabinet 
post, but I certainly want to question the members in government as to whether or not they are 
committed towards involving people at the community level. I want to question that, and I believe that is 
my right, and I believe that is what people elected me for, and I believe that that is what people want to 
know. 
 
Now, in terms of the agreement, Mr. Minister, you stated, in terms of the provincial-federal agreement 
on the Primrose bombing range, you stated in our last review of estimates that you would look into the 
matter. Now I want to ask the minister responsible for Environment whether or not you have looked into 
the matter and whether or not you know that the agreement is up for review. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, in regards to that, we did look into it and found out it wasn’t in the 
Department of Environment at all, that it doesn’t come under our agreements at all. Therefore, you 
know, it didn’t relate directly to us, so we never pursued it any further, because it wasn’t part of our 
estimates. I’m sure that I don’t know whose estimates it would fall under - with DNS or Energy and 
Mines, or whoever signs those lease agreements - but certainly it wasn’t with Department of 
Environment. We  



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1138 

did look into it; it wasn’t part of our department, and that’s why we didn’t report back to you, because 
there was nothing to report. 
 
Mr. Yew: — If in fact it was not part of your responsibility, Mr. Minister, then why did you look into 
the spraying incident last year? The dangerous chemical that was sprayed in that particular area - you 
acted on that responsibility, and I commended you for it. Then why do you tell me today that that is not 
part of your responsibility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Just to answer that. I said that the lease agreement as per se, between the federal 
and provincial government, was not part of the Department of Environment’s responsibility. The 
spraying - anything to do with the environment, spraying wherever - we feel we have a responsibility 
there, although, on Department of National Defence territory, we really don’t have a responsibility 
directly. But because we had a responsibility for the people of Saskatchewan, we looked into it and tried 
to stop it. We had a concern it may get into the lake, it may do something to the fish, it may do 
something to the wildlife. We had a concern that it could affect outside of the Department of National 
Defence territory. So that’s why we looked into that. 
 
But the lease itself - the lease agreement in itself - we don’t have nothing to do with that in the 
Department of Environment. It comes under a different department, as the member well knows. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, then I ask you, and as seriously as possible: do you see us being involved in 
the next interim agreement regarding the Primrose bombing range? Do you see us being involved in 
terms of outlining what the stats ought to be in terms of the forestry; in terms of the royalties; in terms of 
the fishing; in terms of the hunting; in terms of the trapping; and in terms of everything that pertains to 
that agreement - do you see us being involved in that agreement, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, I’m not sure about the interim agreement that you’re talking about. If it 
comes under Parks and Renewable Resources, at that time I’ll answer your question. I don’t know 
nothing about the agreement that you’re talking about, and I can’t answer directly, for sure, the questions 
related to hunting and trapping. I’m very much aware - I’ve hunted and trapped in my life lots too - so I 
know what you’re talking about. But I don’t know specifically the answer for that area without having 
some officials here, and that would fall under a different department. 
 
Mr. Yew: — You keep telling the members on this side of the House that you don’t know nothing about 
a major, a major agreement that affects the livelihood of a dozen, a dozen communities in the north-west 
side of this province, Mr. Minister. And I want to ask you why you don’t do anything about that 
particular agreement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I think I’ve answered that question a few minutes ago, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, I thought that our estimates would go well today. They certainly went well 
Friday afternoon. They certainly went well Friday afternoon. I raised questions with respect to the 
delivery of the housing program in northern Saskatchewan and you answered them quite honestly. But 
this time around, I cannot comprehend what your response is, what your responsibility is with respect to 
environment. And I would like to know what your position is with respect to the Primrose bombing 
range agreement. 



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1139 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — When the agreement is renegotiated, we will, hon. member, put our concerns in 
and we’ll certainly be part of it. We’ll voice our concerns very strongly. And I have, as you know, just 
recently done that. We have a concern up there, and I think we’ve done everything possible, and 
whatever. If you have any ideas, or anything, I’m free to listen to them. My door is open if you want to 
come in and discuss them with me. We can argue back and forth here all night, but the point is that we 
have done everything possible to date. The agreements were signed previously. When the new one 
comes up, certainly we’ll have a concern and we’ll voice it then. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Now, Mr. Minister, you state to me that agreements were signed previously. Okay. We 
have a majority government today, we have a majority government today that has new policies, new 
programs for this province. One of them is open for business, open for business. Okay, let me ask the 
minister opposite then: what is your policy with respect to that agreement? Will you be taking a new 
position with respect to that agreement or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, in regards to an agreement that doesn’t fall under our department, when that 
agreement comes up - and it was signed previously with the previous administration - when it comes up 
again we’ll certainly voice our concerns and voice them very strongly. At that time I’ll even contact the 
hon. member for his input into it, so he can tell us what he thinks. So I don’t know what else could be 
done. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I hope that the . . . Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I hope that the members in this Assembly 
heard the commitment by the member of, the member responsible for Environment, that he has, in fact, 
invited the member for Cumberland to be a participant in the evolution of the next agreement. I hope that 
the members, all the members of this Assembly have heard that invitation and I just want to say for the 
record I accept that invitation. Thank you very much. I accept that invitation. I want to be a full 
participant of the next federal-provincial talks of the federal-provincial agreement regarding the 
Department of National Defence. I would like to be a full participant in that agreement in those talks that 
pertain to the Department of National Defence. 
 
My next - I don’t want to belabour that point of the estimates, Mr. Chairman. I’ll go on to your 
department, Mr. Minister. Could your department provide us with the full particulars with respect to 
your staff in terms of the number of people in your staff, the number of Cadillacs that you have in your 
staff and advise the members on this side of the House as to what your department has with respect to 
staff and people at your disposal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Yes, agreed. We’ll send it over to you. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Also (I think I’ve raised the question prior to the supper break), you will inform this side of 
the House as to grants to organizations . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Yes, we did. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I note that there is a very substantial decrease in the amount from 1982 to ’82-83 as 
compared to the estimated amount to be expended in ’83-84. What I would like to know is what 
accounts for the very substantial decrease in the grants to organizations for the purpose of advising the 
Minister of Environment on environmental concerns? I’d like to know the reason for the substantial 
decrease. 



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1140 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — In answer to the member’s question: one of the decreases was due to the Outdoors 
Unlittered grant. We brought our own program in as you are well aware. You got a brochure the other 
day. Another one is $25,000. That was the Saskatchewan Labour share of the toxicology centre - they are 
going to do it themselves instead of us doing it through us - it’s the same amount of money. In fact, there 
was a . . . In fact, there as a few other additional grants of $6,000 that would be added in. So, actually, 
we took those two out. One is coming through Labour, which is funded just through a different 
department. And the other ones, we brought our own program in, which in fact is even a bit more than 
what this one here was. So in fact, it’s a new . . . Basically, it’s about the same, only through different 
votes. 
 
Item 9 agreed to. 
 
Item 10 agreed to. 
 
Vote 9 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Yes, I’d like to, at this time, thank the Minister for the Department of Environment and his 
officials for taking time and taking the seriousness and the attitude that they did in responding to our 
questions of the opposition. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I, too, would like to thank the officials for the information they’ve given me. 
Certainly, the hon. member over there has a concern for his people in the North, which we recognize. I’d 
like to thank him for his concern for the people of the North, although some of the times I think we got a 
lot of questions that didn’t relate to Environment. But, certainly, because of the concern you showed, I’m 
sure your people up there recognize that you have a deep concern as well as the rest of us do. 
 
I’d like to thank you for your questions, and I’d like to thank my officials. Thank you. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

HIGHWAYS AND TRANSPORTATION 
 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 16 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Sitting directly to my right, the deputy minister, Mr. Jack Sutherland; behind him, 
Myron Herasymuik; beside him, Mr. Al Schwartz. On my immediate left is the chairman of the highway 
traffic board, was, still is, Mr. Bill Sheard, and . . . (inaudible) . . . personnel, and any other support staff 
that we may need here tonight, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’d just like to say a few words before I ask the 
minister his questions. I have noticed in the last short while, the minister bragging about how much 
money he’s going to spend on highways. But when you look at the budget, I have some difficulty in 
trying to find where all that money is that he’s going to spend, because it doesn’t appear to be in there. 
 
One of the other things that I have noticed, and that was on the back of the minister’s  



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1141 

map, was the comment that he made regarding our highway systems in Saskatchewan. He stated that it 
was one of the finest highway systems on this continent and, Mr. Chairman, I would have to agree with 
the minister, that is true. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It was true. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — At least, as my colleague says, it was true. We would like to think that that will 
continue. However, when you look at this year’s Highway estimate, I think we can only say that what 
we’ll be looking forward to in the next year or two or three will be a lot more pot-holes. And the 
minister’s nickname will be well known throughout this province, I think. 
 
Mr. Minister, you said in one of your speeches in this House that you were going to disband some 
highway crews. Could you at this time indicate just which highway crews you are going to disband and 
where they are; whether they’re grading crews, surfacing crews? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, I have a few comments too, before we get into the question period. 
The hon. member was stating the fact that we have one of the finest highway networks in Canada. I have 
to agree with him, Mr. Chairman, we have. And it’s going to get better, Mr. Chairman, as the years go 
by. Mr. Chairman, no longer are the priorities, the political priorities of the NDP going to set the 
highway program for the people of Saskatchewan. It is going to be set by the people themselves. 
People’s priority, where people want roads, Mr. Chairman, and that’s why I have to agree with the 
member opposite by stating that, yes, we have the finest road network in Canada, and it’s going to get 
better. 
 
Regarding the crews - three grading crews disbanded, three surfacing crews, two sealing crews, and one 
mixing crew. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, could you indicate just how many crews, government crews, are going to 
continue in operation in 1983-84? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, there will be left: two grading crews, two surfacing crews, five 
sealing crews, and two mixing crews. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Could the minister indicate where these remaining crews are going to be stationed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, two grading crews: one will be working and located from Michel 
and Dillon, the other one south of La Loche on No. 155. The two surfacing crews will be located 
throughout the province because of the types of work that they do. The five sealing crews: they will be in 
every district. One will be located in every district except Saskatoon. And the two mixing crews: one 
will be located in Regina and one will be located in Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — The grading crews, the surfacing, and the mixing crews that you have disbanded, Mr. 
Minister, could you say where those crews were at the time that you had done away with them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, the grading and surfacing crews are located throughout the entire 
province, like, some employees live in one town, some  



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1142 

employees in another. When they go on a job, they go to one specified . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Town by town I’d like them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — You want where every employee lived, town by town? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Okay. Well, could we maybe provide that to you a little later on? Or we can wait 
here for ten minutes while we give them all, list them all out - it’s up to you - or we could move on to 
something else. Would you like the information provided later? . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Okay. 
We’ll provide you with that information. We’ll go on to another line of questioning. Fine. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, if I understood you right, your staff is now getting out that information of 
where the crews are and where the people are that are going to remain employed, and we’ll go on to 
other questions in the meantime. 
 
One of the other questions, Mr. Minister, is the Open Roads 2 program. How many miles or how many 
kilometres have you surfaced under the Open Roads 2 program? How many kilometres in total and the 
location of where they would . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — For this year? 
 
Mr. Lusney: — For ’82. 
 
An Hon. Member: — For ’82 or ’83? 
 
Mr. Lusney: — For ’82. Do you have the ’82 ones? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, while we’re looking up the other information we could give you 
tonight, we have the information tonight of the breakdown per district where these people come from, or 
we can get it from the office tomorrow as to the separate towns, whichever you want them from. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Give us the names and the districts of them, if you have tonight. You can provide the 
other information tomorrow then. 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Okay. Swift Current district, there is 5 in total; Regina district, 29; Yorkton 
district, 8; Saskatoon district, 33; Prince Albert district, 52; North Battleford district, 12; for a total of 
139. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, you said you’ll be providing the names tomorrow and positions that were 
deleted? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — We have to get that information from head office. We don’t have that magnitude 
of information here tonight, but we can get that for you. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — While your staff is doing that, could you include the years of service that some of the 
people that have been laid off have had? All of them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Yes, we can also provide that. 



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1143 

Mr. Chairman, we don’t have the kilometres here; we have the total dollars and the total number of 
communities for ’82 - 30 communities and total dollars, $1,898,031. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Could the minister indicate how much of this work was done by private contractors and 
how much of it was done by government crews? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, of the thirty projects, one was done. That’s the Lacadena and 
White Bear and that was for almost a quarter of the total price of $573,000. That was tendered out to the 
private sector. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Could the minister indicate what the cost per kilometre was on the private sector and 
the government crews? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, we can give you - and I think it’s fairly pointed on this matter . . . 
With the private sector one, we knew exactly what the tender was. Now we can provide the members 
opposite with the direct cost to the Department of Highways of the works branch on the projects that 
they did. But, I mean, it is not broke down, I don’t believe, explicit enough for to take the indirect costs 
in as well - I mean a percentage of salaries, light costs, heat costs, rent on a building, insurance on 
vehicles. I mean we have a clear, definite indicator of what the costs were in the private sector but I 
don’t believe that we have a total picture including direct and indirect costs on the works branch. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I am absolutely astounded by the confession of this minister because what he has 
indicated here to the people of Saskatchewan that without even an analysis of the costs of government 
crews building a kilometre of highway versus the private, he has turned it over to the private. That is 
precisely what he is saying. He has made no analysis of the comparative costs, and, that I want to say, 
Mr. Minister, is a revelation which we never expected that you would be making. 
 
I want to say to all of those crew members who have been dismissed, fired, laid off, that the message that 
has to go out to them is that you respected neither the job they were doing nor their employment record, 
and you have cast them aside to your allegiance to the private sector without even a cost analysis. 
 
And what I want to go on to ask, in respect to the individuals that have been laid off: you’re providing 
certain information there; I would like also to indicate what steps you are taking for reallocation of that 
139 that you have cut adrift. What steps are you taking? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, I think . . . I believe there’s two points have to be made here, and 
something will have to be clarified for the gang of eight over there, because they don’t realize that last 
April the 26th, 1982, the people of Saskatchewan decided that they no longer wanted the NDP. They no 
longer wanted the NDP to govern this province. When that took place, Mr. Chairman, there was a 
change in philosophy, which I believe is from socialism to freedom, and that’s what happened in this 
province. It’s definitely what’s happened in this province. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the cost saving to the people of Saskatchewan, we believe, is going to be in a lot of 
dollars. We’re going to end up with a better road network in the province of Saskatchewan by allowing 
the contractors to doing some of the sealing coat on new construction work. Now the member on the 
opposite side said, ‘Well, what guarantees, what guarantees have these people got for a job?’ The 
guarantees are there. 



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1144 

Two points, Mr. Chairman: number one, they have their bumping rights within the union that can be 
exercised. We have a four-man employment team at Department of Highways that is ensuring that 
whenever they’re contracted they’re working and doing their utmost to assist these employees. Number 
two, and I could read the letter from the Saskatchewan road builders’ association where they have stated 
that they need 100 or more employees to do the construction in the province of Saskatchewan this 
summer. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, we have to explain this. We can take 100 miles of road here, and if 100 miles of 
road is to be built, whether it’s built by the Department of Highways and Transportation or whether it’s 
built by the private road builders in the province of Saskatchewan, it’s going to take X number of people. 
These lay-offs mean nothing more than the people of Saskatchewan that were working for the 
Department of Highways and Transportation now can have a new boss. They can now go to work for the 
private sector. That’s an opportunity. It’s called freedom - freedom of choice - something that escapes 
the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, the minister indicated that he has turned over the grading, or some of the 
grading, the sealing, and so on, to private companies. And he indicated that he was going to get better 
quality of work. I want to ask him: is he stating in this legislature that the quality of the employees in the 
Department of Highways was inferior, and that you were unsatisfied with their performance? 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re saying that. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Stand up and say it. You said that you’re going to get better quality of grading, sealing, 
and so on. Are you in fact then alleging that you’re dissatisfied with all of the workers with the 
Department of Highways, your whole staff? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can see why there’s only the gang of eight left and the 
others have gone. It’s amazing that there’s still eight left, because they don’t understand anything, 
number one, about government, and number two, about building roads in Saskatchewan. When I’m 
talking about a sealing crew, and I’ll try and give them an education course . . . When we take big 
scrapers, we take dirt from point A over the point B and we compact it . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where you need a road. 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Where it had been done before. There were sealing crews that travelled 
throughout the province sealing this road. Sometimes one, two or three miles of this new grade did not 
have the seal coat on it. We are now allowing the contractors - the private road builders in the province 
of Saskatchewan - to put (maybe I can put it in a simpler term for him) an umbrella that prevents rain 
from getting through to the subgrade. It will prevent the pot-holes which we inherited, Mr. Chairman, 
from the former administration. 
 
So, what we’re doing . . . I have no problem, no qualms whatsoever, with the employees and the type of 
work they did. It was because of the philosophy of the NDP party that enabled us to have bad roads in 
the province of Saskatchewan, because they didn’t know anything about road building or construction in 
the province of Saskatchewan. We’re simply going to end up by people working for someone else, Mr. 
Chairman. We’re going to get the umbrella over the roads sooner to prevent that  



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1145 

subsurface from deteriorating. And the end result is, we’re going to have better roads for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — The inconsistency of the minister is almost unbelievable. In the one hand, the critic for 
the Department of Highways stood up and indicated in respect to the good highway system that we have 
in this province; the Minister of Highways stood up and said, ‘Yes, I agree with the critic. We have the 
best highway system in Canada.’ Now he stands up and says that the previous government, all of the 
highway crews, all of the private firms that contracted and tendered during our administration, were 
doing inferior work. That is what he’s saying. And I want to say I want the minister to clarify, because I 
think he’s making allegations which is a direct attack on the employees of the highway department, of all 
of the private companies that have built roads during the past 11 years. 
 
You have indicated that by going to the private, that you are going to, in fact, improve the quality of the 
roads. That is a direct attack on the crews in the Department of Highways. And I think that it’s only 
fitting that you stand up here and withdraw those slanderous attack on the workers of the Department of 
Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, I will try once again to explain to the members opposite. I am not 
and never have condemned the employees working for the Department of Highways. I, along with the 
majority of voters in the province of Saskatchewan, disagree, oppose the philosophy of the socialist 
government that was in here before. It was their policy directive, their ministers that told them what to 
do. It wasn’t the members. 
 
But now, the members seem to have a hard time understanding this - not the members on this side of the 
House, the government side of the House, but the members opposite. So we’ll try and explain it once 
more, Mr. Chairman. We are taking 100 miles of road here, 100 miles of road here. It takes X number of 
employees to build this road, and X number of employees to build this road. We are moving road A over 
to road B, and we have to move the employees over here - nothing to do with the quality of them. I 
mean, I have read on, rode on chip spreaders in the province of Saskatchewan. And this isn’t a fish and 
chip spreader I’m talking about; this is a chip spreader for spreading the aggregate seal before it goes on 
the new grade. And those employees have done a fantastic job. Where the problem has been, has been 
because of the philosophy and the policies of the socialist government previously. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — What you have done is to basically change a policy. Work which was previously being 
done by highways crews, you have now tendered it over to the private sector; that’s what you’ve done. 
All right, number one, you stood up in this House, and you indicated clearly that you have not made a 
cost comparison between the two. You could not in fact indicate that it was cheaper or saving taxpayers 
money because you hadn’t done a cost analysis. Therefore I ask you: what is the reason then that you 
made the transfer, fired 139 competent employees, and turned it over to the privates? You have no 
answer in respect to that because you didn’t do a cost analysis. The only other thing is which you said, 
and that is you’re going to get better highways. So therefore, in fact, what you are doing is accusing all 
of those employees of doing inferior work. That’s the only other conceivable reason. 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, now we have a lesson in government, Mr.  



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1146 

Chairman, we have the private sector. They know what their direct and indirect costs are. When they 
tender on a section of road, the tender is for X number of dollars. I know you understand it, Mr. 
Chairman, but I’m doing this for the members opposite. 
 
Now, we have the government works branch where there is the direct cost of gas, oil, and salaries, but 
taken into that is not the power for Humford House, as one example, for the district offices, example 
number two; depreciation on equipment, number three, Mr. Chairman. I could go on and on. The costs 
are clear. When the private sector tenders on a section of road in the province of Saskatchewan, I, as the 
minister, know what that’s going to cost us to build that section of road. When works branch is doing 
this road, we know what the direct costs are, but we don’t know what the indirect costs are in total. 
 
Now, you understand that, Mr. Chairman. I’m hopeful the members opposite will or we can explain it 
again. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — All right. I want to ask the minister: are you specifically indicating to this House that a 
cost comparison cannot reasonably, accurately be ascertained? Because I want to tell you that under the 
former premier, Ross Thatcher, there was no doubt we got cost comparisons in respect to it. And I want 
to tell you that in the cost comparisons that were made and submitted by the then premier that he 
indicated the cost per kilometre built under the highways crews was cheaper than the private. And I just 
will not accept that you cannot in fact put a cost comparison. And I think what you’re doing is fudging it, 
and what you have done, without even attempting to do a cost analysis, in respect to the taxpayers of this 
province, you have handed it over to the allegiance of private enterprise without even consideration of 
the taxpayer. And there can be no other explanation, and you know it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Well, two points, Mr. Chairman. We can estimate - and only estimate - the 
indirect costs when it’s done by government, but I’m going to try and explain to the members opposite. 
We talk about costs. We’ll take a sealing crew, for example, the crew that I was explaining to you, Mr. 
Chairman, that goes around and puts, shall we say, the umbrella over the road. They could be down in 
Swift Current district doing a section of Highway 13, putting a seal coat on a couple of miles of road. 
There could be a contract working up by P.A. or over by Yorkton, that has two or three miles of road 
that has to be sealed. By the time the crew picks up, loads the trailers, loads the cats, loads up the 
distributor, moves their fleet to either Yorkton or P.A., the contractor, who is on site, has the equipment, 
has the technology, can do the job right away. Now, those are what I’ll talking about, direct, indirect 
costs. It can be done, I believe very firmly, can be done cheaper by the private sector and it can be done 
immediately, so as to prevent that new grade of road. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, what the minister just said, is a total contradiction of what he said 
before. He indicated that he had not, in fact, made a cost comparison. He said, he couldn’t, in fact, find 
the indirect costs, and I want to say that he can not, unless he comes forward with the calculation of the 
cost, stand up in this House and make the loose statements that he’s making. His statement is on record, 
that he made a transfer to the private sector without a cost analysis, and there’s no other interpretation of 
what he has indicated. 
 
And, I want again to say, Mr. Minister, don’t you think that you have some obligation to people, 139 
citizens of this province, who were trained, who had job security, who had  



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1147 

pension benefits, and that you have now cast adrift with no opportunity of jobs, because there are no jobs 
under this administration? What justification have you, for cutting adrift 139 men without even any 
explanation to this House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, we have not set anyone adrift in the province of Saskatchewan. 
The only members that were sent adrift, were the former NDP members that used to be sitting on this 
side of the House. They’re the ones that are adrift, and still are, and always will be adrift. Mr. Chairman, 
as I had stated before, the facts are there . . . It’s a matter of changing bosses - working for Department of 
Highways, or working for the private sector. That’s basically it, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, the minister talks about this great new freedom that has been found 
by these 139 workers, but in talking to several of them, they don’t think in quite the same terms as he 
does, as being free. What they’re free of is a monthly pay cheque which they used to keep the food on 
the table. In his mind that may be a new found freedom, but, for the workers, I can tell you it’s a fairly 
major problem. What I’d like to find out from the minister, is whether or not you are guaranteeing that 
these 139 will be first hired by the contractors this summer. Are they given preference, or did you get a 
guarantee from the road builders that that would be the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — A couple of points, Mr. Chairman. First of all, for those 139 employees, 104 have 
responded to our employment team; 88 have elected to bump; nine choose to resign, seven choose to go 
on to re-employment, to the re-employment list. 
 
But now, Mr. Chairman, we were talking about philosophy before, and maybe we should touch it again 
tonight. I don’t intend to tell the road builders association of Saskatchewan, or anyone else of 
Saskatchewan, that you have to hire so and so. This is the difference in philosophy; the previous 
government did that. We don’t intend to get into that, Mr. Chairman, the opportunity is provided there 
and I could read you the letter from the Saskatchewan road builders association, where they need 100 or 
more employees. But I’ll tell you one thing, Mr. Chairman, Jim Garner sure isn’t going to force anyone 
to hire anybody if they don’t want to. That’s the difference between them and us, and it’s called freedom. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to take the minister on one more time on this freedom 
issue. In travelling around the province a bit over the weekend, I was in Wakaw and Maple Creek and 
Saskatoon, and everyone I talked to I asked them their opinion on whether or not they consider these 139 
to be free, and they laughed at the minister’s statement that he had freed these people to go look for work 
in the private sector. Mr. Minister, people are laughing at your attitude towards workers of this province, 
and suddenly people who work for crown corporations or governments, are somehow inferior to this 
government. And I want to say to you that that is a slur on every man and woman in this province. The 
30,000 - the 15,000 who work in the government in the line departments, and the 15,000 who work for 
crown corporations - Mr. Minister, you have slurred each and every one of those men and women and 
their families by your attitude in this House last Friday. 
 
Mr. Chairman, this minister has gone the length of embarrassing all of the families of the province, and 
not only here but across Canada, who work for governments and in crown corporations, whether that be 
federal or provincial. And, Mr. Minister, are you telling me that you believe that these individuals who 
have been fired from union positions - many of them who earned, I don’t know, 8, or 10, or $12 an hour 
- now  



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1148 

have the freedom to go to work possibly at minimum wage. Are you saying that that is a decided 
advantage for them to have that opportunity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Well, Mr. Chairman, this time we have three points to discuss. The first point is 
to who the member opposite talked to this last weekend while he was out, and I imagine when you’re out 
campaigning for the leadership of a political party, you only talk to the faithful. I mean, I’m not doing 
that, Mr. Chairman, I’m trying to run the Department of Highways and Transportation in the province of 
Saskatchewan and have the thing flow. 
 
The second point, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite talks about families. Now let me just tell you 
about the real families of Saskatchewan, not the NDP family of crown corporations that they built up, 
the real families, the pioneers of Saskatchewan. Those are the people that we are concerned about. Those 
are the people that we’re interested in, not the NDP family of crown corporations that they just went 
completely overboard with, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Third point: we talk about slander, Mr. Chairman. I didn’t want to have to bring this up, I really didn’t, 
but I think we have to discuss it once more. In an article, Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, sometimes an 
excellent paper - in fact, most of the time, my colleague from Moosomin states, and I have to agree with 
him. ‘Dismissed highway crews expected to get private jobs.’ We go down a few paragraphs here, and 
rather than reading the whole thing - I may have to read it later, Mr. Chairman - but hopefully we can put 
this to rest now: 
 

Garner said the department has a four-man employment team working extended hours to find 
jobs. He also held up a letter from the Road Builders and Heavy Construction Association of 
Saskatchewan, dated February the 24th, as a guarantee there will be enough work for more than 
100 people. 

 
Now, Mr. Chairman, this is a point that really concerns me, and this happened in the Legislative 
Chamber: 
 

This prompted heckles from Shaunavon NDP MLA, Dwain Lingenfelter, of (and I quote from 
the paper), a little bit of graft going on here. 

 
Mr. Chairman, that is just a typical example why the NDP are over there, the Conservatives are the 
government of the province of Saskatchewan, because once again, they were only concerned about the 
family of crown corporations, not the real families that go out there. And I give you an example of 
Morsky Construction, a family-owned business in the province of Saskatchewan. Father and sons 
working on it, the mother works there too, and the daughter does the books. Now that’s a real family, a 
family of Saskatchewan, not an NDP family. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’m disappointed to have heard the member state that the other day and I am just as 
disappointed to read it here tonight. Hopefully, we can let this lie and it won’t have to be raised again. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I find it interesting that even after the Speaker ruled on this very 
issue this afternoon saying that it wasn’t in the record, that not only the Minister of Finance, but now the 
Minister of Highways insists on saying that what Mr. Speaker ruled in this House is not accurate. I find 
that a very interesting position for a minister of the Crown to get up in this House, after Mr. Speaker has 
ruled that it wasn’t  



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1149 

part of the record, to now come in and repeat it, and to challenge the Chair of this Assembly, to 
challenge the Chair in this Assembly after he had made a decision. And I find that despicable that the 
Minister of Highways would speak against Mr. Speaker of the Assembly, even after a ruling had been 
brought down. 
 
Mr. Chairman, getting back to the case in point . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Mr. Chairman, I wonder 
if we could have some order? 
 
Mr. Chairman, I find it interesting that the Minister of Highways has taken the low road in Mr. Speaker’s 
absence to speak against a decision that he made earlier on today. Mr. Speaker, in his ruling, ruled that 
the member from Shaunavon said no such thing as he is being accused of, first by the Minister of 
Finance, and now the member from Wilkie. I find the low road that this member has chosen to travel is 
not new, because I say that a minister who fires 39 individuals who have worked very hard for this 
province, have built roads, have kept the roads in good repair, in fact built up the most excellent highway 
system in this province, are being paid off and paid off in a bad way by this minister who chooses to fire 
them out of hand, without a thank-you, without a goodbye - simply, ‘You’re fired’ and given a slip and 
down the road. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, all the people of the province know that this minister is not doing his job. The fact 
that his nickname has very quickly become ‘Pot-hole Jim’ throughout the province is an indication that 
this minister can be very pompous in this Assembly, can be very pompous and make accusations which 
are not accurate, but cannot defend his department in keeping the funding coming to it. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the minister has talked about the employees - 139 - who have been fired in his 
department, and has bragged about the private sector and what a great job they’re doing, but is not able 
to substantiate whether or not the cost of building a road in the private sector is cheaper than in the 
public sector. And I’ll tell you why he can’t do that. Because when he did the numbers on it, he found 
out a different story. I say to the people here and to the people of the province that he found that the good 
people who worked for the highway department were building roads and doing seal coat cheaper than 
what the private sector was doing. 
 
So why then, Mr. Chairman, has he made this move to the private sector? Well, I say we will watch very 
closely to see who gets the contract and to see who these people are that this Minister of Highways is 
supporting in his attempt to gain re-election in the province of Saskatchewan, and he’s doing this at the 
expense of many, many workers in the government and the crown corporations. 
 
And he talks about the pioneers who built this province as if they were people who did not believe in 
co-operation and in crown corporations. But I’d like to tell the member that Saskatchewan developed 
one of the finest systems of co-operatives and crown corporations based on these very pioneers, who did 
not come here, as you seem to indicate, as self-made people who were very anxious to stomp on one 
another to get ahead, the way members on that side of the House appear to be. They were individuals 
who got together to develop co-ops and crown corporations. And you, Mr. Minister, are slurring them 
today and last Friday by firing and talking about individuals who work for the government as if they are 
a lesser class of people. 
 
Mr. Minister, what I would like to know from you on a different area is the Red Coat Trail:  



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1150 

whether or not the recommendations of the sections of roads, their sections of roads that were being built 
down in that area, whether or not you accepted their recommendations or whether you are going against 
them - the recommendations that they gave to you of building certain sections of that road. 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Okay, Mr. Chairman, two or three points. Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s quite evident 
that the members opposite - the gang of eight, I guess, for a better word - they don’t believe in the 
families of Saskatchewan; they don’t believe in these real people. They believe in their own little crown; 
their own little family; their own little bureaucracy. That’s what they believe in. I believe in the Morskys 
of the world, ‘cause those are real families, real people that I can shake hands with and deal with and 
look in the eye - to look in the eye with them could never work. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, it comes right back down to, he said the people don’t believe in this. Well, where 
was he on April 26th, 1982? Where was he on February 21st, 1983, when the people from Prince Albert 
spoke? I mean, I think that points out, Mr. Chairman, as to who’s really running the government. I mean, 
that’s basically it. 
 
Regarding the Red Coat Trail, I met with their executive I believe two, three, maybe four times as I meet 
with all the people in Saskatchewan. The people from Kamsack were in to see me as to their priorities of 
the road, because the member from there never gave me his priorities, and now the people have to do the 
job. 
 
The main section that the Red Coat Trail - their number one priority was from Govenlock to the Alberta 
border and that, and having it being oil treatment. This was their highest priority. It’s being done. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What’s the second priority? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Second priority was paving, Redvers to the Manitoba border. I’m glad you asked - 
the worst section in Saskatchewan, neglected by the NDP, being done by this government listening to the 
people from the Red Coat Trail Association. Mr. Chairman, I don’t know what more anyone can ask. 
We’re an open government, putting the roads where the people of Saskatchewan want them. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I want to come back to the minister’s comments and his slanderous attack against 
the crown corporations of this province. and he has put it on the record that he is against the crown 
corporations. And I’m going to answer that allegation. I agree that the minister and his colleagues are 
against crown corporations, because all that one has to do is to look at the record of the crown 
corporations that were making millions of dollars for the people of Saskatchewan, and suddenly take a 
look at Sedco - $9 million in the red. Take a look at the potash corporation - in the red, in the hole, 
didn’t make a cent, if they haven’t cooked the books. And I want to say that every crown corporation has 
been run down by this government in their holy allegiance to the private enterprise. 
 
And I want to say that the people of Saskatchewan will ask you boys across there to account for your 
misdeeds to the people of this province. You know, the member says ‘the family of crown corporations,’ 
and we weren’t concerned with the families of the province. Do you know what he has done here in one 
sweep: 139 employees, 139 families affected. Multiply it by four; it affects 560 people that he turned 
loose and took a livelihood from. You know what he says in answer for their potential of getting jobs is 
to go to the road builders; they’re looking for 100 people. 



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1151 

I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, that you had no activity in the Department of Highways last year. The 
established contractors in this province couldn’t even employ their own crews. And if you look at the 
record of the capital expenditures and budgets here, which we will be coming to, I want to say that the 
reason that you had to go into maintenance is that you’re cutting back so drastically on the construction 
of new highways. And there was no room to provide sufficient work for the private contractors who 
were constructing most of the highways. 
 
I want to ask the minister where this four-man employment team is located? I want to know where this 
four-man employment team is located. And I’d like to know who’s on it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m very happy to tell the member opposite that we have a 
four-man employment team. We’ll have the names here for you in a minute. They are located at 
Humford House; you’ll have the names here in a minute. Be patient. 
 
Mr. Chairman, okay, here we are: George Cossette, Ian Louttit, Gordon May and Orest Chuey. Those are 
the four members located at Humford House. But just a little additional information for the member 
opposite; we’ll read you a little bit of this letter from the Saskatchewan road builders, dated February the 
24th, 1983 . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Mr. Chairman, they asked about employment, so I’m going 
to give them the information. I won’t read the whole letter at this time, but I can read them the whole 
letter later on. A couple of paragraphs: 
 

A substantial shift from the private to the public sector would require that contractors in the 
province employ an additional 100 or more equipment operators, labourers, flagpersons, etc., 
experienced in these types of work. To assist our contractor members in locating experienced 
employees, our association would be prepared to make its office available to provide lists of 
names with occupational experience to our members of people who may be displaced from the 
public sector. This is a service we now provide our members, with respect to students graduating 
from technical schools in the province. 

 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I think that points out there is a commitment - a commitment from the 
Saskatchewan road builders association that they need 100 or more experienced, and I emphasize the 
word ‘experienced’, employees to help them construct this work that has been now shifted to the private 
sector. 
 
The members opposite are trying to say that I’m condemning these men that we have laid off, that are 
going to change bosses. That’s not true. It’s another falsehood. But I’m not surprised, Mr. Chairman, 
because I have heard falsehoods, many misleading statements, coming from the members opposite for 
the past four or five years. It’s no surprise to me; it’s no surprise to the general public out there. These 
are facts, black and white proof, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I’d like to ask the minister . . . Since he is reading the road builders’ letter, 
apparently the gospel to him, I would like to ask the minister: did you in fact, as the minister, 
commission a study to determine the impact of firing 139 people and the likelihood of them being 
rehired during the course of the summer? Have you commissioned a study of your own, rather than 
taking the words of the road builders, which I am not doubting, but I’m asking you as minister? You 
made a definite policy of  



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1152 

firing 139 people, destroying their livelihood, and I’m asking you, did you commission a study to 
determine the impact of such action? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, no, we didn’t do a study, and then another study and another 
study. I sat down with the deputy minister and his very competent officials. We looked at the whole 
program, the entire program - costs for tendering, costs for having done in the public sector. I believe 
very firmly, Mr. Chairman, there will be not only a cost saving to the people of Saskatchewan but, 
number two, they’re going to end up with better roads. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You have assured us, one, that there is going to be a cost saving. I think we’re entitled to 
know the details of the cost savings. 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, we will have to do an estimate of a certain section of road. We can 
do that and provide that information to the members opposite later on. We can’t do it here tonight. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You haven’t in fact done it; you’re going to do it. That’s what you’re saying. Therefore, 
you cannot stand up in this House and indicate that there’s going to be a cost saving, because in your 
initial statement you said you were impossible to make a cost comparison. You indicated that you could 
know how much it would cost per kilometre by the private sector, but because of indirect costs, you are 
unable to calculate from the public sector. You are reversing your answer, and I think it’s 
understandable, and I think the people of Saskatchewan will certainly take at faith that you did no 
calculations - that all you did was to make a decision that you were going to turn it over to the private 
sector, and automatically the crews for the Department of Highways had to be released, and you fired 
them without even any consideration for their future, their family, or their livelihood. That, Mr. Minister, 
is the truth in a capsule form, from all of the answers that you have given. 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, they were not fired; they were laid off. I am not going back on any 
previous statement I made, and I will try once again. I will try once again - and I think maybe my little 
five-year-old daughter might be able to explain it to the member. She would understand it, but the 
members opposite . . . It’s a little difficult, so I’ll be patient, Mr. Chairman; we’ll try once again. 
 
We won’t use too large a number for them, we’ll just use two miles - two miles. We’ll take two miles of 
road that has to be sealed, say, Yorkton, Saskatchewan. The sealing crew is in Swift Current. The 
contractor that is building the grades is right on the job. His distributor is there; his chip sealer is there - 
and I hope I don’t have to explain all of this technology to members opposite; we’ll be here for a week, 
Mr. Chairman - anyways, the contractor can take the equipment, put the seal coat right on the road. He’s 
right in camp; he’s on the site - instead of a crew coming all the way from Swift Current, Saskatchewan, 
driving to Yorkton. I mean, there’s a saving right there, Mr. Chairman. Now I mean, there’s two miles of 
road; there could be 100 miles of road. I think I’ve pointed out beyond a shadow of a doubt, Mr. 
Chairman, that it is going to save the people of Saskatchewan tax dollars. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the member is talking about if you’re building some road in the 
Yorkton area and you have to move a crew from Swift Current to do the work. Well, you will have to do 
that now, because you just fired the crew in Yorkton. But what I would like to know is how you can 
imagine that a private sector firm can move  



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1153 

their crew cheaper to the road site to do the building than can the Department of Highways. You make it 
sound like the Department of Highways would have to move there with their equipment, but the private 
contractor doesn’t have to. There’s a leap in logic there that I don’t quite understand - how it costs more 
for the Highway department to move to the site than it does for the private sector. And can you just 
explain that to me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Okay, Mr. Chairman, we’ll try one more time. Every road builder - the majority 
of the road builders in the province of Saskatchewan - have what we call a distributor truck. Now that is 
used, and was used previously under the NDP philosophy, to put a flush coat of oil on, put a flush coat 
on. But that same distributor truck can be used to put the sealing coat on, so that the truck is there, the 
man is there, and they’re in place, right on the job. Now, that’s one example. I could give you many 
more, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Are you saying, Mr. Minister, that the private sector has an inside track on these 
type of trucks, or why can’t you buy one of them, instead of firing the people? Why don’t you buy one of 
them there fancy trucks, like the private sector has, rather than fire all the people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t have to buy any of these distributor trucks. We have, 
according to the deputy minister tells me, we have over 100 already. Mr. Chairman, how can I explain it 
to the members opposite? I mean, the road builders take a distributor truck, they put on a flush coat; they 
were not allowed to put on the seal coat because it was not the NDP philosophy. They wanted to move 
crews from all over the province. We’re simply enabling the Saskatchewan road builders, the 
contractors, private enterprise - I know it’s a dirty word for the member’s opposite; it doesn’t happen to 
be for this government. 
 
We talk about tendering, Mr. Chairman. Tenders are opened in public - lowest tender taken. I mean, 
democracy, there it is, Mr. Chairman. the members opposite, it’s quite evident, don’t know anything 
about building roads in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, the minister just explained to me twice, earlier on, that if he 
needed one of these trucks, he would have to move it from Swift Current to Yorkton. Now he says he 
has 100 of them. Where are these 100 trucks that you would have to move one from Swift Current to 
Yorkton? Why don’t you leave one of the 100 at Yorkton? And then you wouldn’t have to move it from 
Swift Current. It seems to me that you’re creating some sort of a smoke-screen, when in fact what you’ve 
done is fired 139 people who have families. And you’re now trying to explain it by some sort of 
nonsense about moving trucks from hither and yon, when in fact what you’re doing is shifting 
responsibility from the public sector to the private sector. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the minister talks about profits and the abhorrence that this group of people in the 
opposition has for profits. Well, let me tell you, Mr. Minister, that we appreciate profits as much as 
anyone else. But, Mr. Chairman, if this government is saying that they are going to put profits ahead of 
the needs of families in this province, if he’s saying that the profits of the private sector construction 
companies go ahead of the 139 that he has just fired, then I say those profits are immoral. And I want to 
ask you one more time, Mr. Minister, why is it that these 100 trucks, these sealcoat trucks, cannot be 
used throughout the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, these 100 or more trucks are with the 



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1154 

maintenance crews, not the sealing crews. Now, there is a difference between maintenance crews and 
sealing crews; that’s what I’m trying to explain to the members opposite. Now, if I pulled the distributor 
trucks away from the maintenance employees, the members opposite would be the first ones to condemn 
it for not getting their maintenance work done on the road. 
 
Now, you can’t have it both ways. You can’t have one truck doing two jobs at the same time. We have 
these distributor trucks right now, work for maintenance, that fix up the pot-holes in the road, that I 
inherited, that I inherited and that . . . The distributor trucks that we’re talking about are the ones that are 
with the sealing crews that have now gone to the private sector, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I would ask the minister again: then is it a problem of not having 
enough seal coat trucks in the Department of Highways? The 100 aren’t enough to do both jobs; is that 
what you’re saying, in that you need more trucks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — No, Mr. Chairman, we don’t need more trucks because it’s being turned over to 
the private sector. We’re not like the members opposite. If you need a truck to drive from here to 
Saskatoon, you don’t go out and buy one. 
 
We’re trying to point out, Mr. Chairman, the distributor trucks that are in service today are on the 
maintenance operation, not on the sealing operation any more. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I just want to indicate to the hon. minister, that the . . . In Yorkton, the unemployment 
rate there was the second highest in Saskatchewan. Number two, it was. And by you laying off the 
crews, I think that what you will be able to achieve for the Minister of Labour is to probably make him 
number one in unemployment. And I want to say, I want to say that the group of individuals that you 
have fired . . . I want to know exactly what role this four-man employment team is endeavouring to 
perform. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He told you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — No, he didn’t. 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, the employment team will be: number one, informing them of 
their union rights, which are their bumping privileges, and their seniority from within the department and 
within government. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And is that the full extent of this committee? Is that the actual full extent of the 
performance of this committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, of the 139 employees, 104 have responded; 88 have elected to 
bump; 9 choose to resign; 7 choose to remain on the re-employment list. Now, Mr. Chairman, here we 
have the members opposite complaining on one hand about laying off some employees. Now, if we 
didn’t have anyone in there to assist these employees, they’d be hollering at us again. 
 
Now, we hear them stating, ‘What are they doing? Is that all they’re doing?’ What they’re doing, Mr. 
Chairman, is trying to assist the employees that were laid off. I think it points out who has compassion 
for people. It’s this side of the House, not them, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I want to say that the further the minister answers, the worse his  



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1155 

answers become. And I think that the truth of this matter is as one of the members commented: that they 
have been fired and now they’re going to be out and do some real work, because I think it’s the 
contention of the members opposite that all of these people that they have fired were not performing the 
task up to the level that they wanted. And I want to categorically defend all of the members of the crews 
of the Department of Highways, and indicate to you, Mr. Minister, that their performance was good; it 
was excellent and they did good quality work. And I want to say that the quality of the highways in this 
province were second to none, and many of them were built, in fact, constructed by highway crews, 
maintained by highway crews. And I want to say what has happened here is just your blind allegiance 
and commitment to the private sector at the cost of families in this province. 
 
And I want to say that compassion - compassion towards people - is not even a word that’s known to the 
government opposite, because it has happened throughout crown corporation after crown corporation. 
Employees at SGI, highway crews have been cut. Sask Tel, Sask Power. And what it is here is a direct 
policy of the members opposite that they are going to sell out to the privates regardless of the cost, and 
that’s what you have said tonight. 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll try and re-emphasize the point once more. I had no problems, 
no disagreement, no dissatisfaction with the jobs that these employees were doing, nor the maintenance 
employees that we have in the province of Saskatchewan. They are a very excellent group of people. 
 
The members opposite keep stating: why did we fire them? We didn’t fire them; we laid them off. And 
once again, I’m going to try and tell the gang of eight, they now don’t have to work for the Department 
of Highways any more; they can now go and work for the private sector - their choice. We have the 
four-man employment team at Humford House that is willing to help them out and co-operate in 
working on a personal basis with them. We have the commitment from the Saskatchewan road builders 
association of needing 100 or more employees. 
 
Mr. Chairman, it’s a joke when the members opposite get up and start talking about defending 
individuals’ rights. That’s why they’re sitting over there and we’re here. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — All right, Mr. Minister. You clearly indicated here, Mr. Minister, that they weren’t fired; 
they were laid off. I want to ask you: is it the policy of this government to re-institute these crews to 
perform that work in the Department of Highways? Are you going to be re-instituting them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, to give a very simple short answer - and it may shoot over their 
heads, but we’ll try it - no. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — All right. If an individual which had a job to perform and if, in fact, you discontinue the 
work which he was doing in the past, what conceivable right have you to say that he was laid off, and not 
fired, if there’s no job to come back, and you don’t intend to create the job? How can you stand up here 
with a straight face and indicate to 560 people approximately that are affected, or 139 people that have 
been fired . . . how can you stand up here and say they’re laid off, when there is no prospect in the future 
of them retaining or getting back their jobs, because the function, and the jobs they were doing, you 
indicated that you will not, in fact, be carrying out in the future? Answer that. 



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1156 

Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, I have a great deal of confidence in not only this government, the 
private sector, but the people of Saskatchewan. I’d like to share one little point with the members 
opposite. 
 
Saskatchewan’s employment rate (this is April 11th, Mr. Chairman) dropped two-tenths of a per cent last 
month while the national rate rose one-tenth of a per cent. Saskatchewan’s 7.4 per cent is the lowest in 
the nation. The Regina rate is 8.5 per cent, down from 8.9 per cent. Saskatoon is 11.1 per cent, down 
from 13.5 per cent. Nationally, the unemployment rate was 12.6. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, two very important figures there. Nationally, the unemployment rate was 12.6. In the 
province of Saskatchewan it was 7.4. Mr. Chairman, this points out that the policies and the directions of 
the Devine administration are working in this province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, I want to say that the dismal performance of the minister here today, I 
suspected that it’s necessary that he be given some support from his members who are clapping, because 
I know deep in their heart they are, in fact, ashamed of the performance of this minister. I want to say 
here that this minister stands up in this House and starts talking about Saskatchewan having the lowest 
unemployment. I want to say that when he took office in this province, unemployment was the lowest in 
Canada - around 5 per cent, 4 or 5 per cent - 4.5 per cent when you took office. Unemployment has risen 
faster percentage-wise in this province under your administration than anywhere else in the same given 
period of time. 
 
And I want to say, and I also want to add, Mr. Minister, that the record of abuse to citizens of this 
province is unequalled by any government in the history of this province, other than going back to 1929 
or 30 with the last Conservative government 50 years ago. 
 
Other than that, I want to say that one of the basic policies was to design programs, and to provide 
employment to the people of this province. The efforts of this government has been directly opposite to 
that direction. In fact, they have been cutting people from jobs which they have been trained for, careers 
which they have developed over many years, and I want to say that we want the list of those names of 
individuals, because I can see that this here four-man employment committee for these poor people that 
have been fired is going to do absolutely nothing. And we want that list, Mr. Minister, because we want 
to be able to help those people find jobs and employment, because you have fired them and thrown them 
off, perhaps onto the welfare rolls. Your record in employment: there were 7,000 unemployed 
employables a year ago. That rose to 14,000 under your administration. The welfare roll in 1981-82 was 
91 million, in 1982-83 . . . 1980-81, 1982-83, it rose to 141, and this year you’re budgeting for welfare 
$171 million. Your answer to employment is to place them on welfare and to cut them out of meaningful 
jobs that they have been performing for the people of this province. And I think that you should be 
ashamed of yourself, that without even doing an analysis, without doing a study, that you have cast adrift 
139 citizens of this province. And I want to say, Mr. Minister, you’ll rue the day for that ruthless, 
uncompassionate effort that you have done here in firing 139 employees. And you should be ashamed of 
yourself. 



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1157 

Hon. Mr. Garner: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I pointed out to the member opposite, we have the lowest 
unemployment rate in Canada. We have kept it at that. Because after April 26th, when that change in 
philosophy took place, the people, the real families that the socialists chased out of Saskatchewan, have 
come back home. And since January 1 of this year, we’ve employed 10,000 more people in this 
province. Mr. Chairman, that points out where people are coming to, where the lowest unemployment 
rate is in Canada, is here in the province of Saskatchewan. And thank you to the people of Saskatchewan 
for the change in administration. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I find it interesting, this great job the government is doing in raising 
the unemployment rate from 4.5 to 7.4 per cent. And government is saying what a great job they’re 
doing. The fact that there are now 60,000 people on welfare in the province . . . (inaudible interjections) 
. . . 60,000 people now on welfare is equal in relative terms to the number of farmers, each farmer in 
Saskatchewan. There’s 67,000 farmers in the province of Saskatchewan. We now have approximately 
one person on welfare for every farmer in the province of Saskatchewan, and for that the minister 
applauds himself and says what a great job he’s doing. 
 
But the point that I want to make here is that this minister is assisting in that problem by firing 139 heads 
of families in the province of Saskatchewan. And he says that there’s no problem, that these people are 
now free to go look for work. Well, I’ll tell you, what the people of the province should do is make that 
minister go look for work, and find out how tough it is to find a job under the conditions that this 
government has created. Because finding jobs in Yorkton for those eight or 10 families is not going to be 
an easy task. And the member for Yorkton can say that it’s because of the machinery slow-down and I 
agree. To an extent that’s part of the problem, but the minister is adding to that by putting four families 
out of work, or eight families out of work in that city, and saying that there’s no problem, they can go 
look for work in the private sector. Well, we want a list of those names because we want to do a report 
card on you, Mr. Minister, six months later, to find out how many of those 139 families were able to 
benefit from your great freedom program. I want assurances from you now, that you will supply the 
names and positions of those 139 people before we get off your estimates here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, I had given that assurance earlier in the evening. I give it again 
now. That information will be supplied for the members opposite. I will just point out once more that he 
is not happy with the four-man employment team. They have talked to 104 people have responded . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Talking doesn’t help. 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Eighty-eight . . . Well, the member opposite, Mr. Chairman, says the talking 
doesn’t help. No, I guess under the NDP system, the NDP philosophy, talking didn’t help; talking didn’t 
work. We believe that in order to provide good government to people you have to talk to them; you have 
to communicate with them. That’s what we’re doing. That’s why we have a four-man employment team. 
That’s why the Saskatchewan road-building industry wants to find them jobs. The opportunities are 
there. On top of the 104, Mr. Chairman, 88 have elected to bump; 9 have choosed to resign of their own 
free will - no one is forcing them; 7 of them have choose to go on the re-employment list. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I have the greatest deal of confidence in that re-employment team over at Humford 
House. I also, without a doubt, Mr. Chairman, know that the opportunities are here for anyone in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1158 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I find it hard to believe that the employment team is going to have 
much choice or advantage in finding employment for the eight families in Yorkton. And I don’t say that 
against the four individuals that you named who are on that committee, but you are giving them an 
impossible task, Mr. Minister, and you’re attempting to put the blame on someone else, the same as 
other ministers have done in this House, for the fact that you are putting people out of work, you are 
taking the paycheques away from a great number of families. 
 
You, Mr. Minister, are not interested in the families of Saskatchewan the way you attempt to pretend you 
are here in this Assembly. And what I want to know is, of these people who are being fired, how many of 
them are going to be using their bumping rights, by the numbers that you have there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, if the member opposite would have been listening, I have stated 
88 have elected to use their bumping rights. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, the 88 people who bump someone - what do you suppose, Mr. 
Minister, happens to the 88 people that they bump? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — They can, in turn, bump someone else. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, on the last day that the individual bumps someone, where do they go 
- the 88 who are bumping throughout the department? The way you have planned this great scheme of 
allowing people to now go cut-throat through the department and bump individuals and other families, 
how do you think the people who are eligible to be bumped, that you have given this freedom to, how do 
you think those people will feel over the next few months until this thing is sorted out? 
 
It’s not only the 139 who are affected here; it’s all the new employees who have the possibility of being 
bumped and put out of employment will not sleep well until you get this thing straightened out, Mr. 
Minister. And I say you have opened up a can of worms here that you are going to have to bear the 
responsibility for, because you can’t blame that on your officials. This is your decision, and you are 
going to have to bear the brunt. 
 
Can you tell me how many people will be affected indirectly by this bumping procedure that will go on 
throughout the department as a result of this ill-conceived and mad plan that you have? It’s almost as if 
you have a vendetta against the people of the province to see whether you can make them suffer or not, 
the way you go about doing things. 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, I’m going to repeat that one little very important paragraph in the 
letter from the road builders of Saskatchewan, just to clarify it for members opposite. I know it’s a new 
direction that’s different than what they used to do. I do accept full responsibility. I will not pass the 
buck; I will not run away from it. I guarantee you that. 
 
Now one paragraph, Mr. Chairman: 
 

A substantial shift from the public to the private sector would require that contractors in the 
province employ an additional 100 or more equipment operators, labourers, flagpersons, etc. 
(now here’s a very important part, Mr. Chairman) experienced in these types of work. 



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1159 

Now who do you think those contractors are going to go to, looking for men to run, whether it’s their 
road graders, their compaction units or their scrapers? They’re not going to go out there and take a 
schoolteacher without any expertise. They’re going to go to these individuals that have the expertise, 
have the experience and have the knowledge, to offer them a job. The jobs are there. We’ve pointed it 
out. Lowest unemployment rate in Canada - 10,000 additional jobs since January 1. This government is 
working and the policies of this government is working and that’s why the gang of eight is over there. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, there is absolutely no way that you can smoke-screen the issue. When you 
delineate 139 positions, when you indicate that in fact they will not be reinstituted, when you have 
delineated 139 positions - that’s what you’ve done - when you have done away with them, there is 
absolutely no other word for it, other than that they had been fired. Now you go on to say that they have 
bumping rights. The inevitable result, Mr. Minister, is that if you have eliminated 139 positions, 88 you 
indicate are going to take bumping rights, but automatically what happens unless there’s more positions 
created, that 88 on the bottom of the pole are going to be cast out. So not only have you sent 
notifications to 139 people, but what you have done, is in fact to all of the employees, you have said, 
‘You have no job security until all of this bumping rights are put into place.’ And 88 people somewhere 
down the line are going to lose their jobs and there’s no way of denying it. 
 
And I want also to say, Mr. Minister, that my information is that in the various districts the initial 
position by the Minister of Highways was that some time in July . . . that these people would be 
employed until July, that was the initial information that was passed to these employees, and then 
recently without consultation, without any discussion, what happened is that registered letters were sent 
out saying, ‘You are fired.’ Is that not in fact the system that was followed by your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, these positions were abolished. If these employees would have 
been fired, they wouldn’t have any bumping rights. So let’s get some clarification here for the members 
opposite. These positions have been abolished. No one has been fired in these positions. If they would 
have been fired, there wouldn’t have been any bumping rights. We wouldn’t have 88 people bumping in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Just a moment, Mr. Minister. If 88 have bumping rights, they have to bump somebody 
out. Who gets bumped? You have decreased the number of positions and you’re saying you’re 
maintaining the same number of staff. That can’t possibly, can’t possibly exist because you have 
eliminated a number of jobs, 139 jobs you have eliminated. And if 88 go forward and bump, there are 
going to be 88 people on the street looking for jobs. And what is worse is that it is going to continue 
throughout the year and all of these people in the various positions who are susceptible to bumping 
rights, they too and their families are affected. And what you have done is totally, totally put into motion 
the most vicious insecurity package that any minister has come forward with in this province. And don’t 
try to indicate that there won’t be people losing their jobs because of bumping rights. There has to be 
jobs lost and as a consequence, you know it and I know it, that people are losing their jobs. Isn’t that a 
fact? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll try and explain it to the members opposite once more. The 
employment team is corresponding with 104 individuals: 139  



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1160 

positions in essence. The key to this whole discussion is about three points, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Number one - the Saskatchewan road-building industry has stated that they need 100 or more employees 
for the road program in 1983. Number two - which is very important - we have created 10,000 new jobs 
since January 1 of this year and there’s more to come. People are building homes. Mr. Chairman, the 
members opposite are trying to make a mockery of those employees. They will be transferring their 
bosses, that’s all they’re trying to do; instead of working for the Department of Highways and 
Transportation, they now have the opportunity to work for the private sector. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you continue to talk about the bumping rights of these 139 
people or 88 people. As my colleagues have mentioned, when they bump somebody that means that 
someone else is going to be out there looking for a job. So it doesn’t matter how often they bump, you’re 
still going to have 139 people out of work, simply because you do not have the work for them. You have 
cut back on the amount of work that you are going to be doing in Department of Highways. So those 
people are definitely laid off permanently, and they will not have the jobs. Well, I think you mentioned 
that they will somehow be able to find jobs with the private contractors. Well, Mr. Minister, how can 
you guarantee that these private contractors in the province of Saskatchewan are gong to hire 100 or 
more than 100 people in this province when the work begins? 
 
Number one - there is no guarantee that the contractors that are going to be doing some of this work are 
going to be necessarily from the province of Saskatchewan, unless you are operating a closed province at 
this time. If you get a contractor that’s from close to the border in Alberta that might be doing some 
work along that side, or one from Alberta - Manitoba or Alberta, either side of Saskatchewan - these 
people have their own regular heavy equipment operators. They will be bringing in their own operators 
with their equipment. They will not be hiring the people from Department of Highways that have been 
laid off by you - laid off permanently, I might add. 
 
How can you say that these people are going to find that work with the private contractors? Do you have 
some method of letting out contracts that’s going to specify that certain contractors in the province are 
going to get the work? Or how are you going to tender out some of this work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we’ll try once more. A letter dated February the 24th, 1983: 
 

Such a shift of work from the public to the private sector would require contractors to engage 
additional staff over that which would normally be required. It is anticipated that contractors 
would prefer to hire employees experienced in this type of work. The most likely source of these 
employees would be those displaced from the public sector by reduction of work undertaken by 
the department crews. A substantial shift from the public to the private sector would require that 
contractors in the province employ an additional 100 or more equipment operators, labourers, 
flag-persons, etc., experienced in these types of work. 

 
To assist our contractor members in locating experienced employees, our association would be 
prepared to make its office available to provide lists of names with occupational experience to 
our members of people who may be  



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1161 

displaced from the public sector. This is a service we now provide our members, with respect to 
students graduating from technical schools in the province. 

 
Now, Mr. Chairman, we can continue this debate all night, all next day, all next week, and the bottom 
line is, Mr. Chairman, that the private sector is looking for more than 100 employees for the road 
program in 1983 in the province of Saskatchewan. The members opposite can play smoke and mirrors 
all they want - all they want. Talk about bumping and everything else. 
 
The individuals whose positions have been abolished - not fired, Mr. Chairman - have two or three 
options. They can bump; they can work for the private sector; they can go and work for someone else - 
their opportunity. The employment opportunities are here in this case, outside of the fact that since 
January 1 we have created 10,000 additional employees, employment positions in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and there will be more to come. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you have stated that the private sector assures you . . . 
somehow the private contractors are assuring you that they are going to be hiring a good number of these 
people, with a substantial shift from the government or the public sector to the private sector. 
 
Mr. Minister, one thing I can say is that I think the private sector is being overly optimistic in the amount 
of work that they’re going to have, because if you look at the estimates, you are going to find that there is 
a substantial decrease in the amount of work that’s going to be out there this year. So the private sector is 
hoping that there is going to be work, and if they had the same amount of work that was provided in the 
past, then possibly they would be able to hire some of these people. 
 
But when you look at what’s estimated in road-work from 1981 to ’82, which was 488 kilometres of 
grading, in 1983-84 you’re down to 320 - 320. The private contractors are not going to have that work. 
So they won’t be hiring that 100 people or more. That, Mr. Minister, is what’s going to be happening. 
The 139 people that you laid off in highways, along with the large number of people that have been laid 
off from other departments, are going to be out there competing for a few jobs. And very few, I might 
add, because that work is not there. 
 
So, we’re going to have another 139 people on unemployment and on welfare eventually, because they 
won’t be able to find jobs. They’re going to be competing with students coming out of university shortly. 
And, as I mentioned before, and you didn’t answer, how can you guarantee the private contractors of this 
province that they are going to be able to get every tender that’s let out there, and that some other 
contractor from another province won’t underbid them, and bring in his own crew? That, Mr. Speaker, is 
another question that’s there, and you haven’t been answering. 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, first of all, they’re talking about . . . The members opposite are 
concerned that the private sector is not going to be employing these people. They are going to be doing 
in the neighbourhood, in the area, of $4 million work of work. Now, they’re not going to hire robots to 
do this. They need real people, real families to do this job. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the member opposite was stating about the road program as a comparison to when they 
were government. Well, it’s quite obvious it’s different. And  



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1162 

you know how it’s different, Mr. Chairman? Because this road program that I announced in the 
Assembly in my budget address, the roads that are going to be built in the province of Saskatchewan - 
going to be constructed this year, not, as when the NDP were in power, where seven out of every 10 
roads that they announced, there was not funding for it. 
 
On top of that, they announced 28 projects. The previous minister announced 28 projects. And these, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Chairman, were nothing more than political election-bait promises. There was no funding 
there for them. What the people of Saskatchewan got in the budget address from this government, was 
the truth. Real dollars for real roads that are going to be constructed by real people and no more 
misleading the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, the figures that I was quoting you were figures of works to be done in a 
given year. It did not include the carry-over. It did not include any carry-over from the figures that I was 
giving you. I was giving you figures of actual work in a given year. 
 
The work that we had done in 1981-82 was 488 kilometres. That was within that one year. You have 
estimated for 1983-84, 320 kilometres, to be done without that year, leaving out the carry-over that you 
have on your project array. That is the decrease, Mr. Minister. And that is why I am saying that these 139 
people are not going to have a job, because the private contractors are not going to have the work that 
they expect, either. 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Chairman, the member is quite welcome to come up to my office. I have kept 
the project array from the previous minister. We’re going to frame it and keep it in my office, because it 
did point out that the seven out of the 10 roads, there was no funding there. There were roads on there 
that were marked ‘0 per cent completion.’ I mean, they announced it one year; they didn’t build it that 
year. They announced it the next year and maybe started a little bit. And the following year, they 
announced it again. 
 
So, in essence, the people of Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman, were promised 
a road three years before they finally got it, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The difference is, the road program that I announced in this Assembly in my budget reply were roads 
that there is real dollars, and roads that are going to be built this year. Mr. Chairman, I see it’s near 10 
o’clock. I’d better, as Acting House Leader, call it 10 o’clock. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:04 p.m. 


