






















































Hansard: March 07, 1983


(2462) 2463 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 7, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES 
 

Communications 
 

ASSISTANT CLERK: — Mr. Speaker, the chairman of the standing committee on communications, 
presents the second report of the said committee, which is as follows: 
 

Your committee has considered its reference of February 23, 1983, namely, the matter of taking still 
photographs of members in the House. 
 
Your committee recommends that the taking of still photos in the legislative Chamber be permitted, 
subject to approval for use for publication by Mr. Speaker; that the photos be taken only of members 
on their feet, speaking; that the photos be taken without the use of flashes, and only from the press 
gallery location; and that a trial period for the taking of such photos be set for the start of the next 
session, to include only the address in reply and the budget debates. 
 

HON. MR. SANDBERG: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by Mr. Lingenfelter: 
 

That the second report of the standing committee on communications be now concurred in. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Department of Rural Affairs 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, it becomes more and more difficult to ask questions. But my 
question will be directed to the Minister of Rural Affairs. 
 
The minister will be aware of news reports out today of 191 jobs to go under government overhaul. In 
that report the minister will be aware that his department, rural affairs, is one of the departments that is 
looked at to be gotten rid of. What I want to ask the minister is whether or not he will confirm or deny 
this. 
 
HON. MR. PICKERING: — Mr. Speaker, I am well aware of the article the member is indicating 
from. I would like to indicate to you at this time that I would advise the Assembly that the Attorney 
General will make a statement. So I will yield to him. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I believe, Mr. Speaker, the government has made its position quite clear that, in 
fact, there will be a departmental reorganization. That decision has not 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2464 

been finalized, nor has the final proposal been brought to cabinet. As a result, I caution members 
opposite and the public to treat the article as speculation because that’s precisely what it is. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister of Rural Affairs. In light of 
the fact that the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities is meeting in Saskatoon and a great 
deal of concern is being expressed by delegates at that major convention, and in light of the fact that 
when the department was established, it was established on the advice of the Saskatchewan Association 
of Rural Municipalities, will you give this Assembly your assurance today, as well as the members of 
SARM, that you have no intention of dismantling the Department of Rural Affairs? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I remind the hon. member that this government and its 55 members 
is fully cognizant of its support in rural Saskatchewan, its obligations to rural Saskatchewan, and the 
actions that it’s taken for the betterment of rural Saskatchewan. And I just simply remind the hon. 
member again that the article is pure speculation. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I have been referring my questions distinctly to the Minister 
of Rural Affairs simply because he is the minister responsible for that area. I think that what the public 
would like to know, as well as the convention which is going on in Saskatoon, from the minister is 
whether or not he has any plans, or is aware of any plans, to do away with the Department of Rural 
Affairs. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Again I remind the hon. member and I caution him about the rules as to 
repetitious questions, Mr. Speaker,. But we have made it clear. I apologize for my error in my last 
answer. There are 56 government members, not 55, many of whom are from rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, which I do not need to remind the hon. members opposite, but I just simply caution the 
members again that the article is speculation. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Minister of Rural Affairs. Have you at any 
time in the past 10 months discussed with SARM the possibility of deleting or getting rid of the 
Department of Rural Affairs at all? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that the hon. member’s question is dealing 
with the question of government reorganization, and is from the article in the paper, as most of their 
questions are, Mr. Speaker,: that any question of government reorganization is speculative; that should 
there be any changes they would be discussed with the appropriate people if there are to be any changes; 
and I just simply caution the members opposite to very carefully treat the article as speculation. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Speaker, once again, the Attorney General appears to be answering some of the 
questions, but not necessarily answering the question, but merely trying to avoid any other member or 
minister answering a question. 
 
Once again, I direct my question to the Minister of Rural Affairs, and I’m sure he would have a better 
idea of whether the department has talked to anyone, or whether he himself has talked to anyone. Have 
you at any time in the past 10 months discussed doing away with rural affairs, with SARM, or any other 
organization? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Well, I remind the hon. member that in my position as acting, acting, 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2465 

acting assistant Deputy House Leader or whatever position that I have today, I believe that the tradition 
was well established by my predecessor, as a matter of fact, that when there is obviously an article that 
affect several departments, and the government’s position is being made clear the House Leader will 
articulate that position. That’s what I’m attempting to do. I’m obviously not getting through and I 
apologize. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I direct a question to the Minister of Rural Affairs and my question does 
not have to do with what appears in the press. My question is a very simple one. Have your officials, sir, 
been discussing with the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities the reorganization of the 
Department of Rural Affairs and the elimination of the Department of Rural Affairs? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, just to remind the Leader of the Opposition that in fact the material 
in the article is speculation — speculation, Mr. Speaker. All I can do is continually repeat the same 
answer to the members opposite, that the matter of reorganization by the government is certainly a 
government policy, that in fact there will be a reorganization. The form of that reorganization has not 
been decided upon. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I direct the supplementary to the Minister 
of Rural Affairs. 
 
Up to March 1 of this year, and prior to the appearance of any articles in newspapers, were your 
officials, sir, discussing with the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities any reorganization 
of your department which might affect them? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I remind the opposition leader again what I have said repeatedly., and you will 
note that the SARM seems to have been somewhat concerned by the statements, according to your own 
statements opposite. Now what conclusions you wish to draw from that . . . But again I just, as a result 
of that, I would caution you to treat the article, and the suggestion in the article, and any suggestions of 
reorganization and the details thereof, as highly speculative. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask a supplementary. I want to advise the minister, and 
all ministers, that I am not talking about any newspaper articles. I am talking about discussions of the 
Minister of Rural Affairs’ officials. I’m surprised that other ministers are aware of what his officials are 
discussing, but I ask again, to the Minister of Rural Affairs: what discussions have your officials had 
with respect to any reorganization of your department with the SARM? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, it would certainly be unwise for government to discuss any 
proposals for reorganization when it doesn’t have any proposals upon which it’s stated to act, and I 
attempted to indicate that the proposal did not come before cabinet, and as a result, cabinet hasn’t made 
a decision. 
 

Department of Labor — Women’s Division 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to begin by saying the conduct at this 
question period is an absolute outrage. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Is the member on his feet to ask a question? If he is, he has no right to be making 
statements. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I have a question to one of the very few remaining ministers left 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2466 

who had the courage to come to the House this morning. My question is to the Minister of Government 
Services, as I understand it the senior distaff minister in cabinet. My question to you is: do you see any 
need for the continuation of the women’s division in the Department of Labor? Do you as the senior 
woman in cabinet see any need for the continuation of that department? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I don’t know what difficulty the hon. members opposite have, Mr. Speaker. I 
recall on numerous occasions in the past the precedent well established by the opposition members 
opposite that when there was a matter that crossed several different departments, policy that has not 
been determined, the House Leader in his role as such took the answer to the question. That’s all I’m 
simply doing. Again, I just simply repeat that in fact the government policy has not been decided upon. 
The proposals have not come forward. 
 
But let me tell the hon. member . . . He may not like question; I don’t accept that as a criticism of Mr. 
Speaker. I assume that his criticism is directed at the government, and that’s his criticism. But the fact is 
that the precedent of how question period has been handled in a situation like this is a precedent 
established by yourselves. So I don’t know where your complaint comes in, hon. member. And I state it 
again, what the government policy and the government position is. And again, I simply caution you 
against speculation. 
 

SGI Layoffs 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I direct this question with some temerity to the minister in 
charge of SGI, and expect an answer, I don’t know from whom. The question is this. As I understand the 
minister’s position, he indicates that a number of the persons, and a large number of the persons who 
were laid off, were persons who were employed with respect to SGI’s plans to expand. Would the 
minister give an indication of which classes of employees (and I have a list, and he has the list) which 
have been laid off were ones associated with the proposals to expand? Was it perhaps the adjuster 1 in 
the claims department; or the safety staff; or the licence staff in Swift Current; or was it the commercial 
artist; or which ones were working on these plans that he says involve dozens of people? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, in response to that member’s question, I believe what he’s 
doing is taking out of context some answers I may have given. I believe what I did say — and he can put 
it in whatever words he wishes to himself — was that we were reducing the complement of staff in total, 
and that the reduction was as a result of the halting of expansionary plans that had been contemplated by 
the previous government. We have taken those plans and we have removed them. We’ve halted them. 
We’ve said that we will not go into the life insurance business, we will not expand our corporation into 
the province of Alberta in the general insurance field, as you had planned on doing. 
 
Oh, don’t frown. If you want the documentation on that, I’ll be happy to provide it for you. We would 
not expand and buy out some body shops in the province of Saskatchewan but we would direct our 
attention to the service that the people of Saskatchewan are entitled to from SGI as was originally 
established, or the reason why it was originally established. 
 
We have then reduced the number of people, Mr. Speaker, to what best can provide the 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2467 

service. We’ve increased that number from what it was in 1978 before they got into grandiose schemes 
for expanding SGI. We still have about a hundred people more today than they had then, when they 
decided to go from the 1,200 and some people that they had at that time to over 1,600 in their last budget 
to take care of all these plans that they had in mind. We’ve removed them. We are not going into that 
now. We’ve levelled off to a number that we feel will be able to provide the service the people of 
Saskatchewan are entitled to, that they forgot to give when they were in government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I really did not get the answer to the question I asked: which 
employees were involved in these alleged expenses? I’ll try another question to the minister in charge of 
SGI: did your staff consult with any of the city officials of Weyburn or Estevan or Swift Current or 
North Battleford before deciding to close down the licence issuing offices of SGI in those cities? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — No, Mr. Speaker, we did not. I don’t believe that any government crown 
corporation, who made business plans, would discuss these plans with other officials or cities. 
 
I don’t want the impression left here by the Leader of the Opposition that by closing down these offices 
we are in fact eliminating a service. In fact, Mr. Speaker, what we are doing is improving on that 
service. The cost of handling those offices in those four communities, that we removed, was higher than 
what we were bringing in. That’s one of the reasons for the kinds of operations and losses that that 
opposition, when they were in government, were experiencing in SGI. The service that we will be 
providing under agents by appointing issuers that are already agents will provide better service than was 
being given before because they won’t have to go to two places; they can go to one — one-place 
shopping. 
 
As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, under their own administration, most agents in the province of 
Saskatchewan were also issuers. There is nothing different about what we are doing today than what 
they did then. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I thought I was in trouble before but I can see that it’s even worse when 
the ministers, other than the Attorney General, do answer. 
 
I’ll direct this question to the Attorney General as, in his own description, acting acting assistant House 
Leader. Would he advise the House whether or not it is now the policy of this government that when a 
crown corporation, let us say Sask Power, closes a district operator’s office in a community, or when 
Sask Tel closes out an exchange in a community, there is no consultation with any of the local 
authorities because, as the minister in charge of SGI indicates, it is a business decision which requires no 
consultation? Is that the policy of your government, sir? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Well, the government doesn’t have a definitive policy on whether there need be 
consultation at all times. I would suspect that in the interests of an efficient operation of crown 
corporations — and I think that’s an objective of all members — that is primarily a management 
decision. Should there be a major impact on communities, I’m sure that crown corporation management, 
in their wisdom, would in fact consult. Whether this is a major impact . . . I would suspect, Mr. Speaker, 
that in 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2468 

fact there may be a positive impact in the communities as a result of the decision, given the fact that 
existing agents will have some increased workload and benefits as a result. And I would be very 
doubtful if this is the type of decision that management would necessarily take, but certainly, if there’s 
one — and I don’t know where you draw the line — where it has a major impact on a community, I’m 
sure that any crown corporation management would, in fact, sit down and talk to them. 
 

SGI Rates 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — A question to the minister in charge of SGI. By way of background, let me 
say that in the minds of many, the Premier’s statement on Friday created more smoke than light. I would 
ask the minister for a comment on that if we might. It appears that the government has decided to delay 
the implementation of the higher deductible. Will you confirm that is because you now realize that you 
have no right to increase the deductible without referring it to PURC? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Most definitely not, Mr. Speaker. I reiterate the position, and the Premier 
did not contradict a statement that I made. He has put a freeze on it to allow the people of Saskatchewan 
the opportunity . . . In my mind, if you’re asking me what I say the rule or regulation is, I say, absolutely 
not. And I make that very clear: the deductible is not a decision for the public utilities review 
commission. However, as the Premier has said, and I confirm and concur, because it is a gray area in 
perhaps your mind that it is not necessarily perhaps a gray area in the minds of some people, and that it 
is only fair that we say to the people of Saskatchewan, “we gave you an opportunity to have some input 
into it.” In my mind there is no doubt that that is not an area. It is nothing to do with the rate. It is not a 
rate. The public utilities are there to establish and decide all rate increases or rates as such, and the 
deductible is not a rate. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. Trying to find out what is in the minister’s 
mind is far too challenging a proposition for me. I had hoped that what I might get from the minister was 
a concise statement of the government’s position. Is it the government’s position, as distinct from yours 
and the Premier’s and Mr. Black’s, is it the government’s position that the deductibles have to be 
referred to PURC when they are going to be increased? Is that the government’s position? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — No, it is not the government’s position. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Why not? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I could turn it around and say why should it be? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, Mr. Speaker, perhaps I’d better start with a new question. The 
supplementaries don’t seem to be elucidating the matter very much. By way of background to the new 
question, let me say that you said in the House that they did not have to be referred. The Premier said in 
a scrum outside the House that it was a gray area. Your general manager seems to yet have a third 
position. Can you give us any assistance in which of these three positions we ought to choose? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, all three of us are of the same mind on it, the president, the 
Premier, and myself. In submitting the package to the public utilities review commission, it is part of the 
package as to why we want an increase that has a direct effect on what that increase should be, but they 
do not decide on what the deductible will be, and that seems to be very difficult to get through your 
head. But it’s 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2469 

very simple. It may have a bearing on what the rate is going to be, but the fact that it’s there is our 
decision — not theirs. And that is very precise in the mind of the Premier, and the mind of the president, 
and in mind, and the rest of this government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question, Mr. Speaker. If the public utilities review commission does 
not determine the deductible, then my question to the minister is: what purpose will the 90-day freeze 
serve if you are going to continue to disembowel PURC? Is it fair to assume that the only purpose of the 
90-day freeze is to get your government off the hot seat until the end of the next session on July 1? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Not at all, Mr. Speaker. They themselves asked for some time on it. The 
people of Saskatchewan want some time on it. The public utilities review commission would like some 
time on it. They may have a different idea than what we have. I’m saying to you what’s in the act; I’m 
saying to you what is in the mind of the government — that we make the decision on what the 
deductible will be. No one else will make that decision. If they want to challenge an act or if they want 
to come in with a different reply to what we are saying, let them do so. We’ll argue it at that time, 
though we know they may turn around and say to us. “Because of that, we’ll reduce your rate.” It’s the 
rate that’s important. That’s what the people of Saskatchewan want to know — what they are going to 
pay for what they are going to get. That’s why we’re going to the public utilities review commission. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Since you are eliciting views from various 
segments of the Saskatchewan public, do I take it that you are reconsidering the error of your ways and 
are prepared to reconsider the decision itself? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I am absolutely amazed at the position the 
opposition has taken with regard to the public utilities review commission. All of a sudden, Mr. Speaker, 
there is a very important commission out there, one that for four years, while I was in the opposition, 
they fought against having. They said, “We don’t need a public utilities review commission in this 
province.” Now we have one; now they want to know exactly . . . They think it’s very important and it 
must be dealt with for public protection. But they didn’t think that way for the last four years. Four years 
in a row there was a motion put into this Assembly for a public utilities review commission and you 
ignored it every time. Now we have one, and now we’ll let it work, and we’ll give them the opportunity 
to let it work. We will give the 90-day delay if we have to, to give them that opportunity. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

Cruise Missile Testing 
 
MR. YEW: — Mr. Speaker, my question is directed to the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs. What 
is the position of the Government of Saskatchewan with respect to the testing of the American cruise 
missile over northwestern Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Well, Mr. Speaker, similar to the position of the former government, we have 
deep concerns about the cruise testing. Certainly, we acknowledge, as did the previous government, that 
the matter of national defence is purely within federal 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2470 

jurisdiction and supersedes, I suggest, most areas of provincial jurisdiction. It’s a matter purely to be 
determined by the federal government. 
 
Secondly, the federal government has made it clear to us that it is going to honor what it believes its 
commitments under NATO, and have made that quite clear to the provincial government. 
 
I would like to remind all hon. members with regard to the cruise testing within the province of 
Saskatchewan, that it was a predecessor to the members opposite, a CCF government, that made the 
agreement with the federal government to establish the testing range which got us into this mess in the 
first place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I say, we share the concern of, I believe, most people of Saskatchewan with regard to 
cruise testing. We share the concern of most people in Saskatchewan with the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons, so it’s not limited to just the cruise missile testing, but the federal government has made it 
clear to this government and other governments that it’s a matter of national defence and its obligations 
under NATO, and it’s intending to take its action. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Education Week 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Speaker, at this time I wish to take a moment to remind the members of 
the legislature that this is Education Week in our province, extending from March 6 to March 12. The 
them of this year’s observance is “Teachers Helping People.” 1983 is the 50th anniversary of the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. The theme “Teachers Helping People” is therefore very 
appropriate. It is the way of saying thank you to Saskatchewan teachers, past and present, for the 
invaluable contribution which they have made to the province and to the local communities. 
 
I think it is most fitting that our observance of Education Week this year be a recognition of the role that 
teachers have played in building Saskatchewan. Throughout the province, in each community, this week 
is being observed by a variety of school activities to help reinforce the tie between the school and the 
community, and the significant role which the teacher plays in that relationship. 
 
I would like to publicly, on behalf of this legislature, pay tribute to the teachers and their association for 
the abundant contribution which they have made to the educational system of this province. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the Minister of Education to extend to the teachers 
of this province, as we honor them this week, our congratulations and our appreciation for the 
contribution that they have made to the development of our young people in carrying forward a high 
standard of education throughout the province. So all members join with you, Mr. Minister, in 
celebrating Education Week, the theme, the teachers of this province. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2471 

Telemiracle 1983 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to take a moment, if I might, to say, on 
behalf of the government and on behalf of this legislature, congratulations to the Kinsmen clubs of this 
province and to all the organizers of Telemiracle, who, as you are aware, yesterday raised over $2 
million for the many worth-while and outstanding projects that the Kinsmen’s foundation carries on in 
this province. 
 
I think it would be appropriate, as well, to congratulate and say thank you to the public of Saskatchewan. 
Once again, their generosity and their concern has been well-exemplified. On behalf of the government, 
we would say thank you very much. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I too, would like to put on record our congratulations to the 
Kinsmen Foundation of Saskatchewan, who have done an excellent job over the last number of years (I 
believe seven), in raising a large amount of money which will go toward assisting the handicapped in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I think as well it is in order to congratulate the many people who worked on the telephones for 21 hours 
and the many people who contributed behind the scenes, as well as giving a great deal of money (well 
over $2 million) to a very worth-while cause. 
 
I think it is also well to remember on this day that we, as legislators, now have a role to back up this 
kind of work and effort, through accessibility legislation to badly needed rehab centres, as well as the 
funding of non-governmental groups who very much carry out the needs of the handicapped people in 
the province. 
 
So I would like to join, as well, other members of the Assembly, in congratulating the Kinsmen, as well 
as everyone who took part in Telemiracle 1983. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 63 — An Act to amend The Family Farm Improvement Act 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I beg to inform the Assembly that His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor, having 
been informed of the subject matter of the bill, recommends it to the consideration of the Assembly. I 
move that a bill to amend The Family Farm Improvement Act be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 64 — An Act to amend The Department of Agriculture Act 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I beg to inform the Assembly that His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor, having 
been informed of the subject matter of the bill, recommends it to the consideration of the Assembly. I 
move that a bill to amend The Department of Agriculture Act be now introduced and read the first time. 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2472 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 65 — An Act to amend The Public Works Act 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I beg to inform the Assembly that His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor, having 
been informed of the subject matter of the bill, recommends it to the consideration of the Assembly. I 
move that a bill to amend The Public Works Act be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 66 — An Act to amend The Department of Continuing Education Act 
 

HON. MR. LANE: — I beg to inform the Assembly that His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor, having 
been informed of the subject matter of the bill, recommends it to the consideration of the Assembly. I 
move that a bill to amend The Department of Continuing Education Act be now introduced and read the 
first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 67 — An Act to amend The Education Act 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I beg to inform the Assembly that His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor, having 
been informed of the subject matter of the bill, recommends it to the consideration of the Assembly. I 
move that a bill to amend The Education Act be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

URBAN AFFAIRS 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 24 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I direct a question to the minister 
respecting a rail line relocation in Regina, and the minister will be aware of some major proposals for 
rail line relocation in Regina, and more particularly the location of a rail yard in northeastern Regina. He 
will be aware of the proposals which are extant to have that new rail yard, at least in their opinion and in 
mine, comparatively close to the Uplands subdivision of Regina. He will, I expect, be aware of 
representations which have been made by the MP for the area, Mr. Simon de Jong, the MP for Regina 
East, to the Hon. Mr. Pepin, asking that the location of that yard be reconsidered. The current location 
has a distance of approximately 2,600 feet from the closest homes in the Uplands subdivision as it now 
exists. 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2473 

My question to the minister is whether or not this situation has been called to his attention, and whether 
or not he or his colleagues in government are making any representations to the Minister of Transport of 
Canada with respect to the location of the rail lines and yard. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, as I’m sure that the Leader of the Opposition is aware, 
the working authority that is making the plans for rail relocation is primarily an extension of city 
council. We are involved, as was their administration, at this time merely in the funding of the project. 
However, I would indicate to him that this evening on city council’s agenda, this item will be discussed, 
due in large part to the efforts of the MLA for the region. There is a proposal before the council tonight 
to move the general corridor 800 yards further north because of the geometry of the proposal — the 
yards themselves, the line, 800 feet north because of the geometry of it. The yards will then end up being 
approximately 400 feet further away from the Uplands homes, as is now the case in the present proposal. 
I think that the people in Uplands appear to be much more satisfied with this and, as I indicated in the 
beginning, it is a decision that the city council will deal with this evening. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I understand that a petition signed by 
some 2,400 residents of the Uplands subdivision and in effect sponsored and gathered by the Uplands 
Community Association has been prepared, has been provided to the member of parliament for the area. 
My question is whether or not his government has been provided with a copy of the petition. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, we do not have a copy of the petition. We are aware of 
the petition that is directed to the city of Regina by the citizens’ group in the city of Regina. We 
certainly are aware of it, are taking it into consideration, but of course the ultimate decision on location 
will be taken to the CTC by the city of Regina, and really the decision rests there, although, as I 
indicated, the MLA for the region has been very active in attempting to bring about some positive 
changes for the betterment of the situation for the people in northern Regina. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I have no doubt that the MLA has been 
active. I am aware of the MP being active a month ago. And I think we need all the assistance we can 
get from all levels of government. 
 
My question to the minister is now a different question. It concerns the earlier indications of 
amendments to The Planning and Development Act. In about November or December 1, it was 
announced that a review of The Planning and Development Act was then under way. I am asking the 
minister when he believes that changes to The Planning and Development Act will be forthcoming. Is it 
likely that they will be forthcoming at the upcoming session of the legislature, that is before the end of 
May, or is it likely a much longer study and review that is proposed? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — In keeping with this government’s practice, Mr. Chairman, we have 
undertaken a very extensive public consultation process in which we have had input from — at least an 
opportunity for input — and in fact in put from many of the urban and rural municipalities, many 
interest groups, as well as the general public. In spite of that, we are quite confident that we will be able 
to introduce that new piece of legislation in the spring session. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Would the minister give a very brief statement on the nature of the 
consultations, more particularly, from how many cities and towns has he received 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2474 

representations as to the content of The Planning and Development Act, and from what other types of 
organizations has he received representations? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, to this stage we have received well over 100 written 
submissions in total. I don’t have them broken down by urban versus rural, but they have come from 
cities, towns, villages, rural municipalities, SUMA and SARM, from various developmental interests 
like architects, engineers, from HUDAC, from organizations such as Meewasin, and from the general 
public. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Is the minister able to give us any general statement on the philosophy 
which is being incorporated in the new legislation? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — The basic intent of the new legislation is to streamline and simplify 
what had grown into, I think, a rather complex piece of legislation. There are efforts primarily to make it 
more understandable, more readable. I guess streamlined is the best word I could offer. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I would like to direct a few questions to 
the minister concerning water supply in Regina, and I believe some of these have already been directed 
by one of my colleagues. I don’t think I need to remind hon. members that there are some problems with 
respect to the quality and quantity of water supply in southern Saskatchewan. The members opposite 
will be aware of the initiatives taken by the government to appoint a committee, the Muirhead 
committee, and the fairly lengthy report that was produced by the Muirhead committee has been 
considered by the government. As I understand the nature of the government’s position, they have 
reached the conclusion that a large pipeline from Lake Diefenbaker to the eastern end of Buffalo Pound 
Lake, there to connect with the pumping stations and the existing lines from Buffalo Pound Lake to 
Regina and Moose Jaw, is the best way to deal with the situation as it affects the cities of Moose Jaw 
and Regina. 
 
My first question is whether or not it is thought by the department that other smaller communities in this 
general area are in need of a source of water, because of quality or quantity supplies. Are there any other 
communities whose needs need to be addressed at this time in this general area? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — You are referring to the area directly around Regina and Moose Jaw. 
In the series of hearings we just completed, there were a couple of representations made from smaller 
communities in this immediate area. They indicated that they do not have any immediate needs. They 
indicated that they would like to be considered, however, for some type of arrangement such as is the 
situation around Saskatoon, where smaller urbans draw their water off the pipeline directly connected to 
the city supply. They indicated, however, that until there was a better source of water in Regina, they 
weren’t too interested in being hooked into the system. I guess the bottom line is that there is no 
immediate need, but they see a need in the future if the water is corrected. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Minister, from time to time we hear stories that possibly White City, 
possibly Balgonie, possibly Pilot Butte, possibly other communities may be looking to this pipeline 
system as an ultimate source of water. I ask the minister whether or not there has been any consideration 
of the water needs of the Kalium Chemicals Ltd. at Belle Plain, and whether they are thought to be 
adequately addressed for the foreseeable future, or whether or not this pipeline would be thought to be of 
any value 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2475 

to them, if it were built. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, the Kalium potash mine presently does have a supply 
of water that they say is very adequate. They require their water from shallow wells. It was noted in the 
Muirhead report, however, that that might in the future be a potential user of water off the pipeline, but 
at this time there has been no request by Kalium. It has simply been noted. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, have the possible needs of a heavy oil 
upgrader in the general Moose Jaw area been considered in any way in addressing the question of water 
supply from Lake Diefenbaker to the Regina-Moose Jaw areas? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — I think the answer to that specific question would be no. In general 
though, the inference seems to be that there could be future needs in terms of industrial development in 
this area for large amounts of water. The point has been made that that type of development is being 
prevented, or at least inhibited, by a lack of quantity and quality of water. That fact has been considered 
in the report, and of course has been considered by the downstream users. One of the things that became 
obvious throughout our two weeks, has been obvious prior to . . . (inaudible) . . . was that total 
considerations of major diversions have to be dealt with prior to those types of diversions taking place. I 
don’t believe that the pipeline would be classed as a major diversion. The downstream users don’t have 
a whole lot of problems with that solution, and in fact it would probably serve the foreseen industrial 
uses probably into the turn of the century. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, we have in the Saskatoon area a 
somewhat analogous situation where a number of communities, a number of potash mines, and a 
number of other industrial ventures are served by a ditch and pipeline system operated by the 
Saskatchewan Water Supply Board. That, it seems to me, is a very sensible approach when you are 
going to have two, three, four or five possible users of a pipeline and ditch system. I am asking the 
minister whether or not the approach of the Saskatchewan Water Supply Board becoming a supplier in 
the Regina area in the way it is in the general Saskatoon area, has been considered by the government. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — As far as a possible solution to the specific problem, I suppose it’s 
been a consideration. I think we’re looking at it in broader terms, attempting to study the problem across 
the province to determine if that type of an approach is in fact a good approach. It will be probably one 
of the options that will develop out of our recent series of hearings. It will probably be a month to six 
weeks before we get to the stage of studying those on a provincial basis. 
 
It’s interesting to hear the former premier, the Leader of the Opposition, discuss the merits of the 
Saskatchewan Water Supply Board as a solution to the problem. I suppose I might ask why, in a dozen 
years, you didn’t attempt to implement it in this region. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I don’t want to get into a debate with 
the minister. The obvious answer is that each year brings its own challenges. The Saskatchewan Water 
Supply Board has been significantly expanded in the last several years in the Saskatoon area where the 
needs were greater because that’s where the industrial development was taking place, in the potash 
mines in that area. Certainly, there has been a need in this area. As Regina has grown very 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2476 

substantially over the last 10 years, the need to address the problems of Regina, of course, increases and 
I hope that that will continue. 
 
I don’t know whether all growth in Regina and Saskatoon is likely to stop, but I would be surprised if 
that were the case. Even though the short-term picture is bleak, presumably there can be changes in the 
future where there might be jobs and there might be economic activity. So I would anticipate that we 
would continue to progress as we have in the past. I address the minister on what solution he thinks is 
the best one for providing the water which Regina and Moose Jaw need, and the other communities 
presumably will need in the foreseeable future, and accordingly, whose needs ought to be built into the 
solution which is propounded by the government. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — I suppose, Mr. Chairman, the government has gone on record as 
favoring the pipeline from Lake Diefenbaker to solve the water concerns, the water problems of Regina 
and Moose Jaw. One of the reasons, again, of the series of hearings we had is to attempt to come up with 
some solutions or some understanding of the problems that will exist, in the member’s words “in the 
foreseeable future.” I don’t really see any need in the, maybe I’d use the term immediate future, to be 
too concerned about the smaller centres around. As those things arise, the hope we would have is that we 
would have a better idea than has been the case to date on what those needs will be, and be in a better 
position to meet those needs as they arise rather than reacting to them after they become critical, as has 
too often been the case in the past. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I am uncertain as to your financial offer 
which your government has made to the cities of Regina and Moose Jaw. In particular, I ask the minister 
whether or not there has been an unconditional offer of $10 million, or whether the offer is conditional 
upon the city putting in $10 million out of moneys other than debenture moneys, and whether it is 
conditional upon the federal government putting in any sum of money. A number of the stories that I 
have read in the press seem to postulate the provincial government putting in $10 million, the cities 
putting in $10 million, the federal government putting in $20 million, and the balance being borrowed 
and paid for by rates paid by the water users. 
 
What I wasn’t clear on is whether those were conditions that your government was imposing or not and 
whether there was a straight offer of $10 million so that the cities could decide, if possible, that they 
would take the $10 million and raise the remaining 90 by means of debentures, and that would be 
satisfactory with your government. 
 
I would appreciate a clarification of that for my benefit. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — The concept of the offer we made to the two cities is that there is a 
conditional aspect, in that they will put in $10 million up front, the same as we will. I wouldn’t say that 
the federal portion is conditional. We would certainly accept more than what we suggested. If it would 
help I could send you a copy of the letter that we sent to the two mayors and it would help to clarify the 
situation. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I would appreciate that, and would like 
to get a copy of the letter. 
 
My question now to the minister is this: in view of the fact that this project is likely to cost in excess of 
$100 million, and in view of the fact of contributions by the Government of Saskatchewan to some other 
urban communities — and I instance particularly Lloydminster where a contribution in excess of $10 
million was made for 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2477 

under 5,000 people in Saskatchewan residents — does the minister feel that a contribution of $10 
million for close to 200,000 residents is in any way commensurate with the grants which have been 
offered and made in the past short number of years to a good number of other urban communities in this 
province? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — As you indicated, you weren’t in the House on Friday, and we dealt 
with this in some detail at that time. However, to reiterate, the grant that we are projecting is not 10 
million. We are offering an interest subsidy which will take the total as high as $40 million, depending 
on the interest rate at the time that the bargain is struck. We feel it is a very substantial offer, possibly a 
little different concept than has been tried previously, but something that the cities, despite their public 
stance, have indicated some interest in. 
 
In terms of comparing municipal waterworks on the basis of per capita, it has been clearly indicated to 
us that the people of this province don’t accept that as a rational approach. Capital work costs the same, 
or very close to the same, whether it’s going to serve a small or large population. Per capita funding, 
they indicated to us, and I believe they had a good point, was not a very rational approach to funding 
municipal water and sewer requirements. 
 
In terms of Lloydminster, as was indicated, it’s governed under a different act. It is cost-shared with 
Alberta. There are a whole number of factors that can be brought into that discussion, as well as the per 
capita costs, and I don’t think they are really relevant to the whole issue. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I note that you are saying that the 
contribution of the Government of Saskatchewan might be as high as $40 million. 
 
In the circumstances which you postulate the contribution of the government might be as high as $40 
million. What would be the contribution of the cities in that particular formulation? Thus, if everybody 
paid cash, the government puts in $10 million, and the cities and the taxpayers put in $90 million. That’s 
what you are suggesting. You are saying, “But the government is also going to give guarantees of 
interest.” If the government gave a guarantee of interest which would run the government contribution to 
$40 million, how much would the civic contributions be in that case? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — If I understand the member’s question, the cash contribution would 
not change, obviously. The indication he has given of 90 million is certainly not what we are proposing. 
But that’s not a factor. What we have guaranteed is a situation where the cities could make some definite 
plans. The interest rate on the debentures would be capped for the first five years at 8 per cent and 12 for 
the second five. And if there is an increase in interest rates, or they go higher, and when that deal is 
struck, it would be the province that would be forced to pay the extra interest on the loan. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I heard those comments by 
representatives of the government and I tried to figure out under what circumstances that $35 million or 
$40 million could be operative. And either interest rates are thought to be likely to be very high indeed, 
or alternatively the bonds are thought to be probably 25-year bonds. And I thought that a very likely and 
credible thing: that you are talking about 14 per cent interest over 25 years. That will produce a 
provincial contribution of something like you are talking about. But it will also produce a civic 
contribution of (my rough recollection is) about $250 million. And that’s a very large sum of money to 
ask the taxpayers and the water users to undertake. 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2478 

I think that we ought to be aware of the fact that when we are talking about provincial contributions of 
$35 million or $40 million, as I hear from time to time, we are talking about those standing beside 
municipal contributions of well over $200 million. Now those are very, very impressive figures. 
Alongside that, the provincial contribution doesn’t look very handsome. 
 
I am surprised, Mr. Minister, that the best your government can do, at least on an up-front cash basis, is 
10 per cent of the value of the project. That is infinitely less, for example, than the amount provided for, 
let’s say, building a bridge across the river in Saskatoon. The sort of up-front money put up by the 
province is a good deal more than 10 per cent; indeed, it’s a great deal more than that. 
 
I know that there is no direct comparison. Some cities are on rivers and therefore don’t need much help 
with water supplies, but need some help with bridges. And some cities aren’t on rivers and therefore 
don’t need much help with bridges, but need some help with water supplies. I’m curious to know why a 
formula which might have some comparability would not be arrived at. Admittedly, the size of the 
projects is less. I guess the bridge is only $20 million or thereabouts all in; the water supply project is a 
good deal more than that, but involving two cities. Does the government feel that its offer of a an 
$10-million cash contribution, up front, is enough in all the circumstances, having a regard to the fact 
that the project will cost more than $100 million? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — As I indicated on Friday, we feel that the funding scenario that we’ve 
projected is fair. It is a suggestion, a starting point. We’re certainly, as we’ve indicated, prepared to react 
to suggestions or offers from the two cities, which we are patiently awaiting. I think in terms of 
comparing this project with some other project, or that other project, it might be more interesting to note 
that our offer is, in your own terms, infinitely more than anything your government offered. So maybe 
that’s a more relevant comparison than the one you chose to make. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I remind the minister again of offers 
made by previous governments to other cities, let us say, Lloydminster — more than $10 million to 
Lloydminster — and your government can’t even find as much as was offered to Lloydminster. You 
can’t find that for Regina and Saskatoon. And that’s a hard fact. No amount of attempting to dodge will 
in any way change that. The facts are that with respect to the area around Saskatoon, the capital cost was 
put up entirely by the Government of Saskatchewan, much of it by the previous Liberal government, 
much of it by the NDP government, which built the water supply system. And I am suggesting to you 
that that is an appropriate model when you are needing to provide water certainly for two communities 
— certainly two communities, and for other communities in all likelihood. 
 
It’s useful to note that with the water supply board system, many communities have been added which 
weren’t thought to be clients of the water supply board when the system started. That’s certainly true 
with respect to the communities north and west of the Saskatchewan River, and yet they have become 
clients of the water supply board, because those communities, the Martensvilles, needed it, and others 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now look, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Let’s have some order. The member is asking a question. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I will direct some questions to the 
minister who obviously, at least in the opinion of the member for Regina South, is doing badly, since 
otherwise he wouldn’t be interrupting so egregiously. I want now to ask the minister again: does he not 
think that a solution along the lines of the water 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2479 

supply board’s solution, which operates extensively north and east of the Gardiner Dam, is a good 
solution and might equally be applied to communities which are south and east of the Qu’Appelle Dam? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — There is no question that it might be a good solution, and it might 
work adequately, and it is something that we will certainly consider. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I want to raise a couple of other questions 
with the minister, and they concern the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, and their views 
with respect to the property tax as a preserve of municipal governments as opposed to school boards. 
You will be aware of the resolutions passed by SUMA on this issue, essentially saying that in their 
judgment no health services or no education services should be financed by property taxes, and I’m 
summarizing, but I think summarizing fairly. I ask the minister whether or not he shares that view of the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, or whether his government has a different view. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, I think it would be safe to say that I do not favor the 
absolute aspect of the resolutions that SUMA has put forward. I think that the government doesn’t favor 
it. You could find resolutions to the opposite point of view from SSTA, as I’m sure you are aware. What 
we feel has happened in recent years is that the provincial share of funding in education has gone down. 
 
We feel that SUMA has a point in terms of the method in which property taxes are applied. We are 
sitting down with SUMA over the course of this next year, looking at the whole area of provincial and 
municipal funding, trying to find some equitable, fair, and hopefully more meaningful methods of 
providing their needs. But the feeling of the government, my own feeling, is that some portion of 
property tax should continue to go toward the funding of education. Of course, the argument is local 
autonomy, which I think we are all in favor of. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — One question, Mr. Minister. Does the consideration which you are doing 
with respect to SUMA involve an elimination of the system of grants developed over the last number of 
years: to home-owners, called the property improvement grant: to renters, called the renters rebate: and 
the senior citizens grant program, the senior citizens property tax grant program? Does your 
consideration involve an elimination or a reduction of those, or are those programs part of the policy of 
your government? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — I think since we are discussing the budgetary expenditures for the 
’82-83 it’s obvious where we came on that one. We maintained our level of funding for the property 
owners as well as introducing our mortgage plan, which everybody is aware of. We increased above the 
March indications for the senior citizens and for the renters. In terms of our discussions with SUMA we 
will be prepared, as we’ve indicated to them, to discuss any area of municipal funding. That has been 
their request; that has been our response. It is the policy of this government at this time to maintain the 
property improvement grants, if I can throw the three programs into one title. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I just have a few questions, Mr. Minister. Picking up on the second last 
question, with respect to the removal of the costs of education from property tax, do I take it that the 
minister acknowledges the logic of SUMA’s position but denies its practicality? 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2480 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — No, I don’t think that would be a fair statement. I’m simply saying 
that in order to maintain a level of local autonomy, which the trustees’ association, most of the school 
boards, and an awful lot of the citizens of the province, agree is an essential, it’s necessary to have some 
local source to draw funds. At the present time it’s the property tax, and that’s all I’m saying. 
 
I think that there is a need to possibly look at the percentage of funding, to discuss the whole mechanism 
of the thing — the fact that the school boards make their demands and then the municipalities have to 
work within those, and tack their mill rates on top, and so on. There are some decisions that have to be 
made, some studies that have to be done, but I don’t think that your statement was accurate. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — What I hear the municipalities saying, among other things, is that it is an 
inequitable way to raise money for schools. It is based upon no particular logic — neither the ability to 
pay, nor any sort of a user-pay logic. Its sole recommendation is that it is fairly simple to administer. 
Would you acknowledge that the practice of paying education costs on property taxes is based upon 
neither the ability to pay, nor any kind of a user-pay logic? It’s simply grown up over the years because 
it was a relatively simple thing to administer. 
 
I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that it would be far fairer to base the costs of education either upon those 
who use them, acknowledging that might be difficult because it is of general benefit to everyone to have 
a well-educationed society, or perhaps, more appropriately, on some kind of an ability to pay. So I’d ask 
you to respond to what I hear the municipalities saying in part about the education tax. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — I suppose in answer, Mr. Chairman, we have indicated that we are 
prepared to look at it and determine whether in fact it is the best way. Contrary to the statement that you 
made, there is an element of equity in the system. Maybe it’s not the most equitable, but there’s an 
element in that assessment of the property and the property owner obviously would indicate an ability to 
pay. The grant system that is in place has an element of equity, based on income tax and so forth, and a 
large portion of funding comes from there. 
 
I think the vocal member of SUMA’s executive on this issue over the last number of years has obviously 
been the president, Mayor Brady from Carlyle. I believe if you hold a conversation with Mr. Brady, he 
will indicate that his primary purpose in introducing his resolutions is to get discussion, to try to find 
answers. We’re certainly prepared to approach that. We’re obviously not going to do it here. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well I say, Mr. Minister, it deserves no particular response, but I disagree 
with those who believe that local autonomy will disappear if there is not a very large element of local 
funding. I’d remind the minister that in the first part of this century almost all the costs of school were 
paid through property tax, and the Department of Education played a much larger role, a much more 
paternalistic role in education than it does now. Now we have a system whereby the department pays a 
fairly hefty percentage of the cost of education and has a much smaller role in the schools. So I suggest 
that if history teaches us anything, it may be that there is not a lot of connection between our property 
taxes and local autonomy. 
 
I want, Mr. Minister, to ask you about the transit grants. As I understand the situation, 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2481 

the municipalities were promised a level of funding in the budget which was read in March but never 
passed. I will refrain from commenting on the misapprehensions that resulted in such an unfortunate 
chain of circumstances. However, there was some concern expressed by the municipalities when the 
transit grants, in particular, which were promised in the March budget were not in fact forthcoming. I 
have a number of articles here from the Sifton paper. I’m sure that I don’t need to read them to you. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what rationale led to the decision to cut back on the amount of funding 
which the municipalities had come to expect for transit. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, prior to answering the question, possibly I could 
comment briefly on the preamble. The member opposite indicated that he disagreed with the position 
that local autonomy would be lost if, in fact, property taxes were taken off the educational aspect. It is 
interesting to note that you are disagreeing with the policy of your government for the past 11 years, 
which is certainly interesting. 
 
The other point: if I want opinions on whether or not we are affecting local autonomy, I might ask the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees’ Association rather than the member opposite. 
 
Anyway, in answering your question, the specifics of what you are asking, in March, the election 
platform, that was presented in this House and never passed as you indicated, proposed to raise the per 
capita grants to the cities for transit to $5 from $3. We had our own platform when we became 
government; we set about to institute the planks of that platform. I believe the people of the province are 
quite satisfied with our performance to date in that respect. We indicated to the municipalities that we 
would do everything we could to maintain the things that had been promised, that had led to budgeting. 
And we, in fact, met the promises in terms of revenue sharing and so on and so forth. This one we chose 
not to. We simply could not meet all the requests. We did not reduce it; we left it at the level that it had 
been at the year before. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, let me say by way of background that the minister is not noted for his 
arrogance as some of your colleagues are and, therefore, I find your comment, that our views are of little 
merit, somewhat peculiar and out of character. I’m surprised that an elected official who at least has a 
party with the same name as John Diefenbaker would not understand that the opposition also have role 
to play in the affairs of the government, and our views I suggest, Mr. Minister, are ones that should be 
listened to as well. I’m not suggesting they are the only views. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to discuss the review of The Planning and Development Act, if I might, for a 
moment. 
 
Planning and development has long been a source of tension between the developers on one hand, and 
the planners on the other, if I may categorize the urban people involved in urban planning as planners. 
It’s often been a tension between those two groups, the developers wanting less control and more 
freedom to operate, the planners saying, “But no, there are other considerations which we want to 
impose on any development you bring forth.” And this tension exists. 
 
I am sure that your comments, your press release (and I have a copy of it dated December 1, ’82, which 
suggested there be mechanisms to encourage investment and stimulate development in Saskatchewan), I 
am sure it was welcomed by the developers. I’m equally sure that it was greeted by some apprehension 
by planners who may have 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2482 

been afraid that this would mean a diminished role for planners in the affairs of municipal development. 
 
And I’d ask the minister for a comment on whether the minister sees a planning and development act, a 
new planning and development act, weakening or strengthening the role or urban planning in the 
development of municipalities. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, I have to disagree a little bit with the premise upon 
which the question was based: that planners have been concerned that developers have wanted a 
reduction in control. I think what both groups want is a clarification of the rules of the game that they’re 
playing under, and that’s all we propose to do. We don’t intend to remove any of the public input 
process. We hope to shorten up the time process and do some of the approval processes coincidentally, 
rather than stringing them out as has been the case in the past. In essence, the intent of the review and 
the rewrite is to clarify, to streamline, simplify if you will, and at the same time not remove any of the 
controls that are in place — simply make them easier to work within. 
 
I might add that the people who have been doing the review are the planning development from the 
Department of Urban Affairs, plus some people from outside, plus some developers. So we’ve tried to 
put together a group that represents the various components of this thing. It’s our intention to try to get 
these groups operating in a co-operative manner, rather than in an adversary manner, and you are right 
in your first statement that they have been at great conflict. We feel that by cleaning up the legislation, a 
good deal of that conflict can be removed and we can carry on in a co-operative manner that will allow 
us to develop this province in the way it should have been. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, the minister reminds me of the song from Oklahoma, “Why Can’t the 
Cowman and the Farmer be Friends?” They can’t be friends because their interests are diverse. They 
both want the same land for different reasons. 
 
I suggest to the minister that you’re going to have some difficulty getting planners and developers to 
break bread at the same table in the spirit of harmony, because their interests are diverse. Planners want 
to maximize their profit on a given development, and that is the system, and I’m not being critical of 
them for it. The developers want to maximize the profit of any given development. Planners want to 
maximize the public benefit from any given development. That often results in something less than the 
maximization of profit. A simple example is the setting aside of public areas. The developer mustn’t 
make a lot of money when he has got to set aside some area for the public — public reserve, as I think it 
is usually called. 
 
So I suggest to the minister that when you express the wish that these people will break bread in the 
spirit of harmony and the peaceable kingdom will exist in the area of municipal planning, you are 
disregarding the very nature of the relationship. The nature of the relationship is, of necessity, an 
adversarial relationship. They have different interests. I would seek the minister’s assurance that the 
controls exercised by planners to municipal and provincial governments will not be weakened in the 
conclusions that are reached as a result of this review. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, a moment ago the member suggested that he was a 
little disappointed in my new arrogance. I am a little disappointed in your new-found cynicism. I believe 
it is very possible to bring these two groups together. The 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2483 

example that you used of setting aside public reserve land has never been brought to me by a developer. 
There seems to be no problem with that aspect. 
 
I think the key thing that we are trying to get is a balance between those two interests. There is nothing 
wrong with profit in Saskatchewan, and we certainly are interested in maintaining and getting maximum 
public benefits. The two can work together I believe, and we hope that the work we do in cleaning up 
that legislation will in fact lead in that direction. I guess that I just have more faith in the two groups 
than has been expressed opposite. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — That’s a fine line to draw between faith and realism, Mr. Minister. 
 
Those are all of the general policy questions I have to answer. I have a number of standard questions. I 
am quite prepared to accept them in writing, and in some ways I think it is more preferable. I want to 
know the names, positions and salaries of all members of your staff, whether that be in connection with 
. . . I will only ask the question once, and will not repeat it in the culture and youth estimates which are 
coming up this afternoon. What I want are the names, salaries and positions of all members of your 
personal staff. 
 
With respect to your staff, I would appreciate knowing whether or not you have anyone who reports to 
you who is on contract. I would also like to know whether or not the department has retained the 
full-time services of anyone through a contract as distinct from hiring them. If there are, I would 
appreciate knowing the . . . I am not giving you time to copy these down. I am assuming that you can 
use tomorrow’s Hansard if you have to. If the department has any people or is employing the full-time 
services of any person through contract. I would appreciate knowing the terms of the contract, and in 
particular the terms with respect to severance. 
 
I would like to know the amount of entertainment expenses incurred by you, any member of your staff, 
and your deputy, since assuming office on May 8. 
 
I would like to know how many vacant positions there are in the department, and how many of those 
positions are frozen in the sense that they are not being filled for an indefinite period. 
 
We have asked a variety of ministers whether or not any member of their staff has a CVA car. We have 
been told there isn’t, so I assume that’s the case in your office, as well. But as a matter of form, I’ll 
accept the minister’s assurance that there are not. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Just to clarify, my deputy does have a CVA car. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Yes, apart from your deputy. 
 
With respect to the estimates, as well, I’d refer the member to (and particularly his officials who have to 
prepare the information) the estimates given with respect to the budget in March of last year. I would 
ask where the figures in the estimates in the dark blue book, as distinct from the light blue book, where 
the figures in the estimates which you provided under the various subvotes differ from the figures in our 
estimates. I would appreciate an explanation for the reasons and an explanation of the difference. I asked 
the question of the Minister of Consumer Affairs and got the response (which was exactly what I 
wanted) back in about a week or so. I thank the minister for his courteous and prompt response. So if I 
could have all of that, if I could have your 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2484 

commitment to provide that explanation, I would not have any more questions on subvote 1. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, I have the written information for everything except 
the last question. We can provide that very quickly, in a day or two. 
 
MR. YEW: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you might, for my information — pardon my ignorance — 
explain to me the relationship and the status of The Planning and Development Act in relation to Bill 61. 
Bill 61 is in respect to The Northern Municipalities Act which is on the order paper. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Bill 61, as I understand it, proposes, much like The Urban 
Municipality Act, to define the broad powers of municipalities, in this case, the municipalities in the 
North. The Planning and Development Act deals more specifically with planning and development 
areas, and will apply to the communities in the North the same as it does to the communities in the 
South, once they are brought into the two, three years, whenever they complete that transition. I hope 
that’s adequate. 
 
In fact in the process of rewriting it, the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan has sat in on a number of 
the sessions and has provided some very valuable input into the thing. Obviously, it can’t all be applied 
right away, but as they become fullfledged communities, it will apply the same as anyplace else. 
 
MR. YEW: — Does the minister anticipate to have established planning districts in those areas? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — I would say that at this point it’s very uncertain. I would say the 
answer would be no, now, but what will happen in the future remains to be seen. Since we are going into 
’82-83 I don’t see how we could go beyond that. If in fact that becomes a necessity down the road, that’s 
something we would look at. As of today the answer would be no. 
 
MR. YEW: — I raised that point, Mr. Minister, because I have with me just one of the presentations 
that is being contemplated by the communities up north. They are concerned with respect to the 
establishment of district planning committees. They definitely would like to have input in those areas, I 
am sure. 
 
Getting back to The Planning and Development Act in the southern regions, Mr. Minister, have you set 
aside any funds to allow the local municipalities to review the proposals and provide them with funds 
for consultant and legal advice to put forth their recommendations for The Planning and Development 
Act? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — No, Mr. Chairman, we feel the majority of the communities, in fact, 
all have adequate funds to respond. All we are asking for is a response from the councils and so on. We 
haven’t provided any funds; we didn’t feel it was necessary. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I just want to direct a couple of questions to the minister. In respect to the ambulance 
service in the province and the government’s commitment in respect to ambulance service, it is my 
understanding that the government commissioned a committee to review the future of ambulance service 
in the province. What I would like to know, first of all, is whether the report is complete. I will leave it 
at that for the answer. 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2485 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, the government did a great deal more than merely 
commission a report. We injected half-a-million dollars into that program so it could, in fact, exist 
through this year because of the crying need that was out there. 
 
In terms of the report, the Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Health undertook the process. He had 
numerous opportunities for public input; a great many members of the Saskatchewan public took part in 
that. I understand that the report has been prepared. I understand that the Minister of Health has it. It has 
not, at this time, been presented to cabinet. I believe it is complete, if that’s the answer to your question. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Is it the intention, as far as the minister can indicate, to continue the ambulance 
service under his jurisdiction? And I’m wondering since it is under his jurisdiction why he hasn’t been 
receiving the report. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — I think, Mr. Chairman, that it has long been the position of this party, 
both in opposition and now in government, that that program is in fact a health program. Whether or not 
that is the recommendation of the committee that studied it, I’m not sure, but I would say that our 
leanings at least are toward moving that program into health where we feel it belongs. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 40 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 24 agreed to. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND LOANS, ADVANCES AND INVESTMENTS 
 

URBAN AFFAIRS 
 

Vote 62 
 
Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 4 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Could the minister supply us with your total budgeted expenditures on 
Futurescan? I understand this is not to occur this year, but to occur some time in the future. I wonder if 
you could give me either now or in writing the total amount you expect to spend on this as the provincial 
government. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — That is the total amount of money that we’ll be transferring, estimated, 
to Saskatoon. We have in fact presented that. We don’t expect to lose any money. We expect to make 
money on that project; it’ll be returned. 
 
Item 4 agreed to. 
 
Item 5 agreed to. 
 
Vote 62 agreed to. 
 

SASKATCHEWAN HERITAGE FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2486 

RESOURCES DIVISION 
 

URBAN AFFAIRS 
 

Provincial Development Expenditure — Vote 24 
 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 24 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (NO. 3) 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

URBAN AFFAIRS 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 24 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 24 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

URBAN AFFAIRS 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 24 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 24 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 

SASKATCHEWAN HERITAGE FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

RESOURCES DIVISION 
 

URBAN AFFAIRS 
 

Provincial Development Expenditure — Vote 24 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 24 agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to thank my officials for their help, and 
compliment the opposition on the direct line of questioning. We appreciated it. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I’d like to thank the minister and his officials. 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2487 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — I would like to thank the minister and his officials for the co-operative and 
very helpful approach to these estimates. We look forward to picking it up again in the new parliament 
when we have a tad more time to deal with them. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

CULTURE AND RECREATION 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 7 
 
Item 1 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to introduce Mr. Bill Clarke, the deputy 
minister of culture and recreation; Mr. Dick Clarke, the executive director of cultural activity; and Mr. 
Ron Borden, the executive director of central services. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I entered my office just about 10 
minutes ago, and someone had left an article on my desk which says it all, Mr. Minister: “Students want 
jobs, not more excuses.” We went through last summer with a very difficult year for students who tried 
to find employment, without anything that could, in any sense, be described as extraordinary. I’m not 
denying that there may have been a few programs left from the ’60s and ’70s that we had, but I think it’s 
fair to say we had no extraordinary programs to assist students. 
 
The students this year are going to face an even more difficult time of it. I do not envy a student who 
comes out in April and tries to find a job in this market with this government. There are 24 people 
seeking every job opening in Regina, 34 in Saskatoon and 124 in Prince Albert. I expect students are not 
going to get to the top of that list. I would appreciate it, Mr. Minister, if you could tell the Assembly 
where you think we are going with respect to student employment, and what hope we may have to offer 
these students who will graduate? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, as the hon. member is aware, we instituted an 
interdepartmental committee who did a thorough review of the needs in terms of student employment 
for this year. They have submitted a report. The program that will result from that report will be 
announced very early in the next session. The minister’s youth advisory committee has been very 
instrumental in the recommendations they have put forward. While we don’t guarantee that every young 
student who wants a job will get one, we feel that it will probably be the best program that has been 
announced in recent times in this respect. We’re quite confident that we’ll meet a great number of the 
needs of the young people. We are totally aware of the problems. I could make a speech on the fact that 
we’ve created the only province with a positive number of jobs and so on. We’ve all heard that so I’ll let 
it go at that. We know it’s a . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — You know, I think, Mr. Minister, I might appreciate yet one more rendition 
of this speech that we’ve heard so often by the Premier and the Minister of Finance. Your rendition 
might be interesting. It’s like “Snowbird.” It’s always worth while to hear it from one new voice. 
 
It’s a fair point that your program maybe better than any that has been instituted in recent times, because 
this is the first time we have needed it in recent times. Until the Tory deep-freeze settled over this 
province there wasn’t any particular need for such a 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2488 

drastic program. Mr. Minister, I can well appreciate that yours is the best in recent times. 
 
Last summer you studied the program all through the summer. When the students were looking for jobs, 
you were studying it. This summer you say you have some response to it. I hope that the 12 months you 
had will produce something for the students. I can well imagine, as I say, it’s the best that has come in 
some time. I take it from the minister’s comments that we will learn of the program at or around the time 
that your next budget appears. Is that what I understood the minister to say? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — In terms of when the program will be released, I don’t have exact 
details. I imagine possibly the throne speech, possibly later. It will be in place in time, if that’s the 
inference of that word. It won’t be out in time; it will be there in time. If it’s necessary to announce it 
earlier, we’ll do that. I guess that would be the extent of it. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Is the minister prepared to release the study that you received from a 
departmental committee, or is that considered classified? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — No, I don’t think releasing that would accomplish very much at this 
time. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, I want your specific comments on an issue which we discussed 
last summer. Since it wasn’t you who piloted the bill through, it was not possible to get your response, 
but I’d like it. It has to do with the arts board. Heretofore the arts board has been considered a 
non-partisan board. Granted that their appointments were only order in council and could be changed at 
any time, nevertheless three governments changed in this province with all concerned assuming that that 
was sacrosanct and they were not partisan appointments. I am not, and I don’t want the conversation to 
degenerate into the level of my asking you to defend specific names and specific people, but I would 
appreciate a general comment on the arts board itself, and I was disappointed to see that you found it 
necessary to change this board. I think this board is different than some others. This board controls, has 
a direct influence, on the cultural life of the province. In a sense this board has a direct effect on men’s 
and women’s minds and the way people think. I think that is why other governments treated it as 
sacrosanct, and it wasn’t changed on the change of an administration. I wonder, Mr. Minister, why you 
felt it necessary to break with that tradition, which I think was sound and in the best interests of society, 
and reappoint your own people to the board. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there’s a . . . I have problems with the final 
comments of your own people. I am personally not that familiar with any of these people. I might have 
personally known one or two. I would indicate that the chairman of the board is a previous member. 
Two or three other members are returnees, if that’s the proper term. It’s what we use in sport. I don’t 
know if it’s right in the arts board or not. We have put in place a board that we feel is representative of 
the performing arts, that has a certain amount of background from outside the performing arts, which 
was a concern that had been expressed by others, and we feel that we would have no problems justifying 
this board to anyone in the province and in fact we’ve had no complaints about this board. We feel that 
it’s doing an excellent job. We’re totally satisfied and from the comments we get from the community, 
from the artistic community, they appear quite satisfied as well. 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2489 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I think the minister was answering a question which I didn’t ask. I 
specifically refrained from asking you to defend your appointments. What I did ask you to defend, Mr. 
Minister, was the principle involved. 
 
You have, for some reason or other, come to the conclusion that you could not work with the old board. 
In essence you treated the board as partisan and you changed it, and I guess my question is: why were 
you unable to accept the principle that various administrations had worked well with, that that board, as 
distinct from many others, was sacrosanct? 
 
Let me compare it, by way of example, with the board for the Centre of the Arts. I think various 
administrations changed that board, and I don’t think I would have. I went to great lengths to criticize 
you in that regard. That’s been done by other administrations. But I think the arts board was treated as 
different by other administrations, and I would appreciate your comment on the principle, that other 
governments accepts, as treating the arts board as beyond the level of partisan politics. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — I find it a little disturbing to hear the member indicate that the arts 
board is the only board in government that is above partisan politics. I’d like to think we can find a 
couple more if we looked around. 
 
In attempting to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Are you ready? Are you done? In attempting to answer 
the question, I would have to do what you’d determined not to do. You don’t want to force me to defend 
my appointments; I won’t force you to defend the appointments that were made previously. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, is the minister refusing to comment on the principle of a non-partisan 
arts board which is immune from change on the change of administration? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — I’m not refusing to comment on anything. The arts board is an 
arm’s-length organization that is put in place with a specific job to do. We placed a new board; we are 
quite satisfied with that board; we maintained some of the previous members, and that’s the way it is. 
It’s there, and it’s doing an excellent job. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, in your view, was the old board doing a satisfactory job? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — I didn’t operate with the old board. I would find it very difficult to 
make that assessment. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, how could you pretend to change the board until you made an 
assessment as to whether or not their performance was adequate? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — We simply made the changes because we felt that this board would be 
one that we could work with. If you want to get specific, we felt there was a weakness on the other 
board in terms of a feeling for the administration and business field. There were possibly 70 per cent 
practising artists. The recommendation when the board was put in place initially was that it be 
somewhere in the area of a third, maybe a little higher, of practising artists. We have gone back to that 
formula and created a board that takes in a number of practising, or people in the artistic community, 
and yet has some people from the outside, so that we’re not always asking peers to judge their group 
when they’re distributing money. 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2490 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — But surely, Mr. Minister, if you felt the board had a flat side — the business 
community, I guess, is what you’re saying — surely if you felt the board had a flat side, the appropriate 
time to deal with that is when the appointments come up, as they do: virtually every year there are some 
new people appointed. Why not handle your concern in that fashion? I’m by no means admitting the 
legitimacy of that concern. Why not handle your concern in that fashion? Why change the entire board, 
as if the other board was dominated by political wheel-horses in the former administration? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, I believe the process had been to add, to change, two 
or three people over the course of a year. We felt we couldn’t pick up that flat side, if you will, by doing 
that, so we changed a few more. We left some, but, as I indicated, we now are totally satisfied with the 
board. It’s doing an excellent job, and that’s all I can say. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I want to register, Mr. Minister, the strongest disappointment in that 
decision. I think that was one decision you people made which was not in the best interests of the artistic 
community, and I don’t think many people in the artistic community think it was. You may not have had 
many complaints, but I’ll be surprised, Mr. Minister, if you’ve had a lot of people congratulating you 
either, on that move. I think that was a most unfortunate decision. 
 
I want, Mr. Minister, if we may, to get off the area of the arts board and on to the area of Western 
Development Museum. I gathered, from an announcement that was made, that some extensive 
renovations will take place in the Saskatoon Western Development Museum building. I’m wondering, 
Mr. Minister, what plans there are to renovate North Battleford, which is in a very serious state of 
deterioration, and Yorkton, which is less serious but still in need of some improvement. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, as the member is aware, we had indicated to us very 
early in our tenure that the funding that had taken place over recent years for the Western Development 
Museum had allowed a lot of things to be in trouble, but primarily storage. Storage was the major issue 
that was presented to us. We had an opportunity to purchase a building about a block away from the 
Western Development Museum in Saskatoon that would solve storage problems for that specific centre 
but also could be, if they chose, centralized for all of them. 
 
The decision on how the funds that we have allocated will be disbursed is not our decision. It’s a 
decision of that independent board that runs the museum. 
 
The communities you have indicated: North Battleford has desperate needs — as you are well aware, 
that hangar could blow over tomorrow — in terms of storage; Yorkton has some problems. These things 
will be dealt with by the board, a board which we are quite sure will handle that decision-making 
process. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, what requests have been made to you, Mr. Minister, by the board of 
the Western Development Museum with respect to North Battleford and Yorkton? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — I’m sorry? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — What requests, if any, have been made to you by the board of the Western 
Development Museum with respect to the facilities at North Battleford and Yorkton? 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2491 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — We have had some correspondence and some concerns expressed very 
clearly by the chairman of the board on behalf of the board. The funding that we have provided is for the 
WDM to deal with their problems, and we’re not telling them where to put it. We’re saying, “Here’s the 
money; solve your problems.” They say they are quite satisfied with what has happened. In fact, it’s 
indicated it’s a bit of a breath of fresh air. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Am I correct in my understanding that those funds were requested for 
Saskatoon, and are to be largely used in Saskatoon to purchase the building? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Within those funds was a specific opportunity to purchase the 
building. That took place. There is also within that group of funds financing for other problems and the 
museum will make those decisions. Clear enough? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Yes, I think so. I would appreciate it if the minister would supply me with 
the total volume of the grant, which I think I have if I were to dig for it, but you may save me the effort, 
and also, the amount expended on the new building, and the difference therefore left over for other 
projects of the board. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — We’ll provide that. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I want to get on, if I may for a moment, to the lotteries, Mr. Minister. And a 
couple of routine questions first. Since assuming office on May 8, 1982, have any changes been made to 
the Provincial, the Western, or the Super Loto, or any of the other games that may now be run? I am 
thinking in particular, it seemed to me there was some instant feature added tone or other of the games. 
I’d appreciate it if you’d give me either here, if it can be done concisely, or in writing if it can’t, the 
changes made to the games operated through the lottery foundation. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — There have been a number of changes made in the Western Canada 
Lottery Foundation’s modus operandi, if that’s the question. There are a couple of bonus draws. Is that 
the type of thing you’re interested in? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — No. I’m not so much thinking of the bonus draws, which is normally a way 
of dealing with excess funds. I am thinking more of any changes made to the game to make the tickets 
more attractive, such as additional instant features or anything of that sort. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Well, Mr. Chairman we’ve introduced two new games, the 6-49 game 
that you are aware of, and a tick-tack-toe instance game, but there have been no meaningful changes to 
the ones that were in place. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Could you provide the opposition, and myself in particular, with the 
financial statements of the games for . . . It may be public knowledge, I’m not sure if it’s in the library or 
not, but I’d appreciate it if you’d provide me with financial statements for the games for 1982. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — We can provide you now with the statement of the Western Canada 
Lottery Foundation and our annual report. Is that the request? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — One further question then on the features of the game. Is any 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2492 

consideration being given to the addition of any features to the game to make it more attractive, such as 
instant features and so on? Are there any changes being considered now that would be implemented in 
the foreseeable future? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — I suppose it would be fair to say that the Interprovincial Lottery 
Foundation is in a constant situation of change. They are constantly reviewing the games they are 
offering, what things can be done to make them more attractive, how they can be made more productive. 
There is nothing in place at this time or in the immediate future, but it would be incorrect to say that 
there may not be. It’s not really a provincial . . . Marketing them is done through the foundations, the 
Western Canada and the Interprovincial as I’m sure you are aware, and they are constantly reviewing 
them, and trying to improve them. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister will undoubtedly be aware that the manner in which lotteries 
are handled in this province is probably unique in that no part of that revenue (at least when I was 
associated with it) went to the Department of Finance. All of it went to the SaskSport trust fund, and was 
thereby distributed to quite a number of institutions and charities, and so on, and sports groups. 
Likewise, only SaskSport sold the tickets. I’m not asking for an explanation of that, Mr. Minister. I’m 
somewhat familiar with it. But it will come as no surprise to anyone involved with it to learn that at least 
some people in finance have cast covetous eyes on the profits made by the lotteries. There has, I think, 
been, at times in the past, suggestion that this province ought to handle it’s lotteries as other provinces 
do, that is to put at least a portion of the net revenue into the Department of Finance. 
 
Is any serious consideration being given to changing the structure of SaskSport as the sole marketing 
agency of the tickets, and as the sole recipient of the profits? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — No. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, I say in a not entirely jocular vein, good luck with it. As long 
as you’re minister you will have to defend that territory. Ours is an excellent system and I wish you all 
the best of luck in defending that territory from those who would encroach on it. I tell you, if you 
haven’t already found out, that there are those who would encroach on it. 
 
I want to ask you about policy and planning. I understand that in the policy and planning sections there 
are either a number of terminations, or layoffs, or however you want to style it, or a number of positions 
not filled. Perhaps the question can best be answered by asking you to compare staff levels on May 8, 
1982, and the staff levels at present in your policy and planning section. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — The staff complement in policy and planning is exactly the same as it 
was in March of 1982. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Will the minister then confirm that there was no intention to eliminate or 
severely reduce in size the policy and planning area? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — No, there are no plans to reduce or eliminate that person. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I was hoping I might get an opportunity to question the minister about the 
next item in the absence of the Attorney General, since he seems to be acting as legal counsel with 
respect to the reorganization. I do so with some temerity, because 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2493 

I suspect I’m going to get the same speech all over again. I’m not going to get into the area of the 
reorganization, since I know full well what that will draw. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Ralph will answer that. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Yes, Ralph will try for a change. I do want to ask you for your position with 
respect to heritage conservation. Do you see the need for any changes in your department, or the fashion 
in which your department carries out its functions with respect to heritage conservation? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — I understand that we’re dealing with the ‘82-83 estimates. I see no 
problem with the heritage conservation program as it is now. I don’t think I’m giving anything away if I 
indicate that we have talked about the possibility, since it makes an awful lot of municipal grants, 
whether in fact it’s in the right department or not. I don’t believe there are any plans afoot at the 
moment. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Does the minister feel then, in any way, overstaffed in that area? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — No. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Then I take it, in the area of heritage conservation, there are no excess 
positions which might be eliminated in any reorganization. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — I think whatever happens in terms of reorganization will happen in the 
future budget, not in this one. We’ve indicated that there are government reorganizations. The Attorney 
General has indicated that very clearly. I don’t think that has anything to do with these estimates. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I think, Mr. Minister, my question has everything to do with these estimates. 
I wasn’t asking you what you planned in the future. I was asking you whether or not, in the year under 
review (and I was careful to limit my question to the year under review), you felt you had any excess 
staff in the area of heritage conservation. You said you didn’t. Do I take it from that that you would see 
no need for the elimination of any positions in the area of heritage conservation? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — At this time, no. That could change as we review it. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I have a couple of questions. The question of athletic scholarships has been 
consistently raised with the government. I wonder whether the minister could indicate whether any 
policy has been evolved during the course of the year in respect to the support of athletic scholarships to 
the university. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — We have had considerable discussion on the question of athletic 
scholarships, not to the university per se, but to student athletes. We are pursuing that. It’s kind of 
strange that after all the years in power, again, we keep coming back and switching sides on these 
questions. Whether it’s water pipeline or athletic scholarships or whatever, we seem to constantly be 
coming up with positions totally different than the ones that were expressed previously. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — One wants to start to listen to the minister. In every question we ask in respect to the 
policy of this government, his answer is. “You had 11 years in which to do it.” Now, if you can say that 
on every question, then there would be nothing left for you to do. All I can say is that you must believe 
that, because you haven’t done anything. 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2494 

How do you like that? I want to go on with my areas of questioning here. 
 
Another program which we had in place . . . I want to say in respect to athletic scholarships, we were 
carrying on the discussions with the universities and with the athletes. I want to say that I was basically 
in support of it. That’s the reason why I asked the minister whether he had a policy. Let me go on to 
another area of concern to me and to many of the people of the province. 
 
In the last budget that was brought down by the New Democratic Party, we had $43 million budgeted 
for cultural and recreational facilities. I want to say you can’t get off the hook now by saying that we 
didn’t address it, because in the last budget we certainly did address it. We had set out $43 million over, 
I believe it was, four years. There are a large number of communities which have received a tremendous 
amount of assistance in building up the amenities in their communities such as curling rinks and skating 
rinks. I want to say that there are other communities in the process of developing further recreational 
facilities. I would like to know whether or not, in view of the fact that the department is going to be 
phased out, or if indeed it is not going to be phased out, as the Attorney General indicated the cabinet 
had made no decision (our information is that it is likely to be), regardless of that, I would like to ask the 
minister: what is his position? Will he, in fact, be providing grants to communities who are seeking 
support which the previous government provided and planned to provide? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, I believe that the member opposite and I could stand 
here and yell at each other all day about what our government and their government had or has not done 
. . . I think I will just leave that assessment to the people of P.A.-Duck Lake, who made it very clear 
what they thought of what . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
In terms of the program that was announced in the non-budget of March, it was a $43 million program 
spread over five years. We chose not to institute that program because we had some very real difficulties 
with it. A number of provincial organizations, most specifically SUMA, indicated that they had real 
concerns with the conditional programs. We chose to delay the implementation — in fact that we are 
going to implement one — for at least a year, while we had a look at the thing. SUMA indicated that 
they had problems with providing money to communities to build projects which were simply not in 
their minds feasible. There is a curling rink in southern Saskatchewan which was built and never 
opened. There are all kinds of examples of abuse. We have looked at the thing. We will be making an 
announcement in terms of a facilities program in due course. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I just want to indicate that the program that we had in respect to the grants — in 
order to qualify, the municipalities that were involved had the decision-making process as to whether or 
not it was, in fact, in the interest of that community. I find it rather strange that the minister now is really 
criticizing the local communities and the local municipal bodies that participated in the past. I take it that 
what the minister is saying is that they were unable to handle it because of the example that he presented 
here. Clearly, if you are going to look at a future grant system, are you going to allow the input in the 
decision-making at the local level, the community level, or are you as you indicated in your previous 
answer, going to be removing that? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — It never ceases to amaze me how the members opposite can draw 
things totally opposite as to what are said. We intend to increase the opportunity for communities to 
have input. In fact, what we have been doing is not 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2495 

criticizing communities; we’ve been listening to them, listening very carefully to them. We’ve been 
listening to their parent organization, to SUMA. We have been going through the process. We will be 
making an announcement in terms of that. We’ll solve all those problems that were made the last week 
in April. We’ll get the whole thing straightened out. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — One other area. I wonder whether the minister has reviewed the possibility in 
conjunction with the cultural and recreational facilities — whether or not he is considering also 
operational grants in respect to the communities. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Yes we have reviewed and are considering. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much. I want to ask a series of questions which are of a 
more detailed nature, and one has to do with the grant to the open door society. I would appreciate 
knowing what the amount of your grant to the Saskatchewan Open Door Society was. It may be the 
Regina Open Door Society, I’m not sure. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Is the question the amount of funding that’s been provided to the 
Regina Open Door Society? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — That’s right. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — That would be $26,000. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Their needs have sharply decreased, Mr. Minister, I see. I note from your 
annual report the amount provided in 1981 was $50,000, at least that’s my handwritten note. You are 
now providing $26,000. I’m wondering if you can explain the decrease, or perhaps I have the figures 
wrong. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — You asked for the Regina Open Door Society. They also have open 
door societies in Saskatoon and Yorkton. The total grant is $57,000. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. That was the figure I wanted. 
 
With respect to the promotion of crafts, Mr. Minister — in 1981 there was a promotion at the 
Saskatchewan House in London, England, where a series of displays of photos of Saskatchewan crafts 
was organized. Saskatchewan crafts are among the many things that Saskatchewan does well. Some of 
our crafts are at a world level in terms of quality, and I would appreciate the minister’s comments on the 
effort your department took in 1982 to promote these crafts. Was anything done to promote the crafts? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — There is presently a crafts display in Government House in London. 
It’s been there for a number of months. I don’t know if . . . That’s obviously not the total package. There 
have been a number of crafts fairs around the province. The one in Battleford is obviously a prime 
example — an exceptional display. There’s been a number of things. But there is a display under way 
over there. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, without in any sense being argumentative about it, let me urge upon 
the minister and your department increased efforts to promote Saskatchewan crafts. They are of a quality 
that could be sold world wide, and I would urge upon the minister increase efforts to promote crafts. I 
think we could develop quite a good cottage industry which would serve two purposes: (1) provide some 
employment and income for Saskatchewan people, and (2) promote and enhance the 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2496 

Saskatchewan cultural life. So I urge that upon the minister. 
 
With respect to the museums and galleries grant. I would appreciate knowing the total for ’81-82 and I 
assume you can give me the total for the ’82-83 fiscal year as well. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — In terms of museums and galleries . . . Pay attention. I don’t want to 
have to repeat this. The 1981-82 budget for museums and galleries was $190,000. The 1982-83 budget 
is $494,000. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I am momentarily suffering from a dry pen. Perhaps you could give me those 
in writing. My pen went dry just as I was writing them down. 
 
If that represents actual increase in funding to local museums and galleries around the province, I 
congratulate the minister on it. It is overdue and needed. 
 
With respect to the multicultural festival series, is it continuing and, if so, at what level of funding? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — The multicultural festival funding is for this year at 78,000, an 
increase of $3,000. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’d appreciate — and the minister might want to give me these in writing — 
a list of the multicultural projects funded in the ’82 year. You may have them there and can give them to 
me. If that’s possible, it’s preferable. If you don’t, I’d accept them in writing later. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — We have them, but it might be simpler if we provided them. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — With respect to heritage conservation, I’d appreciate knowing the number of 
buildings or sites declared to be heritage sites in 1982-83. You must have a list by now that’s virtually 
up to date. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — We can give you a list now that is maybe a month behind. We can 
send you an up-to-date list in a day or so. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I think I might prefer the up-to-date list in a day or so, Mr. Minister. 
 
Saskatchewan Heritage Advisory Board. I think I’ve got these names correct. I would like to know who 
sits on it and what level of remuneration is paid to the appointees. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — The people who sit on the heritage advisory board are: Ian Wilson, 
Archie Campbell, Eldon Johnson, Ross Keith, Bonnie Pearson, Joe Moran, Mary Heimbecker, Dr. 
William Sarjeant, Jessie Cameron, Mary Kischuk, Dr. Ted Regehr and Linda Weigl. The chairman 
receives $50 a day, the members $35. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — A remarkably frugal level of pay, I may say. They’re obviously doing it for 
the love of it. 
 
The Saskatchewan Heritage Property Review Board. I’d like to know who sits on that board and what 
their levels of remuneration are. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — The members are: Dr. Terrence Heath, Dr. John Archer, 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2497 

Mel Bolen, Gladys Johnston and Jean Sloan. I don’t have the remuneration level; we’ll have to send that 
over. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — With respect to historic interpretation, I would appreciate knowing what was 
expended on restoration for: Cannington Manor, firstly; secondly, Fort Carleton; thirdly, the Candiac 
shrine; fourthly, Government House — in the year under review. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, Government House is under the Department of 
Government Services; it’s not ours. We’ll send you the information on the other three. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, the Archaeology Society of Saskatchewan (I don’t know if 
I’ve got those words in the right order; it may be the Saskatchewan Archaeology Society, I’m not sure) 
has long been pressuring for an inventory of archaeological sites, something which I think is dearly 
needed. As property is developed, as land expands, and so on, many of these sites are permanently lost. 
If we have any hope of protecting them, I think it surely has to start with an inventory of the 
archaeological treasures and sites. I am wondering, Mr. Minister, if you have been able to make a start 
on this, and if not, what your approach to this is? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, the inventory which is being referred to presently 
exists; it’s being constantly updated. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — The Museum of Natural History. I would appreciate knowing the amount 
expended on the Museum of Natural History on any additions, any additional displays or renovations. I 
cannot extrapolate from the subvote what is spent on salaries, operating expenses, and what is spent on 
additional displays, restorations, and renovations to the building. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, approximately 50 per cent of the budgeted number is 
for salaries. The restoration to the Discovery Room, for instance, those types of things — that money 
comes under the Department of Government Services, I believe. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — The capital funds come from the Department of Government Services. Is that 
what the minister is telling me for the Museum of Natural History? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — We’re involved in displays and so on, but for any major additions or 
renovations, such as the Discovery room, the money comes out of government services. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — With respect to the program, recreation for disabled persons, I am wondering 
if the minister can supply me with a list of projects for which grants were given. I guess this is the 
appropriate way to phrase it. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Yes, we’ll send that over. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I would also appreciate a comment on the coaching program. I’m searching 
my memory here, and I’m not having a lot of luck remembering what has been done with this over the 
last year. Have there been any extensions of the program 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2498 

or any restrictions on the program? I ask the minister for the description of any extensions or restrictions 
to the coaching program. It is, I think, largely done by SaskSport and funded through your department. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — You were talking about the coaching certification program? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Yes. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — The program is run through the department, not through SaskSport. 
It’s tied to a national program; it’s ongoing. It is being extremely well received. The clinics are going on 
continuously. I think it’s interesting to note that in Chicoutimi this year in the winter games, for the first 
time ever, all the coaches were certified for the first time. I think that’s indicative of the type of progress 
that is being made. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Does our program now extend to certifying coaches at level 4? I’m just not 
sure. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — The provincial responsibility for administration only goes to level 3. 
Levels 4 and 5 are national. We do have national clinics going on at that level in the province, but 
they’re run by the national certification group. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I just have one further question, and I may be asking you for yesterday’s 
news. It seems to me that 1984, if my memory serves me correctly, would be the Saskatchewan Summer 
Games. I’m wondering where the process of selecting a site stands. Have we selected a site, or is that . . . 
Where does it stand? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — We have selected a site. Approximately two months ago we 
announced in North Battleford, at a major press conference, that North Battleford had been chosen and 
will in fact be hosting. North Battleford is the first Saskatchewan community to host a second game. As 
you are probably aware, they hosted the winter games previously. They are not the first, but they are one 
of a number who will be hosting for the second time. They have a very active committee. Their planning 
seems to be advancing very well. It looks like it will be an extremely successful event. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I just have one final comment. There may be some comments on individual 
subvotes. I just want to compliment the minister. Don’t look so suspicious. I am capable of that. 
 
Your department has not been beset by the tumultuous firings and dismissals and layoffs that some of 
the departments have been. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — It’s just going to disappear. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — The member says it’s just going to disappear. Not quite the point. I want to 
compliment the minister and express the wish that some of your colleagues might have taken a note out 
of your leaf-book. 
 
With that, Mr. Chairman, I have no further questions on subvote 1. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2499 

Item 2 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’d ask the minister for the same information with respect to these subvotes 
as I asked for with respect to urban affairs. 
 
That is, I would appreciate an explanation of any differences between the estimates prepared and filed in 
the legislature in March, subsequent to the March budget, and any figures provided in the estimates that 
you tabled. 
 
If I have your undertaking to provide that in writing, I would be satisfied with that. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Items 3 and 4 agreed to. 
 
Item 5 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — There is a fairly sizeable increase in expenditure on the Museum of Natural 
History. I would appreciate it if the minister could provide me with an explanation for that. 
 
I may say I’m not in any sense objecting, but there’s an increase in expenditure of $140,000 on that 
subvote. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — The increase in large part is taken up by three people in personal 
services, one of them an education extension officer, and a couple of people working with him. 
 
Item 5 agreed to. 
 
Items 6 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I just wanted to make a comment under grants to recreational and cultural 
facilities grant program. I would urge upon the minister consideration of a reinstatement of that 
program. There is nothing budgeted this year because the program is finished. I urge upon the minister a 
reconsideration of that program. 
 
Again, sitting on my desk in the Legislative Building was an excerpt from a comment made by the 
chairman of the OSAC, Organization of Saskatchewan Arts Councils, Marguerite Gallaway, suggesting 
there was a need for upgrading cultural facilities in the province. I entirely agree with that comment. I 
wonder if the department has given any consideration to killing two birds with one stone: (a) upgrading 
facilities with a reinstatement of a somewhat similar program, and (b) doing something about the 
deplorable level of unemployment which this government has visited upon the province. So you could 
kill two birds with one stone. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — As you’re very well aware, we’re the only province in Canada that has 
a net increase in the number of jobs, ad infinitum. However, you accused me earlier of not considering 
the Saskatoon School Trustees’ Association rather than yourself. In this case I will take your suggestion 
into consideration and will, in fact, consider it. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — May I say that the minister’s reformation is remarkable indeed, 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2500 

and I congratulate him on having seen the light. 
 
Vote 7 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

CULTURE AND RECREATION 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 7 
 
Items 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 7 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (NO. 3) 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

CULTURE AND RECREATION 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 7 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 7 agreed to. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I’d like to thank the minister and his officials. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I want to extend my appreciation to the minister and his officials in this 
department for the courteous and co-operative way they’ve assisted us in getting at these estimates. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

ATTORNEY GENERAL 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 3 
 
Item 1 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the Attorney General introduce his officials, please? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — On my right is Dr. Dick Gosse, deputy attorney general; behind me to my right, 
Jim Benning, assistant deputy attorney general; immediately behind, Gary Brandt, who is the director of 
administrative services; at the back, Thor Guttormsson, who is the executive director of court services. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I want first of all to indicate that in preparing for the 
review of these estimates, I thought that a good starting place would be to go back to Hansard and to 
extract all the wisdom that would be provided in the 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2501 

examination of the estimates in the previous year. I could only come to one conclusion in respect to the 
then opposition critic for the Department of the Attorney General because, as I review the Hansard, I 
find that there were very few questions that the hon. now Attorney General felt inclined necessary to 
direct to the then attorney general. 
 
I suppose that there were legitimate reasons for that. I leave to the imagination of hon. members that, 
when a department of the size of the Attorney General’s came up and so few questions were directed to 
him, undoubtedly, in the view of the then opposition critic, things were reasonably well within the 
attorney general’s department. 
 
I realize that the Attorney General has had some 10 months. I have read a speech where he would be 
reviewing the department and evaluating it. As a starter, I would like the Attorney General, if he would, 
to indicate in his view what the ingredients of a good, efficient and respected judicial system are. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Several factors are involved. Firstly, I’m of the view, and I have indicated it 
publicly, that the province of Saskatchewan and most justice systems are going to be faced with 
increasing demands for their services. In that regard, it’s vital in my mind to make sure that the 
administrative structures are as efficient and as effective as possible. 
 
We are going to have increasing demands on the courts by virtue of the charter of rights. I suspect that 
the young offenders act itself will have a tremendous impact on the operation of the court. So, we are 
looking at administrative structures such as computerization of the courts. In my mind, over the next few 
years, the administration of justice will have to get its administrative house as efficient as possible so 
that it can absorb all these increasing demands. That is a priority. It’s a priority in my mind over new 
programs until we have, as I say, the administration as efficient and as effective as possible. 
 
We can’t forget, of course, that people must pay a price for the justice system, that you can’t put 
everything on a basis that you’re going to make money off the justice system by being efficient, etc. It 
doesn’t work that way. So that is a major priority. The question of programs, as I say, will be dealt with 
once we’ve made what I hope to be some rather significant changes, as I say, like computerization of the 
criminal justice system. If it’s properly done, in my view, it will easily be added to in other aspects of 
the court system. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I agree with the Attorney General that important in the whole system is the 
administrative structure. I suppose that, indeed, one goes on, and that includes such things as staffing 
and facilities and, indeed, the complement of competent judges within the system. 
 
My basic concern with the action of the Attorney General. It is recognizing the fact that the load 
continues to increase, as he indicated, both in respect to the charter of rights, the young offenders act. 
And I want to draw to the attention of the Attorney General what I consider to be a very serious 
situation, having in mind his concern with the justice system. And I want to refer to some of the 
comments of Mr. Justice Bayda in respect to the court of appeal. And I’m going to take some time in 
respect to this, because I am very concerned with the direction that was taken by the Attorney General. I 
will, of course, be wanting some clarification of that. 
 
This is a portion of the notes from Mr. Justice Bayda, and he says: 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2502 

The court is not a political institution. The court is not a federal institution, although its members are 
appointed by and paid by the federal government. The court is not a provincial institution, although it 
is established by and its facilities are provided by the provincial government. It is a national institution 
with provincial jurisdiction. The court owes no allegiance either to the federal government or to the 
provincial government, but to the nation. 

 
That is, the people of Canada as a whole, with particular emphasis upon the people of Saskatchewan. He 
goes on: 
 

The court is composed of five judges. When the court was established in 1915, the number was four. 
(And he’s speaking of the court of appeal.) The increase to five was made in 1922, and remained at 
that number until 1981, when it was increased to seven. In May 1982, a order in council was passed 
reducing the number to five. 

 
The chief justice goes on to indicate the situation within the court of appeal. And I think the record 
should show his concern in respect to the workload. What are these five and two-thirds persons expected 
to do? They must not only hear 800 appeals during the course of the year, as will be the case this year 
(401) actual up to June 30; 400 estimated between July 1 and December 31), they must prepare for those 
800 appeals by reading appeal books, factums, summaries of memoranda of the law, and they must 
dispose of 800 appeals by reading case law, and rendering judgment either orally or in writing. Of these 
800, about 350 are sentence appeals which will be discussed later. 
 
He goes on to indicate that workload within the court of appeal versus other jurisdictions. And I’d ask 
hon. members to listen: 
 

Last year, 1981, British Columbia Court of Appeal heard 676 appeals, as compared to our 800 this 
year. British Columbia has twelve and one-third judges, more than twice the number we have. Ontario 
Court of Appeal heard 1,763 cases, that is a little over twice the number we have this year. They had 
sixteen and two-thirds judges. 
 
The increasing workload, coupled with the complexity of cases . . . In 1922 when the court was 
increased to five, a caseload was in the vicinity of 60 to 80 cases per year. It is now 10 times, it is 800, 
and yet the court remains at five. That does not take into account the complexity of cases. A 
1,000-page appeal book was rarity. Today, it’s commonplace. 
 
It seems that we can look forward not to 800 cases next year or the year following, but to some figure 
over 1,000, excluding the charter-of-rights cases. Add to that the charter-of-rights cases and the lights 
start to go out. Despite this multiplicity of legislation on the part of the legislative branch, the report 
court remains at five. 

 
His concerns are threefold, he indicates: 
 

These three concerns can be distilled and reduced to three words: more judicial time. 
 

I don’t think the situation can be better outlined than what has been done by Chief Justice Bayda. What I 
am concerned with is that the Attorney General indicated that he 



 
March 7, 1983 

 
2503 

was concerned with upgrading the judicial system. In view of what the chief justice has indicated, I 
would like him to clearly indicate why he did in fact revoke the appointment of two additional judges to 
the court of appeal. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Well, I think the hon. member should keep in mind that, to the best of my 
recollection, the increase was approved in 1980, and I believe the order in council appointing seven was 
in 1980 — or ’81, I’m sorry. The federal government didn’t act for a long period of time on its ability to 
appoint the two additional judges, so perhaps, and I say only perhaps, the Government of Canada did not 
share the concerns of the chief justice. 
 
We’ve made it clear, and I believe the members opposite, when they were in government were of the 
same opinion, that there should be some consultation, informal or otherwise, with the provinces over the 
appointment of superior court judges. I suggest to the hon. member that if he feels that the appointment 
process in the province of Saskatchewan was universally supported, he is sadly mistaken. In fact, I 
suggest to you, that there was very little support for the process of appointment which has existed over 
the last 10 years. I believe that there should be a consultation. It may well come as a result of the actions 
taken by this government. There should be consultation, and I believe that most members of the bar in 
Saskatchewan support that position. I think the hon. member should remember that there was a very 
long period of time that the federal government had to be able to make the appointments. The order in 
council had been passed; the legislation had been passed. There was ample time for the government to 
act. It did not do so. Again, I cannot attribute that to a disagreement with the chief justice on the 
position. 
 
Secondly, I think the hon. member should keep in mind that there’s a significant number of sentencing 
appeals which, by and large, are fairly straightforward (not to minimize their importance) and that is 
increasing. I suggest that that may color the remarks of the hon. member. 
 
I might advise that the initial request for the increase of the court from five to seven was not made until 
1979. Is that 50 years after five? There are probably other factors in the decision. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


