






















































Hansard: November 29, 1983


339 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
November 29, 1983 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
SPECIAL ORDER 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
ADDRESS IN REPLY (continued) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in reply which was moved by Mr. Schmidt. 
 
HON. MR. DIRKS: — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure for me to rise and to enter into this Speech from the 
Throne debate for the first time as a minister of the Crown. I want to take this opportunity to congratulate our 
new and esteemed Lieutenant Governor on his reading of the Speech from the Throne, and I also want to take 
the opportunity to congratulate my new colleagues who are ministers of the Crown seated here in this row 
beside me. I think, Mr. Speaker, that the vision, the initiative, the drive which the new members of the cabinet 
are demonstrating, along with their other colleagues, are indicative of the fine future that the province of 
Saskatchewan has under the Devine government and I’m pleased to be part of that government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to commend the Legislative Secretaries for their appointments and the fine work that 
they have been accomplishing for Saskatchewan. In particular, I want to say that my Legislative Secretary, the 
hon. member from Saskatoon Riversdale, is providing yeoman service for the people of Saskatchewan. 
Certainly the light went out for Mr. Romanow, but the light has come on for Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DIRKS: — I think more than anything, Mr. speaker, we need this evening to commend one man 
for the fine work that he has done for the province of Saskatchewan, and that is none other than our Premier, the 
Hon. Grant Devine. I think Mr. Speaker, if ever there was a devastating critique of socialism and 11 years of 
socialistic practice in the province, then we heard that devastating critique this afternoon, and at the same time, 
Mr. Speaker, I think we also heard the reason why, we also heard the reason why Saskatchewan is the place to 
be in the 1980s. Mr. Speaker, the former government, the members opposite, have accused this particular 
government of being bankrupt of ideas, bereft of vision, lacking in initiative. I think if ever there was a hollow 
accusation, that is it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If we review quickly the record of the former government, we will find that it really had very little to offer to 
the people of Saskatchewan, and I think in years to come, if people are to say the words NDP here in the 
province of Saskatchewan, five things will come to their remembrance. 
 
Number one, they will remember a land bank which really was a land grab, Mr. Speaker — nothing but socialist 
carpet-bagging, really benefited the people of the province very little. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, they will remember potash nationalization. And I think the members opposite would do well 
to recall the words of one Mr. Edmund Burke who said that it is important for governments to ensure that social 
continuity prevail. And I notice the member from Regina Centre lifting his eyebrows there. Social continuity is 
very important, Mr. Speaker. If there’s one thing that an electorate desires and deserves from its government, 
it’s stability. They want stability; they don’t want radicalism; they want to be free from anxiety; they want a 
confidence in the future. Mr. Speaker, I think, if anything, the nationalization of potash mines here in 
Saskatchewan years ago created a climate of fear, of uncertainty, of lack of confidence here in the future. 



 
November 30, 1983 
 

340 
 

 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to the land bank and potash nationalization, the former government will be 
remembered for a massive increase in bureaucracy. And I ask the members opposite, what benefit was it to the 
province of Saskatchewan to increase our bureaucracy by 66.66 per cent in the 10-year period of time? 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to the three items that I have just mentioned, the former government will be 
remembered for the gas tax — the gas tax. Mr. Speaker, I want the people of this province and the members of 
this Assembly to remember that the first initiative of the Devine government was to remove the gas tax — the 
largest single tax cut in the history of this province. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the former government will be remembered for its bloated family of crown corporations. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — And the Koskie family. 
 
HON. MR. DIRKS: — And the Koskie family as well, yes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is the legacy that the former government has left the province of Saskatchewan. Land bank, 
potash nationalization, massive increase in bureaucracy, a gas tax and a bloated family of crown corporations. 
 
Now they ask us, Mr. Speaker: what new ideas, what new vision, what new initiative do you have for the 
province of Saskatchewan? Let me just remind the members of the Assembly, since we are drawing quickly to a 
close this evening in the throne speech debate . . . Let me remind the members of 21 items which characterize 
the Progressive Conservative government in a short 18 months: a mortgage assistance plan; a public utilities 
review commission; the family farm purchase program; the natural gas distribution system; the Build-A-Home 
Saskatchewan program; we eliminated the gas tax; for making the production of wild rice a number one export 
crop in the world; a chiropody program for the senior citizens, requested by the senior citizens. In fact, I think 
they pled for it for years; we delivered. 
 
An oil upgrader for the province of Saskatchewan. I wonder how many words the former government spoke 
about an oil upgrader. They spoke; we delivered. We revised the labour legislation to provide a more rational 
and moderate labour climate here in the province. And, Mr. Speaker, we will be introducing accessibility 
legislation for the disabled community in Saskatchewan shortly in this Assembly. 
 
And I want the members of this Assembly to realize, Mr. Speaker, as I’m sure they do, and I want the people of 
Saskatchewan to understand, that the former government had 11 years to listen to the pleas, to listen to the 
concerns of the physically disabled community in Saskatchewan, that they turned a deaf ear. The NDP 
government had an opportunity to deliver. Once again, it’s the Progressive Conservative government which will 
deliver. 
 
A women’s secretariat, Mr. Speaker. A department of science and technology to ensure that Saskatchewan 
remains at the forefront of world developments. A water crown to ensure that the water resources of 
Saskatchewan are managed in a sensible fashion. A new vehicles act. 
 
We abolished the department of northern Saskatchewan. We put the crows on a sound footing. We lowered 
taxes on oil royalties in order to create hundreds of jobs. We spent $11 million on senior citizens nursing homes 
in only 18 months. We developed an economic strategy for natives. We put in place a bureau for senior citizens. 
 
Twenty-one items, Mr. Speaker, that indicate that this particular government is not bereft of vision. We are not 
lacking ideas. We are not bankrupt of initiative. I would suggest that it’s the members opposite who are. And I 
think the best indication of that, Mr. Speaker, is what we  



 
November 29, 1983 

 

341 
 

heard our Premier talking about this afternoon. 
 
The members opposite, and their party, have suggested that the province of Saskatchewan would be better off if 
the uranium industry were brought to a halt here in Saskatchewan. I wonder if the members of the Assembly are 
aware of these statistics. They will find them interesting, as I am sure the people of Saskatchewan will. 
 
The uranium jobs projected over the next few years in northern Saskatchewan in the construction end of the 
uranium industry — 3,000 man-hours; the exploration end of the uranium industry — 5,000 man-hours; indirect 
spin-offs — 5,000 to 7,000 in Key Lake alone, we’re talking about 400 to 500 jobs; Cluff Lake, 300 to 500 
jobs; Collins Bay, 300 jobs. Mr. Speaker, all totalled, we’re talking about 10,000 to 15,000 jobs that the 
members opposite would like to see abolished. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that the policies of the members opposite are not job creation. The policies of the 
members opposition are not job creation; they’re job abolition. And I can just envisage the Leader of the 
Opposition as he stands to his feet at his nominating convention, two years hence, to the thunderous applause of 
the five or six people present, and he tells the people present and he attempts to tell the province of 
Saskatchewan, “I pledge today that if an NDP government is elected, I pledge to the province of Saskatchewan 
that we will abolish another 25,000 jobs.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, job abolition is not what the people of Saskatchewan want. Job creation is what they are interested 
in, and I think our Premier did a fine job of indicating our record in that regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we were elected we indicated that we were going to open the books and let the people of 
Saskatchewan know exactly the situation that we found the Government of Saskatchewan in, and we have done 
that in the crown corporations, we have done that in the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, and I would 
like to do that with reference to the Department of Social Services tonight. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have before me some very interesting memos which I am sure the members who are present here 
tonight will find interesting. One of the things we found in the Department of Social Services when we arrived, 
both my predecessor and I, was a total lack of political leadership on the part of the former government. I have 
before me here, Mr. Speaker, a memo dated February 8, 1978, from the deputy minister of social services to the 
then deputy minister to the premier . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I’m sure they wish it were. 
 
I’m sure the premier will recall this memo since it was directed to his deputy minister, unless that deputy 
minister wanted to keep it from the former premier. Here is what was said, Mr. Speaker. This is the deputy 
minister of social services to the deputy minister to the then premier. “I’m forwarding this material to you for 
several reasons,” and I want to quote to you the third reason, “Thirdly, because I hope that when the times 
comes to recruit my replacement, you would be consulted about this matter.” And this is what this deputy 
minister then says, “This poor department has suffered from some unusual, and in my opinion unacceptable, 
management approaches at the ministerial and deputy ministerial level in this decade that compounded tenfold 
the problems reflected in the material that I forward to you today.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is the attitude that certain of the senior civil servants had towards their own department under 
the former government. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, I have another memo here, dated April 22, 1981, which I am sure we will find very 
interesting, from the deputy minister of social services at that time with regards to a cabinet retreat that was 
being planned for June of 1981. This memory was dated just a few weeks prior to that. And I am sure that was a 
cabinet retreat that was going to plan election strategy, but when you hear what I have to say, Mr. Speaker, you 
will understand why their election strategy certainly failed them: 



 
November 30, 1983 
 

342 
 

 
Apparently, there will be a cabinet retreat in June, 1981. At this time the minister would like a short 
paper, not more than five pages long, which would give him some ideas (just five pages long, not too 
many ideas, which would give him some ideas) of where we are heading in the Department of Social 
Services over the next 10 years. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I was brought up to believe that in the democratic process, it was the politicians who laid 
down the tracks for the bureaucrats to run on. They were the ones who laid down the policy. They were the ones 
who said, “This is the direction that the department is going in the next five or 10 years.” 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we have here a memo in which the minister is asking a senior bureaucrat to give him some 
ideas of where the Department of Social Services is heading over the next five or 10 years. Mr. Speaker, that is 
why the former government failed and the members opposite are where they are today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we found a department which was completely out of touch with whatever leadership was there; no 
personal contact whatsoever between the minister and the department employees. When I travelled to La Ronge 
and chatted with the employees there, they indicated to me that this was the first time in seven years that a 
minister of social services had set foot in their office. When I chatted with two of the very largest 
non-governmental organizations in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, they took me aside, both of them, and said, Mr. 
Speaker, “I want you to know that this is the first time ever that a minister of social services has set foot in our 
facility.” Two of the largest social service NGOs in the department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we found a department that spent between $100 million and $200 million on income security, but, 
Mr. Speaker, under the former government you would have had to look high and low to locate the person, the 
one individual, who was responsible for administering the income security programs of that department. And 
the reason why you would have had to have looked high and low to locate that person was because there never 
was such an individual. $100 million to $200 million being spent in income security programs without a single, 
solitary individual being responsible for those particular programs. 
 
If you don’t believe me, Mr. Speaker, I have with me today an organization chart which will indicate that to 
you. There’s the old organization chart, and you will find that there is not one individual who has overall 
responsibility for the income security programs in the Department of Social Services. I have with me today, Mr. 
Speaker, the new organization chart, which indicates that under the Progressive Conservative government, we 
have established an income security division. There will be an individual responsible for the income security 
programs under our government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things which shocked me when I arrived in the Department of Social Services was to 
find out that the former government commissioned a study on how to improve the welfare system here in 
Saskatchewan. That study was commenced, I believe, in 1978, and the recommendations were brought down in 
1979. I want to read to you, Mr. Speaker, one of the recommendations of that particular study, because it’s 
indicative of the lack of action and the lack of concern that the former government had for the expenditure of 
the taxpayers’ dollar. On page 92 of this report, recommendation no. 21 states the following: 
 

That a new social assistance plan computer system be developed, which would have the capacity to 
perform a verification, calculation, and cheque-producing function based on information provided by 
clients or on application or other forms. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this recommendation, brought down in 1979 by the former government, was never implemented. 
And I want to tell the members of the Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan that had the former 
government implemented this recommendation to automate the social  



 
November 29, 1983 

 

343 
 

assistance plan here in Saskatchewan, it would have saved the people of Saskatchewan literally 10, perhaps 20, 
maybe even $30 million in the past few years. I want the people of Saskatchewan to know, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Progressive Conservative government in power today is moving to implement that particular recommendation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the former government, the members opposite, have attempted to accuse us of a certain double 
standard. I think my colleagues have done a fine job of revealing the particular double standard which really 
does exist in the members opposite. I thought it would be interesting to hear a little bit about the double 
standard that existed in the Department of Social Services. During the last budget, the NDP members opposite 
accused us of attacking the NGO community here in Saskatchewan because we happened to redirect certain 
funds to people that needed them more. I have before me here a memo dated June 26th, from the former deputy 
minister, which says the following: 
 

I agree that our first priority must be revamping and fine-tuning the existing grants process. While it 
almost certainly is not timely to introduce the concept of tendering now, I would hope that we could 
actively pursue this as a long-term strategy. 
 

Mr. Speaker, members present here tonight may not be all that familiar with what this particular memo was 
saying. But what it’s really saying, Mr. Speaker, is that the Department of Social Services is going to determine 
the needs of the province of Saskatchewan and the Department of Social Services is then going to tender 
various NGO agencies to meet those needs, rather than allowing the local communities themselves to determine 
what the needs are going to be and to assist in meeting those particular needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we came across a double standard with regards to the day care system here in Saskatchewan, as 
well. The former government has accused my department of attempting to undermine day care. They have 
suggested that we are not interested in the day care community. I have before me here a budget document of the 
former government for the 1981-82 budget year. This was their particular attitude towards the day care 
community. I think there are people in Saskatchewan which will find this document rather interesting. 
 

5. Provincial day care association. This is a new non-government organization which will represent all 
the day care groups, the advocacy groups and consumer groups in the province. The department has 
been promoting the need for such an organization with many of the day care groups. 
 

But then, Mr. Speaker, listen to what the role of this organization would be and how the government viewed it. 
 

This association should provide a unified voice to government, thereby eliminating the various opposing 
views currently being presented to the government. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I thought the former government stood for the local community, stood for local initiative. What 
we have here, Mr. Speaker, is a double standard of the highest order. They wanted to eliminate opposing views. 
They didn’t want the people of Saskatchewan to speak to them. They wanted one unified voice to speak to 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the former minister of social services has suggested that we are uncaring, that we are not listening 
to the senior citizens of the province of Saskatchewan. He has asked that we increase the Saskatchewan Income 
Plan supplement for senior citizens here in the province, since it wasn’t increased last year. I think the members 
of the Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan will find the record of the former government very interesting 
with regards to how they treated the seniors here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to give you, Mr. Speaker, the seven-year funding history of the former government as it  



 
November 30, 1983 
 

344 
 

relates to the Saskatchewan senior citizens’ SIP (Saskatchewan Income Plan) benefit. In 1975, the former 
government started off with a $20 supplement for single seniors and $36 supplement for married couples. In 
1976, Mr. Speaker, did they increase the supplement? No, it stayed the same — $20 for single and $36 for 
married couples. In 1977, did they increase the supplement, Mr. Speaker? No, they didn’t. It stayed the same — 
$20 for singles and $36 for married couples. Now, Mr. Speaker, in 1978, I suspect because an election was 
coming, they did increase the supplement. They increased it $5, from $20 to $25 and from $36 to $45. Then in 
1979, Mr. Speaker, it stayed the same — $25 for singles, $45 for married couples. In 1980, Mr. Speaker, was 
there an increase? No, there wasn’t — $25 for singles, $45 for married couples. Mr. Speaker, in 1981, their last 
full year of government, did they increase the income supplement for seniors? They did not — $25 for singles, 
$45 for married couples. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in seven years, they increased the supplement to seniors once, by $5. Mr. Speaker, that averages 
out to 71 cents per month per year over seven years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the final double standard that I want to draw attention to on the part of the members opposite has 
to do with wages and salaries. They have attempted to make a big to-do about nothing. I want to draw your 
attention, Mr. Speaker, to the salaries that were paid by the former minister of social services in his particular, 
and to the number of executive assistants that were employed by the former minister of social services. 
 
March 31 of 1982, just prior to the election, the former minister of social services had two executive assistants 
at a total salary of $4,769 per month; there was also an information officer at a salary of $1,866 a month; there 
was another information counsellor at a salary of $1,895 a month; there was a research officer at a salary of 
$1,807 a month; and there were three secretaries, for a total, Mr. Speaker, of two, three, four, five . . . eight 
people, Mr. Speaker, employed by the former minister of social services, for a total budget of $16,142 per 
month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we took office, the minister of social services, the Hon. Pat Smith, reduced the salaries in 
the minister’s office from $16,142 to $14,132 total per month, reduced the number of employees as well. And I 
want you to know, Mr. Speaker, that’s of July 15, 1983, the total salary in the Department of Social Services 
minister’s office was $13,882, in comparison to $16,142 under the former government — that’s 18 months 
later. That’s a saving, Mr. Speaker, of almost $36,000 a year. The number of staff in the office has been reduced 
by two. Mr. Speaker, I would say that the double standard is on the opposite side of the floor, not on this side of 
the floor. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to draw attention to the social assistance statistics herein the province of 
Saskatchewan, which the Premier briefly mentioned this afternoon. Mr. Speaker, in 1971, when the former 
government took office, and the member from Regina Centre will remember this, the population of 
Saskatchewan was 926,000 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I have the figures before me here. In 1972, the 
population of Saskatchewan was 914,000. That was a drop of 12,000. In 1973, the population dropped to 
904,000. In 1974, the population dropped to 899,000. Mr. Speaker, in a four-year period of time, the population 
in Saskatchewan dropped 42,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what about the net migration in the province of Saskatchewan? Was there a net migration during 
the first few years under the NDP government? Mr. Speaker, in 1971 the net migration was –24,176. In 1972, 
Mr. Speaker, the net migration was –19,207, and in 1973 the net migration was –16,164. In 1974, Mr. Speaker, 
the member from Regina Centre will remember this, I’m sure, -11,604. It’s no wonder, Mr. Speaker, that the 
bumper stickers in the early ’70s said, “Last person out of the province, turn the lights out.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to draw to the attention of the members of the Assembly that in the first year of a 
Devine government, the population increased 13,000. The net migration was not –25,000 or –24,000 or –
19,000; the net migration was 2,088. Mr. Speaker, I think the members on this side of the House have every 
reason to be proud of the Speech from the Throne. They have  



 
November 29, 1983 

 

345 
 

every reason to be proud of the record of this government over the last 18 months, and I’m sure that I, along 
with every member on this side of the House, will be supporting the motion. And I certainly want to urge all 
members to do so. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is indeed an honour for me to be delivering 
my address today in support of a motion moved in reply to the Speech from the Throne. As we commence our 
third session of the twentieth legislature. I would like to express my appreciation to Premier Devine for his 
leadership and initiative in bringing Saskatchewan out of the Dark Ages and into a period of growth and 
prosperity whereby other Canadians, and indeed other nations, shall recognize this province for what it really is 
— a dynamic and richly endowed region that has been waiting to open its doors. 
 
In my remarks today I shall touch on three areas: what we are doing as a government, what I’m doing as a 
minister of the Crown in charge of the Department of the Environment, and what is happening in my 
constituency of Kelsey-Tisdale. As a minister of the Crown I would also like to thank the other members of 
government, including my cabinet colleagues, for their support and ideas over the past 18 months as I have 
carried out my duties under the Crown. As a team, I feel we have a lot to offer the people of Saskatchewan, and 
we certainly represent a good cross-section of the population, thereby representing their concerns. 
 
When we were elected in April 1982, the people of Saskatchewan looked to us to provide them with new 
programs and policies that would enhance our economic position within Canada and the whole world, which 
would mean that each of us — whether we be farmers, miners, retailers, housewives, senior citizens, loggers, or 
whatever — we would each see benefits from increased economic activity. 
 
No longer did the promise that nationalizing industry to produce revenue ring true in the ears of the public. How 
could those industries ever make money under the former government, when none of them understood business 
or the business world in any way? Instead, the people decided to elect a group of people who understood the 
real world, instead of living by unrealistic theories. We shall, and have already started to turn these thing around 
in this province and to give the people what they really want. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a number of my colleagues have already explained considerably on the programs we have 
already implemented and the priorities we have set, I shall just mention them quickly. Health care has been 
expanded and not restricted. The truth of the matter is that we must work hard to restore the health care system 
that was sadly neglected by the past government. 
 
The education budget has been expanded. Three, consumers have helped through a cut in gasoline taxes. PURC 
has been established. Farmers can now own their own land. Yes, the farmer, who was the most independent 
businessman in Canada, now has the right to own land without the fear he previously had about a government 
possibly confiscating his land to nationalize it. Rural communities are receiving natural gas. The Build-A-Home 
program helped stimulate 5,600 housing starts in Saskatchewan this year, way about the national average. 
Senior citizens are receiving the attention they deserve. We have prioritized housing, nursing home, health care, 
and much more. 
 
Priorizing the water issue in Saskatchewan. Every citizen in this province is affected by water, whether it be 
water quality, water drainage, irrigation, or conservation. Last February, I was a member of the cabinet 
committee on water concerns that has travelled to 10 centres in the province to hear the people’s comments and 
ideas about water. We did hear a lot. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, judging from the needs and concerns that were expressed, a water strategy for the whole 
province should have been initiated many, many years ago. When I look at Alberta  



 
November 30, 1983 
 

346 
 

and see what they have done to manage their water, it is alarming to note the neglect of the former 
administration toward this valuable resource we have. Yes, Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what it should be treated 
as. Water is a resource, and we should manage it so that we are utilizing the water the best way possible. And 
on interprovincial and international streams, we should be sure to use our full allotment. 
 
The implications of a sound water strategy will be tremendous as it affects farming, municipal drinking water 
supplies, tourism, fishing, industry, and every sector of this province. The introduction of a water crown utility 
will be the first step toward such a development plan. This is another example, Mr. Speaker, where we come 
through with the goods. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on with a few initiatives we have taken over the past 18 months, but I would 
now like to turn to what I have done in my own department, Department of Environment, and how we have 
taken steps to ensure that the environment in this province is protected and shall be here for the future 
generations to come. For instance, the department was rearranged to form an information co-ordination 
assessment service in March of ’83 which will co-ordinate the activities of various branches of the department, 
as well as regulatory requirements, and to facilitate efficient processing of applications for licences and permits. 
Mr. Speaker, we now have a one-stop information bureau for the people of Saskatchewan on environmental 
concerns. 
 
The Department of Environment was misused. The tactics used were to create barriers for industry wishing to 
locate or expand in the province, rather than trying to protect the environment while facilitating industry. There 
can be a balance achieved between environmental protection and industrial development. In Saskatchewan we 
have astringent regulations in terms of protecting the water and air and land resources we are endowed with, 
and none of these regulations have been repealed. 
 
Most industries realize that it is in their best interest to recognize environmental needs and protection measures 
that should be followed, but they need to know what is expected before they start. We want to establish the 
game rules with industry before we start the ball game. Let them know what is expected, the permits required, 
the development plans required; don’t throw in any surprises or change the game rules in midstream. 
 
One thing I’ve done, Mr. Speaker, is advise my officials that I would like to see a non-nonsense approach to 
dealing with our clients. Co-operations is the best way to deal with these issues or specific case and it certainly 
goes a long ways into protecting our resources and facilitating new development. Mr. Speaker, the department 
has come a long ways towards changing the way they deal with proposals or situations that arise. They are now, 
from development guide-lines or regulations, taking steps to involve all those affected in the development 
stages of the guide-lines so that instead of being an opposing agency, we are a protection agency through 
consultations. 
 
I’m just going to name a few of the new measures taken. We have a new emissions standards for potash salt 
dust enacted in February 1983. This will reduce emissions by an estimated 4,500 tonnes annually. We have an 
acid rain study. 
 
It’s interesting to know that there was a Commons committee around here last Friday, and just taking hearings 
on acid rain. A Ronald Irwin, MP from Sault Ste. Marie, was chairing the meeting, and he said Saskatchewan 
was doing nothing on acid rain and taking a free ride. Well, I’ll have you know, Mr. speaker, that in the last two 
years, in ’82-83 and ’83-84, we have spent three time as much on acid rain research as was done in the two 
previous years by the former administration. So, Mr. Speaker, we are looking out for the province in regard to 
acid rain. 
 
We have set up services. Committees are being improved. Operating training programs have been upgraded and 
expanded. In addition, a new manual for sampling procedures was issued. A  



 
November 29, 1983 

 

347 
 

program to crush agricultural chemical containers, to collect and dispose of residue, was implemented in 1983. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can say that was long overdue, too. We have over 180 collection sites established through 
the co-operation or rural municipalities; we crushed 250,000 cans this year. The response have been very great. 
 
Legislation authorizing the establishment of regulations governing storage, handling, and disposal of hazardous 
waste has been enacted in June, 1983. Administration of some aspects of the regulations can be delegated to 
local government, where they desire. The regulations are now being drafted, Mr. Speaker, I might add that this 
was in consultation and by request or urban municipalities, and by fire departments, and we have brought in 
those regulations. 
 
We established the toxicology centre in Saskatoon. I might add, Mr. Speaker, it is the only one in western 
Canada, and right now it is being looked at, at expanding it through a federal program, to make it the only one 
in western Canada. 
 
We have mineral exploration guide-lines we’ve established, so that the guide-lines are there to protect the 
environment. We’ve established sand and gravel-pit guide-lines. We have coal reclamation guide-lines that 
we’ve just about to bring into place through consultation. And I might add, Mr. speaker, that I was down in the 
Estevan-Bienfait area, and Coronach, and the reclamation that’s gone on in the last 18 months is more than has 
ever been done before. They are reclaiming the area and putting it back into the condition, so it can be farmed if 
it’s farmland, or it can be grazed for grazing. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, on the subject of water. I’ve already mentioned a few crucial points. Water is presently a 
large part of the department, and this resource is a major concern to myself and my colleagues and we certainly 
intend to continue to pursue objectives for its proper management. 
 
Before I mentioned a few of the events happening in my own area of Kelsey-Tisdale, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
take a moment to say how proud I am of the work my department has done in the last 18 months. They 
developed a non-nonsense approach towards dealing with our clients, using a process of consultation and 
co-operation to develop and implement guide-lines and new regulations. I daresay that most of the employees of 
the department were waiting for a chance to show their abilities and develop new initiatives, as opposed to s 
suppressed state in which they previously operated. If we continue to work as we have, we can prevent 
disorders and environmental damage before it happens, as opposed to trying to correct it afterwards. 
 
I’d like to speak a few moments on my own area of Kelsey-Tisdale, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I heard the 
member from Pelly asking question about the Hudson Bay farmers. And it was interesting to note that he had 
the concern for them, because I sincerely believe that he has some in his own area that probably have the same 
type of concern. And all across the province, Mr. Speaker, there’s many farmers who have the same type of 
concern. Shortage of cash flow has been a problem over the last three or four years. The price of grain is down; 
that hasn’t added anything. Certainly the quotas are very low right now; that hasn’t helped any, either. 
 
But in my own area, Mr. Speaker, over 90 per cent of the farmers have off-the-farm income. That’s interesting 
to note, because most of them either work in one of the mills, or teach school, or work in the hospital, or work 
uptown, or wok in the bank. They have off-the-farm income and they’ve always had to have off-the-farm 
income. There’s very few farmers in that area that solely make their living off the farm, and I’ve talked to many 
of them and I know everyone personally there. And the one really interesting thing to note, Mr. Speaker, is the 
person chairing the disaster assistance program for the Hudson Bay area, who himself said that he was almost 
on the point of disaster, just come back from a 10-day holiday in Las Vegas. And it’s also interesting to note, 
Mr. Speaker, that that gentleman was a brother to the former minister of health here. 
 
I must say, Mr. Speaker, in regards to the farmers up there, there is some, Mr. Speaker, who really do need 
some help. There is a few up there that really need some help that don’t have any  



 
November 30, 1983 
 

348 
 

off-the-farm income. But I think the most important job that I have, Mr. Speaker, as member for that area is to 
make sure that there is off-the-farm jobs available. And we’ve done that, Mr. Speaker. We have really done that 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member from Quill Lakes just left. 
 
Let’s talk about what we’ve done in the area in regards to jobs. I think that’s very important because jobs are the 
essence of all the work-force in this province and certainly, even in my area, the farmers need the jobs. In my 
area there have been close to 70 or 75 new or expanded businesses, in Kelsey-Tisdale. Mr. Speaker, that is more 
jobs. In Tisdale, the business community is developing at a very healthy growth rate. We have manufacturing 
plants expanding; Trail-rite’s expanded; Western Moulding has expanded. We have two implement dealerships 
expanded. We have a brand new car dealership. We have two new restaurants. We have two new fertilizer 
outlets and they have a shopping mall being built there, Mr. Speaker, in Tisdale. That is jobs, Mr. Speaker, and I 
think that’s what we’re here to do, create jobs, and that is jobs. 
 
To Bjorkdale, Mr. Speaker, and Archerwill and Sylvania and Porcupine Plain, Hudson Bay, Mistatim, we have 
seen new and expanded businesses spring up all over. And that is jobs, Mr. Speaker. MacMillan Bloedel in 
Hudson Bay is just completing a major renovation to its operation to produce a strand board, Mr. Speaker. That 
will mean about 200 jobs, Mr. Speaker. That’s what I call looking after the people. Simpson Timber employs 
250 people in Hudson Bay. The plywood plant, Sask Ply, employs another 200. There’s about 500 people 
working the bush in regards to these two plants for those two mills. That’s jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One thing I’d like to point out is that if the timber allocation and the reforestation were to continue as the former 
administration had left it, we wouldn’t have those plants for very long, Mr. Speaker. We’re looking at a whole 
new forest allocation plant that is a must to keep those plants running, to keep the jobs there. It can be done, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m sure the minister responsible will do a good job of it. 
 
We’re finalizing a forest management action plan, and it will provide long-term strategy for the forest industry 
in our North and provide stability for the operation. We’re working with industry to protect our North. We have 
found that consultation and co-operation go a long ways towards reaching goals. Forestry creates thousands of 
jobs, but only if the forests are to be harvested and the mills are running. And that’s what we’re going to do. 
We’re going to ensure that that is there. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, the small business program created 41 new jobs in Kelsey-Tisdale. The JOBS 
program created 60, jobs employed by towns, churches, and RMs. The provincial government transportation 
agency and the community colleges want a rail line abandonment hearing with the CTC, as the CN wanted to 
close the line from Weekes to Reserve. That means more jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Steel Brothers Canada Ltd. has bought a limestone deposit near Mafeking, Manitoba, and should be building a 
quicklime plant in either Hudson Bay or Canora. Mr. Speaker, that would be a hundred jobs in construction, and 
35 to 50 full-time employment in the production operation. Mr. Speaker, that is jobs. I have had indications that 
investors are looking at the re-opening of a dehy plant in Porcupine Plains. Mr. Speaker, that would be more 
jobs. The plants in Hudson Bay and Tisdale are running at full capacity. Again, Mr. Speaker, a guarantee of 
jobs. 
 
Another change we have made, and that is indeed very welcome in my area, is the change in the hunting 
regulations. The change is feared towards restraining uncontrolled hunting, and we are very serious about 
enforcing these measures. Mr. Speaker, uncontrolled hunting must be brought to a stop and we are doing what 
we feel is the right way to handle it, because if we don’t control a hunting we will not have a game for future 
generations. I think it’s recognized by all that it has to be done, and I think that we’re working in a right way 
towards it to control the hunting that is being done out of season. 



 
November 29, 1983 

 

349 
 

 
One other area that I’d like to touch on is the farming situation in my area. The crop this year was fairly good as 
I mentioned earlier in some regions, but in others, poor yields resulting from either flooding, wheat midge, or 
gloom blotch. We had excess moisture in the early growing season around Hudson Bay and Mistatim whereby 
only about half of the land was seeded. The sad part of it was last year we had a severe frost and early in the 
fall, making this another hard year for farmers. 
 
To assist farmers in time such as this, the crop insurance program, as the minister for the Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance said early in question period today, we’re looking at four or five changes — proposing four or five 
changes to it. One of it, stubble land to be insurable for seeding; winter wheat to be insured; better farming 
practices to be recognized, i.e., fertilizer, weed control; spot loss from water similar to hail loss claims; crops 
insurable at a non-devalued rate. For instance, if a farmer had two bad years in a row, that is when he 
desperately needs insurance, but he can only collect a portion of 70 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s how we can help our farmers in the area. That’s who we can help the farmers in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to summarize a few points. The Department of Environment is a 
protection agency. We have not repealed any legislation or regulations that are covered under a permit to any 
industry. I sort of take offence at the Leader of the Opposition’s remarks on page 57 of Hansard, on November 
the 21st, when he states that there will be less protection of the environment. 
 
We are indeed developing new guide-lines, regulations, legislation to protect this province, that we are doing it 
by a process of consultation. It’s no use drafting up a document from an office in Regina for some industry in 
the rural part of the province when it’s totally unreasonable and unrealistic. 
 
The problem before we took office, Mr. Speaker, was that the former administration didn’t understand industry 
at all. Before a new industry locates, we sit down with them and outline all the safeguards and objectives that 
must be met. And, Mr. Speaker, we do not, and I repeat, we do not use the department as a barrier to 
development, and we do not harass them afterwards or change the rules in midstream. 
 
We want to come here to create jobs, Mr. Speaker, and those here want to expand to create more jobs. We want 
to protect the environment and we think both can be done — both jobs and protection. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have already done a lot to change the direction and the image of this province, and we 
certainly have helped to create jobs. A job is the most important asset to anyone, because it provides self-esteem 
and pride. To be able to work and provide for yourself and your family is a basis on which this society is 
formed, and we intend to do all we can to preserve that way of life. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, let me say that I believe that we’ve made an excellent start at changing the direction of 
this government. We’re heading towards growth and prosperity, and that is supported by numerous statistical 
and economic updates. Give us enough time, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll show all the country and all of North 
America that optimism coupled with the wide range of good programs and policies that benefit each individual 
citizen in this province can create a healthy and strong economy. We have tremendous potential here, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of human and natural resources which are only just beginning to be noticed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve only just begun. I move to support the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
November 30, 1983 
 

350 
 

 
MR. SVEINSON: — Mr. Speaker, fellow members of the legislature, Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, I would 
like to congratulate Lieutenant Governor Johnson on his very adequate presentation of the throne speech in this 
first session of this legislature. 
 
In looking back on throne speeches past, I was musing this evening on where they actually originated, and 
looking across the floor I can understand that they’ve been with us for many, many years. I’m talking about 
throne speeches not the opposition. 
 
The first parliament sat in 1265. James II, in 1688, lost power of the king to the legislature and the British 
parliamentary system has followed that course to this date. In spite of a short-term stop and short-term 
experiment with socialism in Saskatchewan and other western provinces of Canada, it’s also been looked upon 
by other jurisdictions within the Commonwealth unfavourably, and today I might say that conservatism in the 
British Commonwealth is the order of politics. 
 
I did a little further research, and, in fact, I found a Tory that was elected back in 1857. His name was Benjamin 
Disraeli. Mr. Disraeli’s objectives at that time, and that preceded the meandering, or the wandering, or whatever 
they called it, the musings of Karl Marx. That preceded those musings. Mr. Disraeli, his intentions were to 
improve slum conditions — a Tory improving slum conditions in England. Also protecting factory workers. 
Can you imagine a Tory protecting factory workers? And also improving, also improving the condition of farm 
labourers. So, the history of the Tory party precludes, does preclude the history of the great and undenying . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I’m not attempting to be a historian. I’m just trying to lay the groundwork for why 
the people of Saskatchewan decided to return to the option of conservatism. 
 
Also, getting off the history for a moment or two at the request of the loyal opposition, I would like to welcome 
those from Agribition. I would like to welcome the people that have travelled to Regina from all corners of the 
world to participate in what has become one of the largest farm shows in the world. Hearing the comments — I 
walked through yesterday –of many of the people that are here from all corners of our globe, they are more than 
pleased with the city of Regina, with the provincial government, with the show itself, and the participation by 
the people of Saskatchewan and the people of Canada. 
 
I also stopped by . . . I was just wandering through and I was thinking of some of the mindless mutterings of 
many of the ministers, the myopic ministers that travel through here from time to time while they’re travelling 
from coast to coast in this country trying to kick that dead horse called liberalism back into life. One of them 
was in yesterday or the day before, and I stopped by for a coffee and doughnuts, but I couldn’t find his booth. I 
don’t think the Russian tractor manufacturer has a display here, unfortunately. The minister was opening one of 
the most functional buildings on the property and when I first caught the presentation, I thought possibly he was 
announcing a tractor manufacturer, possibly in the Soviet Union. That wasn’t the case, but I think he’s even 
been reprimanded by his own caucus. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — He should’ve been if he wasn’t. 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — He was. I’d also like to congratulate the opposition on some of the input they’ve had to 
the throne speech. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Consistent. 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — Somebody said it was consistent. It was consistent in that, I suppose, if you were relating 
it to baseball, the great Dizzy Dean was once asked about a very slow member on the ball team, and he said, 
“Well, he has lots of ups and downs, but he doesn’t have much forward.” I think that would relate very well to 
the participation of the opposition. They’ve had a  



 
November 29, 1983 

 

351 
 

lot of ups and downs, but in the course of this debate, they certainly haven’t demonstrated anything forward, 
and I believe for an opposition to function and expect to participate in government again in this province that 
they’re going to have to show a little more optimism. That’s what built Saskatchewan. It was the optimists who 
believed in freedom of the ownership of their capital and their land and their buildings and their factories, who 
came here from all parts of the globe to establish businesses so their families could grow and thrive. I’m sure 
the opposition must have more than some of the relentless, mindless rhetoric I’ve heard from that side of the 
House in the last eight days, and I know they’ll contribute. I know they’ll contribute and as a good opposition, 
we can expect that kind of input. 
 
It’s Christmas time, and I don’t think anybody’s mentioned Christmas in this debate. Peace on earth, goodwill 
to men. Goodwill toward all men. 
 
Fortunately, Pierre wasn’t born 2,000 years ago, because he certainly couldn’t travel the distance he’s travelled 
in the last three or four weeks on behalf of a condition in this world that we’re all concerned with. I must say, in 
retrospect, whether he’s successful or not, he certainly picked the right time of year to bring peace before the 
people of Canada and the people of the world. Hopefully, those word will go down in history. 
 
The success of this government I believe was very well articulated this afternoon by the Premier in one of the 
best speeches I’ve heard in this House in the time I’ve spent here. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — The open for business theory has opened a lot of businesses. Mr. Devine has been coast 
to coast in Canada and he has been in all corners of the world, preaching open for business and letting people 
know that one of the best held secrets in North America, Saskatchewan, is alive and well and wants their 
participation. And that we have. We’ve opened, since our government took office, 6,582 new businesses, 
compared with in the last year of the NDP administration, a loss of 696 businesses in their last year of 
administration. That translates to many things in Saskatchewan. It translates to capital input, certainly from the 
private sector. It translates into happy families at Christmas time, families with a little more money in their 
pocket. 
 
Talking about money in our pockets, even the NDP and opposition have shared in the removal of our gas tax. 
I’m certain they’ve shared in some respects to our mortgage interest reduction plan. That’s put extra dollars in 
the people’s pockets in the province, also in the people’s pockets in my constituency which, as a representative 
from the north-west of Regina, I feel at this time of the year it’s very important for people of all faiths, 
politically and religiously, to get together, and that goodwill toward men can become a slogan for us all. This is 
the last night of the throne speech, and hopefully we can even participate equally herein the House and bring in 
Christmas and a happy Christmas for all those in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ve been asked to limit my participation in this debate. We still have several members who would like to speak. 
 
I think when we’re looking at how successful we’ve been as a government, we can review simply what’s right 
about Saskatchewan today. I would say the men and women of Saskatchewan offer a very sound basis for what 
is right in this province. I haven’t heard it mentioned but, in 1983, a Nobel prize for Chemistry was awarded to 
an ex-citizen of this province, a Dr. Taube, who graduated from a Regina high school and was able, after 
leaving the province, to further his education and contribute to the point that he was chosen as a recipient of one 
of the most honourary prizes given for educational excellence in this world. He was given, Dr. Taube — in 
chemistry. I’m sure that our educational system in Saskatchewan today probably offers more of an opportunity 
to our children and certainly will to our grandchildren. Maybe we can hold on to this quality of individual. 
Maybe they’ll come back to Saskatchewan and participate in what’s happening in this province. 



 
November 30, 1983 
 

352 
 

 
We have other men and women in Saskatchewan who certainly deserve accolades as well. We have the best 
farmers, probably, in the world, and I think that probably could be related somewhat to Mr. Argue’s argument 
when he suggests our Saskatchewan farmers invest in Soviet-made equipment. I think the question should be 
answered: why? Why does the Soviet Union, certainly one of the largest countries in the world geographically, 
obviously one of the most successful in technology, why do they have to buy grain from Saskatchewan farmers? 
 
I think the question can be answered very simply. In 1919, Odessa was the leading wheat-exporting port in the 
world. This afternoon . . . and, now this is just probably a comparison, but we turned what was a problem in job 
creation in Saskatchewan . . . We made a 180-degree turn in one month, as was quoted by our Premier. We went 
from number 9 or 10 to number 3 in one month after we were elected. 
 
Well, if I go back to Odessa, most of the farmers in the Dneiper River area of Russia who farmed lands whose 
topsoil was three feet deep are now farming in Saskatchewan. The last communication they had with Russia 
wasn’t through the voice communication; it was bullets. And they left because they were no longer free to own 
their land. Under the tsarist rule, a farmer in Russia was allowed to own his land. He was allowed to won his 
land and produce, and that he did. For 300 years, one of the most successful producers of rain in the world were 
Russians. In one month, and it may have been less that that, in one month they went from a net exporter to not 
having shipped a bushel of wheat out of that country since . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member from 
Kelly . . . Pelly . . . I was thinking of Kelly, the old defenceman with the Toronto Maple Leafs. He looks like 
him today — same hairstyle. 
 
But that is a serious situation. These people didn’t leave voluntarily. They didn’t buy their land. In fact, they 
searched this country high and low, and they could not find land to compare with the land they had in Russia. 
They also had a climate like California. They didn’t live in six feet of snow in the winter time like some of us in 
Saskatchewan are forced to do because of the weather — not the politics, the weather. So when Hazen Argue is 
requesting that we buy tractors from Russia, some of the recipients of those bullets may take objection to what 
he has requested. 
 
The Russians buy wheat all over the world. It’s not limited to Saskatchewan, I can promise you that. They buy 
from the Americans. Is President Reagan out suggesting, “Trade in your John Deere on a Belarus”? Not that I’m 
aware of. And I’ll tell you, if the quality is there in the Belarus tractor, and you set it beside any of the other 
manufacturers in North America, I’m sure the farmers — if the quality is better — are going to buy Belarus. But 
it’s embarrassing to walk by a Belarus demonstration, or a Belarus comparison, or whatever you want to call it, 
between a John Deere and a Massey or a New Holland or anything else. Have you ever stopped and had a look? 
Also, if you follow that history a little more, and you believe in Alexander Solzhenitsyn, there’s 19 million dead 
farmers in Russia who were told to get back to the land and produce that grain. And they didn’t do it. So I’m not 
sure that the undercoat on those machines is not the blood of those dead farmers. I don’t think we have to 
apologize for buying John Deere, or Massey Harris, or New Holland, or Case . . . have I missed anybody? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — International. 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — International. And sales in this country, employers in this country, in the farm machinery 
industry, locally and nationally and internationally, have had slow times in the last six or eight or 10 months, or 
maybe 15 or 20 months. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Eighteen months for sure. 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — Eighteen months for sure, the member opposite says. He relates it all to conservatism — 
a government that’s produced 25,000 jobs in the last year, and haven’t yet opened a farm machinery outlet that 
they own — and don’t plan to. 



 
November 29, 1983 

 

353 
 

 
So what’s right about Saskatchewan? That’s the manpower. And we could name many, many others. I’ve 
missed somebody. Grant Hodgins wanted me to mention him, and rightly so — the member from Melfort — a 
young man, aggressive, very, very active in his own business, active in politics . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . .How about Gordie Howe? Gordie Howe, another export. 
 
Anyway, I think the second point about what’s right about Saskatchewan is the motive that we brought into this 
province as a government. And the motive is to put the people of Saskatchewan back to work. That was our 
motive as a government, and we’ve succeeded. We’ve exceeded our intention; we’ve exceeded our goals by 
putting 25,000 people back to work in a mere one year. It was mentioned this afternoon that under your 
administration, between 1973 and 1977, the growth in this province was zero — zero, norm. that is an 
absolutely fact. You weren’t getting any information from the people above you. 
 
Also, the method: the third point in what’s right in this province is the method of establishing the goals that we 
set out in our motives, and putting the manpower we have to work in this province. And the method was simple, 
very simple: put the private capital back to work and let’s let Uncle Government sit back and maybe offer some 
help occasionally, but let’s not take it all for ourselves. Let’s not take it all for ourselves. 
 
Two billion dollars invested in the resource industry in this province since 1971, in equity — two billion 
dollars. Six hundred million in uranium, that over the weekend you decided you were going to shut down. But 
above that 600 million, there’s another 1.4 billion that could have been used to improve our health systems in 
this province, that could have been used to put some people to work through loan guarantees, could have built 
some nursing homes, some hospitals. 
 
But what did you choose to do? You chose to put it in as equity, into corporations that would have been 
established anyway, and many of them already were. You just proceeded to take them over, i.e., potash. 
 
Potash was a good point. It’s been mentioned many times before, but it was not mentioned in the 1975 election 
campaign — not mentioned. But within two or three months you’d borrowed 700 million to take the industry 
over — at least the part you felt was convenient for you for the time being. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — They can’t be trusted. 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — “They can’t be trusted,” a member says. I think I can quote the Premier on, “They can’t 
be trusted.” And I can quote the people at the coffee shop, “They can’t be trusted.” I heard somebody at the rink 
today say, “You can’t be trusted,” I heard somebody in the hallway today said, “You can’t trust them. They’re 
throwing the high hard curve ball at you. They threw it at us, they’re throwing it at you.” 
 
You slid into third and you got put out, boys. You did. And there were three down; it was the bottom of the 
ninth. The game is over. Conservatism has put people back to work in Saskatchewan. That’s what the game is 
all about. 
 
The master, number four in what is right about Saskatchewan: number four is the master, and the master in this 
province has always been, and will always be, the law. That’s not necessarily true in some countries, where 
your philosophy is the established norm. That’s not necessarily true. 
 
But we do have a system of a law in Canada, and that law is administered by the legislature and the judiciary, 
and it’s the master in this province. It’s the master, not some inviolate leader that sits on a perch somewhere and 
preaches the gospel and he calls it socialism. That’s no longer with us. 



 
November 30, 1983 
 

354 
 

 
In the schools . . . They were talking on the weekend of implementing that philosophy in our schools. God help 
us! And He will . . . When that philosophy is mentioned. He must cringe. 
 
And the message . . . The last thing about what’s right in Saskatchewan. That’s the last thing with respect to my 
speech is the message, and how we get that message out. And I would like to quote one of my favourite 
Liberals, one of my favourite Liberals. But he, as Liberal, didn’t last throughout his whole career, but he was 
there for a while . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, it wasn’t — it was Mr. Churchill. And he denied having 
inspired Britain during the Second World War. And he said it was the nation. It was the nation and the race 
dwelling around the world that had the lion’s heart. “I had the luck,” quote Mr. Churchill, “I had the luck to 
give the roar.” 
 
And that’s all we’re doing with respect to this government. We’re carrying the message. We’re giving the roar. 
Eric was roaring in Austria yesterday. Grant could be roaring in Portugal tomorrow. But the message is getting 
out there. And we’re not taking credit for it. The people who are willing to invest in this province are taking the 
credit for it. They’ve got the lion’s heart. 
 
You people didn’t have a heart, and that’s why you’re where you are. And I’m trying to be nice. I’m trying to 
be nice and it’s difficult; it’s difficult. I have listened to the throne speech debate for six days, and I’m thinking 
to myself, how negative can we be? I’ve got to get up and I’ve got to show some positive input. But it’s tough; 
it’s tough. 
 
You know, I was thinking on the way to work tonight, I was thinking on the way to the legislature, I was 
thinking that, you know, how does a musician feel when he’s playing to an empty house? Well, that’s how I feel 
when I’m speaking to the NDP. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — And it’s a frustration. And I would like to come back historically to some of the . . . Just 
moving back to some of our roots as Conservatives. And again, Mr. Benjamin Disraeli, and I think the member 
from Rosthern would be very proud of him. He was the only Jewish-born first minister ever to be in charge in 
England. He said, “I’m a Conservative to preserve all that’s good in the constitution, but a radical to remove all 
that’s bad.” 
 
You know, we inherited an empty cupboard. We inherited an empty cupboard. We have to sit in this House 
when the opposition’s on their feet. We have to listen to an empty philosophy. We have to listen to an empty 
philosophy. In most cases we’re preaching, or at least we’re trying to teach, I’m not sure which, to an empty 
desk. They’re not here tonight. There’s a couple of . . . Well, there’s two or three or four in the House; five or 
six are in and out. The leader isn’t here. And I think, comparing . . . If we want to relate, if we want to relate this 
whole exercise to baseball, and I know that we shouldn’t be . . . 
 
In the introduction I missed on congratulatory message. To the people that have moved in here from Hogtown, 
I’d like to congratulate them on their victory on the week-end. The Argonauts slipped one through, and I don’t 
know how they did it, but they did. So the NDP can . . . It took them 30, was it 32 years to come back? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — 31 years. 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — 31 years? You won’t be with us; the member that’s leaving now from Quill Lakes, he 
won’t be with us 30 years down the road, but I’m sure the philosophy will still be there. 
 
But comparing Grant’s speech to the Leader of the Opposition and relating it to baseball, I would say that Mr. 
Premier could slide a lamb chop past a wolf, and that, Mr. Blakeney, if he continues to throw the . . . 



 
November 29, 1983 

 

355 
 

 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order please. The hon. member continues to call members by their names rather than by 
their position or their constituency, and I would caution him on that. 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — I apologize. No more lamb chops. We’ll let the lamb producers out there take care of 
that. 
 
In closing, I would like to say that for the city of Regina we have announced an upgrader that’s going to put, in 
the construction phase, 1,700 people to work — approximately. After completion, it will establish 
approximately 100 new jobs in Regina. 
 
On the short term, $600 million injected into our economy can’t hurt it. The members opposite have debated the 
upgrader in Saskatchewan for, I would think, 10 years. Nothing’s happened. We’ve been in 18 months and the 
proposed starting date has been announced and, fortunately, as a member from Regina, this is the location 
selected after a great deal, I’m sure, of consultation . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I hear the member from 
Regina Centre is pretty happy about it as well, and I can understand why. I can understand why. 
 
So, in closing I would like to wish the House, I’d like to wish the members opposite, if I don’t get the 
opportunity, a Merry Christmas and Happy New Year. Thank you very much. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DOMOTOR: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to enter into the throne speech debate. 
 
First of all, I’d like to congratulate the members who have risen in the House and spoken. They’ve done an 
excellent job. I’d like to also congratulate at this time the new Lieutenant Governor. I’d like to congratulate the 
member from Melville and the member from Saskatoon Nutana for their excellent speeches on the throne 
debate. I’d also like to congratulate the Premier on his excellent speech this afternoon in outlining our policies 
and what the NDP have done over the previous years. I’d like to also congratulate the new Legislative 
Secretaries and, particularly also, the other members who have been placed into the cabinet. They’re doing an 
excellent job. I’d also like to say that the other members that we have on different committees are doing, also, 
an excellent job, and very well contribute to the type of government that we have in the province today. 
 
First of all I’d like to make a few comments from this afternoon hearing the member from Quill Lakes. He 
talked about the loss of confidence that members have. Well, I would submit that the members today have more 
confidence than they had when we first got elected because we are progressing ahead; we’re seeing businesses 
rise in the province and we’re seeing the oil industry boom. The member from Quill Lakes . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — For every rise there’s a fall, and for every boom there’s a bust. 
 
HON. MR. DOMOTOR: — There’s a pessimist for you. The member, also, from Quill Lakes talked about the 
Sahara Desert. He says it stretches far and wide and is barren. I would suggest that it’s barren just like the NDP. 
I assume that he speaks from experience, like a vast wasteland of sand and vast wasteland of NDP ideas. 
 
He talks about big business. Well, he talked about a few commercial banks. Well, let’s take a look at a few of 
these banks. Let’s take a look at, for example, the Royal Bank, and I’ve talked to a few of the individuals there. 
They’re not only concentrating in large cities, they’re putting up bank offices in rural Saskatchewan — in 
small-town Saskatchewan. And not only that, they finance over 80 per cent of small business. So they’re 
concerned about the small businesses, not just large corporations. I would suggest that the large corporations are 
more tied to the socialist philosophy — to the NDP — along with big government, along with big unions. 



 
November 30, 1983 
 

356 
 

 
What about the funding for programs? They talk about cut-backs in funding. Well, let’s go back a little bit. 1977 
— who reduced the education grants in this province? It was the NDP that reduced that amount and therefore 
put a burden on small school administration to raise the taxes from the individual farmers. And that was started 
back in 1977. 
 
Let’s look at the facts. When we talk about double standards, let’s talk about double-talk. I would suggest that 
the members opposite are very good at doing double-talk, and not only double-talk, they are very good at doing 
half-truths. First of all, they should attempt to get their facts straight before they start going ahead and spreading 
half-rumours. 
 
Now, let’s take a look . . . Last week we talked about President Kennedy and the kind of man he was. President 
Kennedy said, “Ask not what the country can do for you, but what you can do for the country.” What did the 
NDP do when they were in power? The socialist philosophy — they don’t want an individual to go ahead and 
do his own work. They want to go ahead and have him depend upon the government so that they can control 
their lives. Socialism. 
 
Let’s take a look at the Star-Phoenix: “NDP factions square off over key party principles.” And I’d just like to 
read a little quote from here: 
 

Al Reidy of Rocanville said the new statement of principles should emulate the Regina Manifesto of 
1933, containing specifics. 
 

1933 — do you know what the manifesto of 1933 meant? Control of production, control of land, control of 
industries, control of farmers, control of business. The left caucus also calls for the replacement of the capitalist 
system with socialism. 
 
The members opposite complain about a deficit. We’re just looking over here. “NDP president calls the past 
year a success.” This is a success story. “In the financial report read by treasurer Alvin Hewitt of Perdue, the 
party was shown to be running a small operating deficit of $38,000.” I wonder, how can they stand the deficit? 
They’ve been accusing us of a deficit over this last little while. 
 
What about the government in Manitoba — that’s an NDP stripe, and where are they at? They’re into millions 
of dollars of deficit. 
 
The member from Quill Lakes took up to riding about luxury cars, and he says how much it’s costing this 
cabinet for luxury cars. Well I think the member from Souris-Cannington did a very good job in describing 
what these luxury cars were. I’d like to give them an example. I’ve got a luxury car also that they bought. It’s a 
1981 model, one of theirs, 98,000 kilometres. So is the member from Arm River, 1980 model. So is the member 
from Kelsey-Tisdale, former minister’s car that he’s driving, 1980-81 model. Now I wonder where are all these 
new cards they’re talking about. 
 
I would submit that we’d need at least 10 years to straighten out the mess they’ve left this province in, at least 
10 years. Then we could get it straightened out . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . They say that we’ll do it quicker 
than that. I’m sure we will. 
 
Let’s take a look at what the former administration believed in. It believes in government control. On page 103 
on November 22, the member from Regina Centre said: “It is the activist interventionist approach of the former 
government which brought the province a period of unprecedented prosperity.” Interventionist approach — in 
other words, they like to see government control. That’s their basic philosophy. If it was their control today, we 
wouldn’t have the oil drilling and the wells that we have being drilled in Saskatchewan now. 
 
And then they talk about what of our accomplishments. Well, let’s just take a look at a few examples. Let’s just 
take a look at them. What about Opportunities ’83? That was a success  



 
November 29, 1983 

 

357 
 

story. Many businesses and many farms took advantage of that. I have about 150 individuals in my 
constituency, for example, in the constituency of Humboldt, that took advantage of it. What about the $5,000 
rebate? They said there was nothing for the businesses. Over 83 businesses in that constituency took advantage 
of that. And then they say there was no creation of jobs. Well, those jobs had to come from somewhere because 
these people were hired. And the unemployment rate, therefore, is sitting at 6.4 per cent, with a 25,000 increase 
in job rate. 
 
What about the Build-A-Home program? Don’t they know that they was a Build-A-Home program out there? 
That created a lot of jobs. 
 
Now I would just like to refer to the “Market Place” in the Leader-Post, November 28, when they’re talking 
about the oil wells that were drilled. 
 

Numbers tell some (of the success story). 1,537 wells have been drilled here as of November 16, which 
easily passes the record (1,400 and some) in 1980. The total includes 150 natural gas wells, notably 137 
in the Swift Current region, again as of November 16. In all of 1980 there were only nine gas wells 
drilled in the province, and only 16 in 1981, and 47 in 1982. 
 

Now let’s take a look at — they’re talking a few moments ago about the Progressive Conservative Party being 
the party of the big business. Well, let’s just take a look here. Another section it says: 
 

Bill Dutton, president of the Independent Saskatchewan Oil Producers Association, is the oil man behind 
Clan Resources Ltd., one of those small (small!) independent companies that feel the crests and troughs 
of the local activity more so than the gulfs, Shells, and Texacos. 
 

So look, there we have an example of a small independent company that’s been able to take advantage of it. 
 

He’s also an unabashed fan of the Progressive Conservatives’ oil industry recovery program, introduced 
in July, 1982. Ask him what recovery means, and he’ll thumb through his files, citing name after name 
of companies returning to the Estevan fields after an absence of a few or several years. 
 

And the only reason that they were gone was because the NDP turfed them out. There’s a few examples of the 
oil industry. 
 
Now, I have here from the Minister of Labour and the minister in charge of SPC, an example of some of the 
Saskatchewan natural gas distribution program. Saskatchewan Power extended natural gas service to 945 
community customers and 2,330 rural customers in the Saskatchewan Natural Gas Distribution Program. That 
was done under a Progressive Conservative government. 
 
Well, let’s take a look at another one — new service applications. In addition to Saskatchewan Natural Gas 
Distribution Program customers, a total of 13, 036 electric and gas services were connected year to date. This 
compares with 9,982 electric and gas services connected in ’82 — an increase. Why are we doing this? It 
creates employment, jobs. 
 
Now, the member from Quill Lakes was crying away back there a while ago, and I‘d just like to refer to an area 
that’s in his constituency — Annaheim — Annaheim rural underground distribution pilot project. Saskatchewan 
Power installed a rural underground distribution system to 24 farmyards in an area south of Annaheim. Did you 
hear the member from Quill Lakes say anything about that? No, because it’s positive. The pilot project was 
undertaken to determine the feasibility of installing a rural underground system, and give SPC experience in the 
construction, operation and maintenance of rural underground distribution system. But you  



 
November 30, 1983 
 

358 
 

didn’t hear this mentioned by the member from Quill Lakes. All he did was talk about negativism. 
 
As a result of this, SPC increased utilization of private sector contractors, small contractors, in both electrical 
and gas areas, gas construction and maintenance. And that’s ordinary contractors . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Very economical, my friend; very economical. 
 
Now, the members opposite complain that there’s nothing in the throne speech. Well, let’s just take a look at the 
throne speech. The reason that they don’t feel that there is anything because they would like to see in the throne 
speech where we’ve nationalized or expropriate or own or take over. But that’s not the philosophy of this 
government. This government’s philosophy is to have open trade, export, sales, trade with the other countries. 
In the first part it says: “To this end the government has placed its emphasis on trade-related activities that 
promote our province, its products, and the skills of its people.” Promote — there’s an example. 
 
Let’s take a look at what else it says in the speech. It talks about the business employment; about the tourist 
industry that we’re going to develop in the province; about how this is going to help the small business 
development; and it also relates to, during the 18 months, about the rural gasification program and how that’s 
going to continue. Also in the throne speech it says: “The government is also pleased that Canpotex itself has 
now moved its headquarters to Saskatchewan.” Did it move its headquarters to Saskatchewan while the NDP 
were in power? No, because they wouldn’t trust them, because they might be taken over. 
 
A $600 million heavy oil upgrading plant will be built in Regina, and in the construction phase alone will 
generate 2,500 person-years of employment. That’s substantial, but will they recognize that? I submit not. 
 
Also, it says about the royal holidays, how 500 jobs were created, with $250 million in capital expenditures, and 
this, of course, helps the economy, not only of Regina, or the southern part of the province, but the whole 
province, because of the extra jobs it creates and the extra taxes and revenue that you can get in as a result of it 
— the spin-off effects. 
 
A new direction in sound business skills have been brought to crown corporations, new management to make 
the crown corporations run effectively, rather than a bureaucracy that builds upon itself. Furthermore, it says in 
here — obviously these fellows can’t read — there co-exists a need for irrigation and drainage. Difficulties with 
water quality, soil salinization, and the ever-present spectre of drought are characteristics of water management 
problems in the province, and this government is going to act on their water corporation act, and work on how 
we can best streamline the development and management of water. Those are positive steps, Mr. Speaker, steps 
that will benefit all of Saskatchewan. 
 
Another part — national building code, that will help our disabled citizens’ convenient access to public 
buildings. Did they enact anything while they were in power? No, and yet they are the ones that cry about how 
they are the ones that are sympathetic to the poor and the disenfranchised and the disabled. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Sympathetic but never did anything. 
 
HON. MR. DOMOTOR: — Sympathetic and didn’t do anything, as the member from Saskatoon University 
says. Excellent idea. Did they come along with an approach to science and technology? No. Now we have a 
ministry, and a new act, to show that we are interested in new technology that will benefit all of Saskatchewan, 
because if we can do the training here, and make high tech available in the province of Saskatchewan, that 
means more jobs and more sales, and work to generate extra money and revenue into the province. 
 
What about education, educational institutions? We have opening four new technical institutes. In fall, 
Saskatchewan technical institutes will accommodate about 1,100 more students than they  



 
November 29, 1983 

 

359 
 

could a year, raising the total to nearly 6,600. Five new programs have been added to date. Over the next two 
years, total capacity will rise to nearly 9,000 training places. And then they say there hasn’t been anything done 
in that area. 
 
What about the urban and rural planning and development act? This will be in the session that’ll be handled to 
streamline the operation. 
 
Wildlife habitat. Here is another area that says in the throne speech will be introduced to secure and protect the 
most essential wildlife habitat found in provincial Crown lands. 
 
Now these are parts of the throne speech that the members opposite have not read. They haven’t read it because 
they don’t want to know the truth. They don’t ‘want to know that this government is taking some action and 
going to go ahead and work, not only now, but on a long-term plan. So when the members up there take out that 
little blue book, and say, “You didn’t do this; you didn’t do that; you didn’t do that,” Well, those members 
never did it in one year when they got into government either. They go ahead with their farm rebate program, 
and I can remember full well because I was farming. One year they’d bring it in when it was close to election 
time, give you 7 cents a gallon back. You’d get a couple of hundred bucks. Then in the next year, they’d take it 
out. Then they’re talking or complaining that we aren’t doing anything with the gas rebate. We’ve done more in 
gas tax reduction than they did in all their years in office. 
 
There are many other areas that I could expand upon and discuss with respect to the opportunities that we’re 
going to be looking at over the next few years I think at this time I’d like to congratulate the Premier and the 
cabinet and the members that have contributed to the throne speech, and I’ll be supporting the motion and not 
supporting the amendment. Thank you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. MAXWELL: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In my new capacity as Minister of Advanced Education 
and Manpower, this is my first opportunity to address an empty Assembly of the Saskatchewan Legislature. 
Empty because of the empty desks sitting over there on the opposition side, I may say. 
 
I wish to acknowledge what a privilege it is to serve in this ministerial role. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, the only thing 
I cherish more is the privilege of being the member for the fine constituency of Turtleford. 
 
I want to begin by sharing my thoughts about the excellent throne speech delivered November 17th by 
Lieutenant Governor Frederick Johnson, to whom I extend my warmest congratulations on his appointment. 
The tone of this Speech from the Throne was remarkably upbeat, and I believe this one particular paragraph is 
worth hearing again, and the text reads: 
 

It has been a goal of my government to develop policies and programs which encourage initiative and 
not dependence, and which recognize that economic strength and diversity will flow, not from the 
actions of governments, however well-intentioned, but from the vision, energy, and industry of our 
citizens. 
 

Now by contrast, Mr. Speaker, by contrast . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You want to make a comment, stand 
up and make it. Mr. Speaker, he’s shooting his mouth off from the seat of his pants. Quite frankly, one of the 
things I’ve learned in education, Mr. Speaker, is that the average IQ is supposed to be 100. What I’ve 
discovered is, the cumulative IQ in the opposition doesn’t even reach 100. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
November 30, 1983 
 

360 
 

 
HON. MR. MAXWELL: — Mr. Speaker, by contrast to what I quoted from the throne speech, the NDP 
believe that capitalism — capitalism  — is a dirty word. Freedom — freedom in the form of free enterprise (and 
I had some quips over there earlier tonight ) is a dirty concept. However, you have to wonder; you have to 
wonder about the NDP’s own commitment to their ideology of socialisms. In fact, for all their socialist rhetoric 
and bombast about social concerns and social priorities, there was a link missing between the talk and the 
action. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this afternoon I listened in astonishment to what I consider to be a scurrilous attack made on 
me personally, and the government, by the member for Quill Lakes. Mr. Speaker, my astonishment came from 
listening to the member standing over there having the audacity to plumb the depths of hypocrisy. 
 
He was talking about universities in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, with your permission, I’d like to quote, and 
put into the record, excerpts from some letters I received recently, this first one addressed to me in the building 
here. 
 

This letter acknowledges receipt of yours, dated November 14, with thanks. Your response, the 
additional information it contains (may I repeat that) the additional information it contains, and the 
suggestions concerning future discussions are appreciated. Not only is it my expectation that we will be 
able to develop agreement concerning the problems which confront universities, it is also that 
appropriate remedies can be proposed. 
 

Signed, Mr. Speaker, Pamela J. Smith, Chairperson, University of Regina Faculty Association. 
 
Another one: 
 

Dear. Mr. Maxwell: On behalf of Mr. Alex MacDonald, and myself, I wish to thank you for taking time 
to meet with us to discuss matters of concern pertaining to problems and challenges at our universities. 
We appreciated (please note this, Mr. Speaker; I’m going to say this twice), we appreciated the candour, 
the candour, which I may suggest is a departure from the normal type of situation and relationship that 
existed between the previous government and the universities. We appreciated the candour of your 
questions and comments, and hope that there will be further opportunities to discuss and search for 
acceptable solutions to those problems and challenges. We thank you for the interview. 
 

Signed by T.D. Regehr, President, Saskatchewan Association of University Teachers. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — It’s Regehr. And he was the only one who . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
HON. MR. MAXWELL: — Thank you for pointing out it was Regehr. I think it was probably more than 
Professor Regehr. I’m going to get back to it a little bit later, Mr. Member, for your benefit, with some quotes 
that you, particularly, are going to enjoy, if you have the courage to stay seated on the seat of your pants where 
you are now, and not walk out like your colleagues. 
 
Another one: 
 

Dear Mr. Maxwell: Thank you for your encouraging letter of November 14. I very much appreciate your 
offer of being available for discussion, and if your schedule permits, would like to follow through with 
that. 
 

Signed: R. Bryce, Dean of the Faculty of Education, University of Regina. And you can bet, Mr. Speaker, that 
my schedule will be made to permit for consultation with the Dean. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
November 29, 1983 

 

361 
 

 
HON. MR. MAXWELL: — Mr. Speaker, one last letter I’d like to quote from. This letter came as a result of 
an early meeting I had back in August — beginning of August — with the president of the University of 
Regina, Dr. Lloyd Barber, a gentleman for whom I have the highest respect and admiration as an administrator. 
 

Dear Colin: My sincere thanks for a most pleasant and productive first meeting. I came away with an 
enthusiastic feeling. I like where you are coming from. I like what you want to do, and will do my best 
to help you get there. Given the nature, necessarily, of a university, it may not always appear that we are 
trying to do our best to help, and it would be a two-moon Friday if everyone in our university agreed on 
anything. Despite these institutional limitations, we will do our best to help. 
 

Despite views expressed in the media that were not necessarily accurately reflecting an entire half-hour 
conversation I had with a particular report, despite this, subsequent meetings with Dr., Barber have been 
pleasant, have been productive, and I may say I had an excellent meeting with the Board of Governors of the 
University of Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to read a few of those comments into the record . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, 
let’s take a look at something else. You asked for this, Mr. Member, Regina Centre. If you’d kept your mouth 
shut, I may have omitted this, but I can’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m obliged to defend those scurrilous comments from the seat of his pants. And I say seat of his 
pants, not his mouth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from Leo Kristjanson. The present of the University of Saskatchewan, in case 
your short memories have forgotten over there. I’d like to quote from his fall address this year to the senate. He 
said, and I quote: 
 

Capital and equipment expenditures delayed for up to a decade . . . 
 

And who was in power for that decade? It sure wasn’t us, Mr. Speaker. It was those people sitting over there. 
 

. . . have placed physical limited on the efforts of staff to maintain the quality of education. 
 

And who was in power during the 1970s? The NDP, the people who are now the defenders, somehow the 
defenders. They’re freedom fighters who would give multimillions of dollars, all of a sudden, to the 
universities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s check the records, let’s check the records and see what the big mouths over there actually 
accomplished in time gone by. And let’s compare performances. Here’s a headline in the October 20, 1981, 
Leader-Post, October 20, 1981. It states that social spending has slowed in the province. And the article reads: 
 

Saskatchewan’s government has shown a disturbing trend towards slowing down spending on social 
programs in the past five years, a University of Regina professor says. 
 

And I quote him: 
 

“Since 1976, despite the fact that our provincial wealth has been growing strongly, the proportion of it 
that the government spend on the departments of health, education, and social services has been 
declining,” Graham Riches, assistant dean of the university faculty of social work said. 



 
November 30, 1983 
 

362 
 

 
The article states that the NDP government’s social spending declined from 10 per cent of total provincial 
wealth in 1976 to 9.3 per cent in 1981. Double standards, Mr. Speaker, more than that, double whammy. 
 
Hear what the hon. member from Shaunavon had to say when he was minister of social services in reply to a 
reporter’s inquiry about this decline in social spending. I quote: 
 

There have been reductions in staff in certain areas of social programs. It’s a process of belt tightening 
to get the house in order. 
 

He went on to say that in the mid 1970s the provincial government invested heavily in energy and other 
programs outside the social sector, and this is the socialist party. Energy, of course, being the same uranium that 
they now want to reject completely. 
 
On the one hand you have the NDP railing against the Tories for a philosophy of free enterprise, and on the 
other hand you have the NDP deceptively, deceptively cutting back on social spending in favour of increasing 
the government’s involvement in capitalist ventures — state capitalism in a socialist’s cloak; chairman of the 
board in a cabinet minister’s clothing. 
 
The NDP chairman of the board could not have earned their way up the ladder in the corporate business sector, 
because they proclaim themselves socialist. Yet the moment they get their hands on the public purse, the NDP 
cabinet turns into an investors’ syndicate. While the NDP investors’ syndicate of pseudo-socialists were 
performing the sleight of hand with the public purse and cutting back on the province’s commitment to social 
spending, problems arising from neglect were surfacing in the social spending sector of education, most 
particularly at the universities. 
 
The Dean of the University of Saskatchewan College of Agriculture, J.A. Brown, wrote in a December, 1981, 
report to the board of governors, and I quote: 
 

In addition to the limitations of research space and facilities, we have very limited teaching laboratory 
space; little classroom space under the control of our departments; and we are quite short of study space 
and general student space. Inflation and budget cuts (repeat budget cuts) during the last four or five 
years have had quite an adverse effect on our ability to undertake our duties in several departments. 
 

The College of Agriculture during this period, this four or five year period, as stated in the Dean’s report to the 
University of Saskatchewan board of governors, and I quote: 
 

. . . lost most of our budget for student assistance for about one-third of our sessional lecturers and for 
the equivalent of about six support staff positions. 
 

The Dean’s remarks are more than a testimony to what the NDP was doing for the university system in 
Saskatchewan. They are a veritable condemnation. 
 
Listen to what the socialists have left as a monument, as a monument to their sense of devotion and reverence 
for social priorities. A Saskatchewan universities commission report, dated December 23, 1981, contains a 
review of the College of Agriculture physical plant. 
 

Kirk Hall — constructed as a residence in 1947; converted predominantly to office use, although the 
auditorium is used as a classroom and part of the basement is used for soil testing. The facilities are so 
overcrowded that work has been double-shifted, and soil samples have to be stored in the hallways. 
 
The John Mitchell building — built in 1947. This building was used for offices,  



 
November 29, 1983 

 

363 
 

classrooms, and laboratories, and the attached growth facilities are grossly inadequate, as there are no 
environmental controls for the area. Materials and equipment are stored in the hallways, in violation of 
fire codes. The mechanical system is grossly inadequate, and ventilation is achieved by opening 
windows. 
 
The Crop Science Building — built in 1929 through 1937. This building is used for classrooms, 
instructional and research labs. This building does not have a ventilation system, and in some labs small 
air conditioning units recirculate the air to keep the temperature at a reasonable level. 
 
Livestock Pavilion — This building was constructed in 1912. The building is used extensively by animal 
sciences as a demonstration area. The conditions are unusual. There are cockroaches, silver-fish, mice, 
and other vermin in the lab where tissue culture work is done. 
 
Animal and Poultry Science — Built in 1959. This is the newest building in the College of Agriculture. 
There is overcrowding, and seed for nutritional experiments is ground down the hall at the end of the 
building, resulting in a worsening of ventilation problems. The structure is thermally inefficient. 
 
Horticulture Greenhouses — This building was constructed in 1914 through 1925. This structure is 
deteriorating and thermally inefficient, lacks proper environmental controls, and is severely 
overcrowded. 
 

That sums up the province’s physical facility for research and higher learning relating to the province’s most 
important industry. 
 
A report dated February of 1982 makes a comparative analysis between the University of Saskatchewan 
Agriculture Faculty facilities and those existing at the University of Manitoba, Faculty of Agriculture, and it 
reads: 
 

There is a tremendous disparity in respect of the physical facilities provided at the two institutions. The 
College of Agriculture in Saskatoon currently operates with a total of 9,202 net assignable square metres 
of space while at the University of Manitoba, the faculty currently utilizes 18,741 assignable square 
metres of space. Some of the facilities at Manitoba, converted old barns, are certainly not elegant but, 
with one or two exceptions, are reasonably functional. However, several of the major units are housed in 
excellent modern facilities, built in the 1960s and 1970s. 
 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, a damning report. An indictment against the social priorities of the 
socialists of this province when Manitoba can demonstrate a respectable long-term commitment to education 
which must be considered a number one social priority within any civilized society, and the NDP here couldn’t 
even raise a barn for agriculture, during a time when Saskatchewan made greater economic strides than ever 
before in its history. 
 
Somehow, while the NDP was busy cutting back on social spending and reallocating public funds into uranium 
and other programs outside the social sector, they overlooked the fact that Saskatchewan has 50 per cent of all 
the agricultural land in Canada — 43 per cent of improved land, 21 per cent of all farms. They were so engaged 
playing the role of an investor syndicate that they ignored applying even the barest minimum of public funds to 
vital educational facilities that could educate people in our most important industry. 
 
Double standards? No standards whatsoever, Mr. Speaker, and no ethics, and absolutely no concept of what 
kind of social priorities are expected by the people of this province. Whereas the universities were struggling 
and experiencing cutbacks or pure neglect, minister of then continuing education, Douglas McArthur, came out 
and stated in January 18, 1982, Leader-Post,  



 
November 30, 1983 
 

364 
 

that while he agrees additional funding for post-secondary institutions would be attractive, he denies a 
Saskatchewan Association of University Teachers’ (SAUT) contention that provincial government fiscal 
restraint is a reflection of the NDP’s list of priorities. 
 
The SAUT made a broader observation relative to the former administration’s commitment to social spending 
the educational sector, when they noted in the January 19, 1982 Star Phoenix: 
 

Nor has the money simply been diverted elsewhere in the post-secondary education field, since 
vocational and technical institutes have not fared any better than universities in the last seven years. In 
the context of a healthy provincial economy, and of predictions of increased demands for post-secondary 
education from the traditional student population, and from the mature student population, the practice 
of underfunding is surprising. 
 

January 21, 1982 Leader-Post; and who was in office then, Mr. Speaker? The University Teachers Association 
cited the following effects of underfinancing under their administration: a reduction in the number of faculty 
positions, including the loss of five teaching positions in the University of Regina’s Arts Faculty; the 
substitution for full time positions with limited term appointments; erosion of faculty salaries; elimination of 
programs such as the institute for northern studies and plant ecology department at the University of 
Saskatchewan; increasing use of quotas to limit numbers of students entering various programs; and a decline in 
library holdings. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they have the audacity to try somehow to blame us for the sorry mess that we inherited from 
them. The operational side of university funding, under the social priorities government of the NDP, didn’t do 
much better in letting the public dollars trickle down from the top of their syndicate pyramid. Hear this from the 
Saskatchewan Universities’ Commission annual report for the year ended March 31, 1981: 
 

Both universities had to cope in 1980-81 with a difficult budget-setting process. The 1980-81 operating 
grant increase of 8.9 per cent over the previous year was below the eventual increase in the rate of 
inflation, experienced in 1980-81, of 11.6 per cent, as measured by consumer price index. 
 

Further on from that report: 
 

Continuing inflationary price increases during 1980-81, at over 11 per cent, forced both the universities 
to make adjustment in their operations to cope with the decline in funding in real terms. 
 

It’s tragic that the NDP’s useless efforts to curb inflation were not applied to their cabinet’s board of director 
investors’ syndicate mentality, rather than placing the burden upon an already long-neglected educational 
system in this province. 
 
And one wonders, Mr. Speaker, during the halcyon days of the ’70s, where did the money go? Where did it go? 
Well, it went to edifices built to their own glory and their own memory — the T.C. Douglas Building, the SGI 
building, and of course, into uranium mines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take a moment here to express an opinion about a recent hot item in the local press. This 
relates to the subject of academic freedom. I read with great interest the articles appearing in the Leader-Post on 
Thursday, November 24, and the Carillon, the University of Regina student newspaper, which addressed a 
controversial upcoming conference entitled “Theology, Third World Development and Economic Justice,” 
jointly sponsored on December 4 by the Fraser Institute, the University of Regina, Campion College and Luther 
College. 
 
Initially my reaction was to wonder about that deeply held value of university communities called academic 
autonomy, particularly given the fact that my own recent inquiry into faculty  



 
November 29, 1983 

 

365 
 

work-loads at the University of Regina stimulated an outcry from the faculty association of that institution about 
my own lack of understanding and respect for old value of academic autonomy. In this respect, Mr. Speaker, I 
applaud Vice-President Don Shaw’s statement that the university’s rule is to provide a forum for debate, debate 
such as that which undoubtedly will arise during and after the December 4 conference. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from an editorial in the Leader-Post of November 26, 1983, and I think the House 
will find this very interesting. It’s entitled “Scope for open minds.” . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, they 
have closed minds and that’s exactly what this seems to go on to say in the editorial. We’re down to one 
member so I’ll give him the benefit of this piece of wisdom from the Leader-Post. This is for you, my friend. 
 

The nays from the faculty charge the December 4 conference will compromise university independence. 
(Now, here’s the good bit.) Would this same group object to the mind-sealing effect of a fathering of 
doctrinaire leftists? . . . The university is safeguarding independence by its open-minded participation> 
 

However, I’m deeply concerned about the content and tone of the Carillon article to which I earlier made 
reference. I’m concerned about a group of faculty members — I believe it was 31 — who have felt obliged to 
freely preach about denying this conference group the basic freedoms of thought and expression which 
represent cornerstones, not just of our universities, but of our Canadian society. Such muzzling would have the 
effect of insulting the university tradition of academic freedom, academic autonomy, and furthermore, insulting 
two respected affiliated colleges, Luther College and the Jesuit-related Campion College. 
 
For my part, as Minister of Advanced Education and Manpower, and as a former faculty member at the 
University of Regina, I feel a sense of regret for the many faculty members who have been misrepresented, 
misrepresented because they did not choose to pursue a rigid, anti-intellectual course of action taken by the 
signatories to the letter which appeared in the Carillon of November 23. Mr. Speaker, I am committed to 
academic freedom, and I can tell you that we want to develop the best type of advanced education program we 
possibly can for the province. 
 
I can’t leave the subject of academic freedom, Mr. Speaker, unless I share with you a resolution, number 122, 
from the NDP convention this year. And here is the resolution: 
 

Be it resolved as NDP policy that political science, economics, history of the labour and co-operative 
movement be required as part of the curriculum Saskatchewan high schools. 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Brain washing, brain washing. 
 
HON. MR. MAXWELL: — We can . . . My colleagues are saying, “Brain washing.” I wouldn’t be nearly so 
cruel to the indoctrinaire-oriented NDP. We can only speculate as exactly what these specialists in 
indoctrination, the NDP, have in mind for our school children, if they ever get back into power in this province. 
 
Well, let’s look on the bright side, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m hearing cries, “The children 
are safe.” I prefer to believe that’s true, and so do you, Mr. Member from Regina Centre. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — The only member. 
 
HON. MR. MAXWELL: — The only member; yeah. The only NDP member in the House. But, Mr. Member, 
I am enjoying your presence, and I am enjoying the wit of your remarks, because I realize what it’s like, must 
be for you to sit all by yourself over there, surrounded by empty spaces, including the ones between your ears. 



 
November 30, 1983 
 

366 
 

 
In the brief span we’ve been in power, post-secondary education funding has been increased by 34 per cent . . . 
34 per cent in two years. Since we took office, government expenditures in post-secondary education went from 
171 million to nearly 230 million. We’ve managed to outpace inflation in those two years by better than 15 per 
cent. 
 
In the operational grants to universities, we’ve outpaced the rate of inflation in two years by at least 5 per cent, 
and this year we increased, for the first time in four years, the amount allocated to the student aid fund — and 
we doubled it. 
 
At the institute level, they increased funding 9 per cent in the year before we took office. In the year since we 
took office, we increased funding to the neglected technical institutions by a full 18.7 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I did not give some kind of outline of changes and progress being made in the 
Department of Advanced Education and manpower. I’m pleased to report progress in all areas, with particular 
progress taking place in the manpower division. Department personnel have designed an impressive system of 
linkages with business and industry that provide our technical institute administrators with an added dimension 
to course planning and delivery. 
 
As these systems take hold and begin operating, the institutes will receive precise industry and business input as 
to where manpower shortages are impending, where skills need updating, where we need retraining. And 
Saskatchewan students will benefit from being educated in current and up-to-date curriculums, as they devote 
time and energy to the pursuit of their careers. 
 
These linkages with business and industry have been formed for all trade programs and all other programs that 
he institutes. We’ve developed a branch in the department that works to provide labour market forecasts in 
concert with industry and Canada Employment and Immigration. As minister, I have requested that industry in 
Saskatchewan join me in forming a Saskatchewan institute training advisory committee, which has direct access 
to my office, and which will provide the department with a management perception of training requirements 
that previously did not exist. 
 
When we formed this government, the province ranked ninth in Canada in the ability to service student demand 
for technical institute training programs, but this will have changed dramatically by 1985, when we should be 
fifth and possibly fourth in the country in this respect. 
 
A mes amis de langue française, je suis trés heureux de pouvoir vous adresser ce soir. Je n’ai pas souvent 
l’occasion de m’adresser à la communité francophone de la Saskatchewan dans sa propre langue. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. MAXWELL: — Merci, mes amis. 
 
C’est dans là, un double plaisir pour moi. Toute fois, que nous soyons canadien-français, canadien-anglais, ou, 
comme moi, canadien d’origine écossaise, nous avons tous, en grand parti, les mêmes experiences dans cette 
merveilleuse province de la Saskatchewan. 
 
Mes amis, nous avons commencé à établir des bases solides pour la prospérité de notre province en bâtissant sur 
cet effet notre force, et nous croyons que cette force réside dans le peuple de la Saskatchewan. Nous sommes 
engagés, et c’est un honneur pour nous d’en faire parti. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am delighted to support the motion. 



 
November 29, 1983 

 

367 
 

 
MR. PARKER: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is certainly a pleasure for me to rise and participate 
in the throne speech debate. I know that much has been said. Much of the optimism and realism of the throne 
speech and the economy, as it is and as it has been for the last 18 months, has been reiterated very effectively by 
the members on this side of the House. Of course, we balanced that with the usual doom and gloom and dismal 
forecasts of pessimism from the members on the opposite side of the House — something, of course, which the 
people of Saskatchewan have come accustomed to lately. 
 
I would like to echo the congratulations previously articulated by my colleagues with respect to the fine manner 
in which the new Lieutenant Governor delivered the Speech from the Throne. I’d also like to congratulate the 
member from Melville and the member from Saskatoon Nutana for their fine delivery in the motion and the 
seconding of the motion with regard to the throne speech. 
 
I think that most of the highlights of the throne speech have been touched upon. However, as we wind down the 
debate, I think it’s worth reiterating a couple of issues which have to stand out as priorities with the Progressive 
Conservative Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Number one, of course, has been mentioned and that is job creation. We realize that while we do have the 
lowest unemployment in the entire country, since April 1982, we’ve been creating new jobs at an average of 
about 3,500 per month. That’s job creation, Mr. Speaker. Our Opportunities ’83 program placed 4,200 students 
during the summer months. That’s job creation, Mr. speaker. Our $5,000 tax credit program, which was 
introduced to create new jobs, resulted in 3,500 new jobs as a direct result of that program. That’s job creation, 
Mr. Speaker. A $3,000 grant that was made available under the Build-A-Home program to assist buyers of new 
homes resulting in a 29 per cent increase over 1982 from January to August in the urban centres. That’s job 
creation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What have our efforts resulted in so far? Well, as of August 1983, the work-force in Saskatchewan for the first 
time in the history of the province went over the 500,000 mark — an increase of over 22,000 jobs in one year. 
That’s job creation. So when we say that job creation still remains a top priority for the people of Saskatchewan, 
they can rest assured that the government they elected to listen and act according to their wishes is continuing to 
do just that. 
 
We will not abandon the fight against unemployment. We’re still not satisfied, even though we have the lowest 
unemployment in the country. Now, the former government, they had two approaches to dealing with 
unemployment. One was to accelerate their biggest export market which, naturally, we’ve all come to realize 
was our young citizens. The other is, of course, to spend the taxpayers’ money and expand the government 
itself. 
 
Well, we’ve accepted the challenge of providing more jobs, more jobs than ever before in the history of the 
province, Mr. Speaker, and at a time when other provinces are failing in this area. We’re not buying jobs with 
the taxpayers’ money by increasing the size of government, we’re letting the private sector provide the jobs. 
We’re getting off the back of private sector and we’re providing stimulants where it’s needed. We’re helping 
small business by getting rid of hundreds of obsolete regulations that were imposed by the previous 
administration. We’re making it easier for them to establish and to function in the province of Saskatchewan. 
We’ve shown a sincere interest in assisting and promoting small business. One significant contribution we’ve 
made is appointing the first ever Minister of Small Business and, of course, I refer to the Hon. Jack Klein. 
 
Well, let’s look at some of the specifics as they relate to my riding, Mr. Speaker, of Moose Jaw North. In 
virtually every area of retail sales over the previous year, the figures have shown a remarkable increase. I’d like 
to give you some examples of the categories that have show increases in Moose Jaw over the last year. In food 
stores, Mr. Speaker, retail sales have increased $3.25 million — very significant. In general merchandise, a $2.3 
million increase. In automotive accessories, a $500,000 increase. In service stations, a $400,000 increase over 
the previous year. 



 
November 30, 1983 
 

368 
 

 
Motor vehicle dealers, a $1 million increase over the previous year. Men’s clothing stores, a $500,000 increase 
over the previous year. Women’s clothing stores, $300,000 higher than the previous year. Hardware stores, 
$100,000 increased sales over the previous year. Florist shops are up $100,000 over the previous year. Virtually 
every area of retail sales is showing an increase over the previous year, because of the attitude that’s been 
instilled in the merchants, and because of the stimulus that we’ve been able to assist them with and letting them 
do the job themselves. 
 
Statistics released just this week, Mr. Speaker, concerning the city of Moose Jaw indicate that building 
construction in the city of Moose Jaw is up this year over last year, and it’s not just up, it’s up over 300 per cent. 
Now that’s job creation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We offered a mortgage interest guarantee of 13.25 per cent for homeowners at a time when interest rates were 
hovering around the 20 per cent mark. Let’s compare that with the attitude of the previous NDP administration 
when they were talking bout interest rates. When Mr. Blakeney, the Leader of the Opposition now, was asked 
what action the NDP government would take against interest rates when they were above 16 per cent, he 
replied, and I quote: 
 

We are not, not, in a position to announce any new policies which will mitigate the effect of high 
interest rates. Our position is that the first steps to be taken with respect to interest rates ought to be 
taken by the federal government. 
 

They talked and they balked and we took action. We took action to stimulate employment for small business. 
 
In Moose Jaw, our small business employment program resulted in 32 new jobs in the city of Moose Jaw alone 
as a direct result of this program. Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to indicate some of the types of businesses that took 
advantage of the $5,000 program last year in the city of Moose Jaw, just to give you an idea of the variety of the 
types of business that are just waiting out there for some kind of stimulus from the government and are ready to 
respond in a positive manner: A-1 Plumbing Services, Aralee’s Enterprises, Band City Chevrolet Oldsmobile, 
Bunnell Block Management, Campro Oil Fields Services Ltd., Do-Rite Tire and Auto Service Ltd., Inventronics 
Saskatchewan Ltd., Leisure Wheels of Moose Jaw Ltd., Main Street Shell, Moose Jaw Clothes Encounter Ltd., 
New Life Carpet Care Ltd., Penny’s Parlous Ltd., R & I Enterprises operating as Midas Muffler, Regal 
Developments Ltd., Sagal Bros. Sales, Wilson Internationals Equipment Ltd. A real variety of businesses, Mr. 
Speaker, that took advantage of our program and are welcoming and waiting for next year’s programs to help 
stimulate more employment in the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, surely the NDP, they must have done something for Moose Jaw. I mean, after all, we had a cabinet 
minister there. He was a 22-year veteran. He was the labour minister. I mean, he must have been concerned 
about small business in Moose jaw, because, let’s face it, Moose Jaw is primarily made up of small businesses 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I’ll tell you, here’s what the then Hon. Mr. Synder and the MLA for 
Moose Jaw North, Mr. Skoberg, did and always will be remembered for by the business community of Moose 
Jaw. They offered Moose Jaw to be served up as a guinea pig for the New Democratic provincial reassessment. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if you want to know what the business community of Moose Jaw thinks of our two previous 
MLAs from the NDP administration, all you have to do is ask anyone in the city in business from the late 1970s 
on. The evidence of their lack of concern will be there for years to come. As a result of this problem, another 
problem which we inherited when we took over the mess from the previous administration, we’re now acting in 
a responsible manner by working toward a new and equitable formula to try and straighten out the mess created 
by their reassessment. Never in the history of the province, and particularly for the city of Moose Jaw, has one 
effort caused so much harm, one blunder caused so much dismay. My sincere respect goes out to the business 
community of Moose Jaw, all those who suffered during the hardship as a result of being sacrificed and 
deceived by two experienced MLAs, who would have never let it  



 
November 29, 1983 

 

369 
 

happen had they cared. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another example of action by our government, and merely words by the previous administration, 
resulted recently in the expansion of the Saskatchewan Technical Institute in Moose Jaw. My congratulations go 
out to the members of the staff and to the students who were able to take advantage of the beautiful new 
facilities, and I would like to thank the two ministers, namely, the Hon. Colin Maxwell, Minister of Advanced 
Education and Manpower, and of course, the Hon. George McLeod, Minister of Supply and Services, for 
making it possible after two election promises, Mr. Speaker, for the expansion at the STI in Moose Jaw to 
become a reality. The staff actually were wondering if there ever would be an addition at the Saskatchewan 
Technical Institute in Moose Jaw. Once again we made the commitment to them, and we followed through. 
 
The faculty and students at the STI, as well as the citizens of Moose Jaw in general, can now rest assured that 
when an announcement is made concerning any development in Moose Jaw, it will actually happen. It won’t be 
announced, then re-announced as another re-election promise over and over again. 
 
We were talking about small business, Mr. Speaker, and I just wanted to make a quote to indicate the attitude of 
the former administration when you’re talking about free enterprise and small business. A quote from Hansard, 
March 9, 1981, by Paul Mostoway, NDP member, and I quote, “The gentleman talks about free enterprise . . . 
that’s a myth. There is no such thing as free enterprise in this country.” That’s the attitude that the NDP . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . That was Paul Mostoway, the NDP member in Hansard, March, 1981. 
 
David Miner, NDP member, also in Hansard, November 30, 1981, when he said, “Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe 
in free enterprise.” And I think that pretty well sums it up for us. That was David Miner, Mr. Speaker, NDP 
member, quoted in Hansard, November 30, 1981. And he was quoted as saying, “Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe 
in free enterprise.” And I think that pretty well sum sit up, Mr. Speaker, as far as the attitude that the 
administration we were stuck with previous to 1982 hard, as far as their envision in terms of business in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that the people of Saskatchewan are certainly becoming more and more aware of the 
fact that the government that they elected in 1982 is putting forth the kinds of programs that are showing 
positive results — and they’re showing results in areas that can be measured. We’re contributing to growth in 
the private sector, and we make no apologies for that. We’re trying to reduce the size of government, and we 
make no apologies for that. We have proven our credibility beyond any doubts. 
 
I think that it must be very disheartening for the members opposite to return from their convention on the 
weekend, only to look around and find that nothing has really changed. They were sliding downhill, and any 
hopes for any redirection, any new personnel, or any new leadership, have pretty well gone by the wayside. I 
certainly feel sorry for them. 
 
I will congratulate the Leader of the Opposition for retaining his position, as such. It certainly was greeted with 
cheering and happiness in the ranks of the members opposite here. We wish him many years of continued 
health, so that he can retain his position as Leader of the Opposition. 
 
I see that the time is drawing near, Mr. Speaker, and I would just like to close by indicating that certainly I’m 
going to be very pleased to support the motion, and definitely vote against the amendment. Thank you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. I’d like silence while the vote is being taken. It’s very difficult for the 
member to hear. 



 
November 30, 1983 
 

370 
 

 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 44 
 

Birkbeck Dutchak Rybchuk 
McLeod Embury Caswell 
Andrew Dirks Hampton 
Lane Maxwell Gerich 
Taylor Young Boutin 
Katzman Domotor Tusa 
Hardy Folk Meagher 
McLaren Muirhead Glauser 
Garner Bacon Sauder 
Smith (Swift Current) Sveinson Zazelenchuk 
Baker Hodgins Martens 
Schoenhals Parker Weiman 
Duncan Smith (Moose Jaw South) Sutor 
Currie Hopfner Morin 
Sandberg Myers  
 
 

NAYS — 8 
 

Blakeney Lingenfelter Shillington 
Thompson Koskie Yew 
Engel Lusney  
 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Meadow Lake: 
 

That the said address be engrossed and presented to His Honour the Lieutenant Governor by such 
members of the Assembly as are the Executive Council. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Meadow Lake: 
 

That this Assembly will at the next sitting resolve itself into the committee of finance to consider the 
supply to be granted to Her Majesty and to consider ways and means of raising the supply. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:35 p.m. 
 


