






















































Hansard: March 09, 1983


(2674) 2675 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 9, 1983 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 

 
EXECUTIVE COUNCIL 

 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 10 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Premier, just before we called it 5 o’clock you 
delivered a list of permanent position establishment, which I’m sure had just been typed up in the last 
half-hour or so prior to our calling it 5 o’clock. Would you mind indicating for me what this purports to 
be a list of? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Chairman, that is a list (my officials advise me) of all the permanent 
individuals in Executive Council. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Premier, I noted that it appeared not to have a 
couple of names that I had anticipated I would find. I did not see a Mr. Leddy’s name there, and I 
understood you to say he was an employee of yours. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Chairman, there are several people that may have worked for a short 
period of time and may be working now under what is commonly known as a personal service contract. 
Their positions and their qualifications and their salary etc. will be part of the whole package that we’re 
working to put together. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Is Mr. Leddy, who you introduced as one of your employees, working on 
a personal service contract? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — That’s correct. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Did you have an employee in your office by the name of Dave Tkach, 
who was said at one time to be chief of the Premier’s staff? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I believe that I introduced Mr. Tkach yesterday, but in any event, he is under a 
person service contract. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Tkach, who was introduced yesterday as an employee, is also under a 
personal service contract. Mr. Gil Johnson, as I recall it, is now deputy minister of continuing education. 
I may be subject to correction. Did he serve in your office as an employee, or on a personal service 
contract? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — To the best of my knowledge, and we’ll correct it, Mr. Johnson was not under 
a personal contract, but was hired through order in council until December. Subsequent to that, he 
moved into the position of deputy. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Premier, earlier today you quoted from 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2676 

the 1979 Hansard, and I think in the course of so quoting, you may have misled the members of the 
House. And I am going to recount the circumstances from Hansard and they are available on page 1757, 
1767 and following. The circumstances were, as the record will show, that Mr. Collver was asking me 
about estimates, and he asked about salaries of the top five people, and asked me some questions about 
Mr. Kinzel. He was being assisted by the then member and the still member for Regina South, Mr. 
Rousseau. It was clearly very close to 10 o’clock, and that will be obvious in a moment: 
 

MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Chairman, we want to say that the member for Regina South (Mr. 
Rousseau) has a specific reason for this. (Asking about the names of employees, etc.) I wonder if 
you’d do it in a different way; we don’t need it just right now. Obviously we’re not going to finish 
tonight. Could you give us the names, salaries, responsibilities and qualifications of all employees of 
the Executive Council earning over $25,000 — ’78-79 estimates, ’78-79 actual, ’79-80 estimate. Is 
that fair? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Now the question is the names, salaries, responsibilities and qualifications of 
all employees of the Executive Council earning $25,000 or over — ’78-79 estimates, actual and 
’79-80 estimate. O.K. There are some explanatory notes because people moved around in different 
jobs, and we’ll have to do it either by person or by title or both. (Next word on the page.) 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:05 p.m. 
 

Very clearly asking for something that they weren’t going to get before 10 o’clock. Next day April 18, 
committee starts. 
 

MR. COLLVER: — Has the Premier those figures that I asked him for yesterday pertaining to 
salaries in the Executive Council? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Sorry, I have given them to Mr. Rousseau — two copies, one for each. 
 

Now that gives the context and there follows detailed questions by Mr. Collver about the salaries of 
individual employees. I go two or three pages over: 
 

Was Mr. Leeson deputy minister when you paid him a salary of $30,000? Your estimate was 
$22,000 but I noticed that the actual salary paid was $30,000. Was he actually your deputy minister 
at that time? (And on and on.) 
 
Just to carry on a little further, I notice you have three people in your office, Mr. Premier . . . 
 

And there were detailed questions about Mr. Dickinson, and what his qualifications are and Mrs. 
Preston, and page after page the next day. 
 
Following from the information that was asked for at 10 p.m. and was delivered the next day in time for 
estimates, the discussion proceeded. I am not at all sure that that information was made clear when you 
were indicating that on one occasion I said that I would provide the information later. That was at 10 
o’clock and I provided it for next 



 
March 9, 1983 

2677 
 

day’s estimates. I think that that illustrates, and I’m pleased to know that the Premier has said that he 
will follow the customs of the past. And in order to follow those customs I gave him notice, now 36 
hours ago or thereabouts, that I would like certain information and it involved only one year. It didn’t 
involve ’78-79 estimates and actuals and ’79-80 estimates. It didn’t involve two fiscal years — one for 
an estimate, one for an actual and yet for another fiscal year, estimates. 
 
I would not wish members of the committee to draw the conclusion that it has been the custom for 
people in estimates to say that they will provide information later and not have it for the next time the 
committee meets if it were at all obtainable. I invite any hon. members to read the record as it continues 
from page 757 and then 767 and then onward for a goodly number of pages where questions are asked 
about the salary and the duties of a substantial number of employees. I noted that Mr. Katzman was 
involved in some of these discussions and he will probably recall some of them if he refreshed his 
memory. Carole Bryant, he was asked about and Mr. Rousseau was involved and so on. Mrs. Duncan 
was involved. She may well recall if she refreshes her memory. 
 
I want to make that clear that the custom has been to provide information on which further questions 
could be asked. The very instance chosen by the Premier is an exceptionally good one, since at 10 p.m. 
information was asked in tabular form which would have had to be given orally and it was asked for in 
tabular form — in written form. It was given for the next day and the questions proceeded apace on the 
basis of the written information. And I had hoped that I would have received some information so that I 
could have proceeded, as the Premier said, “in the traditional way.” 
 
My question now to the Premier: is a Bonnie Holbird on a contract of personal service in your office? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Chairman, a couple of observations before I address the specific question. 
 
The first is, and I said this earlier, the amount of information that the hon. member has requested during 
a period of transition is a considerable amount of information. It’s not typical in the sense that you don’t 
go through a change in government every year. So, when you’re looking at the kinds of things that 
would be requested from a premier that has been in the office from ’71 to ’75 to ’79-80, he can come up 
with the things, I imagine, relatively quickly compared to a year when you’ve just taken over from a 
previous administration, going through with a large change in administrative procedures. 
 
If we want to provide the best information and the most accurate information and the most complete 
information, that’s what we’re going to do. 
 
Secondly, the hon. member says, well, he wants it read into the record. He gave it to the member 
opposite so that he could read, and so forth. So it wasn’t read into the record. 
 
Let me say, we have been pulling as much information together as quickly as we can. It’s my 
information that Miss Holbird is under a personal service contract. I’ve advised the hon. member that 
we’ll pull together all those contracts for him when we get them all together. 
 
Over the supper hour, and for the last several hours, our people have been pulling 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2678 

together as much information as quickly as they can to make sure it’s accurate. I’m getting some of it 
here now that I am prepared to offer to the hon. member, in terms of the people who are on my staff now 
permanently, and correspondingly the amount of money that they’re receiving. 
 
I don’t have it all, but what I am receiving, I’m prepared to give — their positions and their salary. I 
don’t have all the information with respect to their qualifications, or all the information with respect to 
the contracts, or when some people might have been here for some period but not another period, when 
they’ve overlapped and so forth. All that, I don’t have. But I am beginning to get some of it. 
 
You’ve asked some specific questions. I believe you asked one about a Mr. Chamberlin — Grant 
Chamberlin. He’s a senior administrative assistant and I have his monthly salary — $3,250. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Premier, there is a list of people who I inquire 
about who are not on the list, and who may be, therefore, in the employ of some other government 
agency, or may be on these contracts of personal service which are not recorded in the ordinary course 
of events. 
 
Is a Mr. Terry Leier on a contract of service? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I’ll provide that information when we can pull it together. I just don’t have it 
here at hand, right now. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Premier, do you deny, (a) that Mr. Leier is on a contract of service, 
and (b) that he has been paid or has earned or is entitled to be paid (perhaps is the better way to put it), a 
remuneration in excess of $80,000 since May 10? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — No, I’m not denying or confirming that he has been paid any particular salary. 
What I don’t have is the period of time precisely that he was employed or what he received precisely per 
month or per day or, frankly, with what particular department or agency he might have been employed. I 
will pull that information together and provide it to you. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Perhaps I can narrow it down. Can you tell me what the per diem 
arrangement is with Mr. Leier? Is he on a per diem and do you not know it? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — He may have been, but I don’t have that information here, and I will provide 
it with the comprehensive package. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Premier, are there so many people on contracts of personal service at 
high figures that you simply do not have those figures at hand? Are there dozens of people getting $300 
or $400 a day in your government? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Absolutely not. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Premier, do you deny that Ms. Bonnie Holbird is getting in excess of 
$200 a day under a contract of personal service? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to any of the personal service contracts, as I 
mentioned earlier. I’ll pull the information together in terms of when they started and how long they’ve 
lasted and what they’re worth, and the rest of that kind of 



 
March 9, 1983 

2679 
 

information. I’ll present it all at the same time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — That is a matter of judgment — what they’re worth — and we don’t ask 
that. We already know the . . . We know what happens when good sense and judgment is applied — all 
manner of people get fired. We’ve already been through all that. 
 
Mr. Chairman and Mr. Premier, approximately, just approximately, how many people work in the 
Executive Council who are on these contracts of personal service, which are by and large a pretty 
innovative arrangement? There were very, very few of them before. How many are now on contracts of 
personal service? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Chairman, we’re just doing a little bit of research. I would remind the 
member opposite that again, when you’re going through a transitional period, you may not hired people 
permanently as you’re getting some specific jobs finished. It’s not a typical year, and I’m sure his 
experience in the past would suggest that it isn’t a typical year. As a result of that, the kinds of 
arrangements that may take place in the first six months or eight months or nine months or ten months, 
may not be the case in year two and year three and year four and so forth. While we’re pulling together 
as much of that information as quickly as we can . . . In fact to the best of my ability we’ll find out if in 
fact there were any people under contract under the former administration just to make some reasonable 
comparisons. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Premier, if the time it takes to find out whether 
Mr. Leddy is on your staff is any indication of the time it will take to find other information, there is 
nothing to fear. May I ask whether a Mr. Reg Forsythe was on your staff at any time during the year? Is 
a Mr. Reg Forsythe a member of the Executive Council staff or has he been since May 10? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Chairman, he is on a personal service contract, and I would like to take 
this opportunity . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . to answer the first question. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I said yes, he is. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, he won’t miss this. This is the Department of Executive Council list of 
contracts and consultants, 1980-81. The reason that I’m offering this is that you implied, the hon. 
member implied that there weren’t contracts, personal service contracts, in a typical situation. I just 
throw it out so that we can understand and so that the public can understand two things: number one, it 
may be quite typical in a transition year, because we have all that extra work to do in terms of changing 
horses; and, number two, that it did go, occur and happen in a normal year under the previous 
administration. 
 
Name, Mr. Eric Howe; date, June 1, ’80 to November 10 of ’80; amount, $235 per day from June to 
November, for a total of $20,964, plus travel expenses, computer time, clerical and long-distance 
telephone calls; the reason, for Executive Council, was to prepare economic forecasts for Saskatchewan 
with use of a Saskatchewan economic model. And, if you added some normal inflation costs, that 
probably would be higher. Then again he was hired from November 11. He was fired on November 10 
and hired on 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2680 

November 11 — till September of 1981. $235 per day for a total of another $18,246.66 to revise the 
model again, for testing and preparation of forecasts, and so forth. 
 
A Mr. Forresta, International Ltd. of Vancouver, B.C. — September 22, ’80, $5,935.95, plus reasonable 
travel expenses, clerical and telephone charges, consultant in any aspects — any aspects — of forest 
resource development. 
 
Mr. Chairman, Insight Marketing and Communications Ltd. — January 1, 1981 to March 31, ’81, $200 
per day or $30 per hour, a total of $14,880, to develop a communications strategy in the area of mineral 
development. 
 
Johnson, Lowe and Associates — January 12, ’81 to June 15, ’81, $175 per day, total January ’81 to 
March ’81, $14,139, to determine the feasibility of further expansion of community-based services. 
 
One you may recognize Mr. Lowell Monkhouse, April 15, 1980 to June 30, ’80, $200 per day, total cost 
plus reasonable travel expenses, then hired again July 2 to October 1, and again from October 1 to 
December 31, and was still on contract, I gather, when we came in. 
 
And there are more and more, I just offer this, Mr. Chairman, as a reasonable suggestion that under 
Executive Council people have been on contract for several hundred dollars per day or a considerable 
amount per hour under so-called normal times, let alone when we’re going through a period of changing 
from one government to another, which I believe most people call transition. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Premier, would you mind giving me the same 
information with respect to your government —now? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — We’ve been digging up information. I have some more positions. Permanent 
positions are here their slated title plus the money that they’re receiving on a monthly basis. 
 
I would like to share with the public some of the reasons for the work in transition. One of the reasons, 
for example, is boards and commissions. When we came into Executive Council we found a book listing 
178 boards and commissions, which we thought was considerable to study them, to determine what they 
were for and what they did. 
 
Since that time, we have now identified, with some help of some people on transition, 958 boards and 
commissions, with over 5,000 positions. We found two more yesterday. Some boards were listed as 
current as to 1976. In one case — I just throw it out, -Mr. Chairman, to show the kind of research we 
have do — a listed board member had passed away and has been dead for some time. 
 
In this period of transition, we need to have the appropriate staff to go from one administration to 
another. I will bring all the information on anybody that has been under contract, as the hon. member 
has requested, and the times that they have been hired and the rate and their qualifications. I don’t have 
all that tonight. I do have an increasing list of people who have permanent positions and their titles and 
their salaries, if you want to begin to discuss those. I think you’ve asked for those, Janice Baker, 
administrative assistant, $2,075; Sheila Bultitude clerk-typist 3, $1,470; Keith Lampard, assistant-chief 
electoral officer, $4,000; Peggy Sandbeck, accounting clerk 



 
March 9, 1983 

2681 
 

2, $1,707. I’m getting more of those as they’re pulling them together. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I noted Keith Lampard. That’s another name that wasn’t on this list, 
which puzzled me somewhat. Is he on a contract of personal service — the one that you just indicated? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I believe there is some aberration between the blue book and the electoral 
office. They don’t jibe exactly, traditionally, from one year to the next because of elections and so forth. 
Assistant chief electoral officer and some of that within statute doesn’t show up every year. There may 
be some aberration there, but that’s the position. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Premier, you have indicated that Reg Forsythe is 
on a contract. I noted the list that you gave of consultants, and at least half of them were limited 
companies, which is fairly, fairly common — to have consulting firms doing this or that. I pass that by, 
because anyone can read that list. You left off the limiteds or put it fairly light, but a fair number of them 
were. They are just straight consulting firms. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Eric Howe and Lowell Monkhouse aren’t. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — No, those two are not. I don’t know who Eric Howe is, but I know who 
Lowell Monkhouse is and Eric Howe is a consultant. None of them have been, with the possible 
exception of Monkhouse, associated with the Conservative party or the New Democratic Party. Can you 
say that of Terry Leier? Is that the same Terry Leier who was the federal Conservative candidate in 
Regina East? Is that the same one? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, if you’re asking me the particular persuasion of Mr. Leier, my best 
guess is that he would tend to be Tory. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Premier, would you advise me whether Mr. Jim 
Petrychyn is on a contract of personal services? Would you hazard a guess as to his political leanings? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — To the best of my knowledge, Mr. Chairman, the gentleman is not now under 
contract for Executive Council. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Petrychyn provides some of the interest in being in opposition when 
this government is in office, since his movements are so rapid that we can’t usually catch him. As my 
colleague from Regina Centre aptly put it the other day: as soon as he is known to one department, he 
becomes in great demand by somebody else. He moves, and I take it that he is not now with the 
transition office, as he undoubtedly was. When he was down at room 113 of the Legislative Building. 
I’m reliably advised he was with the transition office. If you tell me he is not now there, we’ll pursue 
him in whatever department he has been visited upon for the time being. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That wouldn’t be a vendetta you’re got going Ned, would it? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Far from it, far from it! He wants to keep him in town. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I just rose to point out again that people may come and go in terms of the 
timing of their contract, and that’s why I said I want to make sure that we’ve done the research 
necessary to say when they were hired, when they were released, 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2682 

and so forth. And Mr. Petrychyn may be exactly in that position. I’m not sure when he might have been 
hired and when he might have been released, or how much, or whatever, but we’ll put that together for 
you. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Can you advise me what duties Mr. Forsythe performed when he was, 
and perhaps still is, with you? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I’m advised that he was, or may still be, an assistant to Mr. Livingstone. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Premier, I look on the list and I don’t find Mr. 
Livingstone. Is Mr. Livingstone on a contract of employment, and what are his duties? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Livingstone is on a personal service contract. He has the responsibility to 
help us deal with the boars and commissions that I had referred to earlier. Perhaps I could just point out 
that recognizing that there exists a proliferation of agencies directly related to the Government of 
Saskatchewan and further recognizing that there has been little or no co-ordination in the creation of 
these agencies, it has been determined that there exists duplication of effort by these agencies resulting 
in excessive costs to the government. And so we have asked Mr. Livingstone to help us identify what the 
boards and commissions do, how long they’ve been in existence, their objectives and activities, their 
functions, their purpose and some degree of accountability, and to measure the performance of them. 
That’s in a general sense his responsibilities. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — And you advise me that Mr. Forsythe is an assistant to Mr. Livingstone? 
 
Mr. Chairman and Mr. Premier, I call to your attention a letter on the letterhead of the Saskatchewan 
Executive Council, dated August 1982 and it reads as follows: 
 

Dear Sir/Madam: This is in further reference to receipt of your resume or application for 
employment with the Government of Saskatchewan. Enclosed herewith please find an application 
for employment through the Saskatchewan Public Service Commission. Although the employee 
freeze is still in effect, there are certain positions which are being released and advertised in the four 
Saskatchewan daily newspapers: Regina Leader-Post, Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, Prince Albert 
Herald, Moose Jaw Times-Herald. 
 
Please complete an application form should you feel you have the necessary qualifications for any 
position. Send the completed form directly to R.L. Forsythe, 102 Legislative Building, Regina, 
Saskatchewan S4S 0B3. 
 
Although you may be employed at the present time, we understand from receiving your resume or 
application that you would like an opportunity to be employed with the Government of 
Saskatchewan. If this is a misunderstanding on our part, please inform us as soon as possible. 
 
At the time the employee freeze is removed, the same procedure as outlined above should be 
followed. You can help us to help you. Sincerely, R.L. Forsythe, Transition Committee 



 
March 9, 1983 

2683 
 

Now, would you care to advise me how this letter relates to a review of the boards and commission 
which Mr. Forsythe was assisting Mr. Livingstone in proceeding with. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — What was the date of that, please? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — August 1982. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, it would seem to me that at the time the individual could have very well 
been employed in the transition which might have been many different responsibilities. 
 
You asked today what he did or what he is doing now and I’m saying he’s an assistant to Mr. 
Livingstone. In August . . . And again, one of the reasons why I think it’s fair that we go back and put it 
all together in terms of the time the individuals come in and go out and work, is so that you fully 
understand what they’ve been doing and so does the public. But I believe at that time we were in the 
middle of transition or at least in the first five or six months. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Premier, I’m sorry that the Deputy Premier wasn’t 
here, because in August 20, the same letter was read in the legislature here and the Deputy Premier who 
has just come in, has said, “Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to try to keep it simple. I don’t want it to go 
over his head (and he’s speaking to Mr. Hammersmith). The simple answer is, I will take notice of the 
question when I’ve had a chance to review the letter. I’m sure when the Premier has had a chance to 
review the letter, he can deal with the matter you raised in your question. Therefore, quite simply, Mr. 
Speaker, I take notice of the question.” That’s certainly simply put and we’re still waiting a little answer 
from that taking notice. What I am asking now, Mr. Premier, is: under what circumstances does a 
member of the transition committee write to the public asking that applications for the public service 
commission be sent to the transition committee of the Executive Council and not to the public service 
commission? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, I believe, Mr. Chairman, you can go back in the . . . the Minister of 
Finance, Mr. Andrew, did address the question specifically, but from the information I have here, the 
transition committee, or part of that committee that Mr. Forsythe was working for, was essentially a 
mechanism of categorizing applications, whether they came from unsolicited job applications or 
opportunities or kids wanting to come home to Saskatchewan or anybody else inquiring with respect to 
the new government, rather than send it directly to a crown corporation or to somebody else, they send it 
to Executive Council. So it’s handled b the transition committee because that’s what transition is all 
about. We have the appropriate people in the appropriate slots to carry on the normal functions of 
government under more typical situations. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I repeat just a little portion of the letter 
again: 
 

Enclosed please find an application for employment through the Saskatchewan Public Service 
Commission. 
 

This is not dealing with crown corporations or anything of that nature — through the public service 
commission. Now may I recall to the Premier’s mind the provisions of The Public Service Act which at 
section 17, subsection 2 says: 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2684 

Appointments to positions in the classified service shall be made by the commission and shall be 
made on the basis of seniority, merit and fitness, to be ascertained by qualification examinations 
where practicable. 
 

The question I ask is: was Mr. Forsythe carrying out some qualification examinations, and what 
qualifications was he seeking when he was reviewing the applications that were to be sent to the 
Saskatchewan Public Service Commission? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t believe that Mr. Forsythe was studying the 
qualifications of applications. And, at the same time, I don’t know why a transition mechanism wouldn’t 
also apply to various departments or crown corporations, including the public service commission, when 
you’re going from one administration to another. So to imply that a transition committee wouldn’t deal 
with the public service commission, I don’t think is reasonable at all. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Premier, I understood from Mr. Andrew that this 
practice had been discontinued. I may well have misunderstood what he said. Can you advise me 
whether or not applications which are to be directed, as I read the legislation, to the public service 
commission are, in fact, not to be directed to the public service commission, but are to be forwarded to 
Mr. Forsythe — R.L. Forsythe, 102 Legislative Building, Regina, Saskatchewan, as indicated by the 
correspondence on your letterhead in August? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well I am relatively sure that the practice has been discontinued and I believe 
all applications for some time now go directly to the public service commission. You know, if it’s 
possible to go from one administration to another without a transitional team or without a transitional 
mechanism and everything could be done exactly with each department, including the public service 
commission, so much the better. But it’s a big job in the transition. So, the transitional committee 
received an awful lot of responsibilities in terms of getting the move from one administration to another. 
I’m sure now that it’s all handled by the public service commission. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Premier, obviously the Premier’s staff are adept at 
historical research, as we have indicated, and I invite them to pursue some similar research and find out 
whether in 1971, or for that matter, in 1964 when the Liberals came in, whether or not the public was 
advised that hereafter applications for positions in the public service should be sent to the Premier’s 
office and not to the public service commission. And I would be very, very surprised if your historical 
researchers can find that in the case of either of the last two changes of government. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, the information that I have here, Mr. Chairman, with respect to just the 
sheer growth and the size of Executive Council, subsequent to you first becoming premier, hon. 
member: the personnel of Executive Council increased from 18, under the Liberal administration in 
1972 estimates, to 45, under the 1973 estimates of the NDP; that is a 2.5 times increase. Then, I believe, 
in the next year it went to 54, which is a 300 per cent increase in the size of Executive Council over the 
previous administration, within the first, well, about 18 months of the administration. Given that 
information, it seems to me to be a little bit unfair for the hon. member to suggest that we’ve had people 
on the transition committee working from changing one administration to another in a period of months. 
 
And, with respect to several of, or I would say a large part of the applications coming 



 
March 9, 1983 

2685 
 

into Mr. Forsythe in the transitional committee, a good number of those are people who were saying, 
“Are there opportunities in boards and commissions?” Because I’m sure people might have heard us 
talking about the fact that we found 928 boards and commissions with some 5,000 positions in them. So 
people say, “Well, what is this all about? Is this normal public service commission requests?” Not really 
— boards and commissions don’t necessarily fit in the public service commission. And I would suspect 
the hon. member didn’t have this tremendous increase from 200 to 300 per cent in his Executive Council 
filled through applications to the public service commission under his administration. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I don’t really want to be led off into a 
defence of the provincial inquiry centre and those things which were added, and you can dump them if 
you like, but I think they’re . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . They certainly were n 1973, when you’re 
talking. Oh, yes. And if anyone denies that, they better do some more research. But what I want to know 
. . . I’m not talking about the numbers. I’m not talking about the numbers of people you have. I’m 
talking about the propriety of advising the public that you can’t get a job with the Public Service 
Commission of Saskatchewan unless you send your application to the transition committee. Never mind 
the public service commission, never mind the provisions which are set up there for impartial public 
service, never mind the law; send it to Mr. R. L. Forsythe, and he will decide whether it goes on to the 
public service commission or not. Now, that’s what you did, and I say that that was improper, and it’s 
high time it was stopped, if it’s stopped now. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, I’ve already made the point that it was for a relatively short period of 
time in the transition committee, number one; number two, that it would largely apply to people finding 
out and making inquiries about boards and commissions, which normally don’t come under the public 
service commission; and, number three, it no longer is the case; the normal applications through the 
public service commission take place, etc., etc. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I listened to the story and I don’t want to pursue all of 
these alleged many boards and commissions. The great bulk of them are under the Department of 
Agriculture, as the minister well knows, under all manner of committees which . . . 
 
But leave that aside. What I am asking is this: for people who were seeking employment with the public 
service of Saskatchewan under The Public Service Act, why were they told that their applications should 
not be sent to the public service commission, but should be sent to Mr. Forsythe? That was to be true in 
August, when the freeze was on, and it was to continue to be true: “At that time the employee freeze is 
removed, the same procedure as outlined above should be followed.” This is not boards, commissions, 
corporations; these are specifically people who are sent applications for the public service under The 
Public Service Act, and are told, “Here is your application. Send it, not to the commission, but back to 
me” How do you justify that sort of conduct? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Chairman and hon. members, most of this dealt with boards and 
commissions. If somebody got a letter of invitation, I can’t comment on that — to make an application 
through the transition committee. 
 
It was designed to deal with applications, to the large extent, becoming publicly known 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2686 

as hundreds and hundreds and hundreds and hundreds — almost a thousand — boards and commissions 
that are not handled through the public service commission, and I don’t believe ever have been handled 
through the public service commission. Now, if some of these applications for other jobs or whatever 
come in for the hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of boards and commissions. I can’t help that. 
 
The process now no longer exists (whenever it finished, last fall or whenever, it stopped). But it was in 
place to deal with a specific problem. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Premier, here we are asked to believe that Mr. 
Forsythe was dealing with people who were applying for employment with the boards and commissions. 
The Premier points out that these appointments are not made through the public service commission. We 
have Mr. Forsythe sending out a letter: “Enclosed herewith please find an application for employment 
through the Saskatchewan Public Service Commission.” 
 
Well, if he was doing something with respect to boards and commissions, he was clearly incompetent. 
He ought to have known that this application had no reference to the work he was supposed to have been 
doing. 
 
If, in fact, he was dealing with boards and commissions and not with employment through the public 
service commission, his letter is nonsense and I want to ask the Premier whether people of this level of 
incompetence are still in his employ, either by contract or otherwise, or whether the facts are quite 
different — that he wasn’t dealing with boards and commissions, but was quite competently screening 
all applications that went through the public service commission. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — The hon. member knows that’s nonsense — sheer, utter nonsense. 
 
If I could respond, I believe the hon. member for Shaunavon asked Mr. Andrew this question in the 
House. I believe that Mr. Andrew said this on February 28, 1983: 
 

That matter was raised, I believe, early in the session, I think within the summer session. At that 
time I gave the House my thinking that that in fact should not be done. It is to my understanding not 
being done and ceased being done when the matter was raised in the House. I do not agree with that 
particular line and I was not aware of it. When I became aware of it, I certainly put a stop to it. 
 

So they were set up for one function. If some people applied to that particular transition mechanism, and 
it was brought to somebody’s attention that that was an appropriate one, he turned around and said, 
“Well, it no longer exists.” 
 
For example, I wonder if this was through the public service commission in ’71. A certain individual 
was appointed executive assistant to the Attorney General, October 22, 1971. He was a defeated 
candidate in June ’71, provincial election. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Who was that? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Shillington. Through the public service commission? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — No. 



 
March 9, 1983 

2687 
 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, did he apply to the public service commission? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Premier, you’re asking us to believe that anyone 
who was appointed an EA to a minister sent in application for Mr. Forsythe? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Mine did. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Oh, come off it. This is sheer nonsense. Everybody knows that EAs are 
not appointed through the public service commission, never have been and never will be; have been OC 
appointments and will continue to be OC appointments. There’s nothing wrong with that, because that is 
a clear indication that you are applying a political screen when you hire your own EA. 
 
What is the point of applying a political screen to people who apply for an ordinary job through the 
Saskatchewan Public Service Commission? You are quite wrong in suggesting that this letter had any 
reference to boards and commissions. Mr. Andrew is quite right in saying that when he found out about 
it he put a stop to it. And what I am disappointed in is that the Premier didn’t put a stop to it before Mr. 
Andrew applied a little judgment and common sense which the Premier didn’t show. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can only reiterate to the hon. member that I will agree 
with him that executive assistants, special assistants and people like that are not normally hired through 
the public service commission. We agree on that. I think we also have to agree that members of boards 
and commissions are not traditionally hired through the public service commission. 
 
Now, with us discovering something like 928 boards and commissions and 5,000 positions, and you 
can’t handle it through the public service commission, how would you suggest it be handled? Through 
some sort of transitional committee. That’s what was going on. If it got confounded, if the public service 
commission and the minister found out about it, he’d put a stop to it. And he did; it no longer is the case. 
That’s the end of it. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’m interested in the smoke screen that 
the Premier throws up. But he knows that Mr. Forsythe’s job was to screen those applications. He knows 
that Mr. Forsythe’s job was to put little tags on them when they went up to the public service 
commission . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Let’s not kid the troops on what was going on around here 
and I congratulate Mr. Andrew in putting into place some other system. I don’t know whether it works 
as well, but I must say that it has a little more elegance — a little more elegance than the premier’s 
system of saying. “Nobody may apply to the public service commission directly; everybody applies to 
my staff member.” He even is prepared to send that out in writing. He says to send them to his office, 
Mr. Forsythe’s office. He screens them, and then they go to the public service commission with 
appropriate comments. That’s what was going on. I don’t know what is going on now, but I’m glad to se 
that the Minister of Finance has put a stop to that sort of conduct, which the Premier condoned. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we both concur with the Minister of Finance and the 
minister in charge of the public service commission for dealing with it. I never said I condoned it; I said 
I would condone a mechanism to deal with boards and commissions, and that’s what it was designed to 
do and I have nothing more to add. 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2688 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. The Premier is no doubt having 
difficulty remembering the names of people he’s worked with, even if they are defeated Conservative 
candidates. I can understand that shortcoming; many people have trouble remembering names and faces. 
I want to take the Premier to an area where he has distinguished himself, and where he will have no 
difficulty with short concise answers. It has to do with the termination of public servants. If you haven’t 
distinguished yourself, Mr. Premier; you’ve had lots of experience over the last year. 
 
You made a comment this afternoon in the legislature that I would like you to expand on. You were 
referred to the services of someone who’s resigned and who was given what appeared to be a rather 
generous severance pay, and you said there were circumstances under which a person who resigned 
might be entitled to severance pay. I wonder if you would tell me, in your view, under what 
circumstances is a person who resigns entitled to severance pay? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — It’s my understanding, Mr. Chairman and hon. member when people are 
terminated there is a mechanism whereby they’re paid so much in terms of a month or two of salary, 
plus an accumulation of the years that they’ve worked and some degree of agreement between 
management and the individual. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’m surprised that took 10 minutes for the Premier to find. I may say that I 
agree with your comments. When a person is terminated, when the departure is not voluntary whatever 
form it may take, whether he is fired or his resignation is asked for, severance pay is not unusual. 
 
I want to remind the Premier of what your minister said. I do not know if you were in the House. That 
gives me an obvious advantage over you. I try to attend. I do not try to avoid the House. Let me tell you 
the circumstances under which Mr. Cousineau left, according to your Minister of Government Services. 
I want to read to you a couple of questions and answers. 
 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister. (It’s an old subject; they’ve 
gone over it once or twice before.) During estimates on government services, the minister informed 
the Assembly, gave a great long explanation about why Mr. Dennis Foley has been replaced by Mr. 
Wallis Cousineau from Ontario, and said what a great job he was doing. Can she now inform us 
when Mr. Cousineau informed her that he would be leaving that position? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Perhaps the member is not aware (Aha! The reorganization. Finally got 
it) that there are plans for reorganization within government (she might have saved the Minister of 
Rural Affairs some embarrassment if she had told him a little earlier), in particular, the Department 
of Government Services and the Department of Revenue, Supply and Services. Mr. Cousineau’s 
resignation is a result of the reorganization which has proceeded. 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter, trying to bring the discussion to a conclusion, asked a succinct question: 
 

Mr. Speaker, a new question. I asked the minister if she could inform us when she knew that Mr. 
Cousineau would be leaving his position. Can she tell us that? 



 
March 9, 1983 

2689 
 

Clearly, if she didn’t find out until he left, it was voluntary. She would have known ahead of time, had 
it been her decision. Equally as clearly, if she knew ahead of time, before the resignation, it may not 
have been voluntary. The minister said that he tendered his resignation on Friday afternoon, the 25th. 
According to her information, she found out not before he tendered his resignation, indicating that that 
resignation was voluntary. 
 
I accept the word of the hon. minister as being correct and accurate and honest. I wonder how, Mr. 
Premier, you can justify paying that degree of severance pay to someone whose departure was evidently 
quite voluntary. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, it’s pretty difficult for me to speak on behalf of every minister, or any 
individual minister, with respect to staff that may come and go. All I can say is the normal mechanism, 
when we get into these, is some degree of recognition for the level they have, the amount of years 
they’ve worked, the qualifications and the rest of it, and a mutual agreement to go separate ways. I 
mean, I couldn’t add any more than the minister’s already added. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Chairman, does the Premier agree that if his departure was his own idea, 
and was not brought upon him by the Minister of Government Services, that no severance pay would in 
the normal circumstances be offered or accepted? Does the minister admit that his resignation could not 
have been voluntarily done if he was given severance pay? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well I don’t talk with individual cabinet ministers about their individual staff 
and all the staff that they have. I didn’t in this case. I am not sure that I fully appreciate the 
consequences of, or the differences with respect to, if a person decides, well, I guess it’s time that I did 
something else, or you call it termination with severance. I mean I think you’re getting into being fairly 
subtle. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I may say, Mr. Premier, that I would have thought you could have 
shirked the responsibility of virtually anything else but the conduct of your ministers. I would have 
thought that would have rested with you. 
 
We are faced with one of two possibilities, Mr. Premier. Either your minister was less than candid in 
dealing with this House, which I do not believe, or she offered him or he was offered severance pay in 
circumstances which must be unique. If he voluntarily decided — to use your phrase, “he wanted to do 
something else,” then he must be the first person in the history of the public service that’s ever been 
offered severance pay. 
 
I’m wondering if you could tell us why a person who decides he wants to do something else would be 
offered something above and beyond his salary to leave. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well I don’t think I have much more to add to this in terms of the details with 
respect to the termination of an individual. I would have to study the case in some detail to know about 
whether the severance package was reasonable or unreasonable or whatever. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I want to say, Mr. Premier, again, in your absence in this House, I tried 
putting some of these questions to the minister in charge of the public service commission, because I 
thought, perhaps, he might want to take some responsibility for the general policy of this government in 
treating and in dealing with its public servants. He continually deferred to you, sir. Every question I 
asked him about 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2690 

public service, he says, “You’ll have to ask the Executive Council.” So I am taking his advice. I’m 
asking these questions of Executive Council, of your policy with respect to public servants. 
 
Is it the policy of this government to offer severance pay to public servants who decide they want to do 
something else, and who leave voluntarily. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, I’m not sure that what you just said about the minister in charge of 
public service commission is accurate . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . I’d want to understand exactly what that meant. In terms of fairness, are you suggesting that there 
never should be severance? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — If you want to appoint me as your minister in charge of the public service 
commission, I would have to ask my colleagues . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I would have to ask my 
colleagues and I might not want to join such a distinguished group of parliamentarians. I might say that I 
might prefer to stay with this group, but I’ll tell you I will give you some assistance, if you want, in 
drawing up some guidelines for dealing with public servants. I know this is a problem that this 
government has had an endless amount of trouble with. 
 
Can you give us any other instance? And again, I take the minister’s comment as candid: she didn’t find 
out until he tendered his resignation. I take that as being a candid comment. If that was said in error, 
then that fact should be revealed and we can get on to something else, if that comment was made in 
error. But I’m taking that comment as being wholly candid, that she didn’t know until she got the 
resignation. 
 
Can you think of any other example? And man, you’ve had lots of experience with people who want to 
leave. That’s one thing that you’re not short of experience in. do you know of any other example of 
someone who has decided “he wants to do something else”? Madam Minister, I want to do something 
else; it’s been pleasant; so long, goodbye and good luck.” Can you think of any other person in this 
government who said that, who has got any severance pay, and can you give me any reason why 
severance pay would be offered in such circumstances? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Chairman, I understand that the Leader of the Opposition offered several 
courses of action to the people that the, what will we call, removed after the election . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Just a minute. Let me finish. One, they could stay and take their chances, or two, they 
could elect to be terminated, which included severance. 
 
Now if those are the rules under Mr. Shillington’s public service commission or whatever, that their 
individuals are offered several courses of action, one, to stay and take their chances or, two, have the 
choice of deciding to do something else but elect to be terminated, which along with that goes from what 
I understand, and that’s normally the case, some severance, well, then, under the previous administration 
they were offered the choice of whatever they might like to do. And certainly as a former cabinet 
minister I suspect that you would understand what that means. And you’ve probably had many more 
years of experience in it than I have and you certainly have no corner on being righteous. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I tell you when it comes to dealing with public servants, this 
government has no corner on it either. This government has no corner on being righteous. 



 
March 9, 1983 

2691 
 

Mr. Premier, may we simplify this problem? Is it the policy of this government to offer severance pay to 
people who want to leave and who want to “do something else.” The example you quoted is obviously 
quite different. I began by asking you a question which took you some 10 minutes to answer, but to your 
credit, it’s one of a handful of questions you’ve answered accurately tonight. You said, “If a person is 
terminated he may be entitled to severance.” Yes, if a person is terminated. But that was not what we 
were told happened. We were told he came in without any foreknowledge on the part of that minister 
and offered his resignation. 
 
Now that minister is either extremely decisive . . . That’s not been the pattern in the past, but that 
minister either has a remarkable degree of decisiveness about her or that resignation was unexpected and 
was his idea. So I suggest to you, if your minister’s answer was candid, then he, left voluntarily, and that 
is a very different situation than the one you just described. I would ask you one more time: can you 
refrain from obfuscating on this question, and give us, in simple terms, yes or no — do people who leave 
voluntarily, of their own accord, of their own volition, get severance pay with this government? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — In the year of our Lord of 2001, when we leave government, we will offer 
government employees the choice of staying and taking their chances, or electing to be terminated. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I do declare! I do declare, Mr. Premier . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
No, I think we may find ourselves getting more, perhaps, out of the Minister of Government Services in 
the estimates that are yet to come up tonight. 
 
I want to ask you some other questions. Now these are going to be easy. I promise you, there’s nothing 
tricky about the ones that are going to follow. They’re straightforward; you’re bound to know the 
answers. One of them is — I do not want to be taken lightly — a question with respect to your 
government’s policy on travel. Again, these questions have all been deferred to you by other ministers. 
That would annoy me too, but that was the position they took. I would think they might have done better 
to answer them themselves, but they didn’t: “Ask them in Executive Council.” So we’re here, asking 
them in Executive Council. 
 
What is this government’s policy with respect to payment of air fare for people who are not employees? 
That covers a diverse group of people. It arises because we put the question on the order paper, and your 
Attorney General suffered from that mysterious disease that afflicted your Minister of Rural Affairs the 
other day. He could not get off his feet to answer some questions. 
 
The order for return asked for air fare paid by Executive Council from the period May 8 to — not the 
present date, the date the order for return had been filed — but for our purposes, let’s say May 8 to 
March 9. He amended that to give us the air fare paid on behalf of employees by Executive Council. I 
said that I could understand that there might be some circumstances; he might not wish to disclose all 
the information. And I gave him the example of social services, who routinely pay for welfare recipients 
to go for medical care, and so on; it would be a very long return. But I said there were some legitimate 
questions. 
 
So I would like to know under what circumstances Executive Council will pay for air fare for people 
who are not employees. It includes people on contract, it includes spouses, it 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2692 

includes people who might be travelling with delegations. Could you give me that in concise terms? 
Because your Attorney General gave up the opportunity to reply in due course. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Chairman, I can only give a general indication, and one example that I 
can recall now, I’m sure we’ll get more information. Generally, when individuals ask to fly with, say, 
government air services, coming along — and I recall this example when I was going to North Dakota to 
meet with the governor — one or two members of the media asked if they could go along. It meant that 
we might have to take another airplane, or depending on how many of us went we would take one 
airplane or two airplanes. So the Minister of Revenue advised me that we would calculate the total cost 
of the trip, divide it by the number of members that are going including government staff and the media, 
and the appropriate simple average per individual would be billed to the members of the media that are 
coming down — CKCK, or CTV, or whoever. Now that is the general policy. With respect to 
non-government members, but family members and employees . . . I have taken my wife, or a daughter, 
or a son to Saskatoon and back, or going up for a public function and so forth. Beyond those two 
examples I would have to get more detail, and I’m prepared to dig up whatever are the rules and 
regulations under different circumstances. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Okay, I’ll take that undertaking and look forward to receiving that. The 
question — and I may not have been very succinct in asking it — the question was under what 
circumstances does Executive Council pay commercial air fare? I say I may not have been very succinct 
in asking the question, Mr. Minister. Although I am interested in your undertaking and I’d like that 
information as well, that wasn’t the question I asked. 
 
What I intended to ask and may not have was: under what circumstances will Executive Council pay 
commercial air fare for people who are not employees? I would assume by way of example (although 
the Attorney General), as I say, sat there like a tree stump and wouldn’t even tell us why he wouldn’t 
answer the question) that someone who is on contract (Mr. Leier, whom you’ve had such great difficulty 
remembering his existence) I assume he travels, say for the government (I understand he’s putting in full 
time here) I would assume that would be paid for by Executive Council. I don’t know, but that’s the 
kind of answer that I want. I’m also interested in knowing if the commercial air fare is paid for spouses 
of ministers — for your spouse. If it isn’t, all well and good. If it is, does this herald a different policy 
with respect to elected members, because heretofore there’s been only one rule for everybody. That is, 
they’re not paid, So I would like your answer with respect to commercial air fares. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, as far as I know this evening, it would be very rare that the government 
or Executive Council would pay for somebody else to travel on private airlines. Now somebody under 
contract may have a contract plus expenses, which means that they’re doing something in terms of 
mineral production or forecasting models or whatever it may be, that’s included in the contract. With 
respect to wives and families, I don’t believe that they’re included at all with respect to cabinet ministers 
in private. I would say that I have given some serious consideration with respect to the ability to take my 
wife as an ambassador for the province, particularly because I think she is a good ambassador, being 
bilingual in French and German and English. I feel that the province could well afford to pay for her 
transportation into various countries we’re going into and so forth, and I may raise that, I think she’d be 
an excellent ambassador. 



 
March 9, 1983 

2693 
 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, okay, I’ll leave the subject shortly. One more question and then I’ll 
make a comment. I take it by the Premier’s comment, that to your knowledge no spouse of any member 
of Executive Council has, to date, travelled and had their commercial air fare paid by Executive Council. 
I take it, not to your knowledge has that happened. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I don’t have any information to suggest that they did. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, let me just say Mr. Premier, if we can raise this for a moment to the 
level of a serious debate, that I think it should be considered if it is in the context of all members. 
Heretofore the rule has been uniform throughout, that is, no wives travel at the expense of the public 
purse . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No spouses travel at the expense of the public purse. They may 
travel at the expense of the Commonwealth parliamentary Association on occasion, I don’t know; but 
heretofore they have not travelled at the expense of the public purse. 
 
May I just say, and I will leave the question at that: if it is going to be reconsidered, it ought to be 
reconsidered in the context of all elected members. I’ll leave it at that. 
 
I have another question which relates to an order for return. If I have the House Leader, whom I do not 
see at the moment . . . If I had your undertaking that you’re going to answer the order for return — item 
9, return 66 — if I had your undertaking you’re going to answer it, I’d leave it at that. But we don’t yet 
have any indication . . . What is it? It’s with respect to your own vehicle. If you’re prepared to answer it, 
I’ll leave it and get onto something else. I don’t particularly want to spend a lot of time on it, No. 9, 
return 66. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — To the best of my knowledge, and we’re still checking on it, if the question is 
about the vehicle that I drive, the CVA vehicle, it was purchased for me by the government in the city of 
Estevan, and I believe it was within the limits that are allocated by conventional . . . you know, whatever 
it is, and certainly if it was any more than that, I made sure that it wasn’t the public that paid for it. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Okay, I take it since that is all the question asks is the make . . . I asked for 
the guidelines respecting the make, model, and cost of the motor vehicle. The question does not 
specifically ask for the details of your vehicle. It asks for the guidelines respecting the purchase of such 
vehicles, the length of time they’re used and any changes that were made since May 8 and if I have your 
undertaking to provide that information, I’ll leave it. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I don’t think the guidelines, from the information I have, have changed from 
the previous administration. If there are, we’ll certainly let you know. It was unit 314997. It’s a 1982 
Buick LeSabre wagon. Number of kilometres on it is 13,000. It was purchased December 2, 1982. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I have another question, Mr. Premier, and this time it’s with respect to the 
deficit that your government has incurred — apparently getting worse. I’d remind the Premier that you 
took over an administration whose financial history and financial records were impeccable — among the 
best in North America. There had been some three occasions, I think, since the war, when deficits had 
been run and those pretty modest. 
 
There were, I think, Mr. Premier, two classes of provinces. There was Manitoba and provinces east 
which traditionally ran large deficits, some of them running as large a 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2694 

deficit as they could reasonably borrow, and there was Saskatchewan west which generally had a 
reasonably good record. We now seem to be in the process of joining Manitoba east, those provinces 
which habitually run deficits. I would hope that that isn’t the case. I wonder when the Premier foresees 
Saskatchewan returning to balanced budgets. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, let me just read this. The Conference Board in Canada has an economic 
analysis publication called the Econoscope. In February of 1983, last month, they projected that over the 
1982-86 period, Saskatchewan will lead all provinces in the following: (1) real growth, (2) growth in 
both residential and non-residential investment, (3) retail sales growth, (4) in the lowest level of 
unemployment, (5) in the highest personal savings, and would be second only to the province of Alberta 
(6) in current dollar growth, (7) in employment growth, (8) in growth and personal disposable income. 
 
This general pattern is expected to continue from 1986 to 1991. 
 
Now, if we as a province are going to lead all provinces (except we may be tied in one or two positions 
with the province of Alberta) from 1982 to 1986 and it continues to take place from ’86 to ’91, I would 
expect, despite international oil cycles or international business cycles, that we will do better than most 
provinces which mean seven to date. When our NDP neighbors to the east have a deficit which is 
closely approaching a billion, and all other provinces have extremely large deficits per capita — ours is 
the lowest in the neighborhood of $220 million — but given this projection by, as the Leader of the 
Opposition says, “the very astute and reputable conference board,” and the latest one (and I point this 
out to the members of the media) that we will lead in all these indicators, then I would suggest that in 
general economic terms Saskatchewan will be extremely strong with respect to deficits, with respect to 
growth, with respect to employment, etc. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I don’t know if the Premier’s got a hearing problem, or if someone around 
you is talking to you when I’m asking questions, but that wasn’t the question I asked. I subscribe to that 
publication; I have it. I noted that that publication did not predict an end to your deficit financing, and 
even if it did, that wasn’t what I wanted. You, sir, are an economist. I assume that this is something that 
you can grapple with. I assume that you can give me an estimation as to when you think our budgets are 
going to be balanced. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — All I can suggest is: as the hon. member well knows, that given all the 
economic forecasts, we are expected to do better than nine-tenths of the provinces, or the best of any 
provinces in Canada, we will come out of a deficit situation as quickly as any other province in the 
country. And certainly it will depend on two things primarily, which you know you are very significant 
in terms of revenues for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Number one is the American farmer. The American farmer has much more discretionary income in his 
pocket when corn prices and bean prices go up. The state of Ohio, the state of Iowa and Illinois and 
Wisconsin will buy a lot of potash from Saskatchewan. When our sales in potash to the United States go 
back up from where they were at a couple hundred million (and now they’re down to $30 million) it’s a 
significant difference — when those turn around, depending on what the U.S. farm economy does. 
Number two, when the oil markets stabilize because there is a couple hundred million dollars in oil 
export tax . . . But when oil prices drop, you know, down to 



 
March 9, 1983 

2695 
 

the 75 per cent level and there’s no tax, well I am sad, if you will, that I can’t control international oil 
prices, or I can’ t put more money into the American farmer’s pocket. When those two things begin to 
readjust in cycles, as they do, we can easily generate 200, 300, 400 million dollars in revenue that we 
don’t have today, and the member knows that. 
 
So, given the economic indications of the fastest area of growth, the most sustained area of growth in 
housing, in agriculture and in jobs among anybody else in Canada, given that, plus improvements in the 
international positions, the sky is the limit for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Premier, I get that publication. It is reputable and it has been saying the 
same thing about the province of Saskatchewan for some time. It may surprise you to learn that what is 
said about Saskatchewan before April ’82 is not very different from what is said about Saskatchewan 
after April ’82. You people are guilty of a sin that many governments are guilty of — you overrate your 
own importance. Their prognosis on Saskatchewan has not changed and did not change with the 
election. They were saying the same thing when we were in office. 
 
Do I take it from your total avoidance, never mind of the question of the issue, that you have no 
timetable by which you hope to balance your budget? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — It’s our intention to balance it as quickly as possible given such international 
economic conditions as U.S. farm income, that dictates to a large extent our potash sales, and 
international oil prices, which dictate to a large extent our tax on international oil revenues. So if I can’t 
predict those, how can I predict when we are going to have another $300 million or $400 million in 
revenues? I’m saying all the indications internally that we control, we have an impact on. It’s saying that 
we’re open for business, providing the tax targets, encouraging people to be employed here, and the only 
province creating jobs. And, in housing (I think it’s interesting to point out because the members’ riding 
is here) Regina’s construction industry is doing considerably better this year than last year at this time, 
despite a recession, if issued building permits are any indication. The city issues $14 million in building 
permits in January compared with $11 million last year. In 1982, according to monthly statistics released 
from Regina City Council regular Monday meeting, among the largest increases were permits issued for 
single-family dwellings. The city issued $2 million worth of housing permits in January ’83 compared 
with only $542,000 a year ago under your administration. 
 
Now the recession across the world hasn’t got better, and in North America it hasn’t got better. But the 
conditions in the province of Saskatchewan, despite the recession, confirm exactly what he conference 
board is saying. 
 
All those things that we can have an impact on internally, we are, and externally, we have to cope. But 
we’re prepared to deal with international pricing conditions or international income conditions of the 
American farmer. And we’re down there doing some things that I believe are pretty important, like 
moving the sales office from Atlanta, Georgia, where they don’t buy potash, up to Chicago, where they 
do. Given the same per capita income, I will forecast that sales out of Chicago will be higher than they 
will in Atlanta, Georgia, for the American farmer. 
 
So, let me just summarize by saying the internal conditions that we can control are very positive. We 
have to cope with international conditions, and I believe that we will. 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2696 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Do I take it from that answer, stretching almost five minutes in length, that 
you have no date by which you’re going to balance the budget? You’ll do it whenever it becomes 
convenient? 
 
I would remind the Premier that prosperity does not bring about balanced budget without some exercise 
of will. The Province of Ontario went through a sustained period of prosperity and during all that period 
of time had a deficit budget. The Government of Canada had precisely the same experience in the ’60s 
and ’70s. This country experienced unprecedented prosperity and unprecedented deficits. There’s 
nothing about prosperity which brings about balanced budgets. I say it takes an act of will and I gather 
from your comments that you have no will, at least you have no timetable. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Chairman, if the member admits that Saskatchewan has very little control 
over American farm income or international oil prices, I think he would have to agree to that. Would the 
member agree to that? He accepts that? All right, let the record show that Mr. Shillington accepts the 
fact that we don’t control international oil prices or the American farm income. Now given that, is he 
suggesting then that we should increase the amount of tax burden on the Saskatchewan public at this 
time — during the recession internationally, North American? Is he suggesting that we should increase 
the tax to the public? I just want him to confirm that. Is that what he’s asking? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I don’t want to give the Premier a lecture on the function of this House — 
never mind the rules: the function of this House. The estimates of the opposition are not before this 
House. Our estimates are not before this House, Mr. Premier. You are not being asked to decide whether 
or not any sum of money should be voted to the opposition. That takes place in a different forum. You 
are asking us to vote a sum of money, and it is us who seek information from you. I did not ask you 
about any of the issues you raised. I asked you: do you not have a timetable by which you’re going to 
bring these deficits to an end? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to make sure that the public understands what the 
member opposite is asking. He’s asking us to balance the budget tomorrow. Now, Mr. Chairman, the 
only way that the member could be suggesting that we do that is . . . Do you want us to put the tax back 
on gasoline? Do you want us to raise the sales tax? Do you want us to do the kinds of things that you 
have suggested that you favor? For example, in the province of Manitoba, they’re increasing tax. 
 
I guess what I’m asking, Mr. Chairman, is if the member agrees, and he has, that we don’t control 
international incomes, and we don’t control international oil prices, therefore clearly that means that we 
don’t control a good part of our revenues. If he agrees, and I think he has suggested in this House, that 
we spend public money for jobs . . . Does he agree with that? He’s nodding his head in the affirmative. 
For schools, and for hospitals. He wants us to spend money to create jobs. Mr. Chairman, the member 
for Shaunavon said his constituency was prepared to spend $50 million on a pipeline — his 
constituency. They’re prepared to do that. And he wants us to spend more and more public moneys, and 
he’s just recognized that we don’t control international economic conditions. So the only thing in 
between is to raise taxes. Now I want the public of Saskatchewan to recognize that the members in the 
opposition want the Government of Saskatchewan now to raise sales tax, and to raise income tax, and to 
raise gas tax, and to raise corporate tax, because that’s the only way they’re going to do it, given these 
two alternatives. 



 
March 9, 1983 

2697 
 

Now if that’s what they want, I want everybody in Saskatchewan to recognize that they’re asking for tax 
increases. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — If the Premier can find in Hansard any one of those comments he just 
attributed to me, I will eat that desk with the electrical cord still attached! It is not there, Mr. Premier. I 
said no such thing. What I did say was that prosperity, which you are assuming, will not bring about, in 
and by itself, balanced budgets. That takes an act of will. I have never been impressed with the financial 
management of the Government of Ontario. But I will say this in favor of the late Larry Grossman, 
before he departed from that post he set a timetable — four years. I don’t think they’ll make it, but at 
least they had a timetable and some exhibition of will to balance it. 
 
What I see this evening is no timetable, just a blissful assumption that somehow or other the tooth fairy, 
or someone else, is going to balance this budget for you. I suggest that isn’t going to happen unless you 
decide it’s going to happen. And I ask you again: do you have no date by which you’d like to balance it? 
Never mind when you think it will balance. Give any date by which you’d like to see it balanced, apart 
from the trite answer as soon as possible. That’s no answer at all. Surely the Premier has some timetable 
which he views to be desirable. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Chairman, we would all like to see a balanced budget. The members 
opposite say they want to see a balanced budget, but they won’t tell us how they would plan to do it with 
increased public spending on one hand, international revenues falling at the same time, except to raise 
taxes. 
 
Now, I know that’s their solution. It’s to tax, and to tax, and to tax. I don’t think, during these times, it’s 
a good idea, as you might, to raise income tax, and to raise sales tax, and to raise taxes and taxes when 
you know the international economic conditions are beyond your control, and you’re asked by the 
opposition at the same time to spend money on public projects. 
 
So, we’d all like to have balanced budgets. Given the international economic conditions and given what 
we’re doing today . . . Perhaps I could add that it says here in the same publication, just to give you 
some hope so you have a positive attitude — a good positive attitude . . . For the Leader of the 
Opposition who just came in, I’m quoting the conference board, that prestigious organization that you 
quoted the other day, and its February issue of the economic analysis publication, the Econoscope. And 
it notes: 
 

Saskatchewan’s economy contains many of the basic ingredients for strong growth in the 1980s. 
 

And I just point out that we are going to lead in eight different categories from 1982 to 1986, and likely 
continue to lead in those eight categories from ’86 to ’91. It’s in Hansard now. 
 
It says that Saskatchewan has substantial mineral resources. 
 

Its single most important industry, agriculture, appears poised for strong growth during the next few 
years. Its government has a low debt burden, and the benefit of substantial energy reserves. Finally, 
the provincial government is intent upon attracting private sector investment as a stimulus to 
economic development with high tech industries as the main candidates. It is on this 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2698 

basis of these positive factors that Saskatchewan’s gross domestic product, GDP, is forecast to grow 
at a rate second only to Alberta’s in the entire decade. 
 

Now, may I just reiterate? All those things, internally, that we can do to encourage economic growth and 
development in terms of public spending for employment, tax reductions to encourage investment, and 
to help people have a good positive attitude, we’re doing. The member opposite admitted that we do not 
have any control over American farm income, and the subsequent demand for potash, or international oil 
prices. Both have a major impact to the tune of probably hundreds of millions of dollars on our revenue. 
So, subject to that, subject to the things we are doing here, we would all love to balance it tomorrow, but 
we’ll balance it when these economic conditions come together. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Yes, and when I win the lottery, I’m going to retire, too. I think it’s all going 
to happen at about the same time. I’m going to leave this subject, but I think it’s fair to say that having 
been invited to do so over a 20-minute period, and since you were unable to articulate anything in the 
way of a timetable, I think it is fair for the public to assume that you don’t have a timetable by which 
you would like to see this budget balanced. It’s just whenever the economic conditions are going to 
make it convenient for you. I suggest you’ll be long gone from office. In a brief period of time, even if 
the time span that you believed happened, I suspect you wouldn’t balance your budget. 
 
While the debate is at a reasonably high level, I want to ask a question. I want to say by way of 
background that I am not muckraking by answering this question. I have known the member for 
Thunder Creek as a personal friend for many years. I have known his father as a friend and neighbor. 
And I feel a tragedy has beset him in a way, I think, as personal as anybody in your caucus. Having said 
that, this city is rife with rumors about his resignation. I want to ask you a question, Mr. Premier, for the 
record, really. Will the Premier confirm for the record the resignation of the Minister of Energy and 
Mines had absolutely nothing to do with any improprieties, financial or otherwise, with regard to the 
performance of his duties as a minister of the crown or as an elected representative? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, I can only reiterate, Mr. Chairman, what I said at the time, I believe 
when I was in a news conference, with respect to the resignation of the cabinet minister. He and I had a 
conversation and we mutually agreed that given his financial and family responsibilities, it was best at 
this time that he stepped down from cabinet. And we agreed that that should be the case and that’s 
exactly what happened. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I want to remind the Premier before I leave the subject. I’m not going 
to spend long on it. I phrased the question with great care because there are rumors to the effect there 
were improprieties involved with his ministry or with his performance as an elected representative. I 
repeat the question and I say to you, Mr. Premier, if you refuse to answer it you are simply going to fuel 
those rumors. Now let me repeat the question for you. Will the Premier state clearly for the record that 
the resignation of the Minister of Energy and Mines had absolutely nothing to do with any improprieties, 
financial or otherwise, with regard to the performance of his duties as a minister of crown, or as an 
elected representative? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — It had nothing to do with improprieties. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. I want to get on to a question I raised with the 
minister in charge of the public service commission. Again I would have 



 
March 9, 1983 

2699 
 

thought this to have been his responsibility, but it apparently is not. It apparently is yours. It has to do 
with the public service firings. I suggested to the minister in charge of the public service commission 
that the ongoing firings, the fact that you’re cutting the dog’s tail off one-eighth of an inch at a time is 
creating some very severe problems within the public service. I do not have any statistical data but I do 
have some experience and I want to relate it to the Premier. 
 
I used to be able to meet public servants and say, “How’s it going, Bill?” (to pick a name out of the air). 
And they would under normal circumstances tell me what they’re doing in their department, what’s new, 
talk about the latest project they’re working on, something they’re interested in. I often kept in touch 
with what was happening in the department in a way that it did not involve any sort of political interest. 
 
Now you ask any public servant, “How’s it going?” The answer is universally the same. With sort of a 
wry grin, they say, “Well, I’m still working.” That’s the standard response of any public servant. That’s 
all they are thinking about at the moment. The continual, ongoing firings, Mr. Premier, are decimating 
the morale of the public service in Saskatchewan. I ask you in the name of all that’s decent, when are 
you going to bring this process to an end? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t buy the argument at all that morale in the public 
service is as described, as the member puts it. I think if you look up the morale of the public employees 
in Prince Albert-Duck Lake, for example, and if you go through the riding, and if you went through the 
ridings today and through the cities, in particular the city of Regina and the city of Saskatoon, you’d see 
that the morale was good. The morale is better and it’s getting better. So, I don’t buy the argument that 
there’s any kind of a problem, as implied by the member opposite. They expect some positive changes 
to be made, and they have been made. 
 
If the hon. member wants to court rumors — he may like to — that’s his prerogative, but I just don’t buy 
the story. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, once again, I’m having great difficulty making the Premier understand 
the question. I want to know, Mr. Premier, when these firings are going to come to an end that keep 
going on and on and on and on and on. I may say, with respect to Prince Albert-Duck Lake, there 
weren’t enough public servants in that riding to materially affect the outcome. I may say I met a public 
servant. I knocked at the door and I said, “I’m Ned Shillington here on behalf of Jerry Hammersmith.” 
The response was, “Well, I’m a public servant and I guess that tells you how I’m voting, doesn’t it?” I 
said, “Thanks.” He said, “You’re welcome. I’ll be sure and be out.” That was as long as the conversation 
lasted. And he did. In fact, that public servant, I suspect at very considerable risk to himself, put up a 
sign for Jerry Hammersmith. 
 
That was the response and that is the mood in the public service. I do not expect you to acknowledge 
that the morale of the public service is as low as it is, freakily. I do expect you, in the name of all that’s 
decent, to bring this process to an end at some time and to say, “We are finished with the transition 
period and we are going to discontinue the ongoing firings which continue on almost a daily basis.” 
When, in the name of all that’s decent, are you going to let the public service of Saskatchewan get down 
to work and stop worrying about their necks? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Chairman, the public service commission is working right now. They’re 
working in crowns and in departments. The member keeps using the word 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2700 

“firings.” We have had a freeze on, which meant we haven’t been hiring. I think the general public will 
— as they don’t want to see the size of government grow any more than it had been over the last 10 
years because it doubled in size . . . They say that in Prince Albert and they say it in Regina and Moose 
Jaw and Swift Current and Melfort: don’t have this thing growing more and more so we have to raise 
more taxes to pay for it. So, we have said that we don’t want to see government grow. We want it to be 
efficient and effective, get the services finished, and provide the services to the public at a reasonable 
cost, and that’s what we’re doing. 
 
With respect to adjustments or changes in a direction or modifications to a department or a crown, the 
members opposite were involved in modifications to crowns and changing them or redirecting them or 
cancelling them or building them or whatever. That goes on in government. It went on year after year 
after year after year. “The firings” is a misnomer. There have been very few people moved, 
percentage-wise. I think in total government, in crowns and in departments, there’s something like 
27,000 or 28,000 people, which is a large number. We have put a freeze on hirings. We have moved 
some departments like DNS into some others, and so forth at the will of the people, and I’m sure it’s 
very popular. We’re still providing the service. The attitude is one that we can build; we can continue to 
build to provide the service but not at an undue cost or tax burden to the public. I believe the attitude is 
better now than it was, certainly than it was prior to the election. It’s getting better, as evidenced by the 
reaction, as I mentioned, in Prince Albert. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, do I take it from the Premier’s response that this process is going to 
continue? (Use whatever term you want.) I say, Mr. Premier, you have fired those you can and laid off 
those you can’t fire. But the process is the same. You are weeding out those who, for some reason or 
other, you feel aren’t going to be loyal to you. I may say, I’m not going to get into the names, but a 
goodly number of the people you laid off, fired, terminated, use whatever phrase you want, would have 
loyally served this government, and served this government as loyally as they did the last government. 
 
Do I take it again from your inability to articulate a timetable over a 10-minute period, that these firings 
are going t continue —layoffs, firings, terminations — are going to continue into the indefinite future? I 
remind the Premier that it is ongoing, ongoing; it continues. Every day we hear more of it. Do I 
understand the Premier to say that this process which is now ongoing is going to continue into the 
indefinite future, and you really don’t have any idea when it is going to come to an end? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think it’s fair to point out that some departments, some 
crowns, and some agencies are growing, and some are declining in terms of emphasis. We have 
expanded a department, for example, like economic development and trade. As a result of that, we are 
bringing in new people because we have a new thrust. We may do the same in some other areas. 
Certainly some of our potential reorganization will be the growth of some thrusts into areas where we 
feel we have the greatest strengths for the province. That will continue. 
 
So, in fairness, I think the member should look at the total picture in balance, about the growth in some 
areas, expansion in some areas, as well as the decline in others, and that process continues on and on. 
The net result may not be any particularly dramatic change at all in the total level. I will say though, that 
I doubt very much whether the size of government, the total size of government, is going to grow 
anywhere close to the rate 



 
March 9, 1983 

2701 
 

of increase of the previous administration, and I believe that’s the will of the folks, the will of the voters, 
that they don’t want to see a massive increase again in the public service. So we’re increasing some 
departments, there will be a reduction in others, and on balance, it’s up or down, whatever. So I just 
think it would be fairer if he would at least recognize in some cases we are bringing on new employees 
when in other places departments are being merged with others. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Premier, I want to get on to a different subject since I’m patently not 
going to get an answer to that one either. 
 
The next subject I want to deal with is minimum wage. I am not going to deal with the level of salaries 
paid to the political personnel which you hired, apart from reminding you that those salaries represent a 
very substantial increase over what was paid previously. If that’s going to be an issue, I’ll give you some 
names. But I assume it isn’t going to be an issue, and I won’t. The level of salaries you pay to the 
political personnel is a very considerable increase over what was there before. 
 
I am not so much concerned, Mr. Premier, with your generosity to your friends, as your niggardly 
attitude toward those who apparently are not. I am referring to those on minimum wage. Mr. Premier, I 
wonder how on earth you can justify not giving any increase to those who are at the bottom of the 
ladder, at the very bottom of the ladder, when your assistants are deserving of increases as high as 
$20,000 and $30,000 over the incumbents in those office previously. How on earth do you justify 
keeping those at minimum wage at the same level since last January? That’s how long they’ve been 
there. You have ignored the recommendation of the minimum wage board, and I wonder if you would 
give us your justification for treating those people so shabbily. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I am tempted to make some comparisons between ’72 and ’73 but I will 
refrain from doing that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m talking about salaries in Executive Council 
when I’m talking about this. I’ll just say with respect to minimum wage, the members opposite are 
asking time and time and time again to have more done to encourage both the pubic and the private 
sectors to employ more people. Would the member opposite agree that there is some relationship 
between the level of salary of individuals and the number of people employed? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — None at that level; I don’t know a reputable economist who believes there is 
at the minimum wage level. Minimum wage is not paid, I would remind the Premier, minimum wage is 
not paid by large businesses. They are normally unionized; they normally pay more than minimum 
wage. The vast majority of those on minimum wage are employed by small businesses who do not make 
that sort of a sophisticated calculation saying, “Now if minimum wage goes up by 5 per cent or 6 per 
cent that’s going to increase my labor costs so I’m going to have to lay off some people.” That isn’t how 
the clothier or the other small businessmen who hire minimum wage make those hiring decision. That 
may be how large industrial or commercial concerns make those decisions, but hat isn’t the mental 
process of a small businessman. He says to himself, “Can I possibly get along with that employee?” and 
if the answer is no, he hired them. 
 
I suggest to you that the level of employment of those at minimum wage is, within reasonable limits, 
unrelated to whether or not they are given a 6 per cent increase. If you doubled the minimum wage, that 
might be different, but I suggest to you that the minimum wage recommended by the minimum wage 
board last June would not have affected the level of employment of people on minimum wage by one 
iota. 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2702 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, that shows me that the hon. member doesn’t understand the economy at 
all, because you would find very few employers in Saskatchewan or in Canada or in the United States 
that don’t say the number of people employed is very highly correlated with wage rates. So to the extent 
that we look at it, and if I remember my figures — I’ll stand to be corrected — up to 70 or 75 per cent of 
the people on social services today in the province of Saskatchewan have less than grade nine education. 
A large number of those people would fall into something close to the minimum wage category. 
 
If you are suggesting to me that we would employ more people by raising their wages, and at the same 
time say that we can have an increase in the number of people employed in that category which is the 
most difficult, and at the same time raise their wages, then it flies in the face of every economic 
relationship that I have seen with respect to employment and the level of employment. To put it another 
way, I think the hon. member would realize that as the price of something gets more expensive, people 
tend to use less of it. He says, as he shakes his head, that that isn’t the case in labor. I would say if you 
look at the employment pictures around the world where the settlements are coming in at 3 per cent, 5 
per cent or zero per cent, in U.S. steel or some other place where they’re coming in at less than that, then 
you see people employed and you tell me that we can make an increase in most of those people. Seventy 
to 75 per cent, if I’m correct, in social services with a grade nine education or less, would fall into that 
category. That we would improve their lot by raising the minimum they have to be paid, expecting more 
people to hire them — well, I guess I just have to say that clearly you don’t understand the economy. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Premier, you relate (I certainly have to give you high marks for 
innovation in this economic period) a level of employment of people on minimum wage to the 
employment levels. And you say we’ll employ more. Yes, okay, I therefore assume that there are not 
enough people at the minimum wage level employed to raise the minimum wage. That seems to be what 
comes out of your comments. 
 
I assume that in some fashion, if there’s any logic to what you’re saying — and the answer to that may 
well be no — but I assume if there’s any logic to what you’re saying, it is that given the rate of 
unemployment, you don’t want to increase the minimum wage, because it might exacerbate the 
unemployment problem which we all admit we have. 
 
Is that what you’re saying — that given the level of unemployment, you don’t want to increase the 
minimum wage? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Chairman, if the members agree that unemployment is a significant 
problem in Canada, and it’s higher in Saskatchewan than we’d like it to be, then it’s hard, or difficult, or 
somewhat confounding to me that they’re asking to have the wage rates increased. At the same time, 
they want to employ more people, when those folks that have to hire them are telling me that it’s 
difficult enough now to make income. And you’re saying that the bankruptcies may be increasing 
because they haven’t got more money, but you want them to pay more. I mean it’s a circle that you just 
get caught chasing your tail. I mean you can’t have it both ways. If you want to increase the number of 
people employed, you can’t ask for significant increases in salary. There is a relationship.’ 
 
In the public sector, you’ve just asked: when are we going to balance the budget? Well, if you had 
asked, say, that we should increase the minimum wage . . . Shall we increase 



 
March 9, 1983 

2703 
 

the minimum wage, which means we’ve got to raise more taxes to pay for that? That’s going to mean 
that we’re going to have to look at a change in the deficit position. Again I have to go back an say, if 
you want them all hired in the public sector, you’d have to ask us to raise taxes. And if that’s what 
you’re asking, I would say fair enough, but I don’t agree with you. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — All right. Since the refusal to raise minimum wage is tied to unemployment 
levels, will you then tell the House: how low does the unemployment level have to fall before you’re 
going to raise the minimum wage? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Are you admitting there’s a relationship? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — It’s your theory, not mine. I’m just asking you to draw it to a logical 
conclusion, Mr. Premier. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, when we get to a position where unemployment is no longer a problem, 
or when we’re making vast strides across Saskatchewan, and indeed, the country, and generally, people 
are finding jobs readily and quickly, and the demand is there, what happens in many, many cases, if 
employers are looking for people, they no longer want to pay the minimum wage. They’ll pay above the 
minimum wage to attract those individuals. Most people in the province of Saskatchewan want the 
maximum wage, not the minimum wage. And quite frankly, it’s my theory that the million children that 
have left this province did so because they didn’t want to be stuck on minimum wage. They wanted to 
go to another province to get maximum wage. And the province of Saskatchewan is going to be one of 
positive attitude, so that you can get $5, $10, $15, $20 an hour, and not be stuck at the minimum. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I take it the Premier has no timetable by which he’s going to raise the 
minimum wage either, except I suppose it’ll come about . . . (inaudible) . . . full employment. 
 
Harry Truman used to say that there’s nothing new in this world, just history you’ve not seen. And I say 
this is an old movie. In 1964, the CCF government left office after a period of prosperity, and they left 
office with a high minimum wage. The Thatcher government left office after a difficult period in terms 
of the economy, and had the lowest minimum wage. Now, during the ‘70s, when the former 
administration was in office, the minimum wage went from being one of the lowest to the highest and 
that was during a period of prolonged prosperity. I say what we’re going to see is history revisited, an 
old-line party in office which will freeze minimum wage. You will come into office with the highest 
wage in Canada. I’ll predict you’ll leave with one of the lowest. And you will fail to achieve any of the 
prosperity which you claim. 
 
There are so many parallels, Mr. Premier, between your administration and Mr. Thatcher — so many 
parallels. I was interested to see a conference hosted by the late Mr. Thatcher. You’ll never guess what 
the theme for the conference was — open for business. There are so many parallels. There are so many 
parallels, Mr. Premier. Unfortunately that is not remembered as one of the better periods n the history of 
this province. I’ll make the prediction that your administration will not be fondly regarded by the people 
when it’s gone, either. 
 
I want, Mr. Premier, to get on to the issue of jobs. I asked you a question the other day 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2704 

and in a half-facetious manner, asked you to spare this province another conference, the last one having 
been so disastrous. Your response to that was a somewhat rambling apology for all the problems that 
had fallen on your head. And you talked about the oil price and the price of potash, and the U.S. farm 
market. And I’ll admit that you don’t have sole and exclusive control over the international price of oil. 
I’ll admit that there are some of the other things, some of the other problems you claim may have some 
claim to legitimacy. I put it no higher than that. 
 
But there is one thing you could have done with respect to jobs, Mr. Premier. You could have enhanced 
spending in the public sector, and that simply didn’t happen. That simply didn’t happen, Mr. Premier. 
That simply did not happen. Mr. Premier, the level of spending in the public sector was abysmally low. 
The overpass at Moose Jaw, which you and I go through every time we go back to the districts we grew 
up in, I thought was symbolic of the level of public expenditures in this province. A truck ran into that 
overpass in May, damaged it; one lane was closed off. And it wasn’t fixed until October. And you and I 
drove under that overpass all summer long. It wasn’t because the engineers in the highway department 
couldn’t figure out how to fix it — that technology has been with us for some time. It was because the 
money wasn’t available. 
 
And that example occurs throughout the length and breadth of this land. There was, by the admission of 
your Minister of Government Services, a freeze on spending, on public spending in her department for a 
good part of the summer while she analysed the budget and reviewed it. Your minister in charge of the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation put a hold on the power project at Nipawin during most of the 
construction season. It wasn’t until September that that was lifted, after most of the construction season 
had passed. The motto which you people borrowed from some commercial enterprise was: “There’s so 
much more we could be.” Mr. Premier, there is so much more you could have done and you didn’t do it. 
I’ll admit you can’t control oil prices but you could have controlled the level of public sector spending in 
this province and created some more jobs. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, a couple of observations. Number one, we found . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . would the member for Shaunavon like to . . . I want to remind him of this. They took 
over in 1971. As a result of minimum wage changes from 1971 to 1972, the January to January figures, 
you may have increased the minimum wage but you dropped 8,000 employees. Those figures were 
pointed out last night. And if you can show me or anybody else that there’s a positive relationship 
between the height of wages and the number of people employed, I’d be glad to look at the evidence. 
And anything that is close to that borders on being ridiculous. 
 
In terms of public spending (and your own track record shows it), the hon. member knows that we have 
spent money on schools, on hospitals, on nursing homes, on water, on housing, farm purchase programs, 
by the hundreds of millions of dollars — public programs. Now admit it. We’re not just building 
buildings for the sake of building buildings. We’re investing in a rural gas distribution program. We 
saved $10 million by renegotiating the Nipawin hydro project, and that’s $600 million or $700 million 
under way. The natural gas is $350 million over 10 years, and it’s a major expansion. And schools and 
hospitals and nursing homes — those things are going on. 
 
Public expenditures on one hand, and at the same time incentives in the private sector to encourage 
people to come and work and operate here . . . The combination is that we’re the only province in the 
country creating jobs, both public and private. The balance of both (which I’m sure he’s looking for, 
unless he admits he doesn’t like any 



 
March 9, 1983 

2705 
 

balance at all but a combination of public and private investment) is causing us to be the only province 
in the country creating jobs. 
 
And I predict — I predict today — that over the years ahead our wages will be higher and our income 
will be higher, and the growth in person discretionary income and family income will be higher and 
higher and higher and higher. The people at the bottom will go to the top — will go to the top and will 
quit going to the province of Alberta. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I thought Aesop had died some 2,000 years ago. I see there’s still fairy tales 
being invested which would put him to shame. 
 
With respect to public sector spending, I know you will stand up and deny that the sun is going to rise 
tomorrow morning, and you would also stand up and deny . . . But it is a matter of public record in those 
estimates that you did build schools. You did all the things you said you did, but you did it at a level 
well below what this province has customarily spent in previous years. 
 
Your . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Which you didn’t start. Which you didn’t start, Mr. Premier. It was 
scheduled to start last year. You put it on hold. Not a pipe has been welded. Not a thing has been done. 
Not a thing has been done, Mr. Premier. 
 
If you had . . . 
 
MR. VICE-CHAIRMAN: — Order. Let the member . . . Order! Let’s let the member do his speaking. 
We want to get through these estimates tonight. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — If you had just gone on a vacation and done nothing, the expenditures which 
were budgeted would have been well above what actually occurred. We would not have had the 
deep-freeze into which this province sank during the summer. 
 
I want to ask a couple more questions. These are minor questions. The first one is: I know the Premier of 
Alberta has a clothing allowance. Does the Premier of Saskatchewan have a clothing allowance? If so, 
what’s the amount of it? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — No. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I gather there is a Clerk of the Executive Council — Mr. Gren 
Smith-Wilson. Have I got the name right? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Windsor. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Windsor. Is there an apartment rented for Mr. Smith-Windsor’s benefit, at 
public expense? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I’ll get that information and let the hon. member know. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I’m amazed, Mr. Premier, that you don’t have . . . These estimates are 
not a very new phenomenon. They have been going on for some decades without a lot of change. 
 
One of the features which used to be standard was the officials would bring along some briefing books 
with some fairly standard information. Ask the gentleman to your right. I 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2706 

am amazed that your officials have not had sufficient foresight to bring along such information as the 
perks attached to the Clerk of the Executive Council. I am just amazed to see that that is something that 
you didn’t bring with you. 
 
I am not going to refight the battle so well fought by the member for Elphinstone, when you did not 
know the existence of Mr. Leier without a bit of prodding, the existence of a number of other people 
whom you must see on a daily basis. I’m not going to repeat that battle and I’m not going to try and 
bring your stonewalling to an end. I am going to ask another question with respect to that issue which I 
would ask you to respond to and that is: if there is a suite or an apartment, or some premises leased for 
the Clerk of the Executive Council, are those premises customarily available to any member of your 
Executive Council? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I just don’t have that information with respect to the individual or anybody 
else. I’ll get the information and provide it to the hon. member. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Premier, just a couple of questions. As I 
understand it, we have the undertaking of the Premier to give us the information set out by request in a 
letter, Blakeney to Devine, dated March 8, 1983. Am I correct in that? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Yes, sir. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I would ask the Premier whether he will include in that (and I understand 
he has already given us that commitment) people who are on, and I have asked that, contracts of 
employment. And here I would advise the Premier that we are not looking for ordinary consulting 
contracts of short duration where you do not have the exclusive use of an individuals’ time. There must 
be many of those (I suppose somebody may come in to fix a water purifier or something like that). That 
may indeed be a contract of personal employment. We’re not looking for that; we’re looking for the 
other information already indicated. 
 
I would ask that the Premier particularly indicate whether the following have been in the employ of the 
Executive Council by appointment or by contract, and I mentioned Dave Black, Ian Disbery, Reg 
Forsythe, Garnet Carven or Garven, Jack Harrington, Terry Leier, Scotty Livingstone, Jim Petrychyn, 
Paul Robinson, Harvey Rothecker, Ted Walters . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You’ll never make it. 
 
Mr. Chairman and Mr. Premier, I would also like to request the amount paid in fees and other payments 
to the law firm of MacPherson, Leslie and Tyerman, or any members thereof. I am here assuming that 
Mr. Ron Barclay and Mrs. Marjorie Gerwing are members of that firm — that’s not the complete list of 
the members. I ask whether the Premier has that information available. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I’ve already answered in the affirmative that I will provide the information 
that is requested in your letter, which includes all the contracts for people and for services rendered, or 
to be rendered since May 8. I’ll note your caveat, or your qualification that, where it was a combination 
or a short-term, somebody who might have been employed with somebody else, and in and out, it might 
not be what you’re precisely looking at. I don’t say that in a fashion that I won’t include those who are 
still employed. But I’ll provide that information, including the names of the individuals that you listed 
and so forth, if they’re there and if they are employed. 



 
March 9, 1983 

2707 
 

With respect to the attorneys and lawyers and so forth, I don’t have that information to date, certainly 
not the amount of money that might have been paid, or the remuneration, but I suspect that without too 
much difficulty we can provide a good part of that information. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I’m sorry I missed that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Just at the end, I’m 
really just firming up what we think our commitments are with . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 
that’s right. I never did smoke so I don’t get one of your big red posters, I’m sorry . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, would you also include in the list those people who are employees of 
the chief electoral office? We have noted that while the expenditure appears in the blue book, the dark 
blue book, the number of employees is not specifically identified. We’ve already indicated that Mr. 
Chamberlin or Mr. Lampard are employees, and would you include those in the information you 
provide? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, I suspect that we can provide those individuals in the total package we 
are putting together. Within the statutes associated with elections and so forth, they are a little bit apart 
from what normally goes on, but we’ll provide the information to the best of our ability on who’s there 
now and what they do. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I would hope, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, you would regard that 
(and I ask you to do so) as an addition to number one, saying the names of persons who are, or have 
been on the staff of the chief electoral office, and just as if it were there, in that form. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I think that we can co-operate. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I just want to say, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Premier, that I have sat here through a 
number of hours of questioning and I want to say that I had a number of questions which I felt important 
to ask the Premier. I want to say that I sat here and listened while we attempted to get information and I 
think it has been the worst display that has been given by any Premier in the history of this legislature. 
Absolutely no information, and I think that lack of information is either deliberate or what people are 
starting to say is in fact, true. The Premier is not a bad guy, but many people in the province are 
concerned that the Premier really isn’t running this province; he’s not the Premier; he doesn’t know 
what going on. And so my questions are going to be very brief because you are providing no 
information whatsoever. And I think it’s a waste of the taxpayers’ money to continue the questioning 
with the lack of information that has been exhibited here today. 
 
I want further to say that you came into office with a lot of hopes and aspirations in this province, and I 
think that the callousness of your government toward human beings, professional civil servants, the 
massive firings and the depth of the highest unemployment that this province has seen is a disgrace. I 
think that I’m going to direct two or three questions and sit down, because I think that the performance 
of the Premier has finally been exposed to the public — that he doesn’t know the facts. He’s not in fact 
running the government. He has a transition team who is running the government, not him. 
 
I want to ask just in respect to minimum wage. And what I want to ask as a follow-up, listening to your 
discussion in respect to minimum wage: has the government considered, is the government considering, 
has it during the past ten months 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2708 

considered establishing a minimum wage differential, that is, for the young employees, a separate wage 
and a higher wage for the experienced employees for employment? The reason I ask that is that Ronald 
Reagan has recently indicated that he intends a proposal of reducing it down to $2.50 an hour for young 
people, and I wonder if in fact the Premier can indicate whether he has any policy in respect to this. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, I can say that I have considered the implications of a staggered 
minimum wage, not for young but for students because a large number of students across Canada, 
indeed in the province of Saskatchewan, have decided to go back to work and are very concerned about 
employment. And again I go back from my economic studies and analysis — there is a relationship 
between student employment and the level of wage. And other jurisdictions in Canada, jurisdictions of 
your political persuasion, have dealt with a staggered minimum wage that would have an effect, a 
possible effect with respect to students, not young or old; students can be of any age. So, yes, I’ve given 
it some consideration because the major problem, as you I would suspect agree, is employment. So we 
don’t want to jeopardize any possibilities for student employment by doing something that may harm or 
jeopardize an employer hiring students. And in that context I have looked at a lot of things, including 
staggered wages. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. I just wonder what success the other provinces are having 
with their staggered wages for students. Obviously you have indicated that this province in the past has 
had the lowest unemployment rate with the highest minimum wage. And I think it is really dependent 
upon basically the economic will of that government and the extent that that government is prepared to 
stimulate and to maximize the economic activity in the province. I think that’s where we had success in 
the past and I wonder very much as to the success that they’ve had in stimulating this economic activity 
in other parts of Canada — the Maritimes, Ontario and so on. So I accept what you say and I thank you 
for indicating that you’re considering it. 
 
I just want one other piece of information. Your government recently increased the number of 
Legislative Secretaries and I think it has been increased to ten if I’m not mistaken and I would like if 
you could provide me with a list of the Legislative Secretaries (I have an idea who they are but it’s 
convenient with the question), a list of the Legislative Secretaries an all the related expenses that have 
been paid in conjunction with their legislative duties. Could you provide that? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — If I could just make one comment with respect to employment before I answer 
this. I think the hon. member will agree that history will support the following argument. You may have 
said that Saskatchewan had the highest minimum wage in Canada and that you had low unemployment 
at the same time. Let me remind you, sir, that no other jurisdiction in Canada or the history of Canada 
ever exported more children than the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mostly under the jurisdiction of a party that believes that there is no 
relationship between wage and employment (and clearly they don’t believe there’s any relationship), 
Saskatchewan lost thousands and hundreds of thousands of students and young people to go find jobs in 
other provinces rather than here. I just want to remind them of that when they are bragging about having 
a high minimum wage at the same time of having low unemployment when they’re exporting all the 
employables. 



 
March 9, 1983 

2709 
 

Second part of the question: Birkbeck, health, August 16, 1982; Gordon Dicks, Executive Council, June 
10, 1982; Tim Embury, finance, June 10, 1982; Rick Folk, industry and commerce now economic 
development and trade, June 10, 1982; Lorne Hepworth, agriculture, June 10, 1982; Ralph Katzman, 
agriculture, August 16, 1982; Colin Maxwell, labor, June 10, 1982; Miles Morin, energy and mines, 
June 10, 1982; Gerald Muirhead, environment, August 16, 1982. I will provide the member with their 
accumulated expenses or associated expenses with their responsibilities in the near future. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you. I would also ask the Premier whether any MLAs other than Legislative 
Secretaries who may have acted on any committees have indeed been provided with expense 
allowances, travel allowances, or the like. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, not to my knowledge there wasn’t. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I just want to comment on your other statement in respect to the minimum wage,. 
Mr. Premier, I just want, as my colleague indicated to you, that what you should do, as I urged the 
Minister of Industry and Commerce when he was talking about the economic strategy of this province, 
is to go back to 1964 to ’71. Same policy — Saskatchewan: Open for Business. There is no doubt that 
the minimum wage dropped during that period and that there was the largest exodus of people from 
Saskatchewan ever in the history of the province during that period of time. So I think what I want you 
to do is to go back, review the record from ’64 to ’71. Exactly the same philosophy, in fact many of the 
same bloodlines running the government and so I invite the minister to do that, because the Minister of 
Industry and Commerce wasn’t even aware of what government was elected from ’64 to ’71, nor did he 
know about the economic strategy at that time. I take it the Premier may be aware of that, and I would 
invite him to take a look at it. 
 
I want to ask another question in conclusion. I’m not sure, since the Premier in effect organized the 
transition team which performed its massacre of the public service, I presume that the transition team 
headed by the Deputy Premier probably also had your hand in the ill deed of the massacre of many 
professional crown corporation employees. Could the minister advise me whether the transition team 
was also involved in the selection of those to be fired in the crown corporations? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — In answer to the first part of your question with respect to reviewing the 
record, I think it would be fair to point out to the hon. member that after 10 years of reviewing the 
record, the people of Saskatchewan reviewed the record of the members opposite on April 26. Then, 
again, they reviewed the record of the new administration on February 21. Both those circumstances 
offered a fair review of the record, and they speak for themselves. 
 
Number two, with respect to the transition team and its dealing with crown corporations, I would think it 
would be fair to say that the boards of directors of the crown corporations made many of the 
management decisions. I think it would also be fair to say that they may have been in discussion with 
people involve in Executive Council and/or transition. Well, I can’t add anymore than that. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — One final question. I wonder, Mr. Premier, if you could provide this information. 
Could you indicate the total cost in respect to the settlements of the employees of the crown sector that 
the government has paid out to date? In the public 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2710 

service commission, the Minister of Finance indicated that there was, I believe, $1.3 million in respect to 
public service employees who were dismissed and severance was given. I wonder if the Premier could 
provide the total amount that was paid in respect to the severance packages of crown corporation 
employees who in fact were relieved of their duties. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I believe that despite the fact that it doesn’t apply to Executive Council, we 
can get most of that with a couple of caveats, except for perhaps by agreement the individuals didn’t 
want it to be released, they’ve asked for that, and I would respect that confidentiality. But under the 
normal run of things, I expect we could provide most of that. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — One final piece of information that the Premier could advise, since he’s getting into 
the mood of providing information: could he provide the total number of pending lawsuits against 
officials, chairmen of crown corporations and/or public service employees? I’d like to know the total 
number of pending legal actions by employees who have been dismissed. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Chairman, I was tempted to say yours or ours, but I won’t do that. I will 
take note of the question and gather the information to the best of my ability. I think that we can provide 
that information. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 10 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 10 
 
Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 10 agreed to. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

LEGISLATION 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 21 
 
Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 21 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (NO. 3) 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 



 
March 9, 1983 

2711 
 

LEGISLATION 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 21 
 
Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 21 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

LEGISLATION 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 21 
 
Items 2 and 4 agreed to. 
 
Vote 21 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (NO. 3) 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

ENERGY AND MINES 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 23 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 23 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (NO. 3) 
 

SASKATCHEWAN HERITAGE FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

ENERGY SECURITY DIVISION 
 

ENERGY AND MINES 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 47 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 47 agreed to. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD 

 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 22 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2712 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 22 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (NO. 3) 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 22 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 22 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 22 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 22 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (NO. 3) 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

HIGHWAYS AND TRANSPORTATION 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 16 
 
Item 1 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Deputy minister of highways, Mr. Chairman, Jack Sutherland. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, previously when we did highways, I’d asked you 
for the names, salaries of any executive assistant or special assistants you may have. You said at that 
time you had one executive assistant. That may be changed now. Could you give me the names of any 
executive assistants or special assistants that you may have, or people under contract to you? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, if it’s okay we could get that and send that to you. Is that okay? 
 
We’ll send you the complete information of the staff to date. Is that what you’re asking for? You got it 
— personal staff, you got it. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — The minister doesn’t have that with him at the present. Is that what 



 
March 9, 1983 

2713 
 

you’re saying, that you don’t have that information with you? 
 
You have an additional expenditure here of 2.8 million on one page and 3 million on the other. Could 
you explain what the additional costs were for? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Okay. Basically, under item 1, vote 16, 5, there is $100,000 for additional 
grid road legal survey work to reduce the backlog in this program. Vote 16, 8 — there is $1,150,00 for 
accounts payable; $1 million to offset maintenance costs — increases for abnormal unseasonal late 
spring and early fall ice and snowstorms. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — The announcement that the minister made just the other day on March 2 of $1.6 
million, is any of that money included in the supplementary estimates/ 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — No, it is not included in this. These were dollars that were left over because 
of some of the weather problems we had on completion of some grading projects for ’82. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Vote 16 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (NO. 3) 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

HIGHWAYS AND TRANSPORTATION 
 

Capital Expenditure — Vote 17 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 17 agreed to. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND LOANS, ADVANCES AND INVESTMENTS 
 

POTASH CORPORATION OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 

Vote 58 — Statutory 
 
Item 1 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, just the one question. I was curious to 
note the view of some of the people at the potash corporation that the delay in proceeding with the 
Lanigan expansion would save money rather than cost money, and I don’t know whether the minister 
wishes to comment on that. If not, I will seek another occasion. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Your question was the fact that it was delayed? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Right. 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2714 

HON. MR. McLAREN: — We spent some time wondering, Mr. Chairman, whether we should carry 
on with the completion of the expansion and I realize that that delay did have some impact. However, 
we have decided to go ahead and complete the project and we understand that we’ll still come in on 
time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND LOANS, ADVANCES AND INVESTMENTS 
 

SASKATCHEWAN POWER CORPORATIONS 
 

Vote 52 — Statutory 
 

SASKATCHEWAN HERITAGE FUND LOANS, ADVANCES AND INVESTMENTS 
 

ENERGY SECURITY DIVISION 
 

SASKATCHEWAN POWER CORPORATION 
 

Nil Vote 
 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Just one short question. This used to fund a Warm Up Saskatchewan 
program as I recall it. What has happened to that program? Does it still exist? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Chairman, yes it does still exist. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (NO. 3) 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

LABOR 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 20 
 
Item 1 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I think if we can wait a moment, I think my colleagues, the member for 
Regina Centre had a question or two. I can fill in the time or else we can all sit down . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I thought you’d opt for that, Jim. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I want to ask the minister a few questions and I’m not going to turn this into 
any sort of federal case. I want to ask the minister some questions about the minimum wage board 
report. I understand you said it would be available in a few days. I had some difficulty getting a precise 
definition of what a few days means in times past, Mr. Minister. May we expect an announcement by 
you on the disposition of that report by the end of this month? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Chairman, it is fully my intention to have that report out before the end 
of the month. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Okay, I shall leave it at that. I don’t think you can do better than that. 



 
March 9, 1983 

2715 
 

Now with respect to the final report of the workers’ compensation board. You will recall, Mr. Minister, 
that we dealt with the interim report of the workers’ compensation board. With respect to the final report 
which you said you are reviewing, would you give me the status report of your review of that report? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Chairman, that report . . . What we wanted to do was get a complete 
. . . If we implemented the whole report as it was presented to us, what kind of an impact 
monetarily-wise it would have on employers and their contributions to the workers’ compensation board 
. . . We have done that. I haven’t had the figure yet, although I understand it’s almost ready for us. We’ll 
be reviewing the report. There’s going to be probably some things that we agree with, that we can 
implement, which won’t be a large monetary item. But we are a little afraid of doing a lot of it this year 
with the economic conditions the way they are. The major one would be the rehab centre and we’re 
doing some investigation work along with the Minister of Health in that area. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Do I take it from the minister’s comments that at least some of the 
recommendations of the report would result in either a deficit in the fund, which that fund has never had 
to date, and I hope this government wouldn’t set any precedents by beginning a deficit in that fund, or 
alternatively, an increase in the rates charged to employers. Do I take it from the minister’s comments 
that some of those recommendations . . . Wait, wait till we get to CIC if you think this is agonizing, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
With that interjection aside, do I take it, Mr. Minister, that some of those recommendations would result 
. . . Let me try this again. Do I take it, Mr. Minister, that some of those recommendations could not be 
paid out of the existing fund without an increase in rates? Is that what you are telling us, that some of 
those recommendations cannot be paid out of the existing fund without an increase in rates? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Well, what I said was that there is probably a number of items in the report 
that are not monitored that we could implement if we felt that it was a good thing for the worker out 
there. As far as the . . . We did have an increase this year. There has been an increase go through in the 
workers’ compensation board assessment; some higher than others. But the increase has already gone 
through. We did that starting the earlier part of January. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Do I take it that you will implement any increases recommended by the final 
report of the workmen’s compensation board which do not require any abnormal increases in the 
assessments to employers? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I’m not saying at this point what we will or won’t implement. We’ll be 
looking at all the report; and any items that we feel that we can accommodate, we will look at and 
implement. As I say, we haven’t gone through it point by point and decided which, if any, we will be 
doing this year. If it’s a monetary thing, we’ve already put the increases through, and I agree with you, 
we don’t want to be in a deficit position in the fund. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Do I take it that there will be legislation introduced at the next session? Do I 
take it the minister expects to introduce legislation at the next session to introduce at least some of the 
changes in the final report of the workmen’s compensation board? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — If you are referring to the spring session, Mr. Chairman, I’m not 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2716 

aware that I can get that in right now. Our slate is pretty well full. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, you know, if it’s . . . Well, I won’t get into it now. When there’s a 
more appropriate forum, I think a more appropriate time to have this little hair-pulling session, I’m 
going to be hard to convince. I’m going to warn you that we cannot spend the extra day it would take to 
introduce those amendments. They’re going to be hard put to be so convinced that there isn’t time to 
deal with those people who are among the most unfortunate in society. 
 
Mr. Minister, with respect to a differential wage rate, would you tell us whether or not you are 
considering a differential wage rate? By that I mean a lower rate for students or young people or, 
whatever, you want. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Chairman, I think I mentioned in the House the other day that the 
minimum wage board in their survey recommended that we look at the two-tier system. I am not 
convinced myself yet that we will do that. I’d like to remind the members opposite that every 
jurisdiction in Canada, including the federal jurisdiction, has a two-tier system. It’s been there for a 
number of years, but I’m not going to say tonight whether we intend to implement that or not. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I will say this, Mr. Minister, and then I’ll leave this as well. I sincerely 
hope that you do reconsider that, and I sincerely hope you don’t do it. I think there can be no 
justification for paying young people less. That is simply rank discrimination on the basis of age. If you 
have a more humanitarian instinct, and I’m prepared to accept the fact that you do, I sincerely hope that 
is not among the recommendations you bring in. 
 
I just want to make one final comment about the much-discussed reorganization. I hope the report on the 
reorganization with respect to the women’s division is precisely what the Minister of Rural Affairs said 
it was with respect to the Department of Rural Affairs. I hope it is absolute nonsense. I hope you are not 
going to further down . . . I’m not going to repeat the comments I made in your estimates; suffice it to 
say, the differential and the discrimination against women in our society is something that we should be 
deeply ashamed of. I hope you don’t exacerbate that differential and that discrimination by doing away 
with the one agency of government which seeks to promote their interests. I hope that the downgrading 
of the women’s division is not part of the reorganization. And, I in this caucus am going to be most 
upset if that is part of what comes out in the reorganization which I assume we will see in the budget. 
 
With that, Mr. Chairman, I don’t believe I have any further questions of these estimates. I will save any 
further questions for your estimates which will be coming up in six weeks time. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 20 agreed to. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND LOANS, ADVANCES AND INVESTMENTS 
 

CROWN INVESTMENTS CORPORATION OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 

Vote 65 — (Statutory) 



 
March 9, 1983 

2717 
 

Item 1 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister introduce his official please. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes thank you, Mr. Chairman, on my left, Mr. Steve Barg, who is the 
acting chief executive officer of CIC. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Minister, I believe you indicated that in respect to the Wolfgang Wolff crown 
corporation review commission that total cost was somewhere around $600,000. Would the Minister 
provide me with the membership of that committee and the per diem that was provided to each member? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I’d like just to correct the statement that he made. I 
didn’t give you that information. You may have got it from someone else, but it wasn’t from me. 
However, the information you have asked for, we will provide, but we don’t have it with us. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Do you have the total cost of the commission? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — I would presume, Mr. Chairman, that the information was provided to the 
member by the Minister of Finance or the Premier, but it wasn’t given to you by myself and I don’t have 
it with me, and I don’t know what the amount is at the present time . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
What’s your question? Are you asking what we spent, what it cost us? I don’t know. I’ll get you that 
information. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Well, why don’t I write you a letter and then forget all about it? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, if the member wants to write me a letter, I’ll be very happy 
to reply to his letter. The estimate is called for here on a statutory vote. If he wants to get into other 
areas, I won’t refuse the opportunity to give him the answers. But, I don’t have it; I’ll provide it. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I want to get through as much as anybody else. But the other day, Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan — this statutory vote — came up. The minister asked to 
adjourn that consideration of the Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan. And tonight we 
come back after he adjourned it the other day, and I ask him some questions and he has no answers. All I 
am saying is that it’s reducing it down to not being very meaningful. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — If he wants an answer, I just had it; we didn’t pay for it. It’s paid for by 
the Department of Finance. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Well, do you know the per diems? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — No, again it was paid for by the Department of Finance. They’ll have the 
information and if you didn’t ask the Minister of Finance at the time when you had the opportunity to 
ask . . . However if it’s at all possible I believe we can get the information. I’ll check it out. I believe the 
information can be made available. But I want the member to understand I’m not committing the 
Minister of Finance in my offer. I will do what I can for you. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Well, fine and dandy. Do that. And certainly there are other ways of receiving that 
information, if you don’t have it. 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2718 

I’d like a list also of all the persons that were either fired or whose employment was terminated since 
May 8, 1982 by the present government in respect to crown investments corporation. I’d like you to give 
me their positions and the salary which they were receiving at the time. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — You said crown investment corporation, you’re talking about the one 
corporations? We will provide that information. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — And, Mr. Minister, can you also provide us then, if that’s obviously the route we’re 
going, a list of all the persons who have been transferred from CIC to other government departments or 
crown corporations? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — To the best of our recollection and mine as well, I don’t believe there 
were any transfers. However I will take notice of that question as well, and provide you with the 
information if there was. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — And I would ask the minister, in respect to the per diem received by the board of 
directors, could you indicate whether there is a per diem? It’s all ministers, is it? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes, you’ve answered your own question. That’s right, there’s no per 
diem. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I’d like also to know who at the present time is the chief executive officer, if I may 
call that, in respect to CIC? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I just introduced him a few minutes ago. Acting chief 
executive officer. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — And, could you provide us with the salary of the chief executive officer? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, the answer to the question is no, we won’t be providing 
that information. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Can the minister indicate why he is not prepared to give this information? Without 
asking the Deputy Premier. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, I suppose I could give the same answer they gave us for three years, 
but Mr. Chairman, the information that we can provide, and in fact it’s in the annual reports, is the total 
amount of salaries paid to all of the executive management team in each crown corporation. We could 
do the same for CIC, but we won’t provide the chief executive officer’s salary. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Can you indicate whether or not you have, on contract or whatever arrangement, a 
consultant from Manitoba, or have you had a consultant from Manitoba, an individual that previously 
was in the Sterling Lyon Department of Finance? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — . . . (inaudible) . . . give me the name of the individual that you have? 



 
March 9, 1983 

2719 
 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Don Craik. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Would you also provide the details in respect to the contract and the rate? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, we’ll take notice of the question and provide details. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — A couple other questions, Mr. Minister. The report that was provided to the 
government from the report of the crown corporations review commission . . . One of the essential 
threads of emphasis in the report, the central thesis of the report, is that the only real test of earnings or 
return on investment is the amount of dividends paid by a crown corporation to the province. 
 
Are you in agreement with that central thesis as propounded by the report? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, to answer that question — and he’s asking for my opinion 
— well, my opinion is clearly that the return on investment (I think was the question) or dividends paid 
is definitely an important criterion. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I take it that there are others. I was wondering whether the minister would indicate, 
having reviewed it and being the head of CIC, whether or not he would indicate some of the other 
considerations that one might look at in evaluating the value of a corporation. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t think it would be appropriate for me to discuss 
tonight what other criteria I think are important. We are reviewing. No decision has been made on the 
Wolfgang Wolff report and until cabinet has made a decision on that, I would reserve any further 
comments as to my opinion of what it should be. 
 
I may or may not have any influence on the decisions. We’ll wait until cabinet has made a decision on 
that report. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — When I direct a question to the minister, I want him to understand that I’m not 
asking for your opinion as Paul Rousseau, the individual. I’m asking you as a policy of government, as 
the chairman of CIC. 
 
I hope that you’re answering it in light of that proposition. 
 
I just want to say that in respect to that report, that in reviewing it, as I said the central thesis of the 
report is that the only real test of earnings or return on investments is the amount of dividends paid by 
the crown corporation to the province. That is the essential thesis of the report. 
 
I want to say that we on this side totally disagree that that should be the essential. There are many other 
factors that should be looked at. It appears that income doesn’t count; retained earnings don’t count; 
growth and assets don’t count. No reference is made to the market value of any investment. The 
earnings retained by PCS are of no direct significance to the provincial budgetary process until actually 
paid to the province. 
 
And, I want to say that any private sector would, in fact, consider some of the other factors which I have 
mentioned equally as important as the payment of dividends. What I want to say is my view that the 
report is again a detraction and intended to be against 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2720 

the encouragement of the position of crown corporations in respect to this government. 
 
I hope that the minister will, in fact, in reviewing the report. use whatever business sense he has and will 
make the evaluations on other criteria as well as the central theme as set out in the Wolfgang Wolff 
report. 
 
Having said that and the hour growing late, I know there will be other occasions, and we shall meet 
again. I indicate, Mr. Minister, that I have no further questions. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 

SASKATCHEWAN HERITAGE FUND LOANS, ADVANCES AND INVESTMENTS 
 

RESOURCES DIVISION 
 

CROWN INVESTMENTS CORPORATION OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 

Vote 35 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 35 agreed to. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND LOANS, ADVANCES AND INVESTMENTS 
SASKATCHEWAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION 

 
Vote 48 — Statutory 

 
Item 1 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my right the acting chief executive officer 
of Sedco, Mr. Wayne Thompson. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was a little concerned when the minister rose 
so quickly. I thought he was going to take notice of my question. 
 
What I’d like to know from the minister: last day we were in industry and commerce, I asked some 
questions about the lending policy of Sedco, and at that time he had asked that we leave it till a later 
date. So I’ll take the opportunity, even though the hour is late, to ask only a few short questions. If we 
get the right answers, we can go very quickly. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you give me the government’s policy on loans that are presently in place at the 
present time with small business people who are finding themselves in ever-increasing financial 
problems as a result of the fact that Sedco is refusing to refinance loan which the business people and 
small businessmen are currently paying in some cases in the area of 16, 17, 18 per cent? What I want to 
know is: what is the government’s policy at this time? Are you considering renegotiating these loans? 
Are you anticipating that your open for business philosophy does not apply to the business people who 
are already here? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — The first comment I’d like to make, Mr. Chairman, is: I’m a little 



 
March 9, 1983 

2721 
 

surprised at the comments made by the member for Shaunavon. He’s well aware of one very large loan 
that was made in his own constituency to keep a company viable and alive. We are certainly going to 
address the problems the small businesses are having in Saskatchewan, as we did the one in his own 
constituency. I’m surprised that he would make that kind of a comment, that we are not concerned about 
the problems that some of these small businesses are faced with today. 
 
To the second part of his question, I repeat again the answer I gave him the first time. That is that we are 
no different than any other lending institution. We have made a contract with the firms. The contract 
was signed by both parties. We’ve lived up to our agreement and we will continue to do so. That 
agreement includes . . . If they wish, they can borrow the money from any lender they so desire, and pay 
us out. 
 
I might add, Mr. Chairman, that in doing so there will be no penalty to any of the clients. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, Mr. Minister, as you will know, under the philosophy of the previous 
government, we encouraged small business to establish in Saskatchewan, and in many cases these were 
individuals who had gone to the traditional lending institutions and had been turned down. They then 
came to Sedco and arranged loan with that organization. Now you’re telling them that the new 
Conservative government does not have the foresight to come forward and renegotiate these loans, so 
that these people will be able to stay in business. 
 
I know of a couple of cases where small companies, because of the policy of this government, are facing 
bankruptcy. I’m wondering whether the minister is saying here tonight that he is giving no consideration 
to renegotiating loans that Sedco has with companies and businesses that are facing tough economic 
times. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — If I understand, Mr. Chairman, the member’s first comment, it sounded 
like he was saying that when they were the government that Sedco was a lender of last resort — that all 
of the accounts they had, and the clients that they had, went to the private sector and as a desperate 
move, finally went to Sedco. I think that’s exactly what the member said, and I know that the previous 
minister and the previous government vehemently denied that they were a lender of last resort. But, 
that’s exactly what the member opposite was saying a minute ago. 
 
Again I remind the member, as well, that the contracts that were signed were signed by the former 
administration, except for those that we have signed since we’ve been there, but the bulk of them, of 
course, would have been under the previous administration as a contract. Now, I ask the member: if they 
were so benevolent as they seem to think they were and seem to claim they were, why didn’t they make 
the loan a floating loan at the time? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — They didn’t want it. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Oh, they didn’t want it. I see . . . Well then I guess he’s answered his own 
question, Mr. Chairman. They didn’t want the loans changed. They wanted what they got and we’re 
living up to our agreement. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the business people of Saskatchewan will be 
very interested in that comment when I get a list of the names from him of the business people and small 
companies who are paying at the present time interest rates in excess of 13 per cent. Can you get that list 
for me? 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2722 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — I don’t think so, Mr. Chairman, because I know when I asked for that list 
when I was in the opposition, I wasn’t allowed to receive that information from the government of the 
day. It is confidential information and I think the member knows that. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, the minister is saying that he is not going to give the information and 
I’m sure the reason why is because he doesn’t want to admit that his policy in dealing with these 
companies and individuals who are attempting to renegotiate their loans is not one that he’s terribly 
proud of and I can well imagine why. Because what I am seeing happening out in Main Street 
Saskatchewan is that many of these people who supported the Conservatives at the time of the last 
election are very quickly having second thoughts. First of all we have a huge Open for Business 
conference where foreign investors are invited in to be wined and dined by the cheer-leading crowd of 
Saskatchewan, but when the business people from rural Saskatchewan come in to have their loans 
renegotiated there’s not a person around to listen to them. And I’m sure if the minister won’t get me that 
list, I can get it myself. That’s all the questions I have. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I would just ask the minister if he would indicate what indeed is the policy of 
providing loans to the business community. Is it in fact the policy to be providing loans as a last resort? 
Is that as a policy, or could you outline exactly what is the policy of Sedco? Do you follow the question, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I will offer the member the document that we have 
recently approved by cabinet and by the board of directors of Sedco, which is the new mandate for 
Sedco. I’ll do it as soon as possible. I’m not too sure of the time frame. We haven’t made it public yet, 
but it will be very shortly. I’ll provide you with that, if that’ll be of any benefit. But to answer your 
question, the specific question that you asked: no, certainly not. Sedco is certainly not a lender of last 
resort under our administration. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I would appreciate when you have it established as a policy if you’d send me a copy. 
 
I would like the minister to provide the total number of loans made during the past fiscal year and the 
total value of the loans. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — In 1982 I take it? I’ll take notice and provide you the answer. And I might 
add that it will also be in the annual report which will be tabled at the end of this month. But I’ll provide 
you with that answer. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — The problem I have is I don’t have the report. And would you also provide the total 
number of loan failures and/or defaults in loan repayments? Without identification. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I’ll provide that to the hon. member, but I will take 
notice of the question. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (NO. 3) 
 

SASKATCHEWAN HERITAGE FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

RESOURCES DIVISION 



 
March 9, 1983 

2723 
 

GOVERNMENT SERVICES 
 

Vote 14 — Provincial Development Expenditure 
 
Item 1 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my right is my acting deputy minister, Mr. 
Otto Cutts, and to his right is Ken Rankin, acting director of the purchasing agency. Behind him is Keith 
Laxdal, assistant deputy minister and branch head of the revenue division. Behind me is Ian Laidlaw, 
executive director, operations division. And seated next to him is Ken Brehm, executive director of 
administration. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that introduction by the minister. I hope that 
the person sitting to her right realizes the precarious position that he sits in, because people who have 
been in that position over the last 10 months have had a very short term. Only a few short weeks ago we 
were in this House discussing one Dennis Foley and the problems that the minister had with that deputy 
minister. I wonder if she could now explain the problems and the reasons for the demise of her next 
acting deputy, and give the reasons why he is no longer an employee of the department. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Chairman, we are in government services, supplementary estimates, 
vote 14, expansion of the Saskatchewan Technical Institute. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, the minister wants to stonewall. You may do that. We saw a precedent 
earlier this afternoon when your Premier refused to acknowledge the existence of people. The member 
from, I don’t know the name of your riding in Saskatoon, may one day understand there is more to these 
proceedings than what the media report. There’s also traditions and custom and respect, which has 
heretofore been observed. The minister wants to stonewall. She’s got an excellent precedent. Your 
Premier did it all afternoon. He did not know the names of people who he rubs elbows with every day — 
did not know of their existence. 
 
But the minister is not going to get away with suggesting that we are limited in dealing with estimates to 
whatever it is the money was spent on. That is not the system; has never been the system; and isn’t the 
system now. And none of your colleagues so treated it. It has not been done in the past. This is not the 
first time this has happened. 
 
If the minister wants to stonewall on the issue because there isn’t an answer that won’t disgrace you, I’ll 
accept that, and frankly, that is what I suspect the answer to be. But don’t for one moment suggest that 
you have no obligation to answer any question but the specific item on which that money was spent; that 
is simply not the system. If you can’t given an answer which won’t disgrace you, then we’ll accept that. 
And I rather suspect that’s the case. But nobody who has a smattering of understanding of these 
proceedings will accept for one moment that you responsibility is limited to the specific thing that the 
money was spent for. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Chairman, I just reiterate that we are off vote 1 on government 
services. We are on vote 14 of the supplementary estimates, and it pertains to the expansion of the 
Saskatchewan Technical Institute in Moose Jaw. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll ask a question of the minister in regard to 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2724 

one, the acting deputy minister of government services, Mr. Wallis Cousineau. Can the minister tell me 
whether or not you recommended the order in council, February 25, which allowed for a payment, 
severance payment, of $17,500 to be paid to that individual? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I see no relevance, Mr. Chairman, to vote 14 on supplementary estimates. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I want to try this another way. Will the minister please try 
to explain tome why the $17,500 was paid to that individual in light of the fact that he was also paid 
$7,000 to move here? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the member stay on the topic, with respect to the Saskatchewan 
Technical Institute, if he has questions pertaining to that area? The member for Shaunavon. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I can well imagine why the minister doesn’t want to talk 
very much about her performance in dealing with deputy ministers and acting deputy ministers in light 
of the fact that they stay so very shortly. But I wonder if she could ask her acting deputy now and find 
out for me what this money is exactly being spent on. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The supplementary estimate of $1,160,000 is being spent on the expansion 
of the Saskatchewan Technical Institute in Moose Jaw. Because of the construction strike in 1982, we 
had expected a slowdown, but materials continued to be delivered to the site and were therefore 
available to proceed with the construction as soon as the strike was over. Because of that, and due to the 
accelerated construction just mentioned, this additional money was needed to do the project. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I wonder if the minister could advise us how many square feet are 
involved with this project. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t have that information, but we will supply it 
forthwith. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, it’s 
Madam Minister, that’s right; I’m not to make that mistake. Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, could 
you tell me when this expansion for which this additional funds is required commenced? When did the 
expansion commence? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The project started about May and it involved a two-story addition, a 
236-stall parking lot, and renovations to the shop, gymnasium, cafeteria and the T-block areas. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — The minister advised that the project started in May. How does this 
project relate to the project which had started some months earlier for which the structural steel was up 
at some earlier time in the year? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — My officials indicate to me that they believe it started in May but we do not 
have the data base here. We will send it all over to you. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I was just a little curious to know how it related to the project that I had 
the honor to attend the official opening of, back in, I think, February as I recall 



 
March 9, 1983 

2725 
 

it. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — March 25. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — March 25, could be, but I think not. Some earlier time, I would have 
remembered March 25 — I’m sure I would have. There was a large hole in the ground at that point, and 
there was some evidence of activity. We were unveiling models, and at least you were talking about . . . 
There has just been one project for the expansion of the technical institute in the last 18 months. Is that 
accurate or inaccurate? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, that’s accurate. It’s a continuation phase. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 14 agreed to. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

REVENUE, SUPPLY AND SERVICES 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 18 
 
Item 1 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Madam Minister and Mr. Chairman, I want to start first of all with a question. I 
would like to ask the minister if she would outline the purchasing policy of her department. Does, for 
example, the policy continue to guarantee access to government markets by all qualified suppliers? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — We haven’t made any changes under The Purchasing Act as was followed 
by the former administration, so I would assume, yes, access is available to all qualified people. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I wonder if the minister, for the edification of all, would outline briefly what she 
considers to be the policy which she is following. I know she says she’s following the other one. I would 
like her to outline some of the ingredients of that policy. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Basically, we follow The Purchasing Act of 1973-74, called An Act 
respecting Government Purchases, and the guidelines that are set out in it. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Then I have one further question which was alluded to previously, but it comes 
under the purview of revenue, supply and services. Can the minister indicate whether the policy was, in 
fact, followed in respect to the purchase of purifiers? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, it was. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Were the individual purifiers which we alluded to previously tendered? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, they weren’t. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Will the minister indicate why they were not tendered, and what provision of the act 
or the regulations was followed in respect to not tendering for a purchase of purifiers? 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2726 

HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The purifiers were bought through government services, and The 
Purchasing Act, section 11, was the section that was used. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Well, I’m rather surprised. Is it normal for articles such as purifiers to have been 
purchased under government services rather than under the policy of revenue, supply and services? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I would say that government services acted unwisely perhaps, but now 
unlawfully. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Would you explain what you mean? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well, section 11, Mr. Chairman, of The Purchasing Act, or purchasing 
agency under which the purchasing agency works, states that the Lieutenant-Governor in council may 
make regulations prescribing (a) the manner in which supplies will be acquired and disposed of, whether 
by public tender or otherwise, and the procedures to be followed. Item (b) goes on to state the type of 
supplies that shall be acquired or disposed of by public tender or otherwise. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Madam Minister, I think if you recognize that really the purchase should have been 
made under revenue, supply and services, and indeed that you would then be governed by The 
Purchasing Act and the regulations thereto . . . I am saying to you: do you agree that in fact the 
purchases should indeed have been made under The Purchasing Act under revenue, supply and services? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well, I would tend to agree with you, but as I indicated before, though 
government services might have made the purchases unwisely, they were not unlawful. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I want to point out to the minister that The Purchasing Act requires all purchases to 
go through the purchasing agency unless the authority is specifically delegated in certain cases, either by 
order in council or by order of the director of the agency. I ask you: have any such delegations of 
purchasing authority been made under section 5(2) or section 5(3) of the act since May 8, 1982? If so, 
give the details. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, we do delegate. One department that gets a lot of delegation to do 
purchasing is government services. I an only state once more that although it might have been unwise 
and the purifiers slipped through the crack, it wasn’t unlawful. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Well, I’m moving off from the specific though, and what I’m asking you is: under 
The Purchasing Act it requires all purchases to go through the purchasing agency unless the authority is 
specifically delegated, as I indicated. What I’m asking you is: during the course of the year since May 8, 
1982, have there been any delegations made in respect to any other contracts, and if so, would you give 
the details? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Chairman, I can just inform the member that we haven’t made any 
changes to the delegation that was in place before, such as highways being able tog o out and contract of 
their gravel, and government services in the renovations of buildings and whatever .In the past they were 
given delegations and powers to go out and procure the type of supplies they need. That hasn’t changed 
since May 8. 



 
March 9, 1983 

2727 
 

MR. KOSKIE: — Has there been any change in the purchasing policy in respect to preferential 
treatment for Saskatchewan companies? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, there hasn’t. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I address to the minister, there is sometimes a concern in respect to restrictive brand 
specifications. In other words, certain departments may be ordering specific purchases and it goes 
through the agency, but the specifications are, in fact, set out so that only a specific brand can qualify 
under the specifications. I wonder if the minister is aware of this particular problem and whether she 
addressed it during the course of the year. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I might respond to the member by saying that since taking over we try to 
use the generic brands in as many instances as possible. Our objective is to get the department in line 
with the Canada standard specifications, something that wasn’t done by the former administration. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I’d like to ask the minister: have any purchase orders been issued by the purchasing 
agency that did not result from a competitive public tendering during the course of the year? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, it’s all on a competitive bid system. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — You’re saying then, if I’m clear, that during the course of the year, there were no 
purchase orders issued that did not result from competitive tendering? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, I can give the member that assurance, that anything purchased since 
May 8 through revenue, supply and services was done on a competitive base. I might add even the 
gasoline is now being purchased on a competitive bid process, something that your administration didn’t 
do. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I’d like to turn to the CVA aircraft. I was wondering if the minister could provide 
information on all occasions in which the Saskatchewan government aircraft has been used since May 8, 
1982, include CVA aircraft and also provincial air ambulance aircraft. I specifically want to know where 
each flight started, its destination and the names of all the passengers on each flight. In the case of 
passengers who were government employees, what their position was, and what department. In the case 
of passengers who were not government employees, the reason they were on the aircraft and which 
department or agency paid or will pay for their flight. I wonder if the minister could undertake to 
provide that information. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, I can provide the type of information that is available to the public and 
to the opposition. As I’ve said, we haven’t changed any policy, so as far as the individual names of 
individual passengers are concerned, that information, as in the past, is never made available. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I want to finish off a few other questions, and my colleagues have a few questions, 
just in respect to a couple of the subvotes, and I can pass through them fairly fast. In respect to the 
administration, subvote, I notice that the total number of person-years is the same, 29.5, and I note that 
there has been a very substantial and 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2728 

sizable increase in other expenses. I was wondering if the minister could indeed provide the reasons for 
the substantial increase. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — With respect to administration, personal services, it just reflects the more 
accurate cost. Apparently the retroactivity that came with the last contracts signed was not in place in the 
’81-82 budget. As far as the other expenses are concerned, that reflects approximately a $400,000 loss in 
the systems centre. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I wonder if the minister could provide a breakdown in respect to other expenses, the 
details of other expenses in the subvote 1. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — We will provide that. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Just to speed it up, I have another subvote, if you don’t mind proceeding that way, 
Mr. Chairman, and that’s in respect to time 5, mail and telecommunications. And here again, I note that 
the person-years is exactly the same, 39.1. There’s a fair increase in respect to personal services, but 
there is a very substantial increase in respect to other expenses, and I’d like an explanation in respect to 
that. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The reason for the salary, again, is the same as under subvote 1, a more 
accurate calculation of it, and retroactivity being included in the forecast for ‘82-83. As to other 
expenses, it just reflects an increase in postal rates. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — There is an increase of about $1.8 million. Are you indicating that that is all reflected 
in respect to the increase in mailing costs? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — It is calculated at $1.549 million with the last rate increase from Canada 
Post. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Again, I would like to ask the minister to provide me with the itemized breakdown 
of the expenses in respect to that subvote. Can she do that? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, we can. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — One other item, and that is in respect to the mortgage interest reduction plan. I was 
wondering if the minister had allocated some $35 million. I was wondering whether or not she could 
indicate whether that amount will represent the take-up on the program, or is it likely to exceed the 
amount? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I can indicate to the hon. member that when the calculations were first 
being done on projected costs for MIRP, we estimated the cost of the program in the ‘82-83 fiscal year 
would be in the neighborhood of $56 million, and at that time interest rates were exorbitantly high. As 
the member will I’m sure remember, most of them were around the 19 per cent and above range. The 
current revision, with the downward trend in interest rates, is $35 million. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Chairman, thank you. Madam Minister, could you tell me how many aircraft you 
have in your fleet at this time? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Chairman, we have three aircraft based in Regina, two Cheyennes and 
a Navajo; a Navajo in Saskatoon that is our air ambulance. This was the 



 
March 9, 1983 

2729 
 

figure that really surprised us, because as opposition members we could never get the number of aircraft 
owned by DNS, and to our surprise, it’s 17. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — How many pilots are stationed at both Saskatoon and Regina? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — We have five pilots based in Regina and two pilots based in Saskatoon. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Do you have any airplanes on contract in Regina that you lease, over and above the 
number the number you have listed here? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Not on a regular contract. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I meant other than a charter flight, do you have some aircraft that you would lease 
that these pilots would use should one of theirs be laid up or inoperative or if you require additional 
ones, or do you go straight for charter flights? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, we don’t. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, I have one short question. I would 
like to know, in particular, in the case of a blue 1980 Oldsmobile, licence number KDW 292, who this 
car was signed out to during the period January 1 to February 1 of this year. If you could send me that, 
give me your assurances, I’d accept that. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, I can’t give the hon. member that assurance because that type of 
information also is not divulged. It’s a regular CVA pool car and it’s used on a demand basis. I think 
that as members just coming out of government, you would realize that that type of information is not 
available. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, Madam Minister, you’re saying that it’s assigned out in a pool 
nature. Is that what you said, or what was your response? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — My response was that it’s not government policy to divulge that type of 
information. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, I wonder if you can explain the reasoning behind not divulging that 
kind of information. What harm could be done by giving out information of a car that is bought and paid 
for by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and where it was during a certain period of time? What’s the big 
secret? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — We’re just being consistent with what CVA divulged under the previous 
administration, and that was one of the things they didn’t divulge as they didn’t divulge the list of 
passengers on aircraft, and we’re just carrying on with the tradition set by the members opposite when 
they were on this side of the House. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — It’s hard to understand how this government picks and chooses the things 
that it wants to follow of the previous administration. In terms of the minimum wage, you certainly 
aren’t following the fine tradition set by the former government, but now, when it’s convenient for you 
to attempt to cover something up, you don’t want to answer the question . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
The fact of who had this car, licence number KDW 292. That’s what. Because she won’t give it to me, 
that’s why. She won’t tell me who had the car signed out. That’s what I’m asking, and 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2730 

I want her to give me the names of the individuals who that car was signed out to during the period of 
January 1 to February 1 of 1983. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, I’m not prepared to give the hon. member that information. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, I will ask the minister again. Can you explain the reasoning, other 
than the fact of the fine tradition. I don’t think that’s good enough because it just doesn’t make any sense 
that the member would pick and choose which of the fine traditions they were going to follow. Why, in 
your mind, doesn’t it make sense to allow the opposition and the people of Saskatchewan to know where 
one of their cars, paid for by the taxpayers, is and who it’s assigned to? Why are you afraid to answer 
that very simple, straightforward question? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I might respond to the member by saying that I’m not afraid of you. I’m not 
supposedly hiding something, covering up something. It is just not policy to divulge that information. 
We have 5,000 cars to look after. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I can see very easily why the minister, if I was asking for 
all of the 5,000 cars, where they were, and who they were assigned to . . . I’m asking very specifically 
for one car, one licence number, for one month during the term of this government’s administration. 
Now the answer you gave me that you have 5,000 cars and it’s impossible to give that, I agree. But I’m 
asking for one car for one month, and that doesn’t seem like a very big task, and I’m not even asking for 
it tonight. If you want to write it down and send it to me over the next week or month, that would be 
fine. So I’m giving you every opportunity. It’ s not a task that’s too great, I don’t think, for your new 
deputy to take a minute tomorrow, look it up and send it to me. Will you not do that? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I can only tell you one more time very directly and very succinctly: no, I 
am not prepared to provide that information. I can’t be more direct or more emphatic. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, in the case of this individual car, this one car for one month, why is 
it so difficult for you to do that? Can you explain that to us? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I am just being consistent with the policy that was set by the previous 
administration, and I think that was one of your better policies. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, will the minister read me from the policy which she is referring to, 
where it says that she cannot divulge who cars are assigned to? Give us an example. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well, I can read it directly from the former minister of revenue, supply and 
services who under CVA estimates said: 
 

I am not trying to hide anything personally. I said it was government policy not to divulge the name. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — I wonder if the minister would take the time to read the question. It’s a 
little hard to understand the question when you read out an answer that doesn’t refer to CVA vehicles or 
anything else. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I don’t think it’s necessary, Mr. Chairman. I don’t think I need the 
question. You asked for the policy, and I gave you the policy. It was set by Mr. 



 
March 9, 1983 

2731 
 

Robbins when he was minister of revenue, supply and services. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, this is absolutely ridiculous. The minister is giving an 
answer that doesn’t refer anything to do with the policy of CVA vehicles, and attempting to tell the 
Assembly that we should just accept it. What I want is the policy of this government on CVA vehicles, 
and I would like you to read that to me so that I know whether or not you are attempting to mislead us in 
not giving us the information. Quoting from a former minister out of context, without the question, is not 
good enough. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I can only reiterate it is not the policy of this government — it was not the 
policy of that government when sitting on this side of the House — to divulge that type of information 
when it pertains to CVA. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I can guarantee you that the members of on this side of the 
House do not accept that that was the policy of the former government, given the words that she has put 
on the record here tonight. I wonder if the minister will tell me if she’s refusing to give me the policy, 
verbally, of her government, or written, as to their policy, and just get up and read it off a piece of paper. 
Where is this great policy? Is it like the ones that apply to civil servants and their political activity? 
 
It seems like you have a policy for all these things, but when you go to look at it, there’s nothing written 
down. In fact, there is no policy. You make up the policy to fit the situation. In the case of this vehicle, I 
would like very much to know who it was assigned to between January 1 and February 1 of 1983. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well, I might say, Mr. Chairman, that there is written policy, but we are 
following the policy as was enunciated by the former minister of revenue, supply and services in direct 
questions from us, when we were on the opposition side of the House, stating very clearly that it is not 
government policy. Whether it’s accepted, whether it’s written, whether it’s understood, that isn’t what 
the former minister said. I will continue to tell you that it is not government policy to divulge that type 
of information. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — I wonder, Mr. Chairman, if the minister would kindly send me across the 
memo that she’s reading from so I could have a chance to peruse it. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — It’s Hansard. It’s the only one I have with me. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Will the minister please send it across so I could have a look at it? I don’t 
have my copy with me from back in whatever year she’s quoting from because we don’t have it here at 
our desks. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — It’s the 1981 Hansard of April 8. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, will the minister send it across? Just ask for a page to bring it across 
to me so I can read it. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — This is my only copy. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I find this an absolutely appalling way to carry out 
estimates. We saw it earlier tonight and all day today in fact: the Premier attempting to stonewall in 
terms of getting information. And now tonight, we have the minister in 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2732 

charge of revenue services and government services stonewalling on a very important issue — the issue 
being the control and whereabouts of CVA vehicles, taxpayers’ vehicles. And I cannot understand why 
the minister is carrying on in this manner, but I think that the people of Saskatchewan will be very 
interested in knowing that the whereabouts of this particular vehicle is not being explained by the 
minister and this government, and we’ll see how that turns out. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, can you tell me if licence plates have been changed 
on vehicles during the year 1983? Has the vehicle been registered with another licence plate? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Only those vehicles for which the licences have expired. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — When CVA vehicles’ licences expire during the year, do you usually apply and get a 
new number for them? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, it’s done like other non-government cars; you get a new type. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Have any vehicles received a new number for one reason or another — the licence 
numbers destroyed or bent or damaged, so that you had to get a new number for one? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — That’s possible. If one or two of them were destroyed or, as you indicated, 
bent or whatever, yes, it’s quite possible. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Is it possible that a licence plate was changed for some reason or other like that for a 
certain 1980 Oldsmobile that seems to be of interest to some people? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — If the member could indicate to me the serial number of that particular 
vehicle — we have several 1980 blue Oldsmobiles. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — The former licence number of a certain blue 1980 Oldsmobile was KDW 292, and my 
driving around the yard and lots just has failed to reveal that that car is around. I was just wondering if 
you happened to change the licence number on that vehicle. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — My officials are not aware of it, but we will check that particular question 
that you asked of me and provide you with the answer. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Will you then provide me with the new number that was issued to that car? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, we’ll indicate to you whether or not that particular licence plate was 
changed on that particular car. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — If it just so happens that it was changed, will you provide me with the new number 
that was issued to that car? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, we won’t give you the new licence number. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, the minister mentioned a moment ago the page 



 
March 9, 1983 

2733 
 

in Hansard which she was quoting. I wonder if she would give me that again. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — It was under revenue, supply and services, April 8, 1981, pages 1982-1983; 
it goes on and on and on . . . 1987. It’s just . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, the minister is becoming more and more confused on this issue. 
She’s listed out five pages now, saying that this is where she quoted from. She quoted one line. Can the 
minister tell me what page and what date it’s from? Or are you attempting to mislead the House? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I am not trying to mislead the House. I might say that that particular 
exchange in 1981 raised quite a few questions. I am reiterating what Mr. Robbins, former minister of 
revenue, supply and services, states when it came to questions under CVA. That information is not the 
policy of the government to divulge is what he said repeatedly. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, will the minister give me the page of Hansard that she 
quoted from earlier? In fact, was she not quoting and attempting to mislead the House? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I gave it you: 1981, 1982 and 1983. For the member’s information, the 
page number is right there: 1982, 1983, and 1981. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Which one were you quoting? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — All of them. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, the minister is saying that she quoted five pages from 
Hansard when she was giving her explanation. I am sure she didn’t. What I would like to know is where 
she was quoting from? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well, on page 1982 the minister indicated, “It’s not government policy.” 
On page 1983, he stated again, “I said it was not government policy to divulge the names.” And we 
don’t intend to either. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I want to know whether the minister is telling this committee that any of 
those answers referred to CVA automobiles? Did they not all refer to passengers on CVA aircraft/ 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — It refers to CVA, all of it. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — But, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I invite anybody to look at this, and 
it will be revealed . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, we’ve got lots of time. All right. 
 

MR. THATCHER: — As you provide us with the updated list to February 1981, I certainly don’t 
want to trouble you and send you back in the intervening years. Perhaps you could provide us with 
the names of the updated list of not only the individual who booked the flight but the names of the 
people who accompanied him on that flight. 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS: — No, that’s not government policy. It’s just the number recorded on the 
flight. 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2734 

MR. THATCHER: — Let me understand you. Are you saying that you won’t, or you can’t? 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS: — It’s not government policy. 
 

Those are the only places on that page that those words appear, “It’s not government policy.” It is all 
passengers on CVA flights; not anything to do with automobiles; not anything to do with anyone who 
booked an aircraft. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — We’ve expanded the policy . . . 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I am directing this to the minister. Is she saying that on pages 1982 and 
1983 Mr. Robbins said one word about CVA automobiles? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I am saying that CVA encompasses both automobile and aircraft. To me it 
is very clear what Mr. Robbins, the former minister stated: that it is not government policy to divulge 
certain information as it pertains to CVA. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I am sure it’s not government policy to divulge certain 
information as it pertains to CVA. But what he said was that it was not the policy to divulge the names 
of passengers of the aircraft, because there was no way of getting them recorded . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Chairman, if the Minister of Agriculture wants to enter the debate, I am sure 
he will. I am saying that there is not one shred of support for the proposition that the minister put 
forward that anybody has ever refused to give the name of a person to whom a vehicle was assigned — 
not one shred of support. The suggestion that, because the names of passengers of aircraft have not been 
divulged, therefore, the names of persons to whom automobiles are assigned should not be divulged, is a 
truly remarkable judgment, and one which I suggest does the minister no credit, particularly because she 
did not explain this before it was made rather clear that she was, at least, being less than candid with the 
committee. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — We were talking about CVA. CVA encompasses both vehicles and aircraft. 
I think that the former minister made it very clear what the government policy was, though it is 
unwritten, I might add, for the member’s edification. I might add that the answers here were less than 
precise. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, I think there is quite a difference here. If we would 
have asked a question, who was riding in a car on a certain day, that would be very difficult for you to 
reveal, because that kind of record isn’t kept. That record isn’t kept. If you’re asking who was riding 
along a certain aircraft, those kind of records aren’t kept. Btu when you assign a CVA vehicle, you have 
some explicit records who has that car, and there is no reason to hide who had that particular licence 
plate for the month of January. There is no reason why you would want to hide that. 
 
The only reason you can’t make available who was riding in an aircraft is, they didn’t know if I 
happened to be riding along as a passenger, or if my wife was, or who was, because those kind of 
records weren’t kept. They didn’t have a passenger list. So that wasn’t policy to declare that, and if a 
minister happens to pick up a person and given him a ride in his car he doesn’t happen to keep a log on 
that, but if he’s assigned a car, that’s an altogether different story. 
 
If you’re telling us that you have 5,000 vehicles that you’re spreading around 



 
March 9, 1983 

2735 
 

Saskatchewan, and are afraid to disclose it in case you’re assigning it to your campaign manager or to 
your other staff that you’re saying haven’t got CVA vehicles, is that what you’re trying to hide? Was 
that car assigned to somebody that was a political employee of yours, or was that car assigned to 
somebody that was officially on the list that could have a car? And that’s what we want to know. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I might respond to the hon. member by telling him he doesn’t know exactly 
what he’s talking about. He may have been led to believe by the former minister of revenue, supply and 
services, like he led us to believe, that those passenger lists were not kept. In fact, he misled the House 
with that statement. 
 
And I might also say to the hon. member an assigned car is a heck of a lot different than a pool car. An 
assigned car we can give you some information on. A pool car, we don’t keep that type of information. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I find it absolutely astounding that the minister would rise 
to her feet and accuse a former minister of misleading the House, based on a bunch of rhetoric which she 
is trying to put out here today. But I’d like to tell this Assembly that if anyone is misleading this House 
it’s the minister in charge of revenue and supply, and she’s doing it very deliberately by attempting to 
mislead this group of people into believing that she was quoting regulations which apply to CVA 
vehicles, when in fact that wasn’t true. And, Mr. Chairman, the record will show that the minister was 
attempting to mislead this Assembly. That’s why she wouldn’t send it across to me, and that’s why she 
wouldn’t read the question. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would like to know now, in light of the fact that the policy she was quoting from was 
not CVA vehicle policy, but CVA aircraft policy, whether she will give me the names of the individual 
or individuals who were assigned a blue 1980 Oldsmobile, licence plate KDW 292. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Chairman, on a point of order. I think the member opposite has been 
around long enough that he knows full well that when a minister of the crown in this legislature puts 
whatever it is she puts on the record, she puts it on the record in the best of her believe, to the best of her 
knowledge, and that word must be accepted by the members of this House. That member accused the 
Minister of Revenue, Supply and Services of misleading this House, and unless he can substantiate that, 
Mr. Chairman, he’s under some obligation to withdraw and apologize. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Attempts to deliberately mislead the House are out of order. I caution both 
members they have been kind of stretching that a little bit. Let’s get back to the business of the revenue, 
supply and services. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I can only say one more, Mr. Chairman, to the hon. member that it is not 
government policy to divulge that type of information. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, I may have missed something while 
I was out for a moment. Did you indicate that this car was not assigned on a regular basis but was a pool 
car? When you say that it’s not government policy to divulge the name, are you saying it’s not 
government policy to divulge the name of cars permanently assigned to ministers or public servants? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — We provide a list of assigned vehicles to cabinet ministers and 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2736 

senior government officials, but the information as it pertains to pool cars which may be taken out for 
one day or two days or one week is not tabled and not divulged. So, I can only reiterate that it is not 
government policy to issue information on pool cars. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, just so that I may get the policy 
clear, is the minister advising the committee that it is policy to divulge the names of employees, elected 
officials or otherwise, to whom cars are assigned on a permanent basis? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — A cabinet minister, of course, is assigned a permanent car. There are many 
senior officials who qualify for an assigned permanent car. That information is available on request. We 
got it. I believe, when we were in opposition. What I am saying is that the information on the pool cars, 
which are used on an as-needed basis for a number of reasons, is not made available. The assigned 
permanent vehicle — yes, that information is available. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, do you have available the 
information of how many Oldsmobile 88s are in the pool? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — We have five 1980 Oldsmobiles in our assigned fleet. As far as the others, 
it fluctuates because do come back and are traded in, and we use them for longer than what other 
officials will use them for. Then they’re assigned to pool car status and that type of thing. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I’m not sure I made the question clear. During the month of January 
1983, can the minister advise us how many Oldsmobile 88s were in the pool? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — My officials indicate that we don’t have that information, nor do we keep 
it. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I am puzzled by the minister advising that there would not 
be information indicating what cars were in the pool at any given time. This is reminiscent of yet 
another period in this legislature’s history when a car was lost. Our colleague, the former minister of 
labor, had great difficulty with that particular vehicle. Are we to understand, therefore, that cars could be 
lost from the pool with relative ease, on the grounds that nobody knows how many are there? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I’m not saying that. We keep good track of our cars, but the pool fluctuates 
daily, weekly and monthly — cars are rotated in, rotated out. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Well, I’m delighted, and I’m sure everyone will be delighted to know that 
the department keeps good track of its vehicles and knows where they are at any given time. And it was 
that sort of question which we were really directing. As I recall it, my colleague merely asked whether 
that was an assertion on the part of the department or whether, in fact, they did know where the vehicles 
were — not where they are on a daily or hourly basis, but who at least is responsible for knowing where 
they are. I think that was the question. I gather you are asserting that that particular vehicle was in the 
pool at the time in question. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, that particular vehicle was in the pool at the time in question. 
 
MR. YEW: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, just a while ago, you answered 



 
March 9, 1983 

2737 
 

in response to my colleague for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg that DNS had in its possession 17 aircraft. I 
wonder if you could specify, for the record, what those aircraft are for. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — They are used for transportation and fire-fighting. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Breakdown, please. 
 
MR. YEW: — Yes, please, for the record. I just don’t want to have those 17 aircraft, as mentioned here, 
to imply that that is a waste of taxpayers’ money. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I don’t think that the member should feel that way. I think most people 
realize the vastness of the North and the inaccessibility to man, of the communities in the North, and that 
that is the particular need for that number of aircraft up there. We have people flying virtually all over 
the North, servicing the people of the North. 
 
MR. YEW: — Mr. Minister, you would agree then . . . Just a short supplementary here. You would 
agree then that the majority of that aircraft is for fire protection, would you not? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Sorry, I didn’t hear that. 
 
MR. YEW: — You would agree then that the majority of that aircraft is for fire protection, would you 
not? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well, we have three Cessna 185s, six trackers that are used in fire-fighting, 
three Cansos, three Barons, a Cheyenne, and another leased aircraft. 
 
MR. YEW: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I just wanted to make it clear that those aircraft are for the 
specific use of forest fire protection, etc. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Could the minister indicate about how many aircraft Quebec would use in northern 
Quebec? Do you have a comparison? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It maybe sounds funny to you, but 
when the minister answered earlier, the tone she used in talking about “17 in northern Saskatchewan,” as 
though that was a tremendous thing. Now, I was surprised that you didn’t buy additional aircraft for 
fire-fighting, but could you tell me about how many aircraft Quebec would use in fire-fighting in 
northern Quebec? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I can indicate to the member that I can’t answer for the Government of 
Quebec. Also, the surprise that I felt was why did you guys keep it secret whenever we asked you — 
you were the ones that tried to hide it. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I don’t mean to get into the debate too 
much, but I wouldn’t mind reading a little bit from the annual report of the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan, and I’m reading from the 1980-81 report. It says: 
 

Two teams comprised of provincially owned tracker aircraft, three aircraft per team, and Beach 
Baron 55s, one per team, were operated by the department of northern air services branch, and two 
of three PBY 5A Cansos purchased by the province in the winter of 1980 were also operated . . . 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2738 

This is not very carefully hidden if it’s on page 20 of the annual report, which is available to all 
members. I thought I’d point that out in case it was thought that the information was buried particularly 
deeply. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Why didn’t you give us the answers when you were asked? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Nobody has refused answers. This is a flight of fantasy by the minister 
(we always enjoy her particular flights of fantasy), but here is simply no basis whatever for the 
suggestion that these questions weren’t answered. But at any rate, anyone can read it in the annual 
report. It’s available for all. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I can only indicate to the hon. member that perhaps he is the only one on a 
flight of fantasy; he is still trying to govern in absentia, but it’s not accepted in a democratic country. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Item 3 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — With respect to the purchasing agency, would the minister advise who is 
director of purchase at this time? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Ken Rankin is the acting purchasing agent. I’m getting real 
tongue-tied; it’s past my bedtime. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Has Mr. Rankin been in the service of the Government of Saskatchewan 
for long? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Rankin has been with the Government of Saskatchewan since 1973. 
 
Item 3 agreed to. 
 
Items 4 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 14 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Madam Minister, on these statutory votes to provide for a net advance or 
a recovery from the advance accounts (and I think we’re on number 14 at the moment), the earlier 
legislation prior to the coming into effect of this new system, as I recall it, provided for a ceiling on the 
advance accounts. The new revolving accounts do not have a ceiling, or it is not provided in statute. 
Would the minister advise whether or not, and I now refer to the supply agency advance account, it is 
subject to any ceiling — the revolving fund — in the same way that the statutory advance account was 
subject to a ceiling? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — My officials indicate that, yes, they are subject to a ceiling. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, could the officials advise you so that 
you could advise me, in what sort of document is the ceiling? Is it in the statute or is it in regulations or 
is it in treasury board regulations? How is this achieved? 



 
March 9, 1983 

2739 
 

HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — It will be a treasury board regulation. 
 
Item 14 agreed to. 
 
Items 15 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 18 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

REVENUE, SUPPLY AND SERVICES 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 18 
 
Items 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 18 agreed to. 
 

Resolutions 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I have a number of resolutions I would like to move at this time. I move 
resolution no. 1: 
 

Resolved, that toward making good the supply granted to Her Majesty on account of certain 
expenses of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1982, the sum of $138,616,630 
be granted out of the consolidated fund. 
 

Resolution agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — No. 2, I move that: 
 

Resolved, that toward making good the supply granted to Her Majesty on account of certain 
expenses of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1983, the sum of $2,757,978,110 
be granted out of the consolidated fund. 
 

Resolution agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — No 3, I move that: 
 

Resolved, that toward making good the supply granted to Her Majesty on account of certain 
expenses of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1983, the sum of $35,942,620 be 
granted out of the consolidated fund. 
 

Resolution agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — No. 4, I move that: 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2740 

Resolved, that toward making good the supply granted to Her Majesty on account of certain 
expenses of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1982, the sum of $136,702,000 
be granted out of the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund. 

 
Resolution agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — No. 5, I move that: 
 

Resolved, that toward making good the supply granted to Her Majesty on account of certain 
expenses of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1983, the sum of $823,233,750 
be granted out of the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund. 
 

Resolution agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — No. 6, I move that: 
 

Resolved, that toward making good the supply granted to Her Majesty on account of certain 
expenses of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1983, the sum of $17,160,000 be 
granted out of the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund. 
 

Resolution agreed to. 
 
The said resolutions were reported, and by leave of the Assembly read twice and agreed to. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That Bill No. 68, An Act for Granting to Her Majesty Certain Sums of Money for the Public Service 
for the Fiscal years Ending Respectively March 31, 1982, and March 31, 1983, be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 

Motion agreed to and bill read a first time. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to put forth a few comments on this bill, but I 
understand that there are other members of the Assembly that would like to speak to it, so I will hold my 
comments until closing debate. So, by leave of the Assembly, and under rule 48(2), I move that the bill 
be now read a second and third time. 
 
MR. MEAGHER: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured this morning to make a few brief 
comments on this the prorogation of the first session of the 20th legislature. Given the hour, I’m sure all 
the members will appreciate my brevity. 
 
Nevertheless, I do so with a great deal of pride. I am proud to be the member of this legislature for 
Prince Albert. I’m proud to be a Progressive Conservative member of this legislature. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 9, 1983 

2741 
 

MR. MEAGHER: — And in that capacity, proud to be able to support the efforts of the new 
Government of Saskatchewan in cleaning up the mess that was inherited from the previous NDP 
administration. 
 
Some time ago, Judge Noble referred to the DNS as a bureaucracy run amuck. Well, Mr. Speaker, what 
is being demonstrated in this session by the report of the public accounts committee, by ministerial 
statements and other revelations, is the indisputable fact that what was inherited last April was a whole 
government run amuck. An NDP bureaucracy, Mr. Speaker, out of control, out of the control of the 
legislature, and therefore the taxpayers and people of Saskatchewan. 
 
In their socialistic desire to own and control as much of the economy of Saskatchewan as they could, 
they squandered away hundreds of millions of dollars. They spent windfall resource revenues like 
drunken sailors. The difference, Mr. Speaker, is that a drunken sailor is spending his own money. The 
NDP administration spent the people’s money. They squandered the people’s heritage. 
 
Then, alas, the chickens came home to roost. Faced with a worldwide recession, falling revenues, a 
bureaucracy out of control, they called an election. The proposition has been put forward that the NDP 
strategy was if they lost they election they would be handing over a practically bankrupt administration 
to a new Conservative government and their old slogan, “Tory times are hard times,” would become a 
reality and we would have a depression, don’t you know? And they would be swept back in power at the 
next election and inherit a cleaned-up, trimmed-up ship of state, and the Tories would get the blame. 
That, Mr. Speaker, is why the NDP want a depression; they need a depression. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MEAGHER: — They want to go back to their roots. Well, Mr. Speaker, this session of the 
legislature has demonstrated to the people of Saskatchewan just how far off the mark that strategy is. It’s 
off the mark on two counts. 
 
Number one, they greatly underestimated the depth of the voter dissatisfaction with big government. 
However, after the by-election in Prince Albert-Duck Lake, I think they may be getting that message. 
 
Number two, they greatly underestimated the resourcefulness and ingenuity of the people of 
Saskatchewan. With the government off their backs and out of their pockets, they decided not to 
participate in this depression. 
 
It’s for those reasons, Mr. Speaker, that I am so proud to be a member of the 20th legislature of 
Saskatchewan. The fact is that this session will be remembered as the turning point in Saskatchewan 
history. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MEAGHER: — I am glad to see that all the members are with me on that. This is the legislature 
that demonstrated to the rest of the country that indeed, God willing, there is so much more we can be. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2742 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — We have had, Mr. Speaker, a number of instances of the flights of fancy 
(not to say fantasy) which overtake members opposite from time to time, and we had reference to some 
of it earlier. But we have had yet another flight of fancy from the member for Prince Albert. 
 
He said that we, on this side of the House, needed a depression. May I assure him that if we had needed 
a depression, we could have done something about it in the last 11 years of unparalleled prosperity in the 
history of Saskatchewan. But whether or not we need a depression, I regret very much that I think we 
will get one. We will get one because members opposite believe their rhetoric. Unfortunately, the results 
of their rhetoric are such as to leave all of us the poorer. There is so much more we can be, bub, and the 
b-u-b stands for broke, unemployed and bankrupt. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — That, in fact, is what we are likely to be. More and more people, with 
every passing day, are broke, and more and more, with every passing day, are unemployed, and more 
and more, with every passing day, are bankrupt. 
 
Looking at the budget which we are dealing with, even with the supplementaries the total capital 
expenditure is down, and with it the employment opportunities are down. I invite any hon. member to 
look at what the proposals are for the spending for highway construction, tell us say, in northern 
Saskatchewan. There is talk, of course, of developing our resources, but when it comes to putting out 
money to build roads into those resources the money is not in this budget. Tens of millions of dollars 
have been cut out of this budget so that that effort to build on our strengths has come to naught, because 
out of this budget has been cut the capital financing which would be necessary. 
 
In the same way, out of this budget has been cut the geology building at the university, because 
members opposite really don’t have confidence that we will be needing to do something to educate 
geologists. Probably, probably it will come in a later budget. They can’t put it off forever, but they 
certainly have put it off successfully for one year, and that is a year of lost opportunity in the history of 
Saskatchewan, and a good number of young people in Saskatchewan. 
 
I could list many, many other programs which have been cut in this budget. We have members who 
were elected to this House campaigning for high schools in Regina and Saskatoon and in due course 
maybe, if we all live long enough, they’ll be there. But not one of them has been started this year. After 
10 months there is not anything done with respect to high schools in Saskatoon or Regina, and I could 
. . . Except, of course, in announcements. Of course in announcements. If I may discount announcements 
and ask people to cut sort of something a little firmer, we certainly don’t see any activity generated by 
those steps which are in this budget. 
 
Here is the budget for 1983, and if anyone can find a dollar in there for Regina high schools or 
Saskatoon high schools, it got by me. So they are cutting out a good number of the things which they 
should have done to generate the activity which they say this province needs, and which I agree with 
them. 
 
What else did they cut out? Every government reveals its priorities in the course of deciding to manage 
its money. And I remind the Minister of Urban Affairs that that’s the 



 
March 9, 1983 

2743 
 

way it is. I am sure that he is amusing himself, and I am equally amused because he is probably not 
going to speak in the debate. He is confining himself to doing some musical direction from his seat. 
 
Here is the first budget of this government, and in this budget it reveals its priorities. I ask the Minister 
of the Environment to pay heed to what I say, and whether or not it can be claimed that people are the 
priority when the planning and research in environment is cut back, when mines pollution control is cut 
back, when mine waste management and research is cut back, when environmental assessments are cut 
back. This is the language of a right-wing government which does not believe that the environment 
should be protected, but rather, in a the words of the member for Saskatoon University . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: —. . . “it’s time we stopped placing so much emphasis on environmental 
protection. It’s time we opened the doors to the private sector.” And this is very, very clearly coming 
through in this budget. 
 
I see the Minister of Labor there, and a look at the labor estimates will make clear that he has cut some 
aspects of his budget. And what has he cut? He has cut the pension benefits provisions. Of course, this is 
a government which has people as its priority. It has done nothing in labor except cut pension benefits 
(that’s old people), and cut the women’s division (that’s women). So these are clearly not priorities for 
this government, other wise we would have seen additional expenditure in those areas. 
 
But where do we see massive increases in spending? We see massive increases in spending on interest 
on the public debt, because that follows from the fiscal policies they are following, fiscal policies which 
are leading to massive deficits. We are seeing huge increase in the amount of welfare payments. Indeed, 
the payments under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, under this budget, are up $50 million in one year 
— $50 million. And this is because of the enormous increase in unemployment. A simple look at the 
figures will show that the great bulk of the additional funds is going to people who are employable and 
who cannot find jobs under this government. No one, I think, is alleging that this government is 
responsible for all of the unemployment, but we are certainly alleging that they have not done what they 
should have done to lessen that unemployment. 
 
The increase in this budget is up from $7.7 million to $30 million for assistance to the unemployed 
employable, and that is an indictment of the policies of this government. So we see a government which 
is spending its money on welfare and spending its money on interest payments, but doesn’t have money 
for environmental protection and doesn’t have money for pension planning and doesn’t have money for 
women’s divisions. It doesn’t have money for the senior citizens home repair grants; they’re also cut. So 
that we are finding . . . I’m getting a good deal of assistance, but may I point out to members opposite 
and to my left that when they say “houses,” that there’s been a significant decrease in the spending for 
the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation in this budget which we have . . . 
 
But let me turn now to this budget which should be written in red ink — should be written in red ink. It 
is blue. It is Tory blue, and I’m very, very glad they’ve changed the color, because I wouldn’t want 
anybody to think that this first Tory budget had anything to do with the New Democratic Party 
government . . . 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2744 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — . . . a budget which has a deficit larger than the accumulated deficits of all 
the deficits in the history of this province, one which . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . We have had 
suggestions that the treasury was bare when the government came to office. It’s too bad that the 
provincial auditor keeps insisting that there was a surplus of $140 million last year, and he’s going to 
say that there’s a deficit of 220 million or 230 million this year. And we, therefore, are going to see a 
turn around of $360 million or $370 million in one year, and that is absolutely unprecedented in the 
history of this province — absolutely unprecedented. For any province this size, I suspect, is absolutely 
unprecedented — a turnaround of 360 million in a year. 
 
I hear my friends opposite from time to time complain about the performance of a much less 
well-endowed province, the province of Manitoba, under Tory governments and under NDP 
governments. Even under the Tories there, or under the NDP there, they have never gone back $360 
million in a single year — never. 
 
This is making Saskatchewan number one — number one in going from a position of plus 140 to minus 
220 and more, I fear. This is said to be getting the government off the backs of the people and out of the 
pockets of people, but I tell you that very soon this government will be going into the pockets of people 
to pay the interest involved. It cannot be otherwise. It cannot be otherwise because not even Tories who 
wish to blind their eyes to the realities, not even they can get the bankers to blind their eyes to realities. 
In fact, you will have to pay the interest and you will have to pay the sinking fund. It will start coming 
out of your second budget, and we will see more of that in a couple of weeks. 
 
There’s no reason for pessimism about the future of this province, if we had a government which was 
able to grasp that future. We, however, have a government which says that it wishes to open the 
province for business, wishes to open the province for business by way of having a conference but not 
having any business. We have a government which has been in office for 10 months, and has a dismal 
track record in stimulating the private sector - -and they’re perfectly willing to admit it. They are very, 
very frank in saying that their activities have created a large number of jobs — and they imply new jobs 
— in this province. They are very, very frank, also, in saying that the total number of jobs in this 
province is the same as it was a year ago — or perhaps 1,000 more, perhaps even 2,000 more, if you’re 
jigging all the figures. Yet they say their efforts have created 10,000 jobs or so. 
 
What can I conclude from that except that their private sector partners have lost 8,000 jobs? Their 
activities have lost jobs. There is no way that they can argue, Mr. Speaker, that the government has 
created many new jobs, the private sector has created many new jobs, but unfortunately, in total, there 
are no new jobs. Not even the Tories can make that one stick. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — The fruits of the first year are here, and we are about to see the 
continuation of those policies. We are about, I suggest, to se yet another massive deficit and yet another 
indication that, when you start down the Trudeau trail of deficits, you will very soon have to pinch in the 
spending on welfare programs, pinch in the 



 
March 9, 1983 

2745 
 

spending on health programs, pinch in the spending on education programs. I predict that this will 
happen within the next 12 months. I predict this will happen in the next 12 months. 
 
So we are, Mr. Speaker, about to pass this budget. We are about to vote the appropriation act, but no one 
can deny that this is a sad day when we have to vote an appropriation act which has such a poor 
financial showing identified in a budget. I don’t imagine anyone opposite is proud of their financial 
showing. I can’t imagine anyone being proud of that record. None the less, all of us, I think must look at 
it with some regret to see that, for whatever reason, be it hard times or be it incompetent management 
(and we probably all will have our own explanations), the fats are that we have a budget which is 
starting us down a trail of massive deficits which have left other governments in Canada in disarray, and 
which will leave this government in disarray if those policies are continues over an extensive period of 
time. 
 
I would be delighted to think that the government opposite had any plan, had any idea, other than the 
boosterism of how we are going to extricate ourselves from this position, but I do not detect n members 
opposite any plan other than the idea of having a good attitude and hoping that, in the best of 
Micawberish tradition, something will turn up. And I expect that this is how they will conduct their 
affairs. 
 
We have seen many other governments try that, almost always with failure as the result. We have seen 
the federal Liberals do it with failure as the result. We have seen Conservative governments, pretty 
consistently across Canada, do it with failure as the result. And while I hope that I am wrong, unless 
something very surprising happens, I suggest that the government opposite will be unable to extricate 
itself from this financial morass, and they will hand over to the next government which succeeds it, 
whenever that may be, an accumulated deficit the likes of which this province has never seen, or has 
never contemplated until the election of the government last April. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a pleasure to address this motion, or 
this bill, at this early hour of the morning. And I suppose the most enlightening thing that I heard, and 
the thing that gave me the most hope, was when I heard the Leader of the Opposition predict more doom 
and gloom for this year. Because I remember that same man last spring predicting victory, and I saw him 
call an election and 44 seats diminished to a meagre 8. And if those are your predictions, and that’s how 
they went, that gives me confidence that the economy will be turning around, because, sir, I have no 
faith in your predictions, and I don’t believe anyone else in Saskatchewan does either. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I also . . . I’ll tell you that is so, because you haven’t learned one thing. We 
had a nice little economics lecture today, a little discussion in which our Premier said, “It’s very 
simple.” You can’t go around the country as you have in the past talking out of both sides of your mouth 
saying, “You can’t be cutting things here.” And on the other side, “You can’t have a deficit finance, a 
deficit budget.” And that’s what you’ve been saying, and that is probably the reason why you’ve lost the 
credibility, or any credibility you had in this province, and I’m afraid, sir, it won’t be coming back. 
 
You talk about cuts, and cuts, and cuts. And I want to tell you there was one cut that this 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2746 

budget brought about and it’s a cut that I’m proud of, and it was a cut of one NDP member in the 
by-election in P.A. that’s what that budget brought: a cut to your party. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we could go on, talk about these things, but I want to bring forth some true facts of 
what the mid-course correction, the budget brought in by my colleague, the Minister of Finance, this 
year, has done for this province, and the direction to which we’re headed in the future. 
 
You know, we can talk about budgets from a philosophical course all night long, and that’s what the 
debate has been about in the last week or two in this election, or in this legislature, but I want to tell you 
one thing. You can’t argue with the expressed desire of the people of Saskatchewan for a change in 
economic direction. That was what was expressed on April 26. That is why Premier Grant Devine is the 
most sought-after speaker in North America today, because the people across this nation realize that in 
Saskatchewan, in a prairie province, in western Canada, there is a new direction. There is a government, 
as I said the other day, a government with imagination, a government with innovation and a government 
that is leading Canada in new ideas such as family farm purchase plan, mortgage, an dyes, gasoline. And 
as my colleague from Meadow Lake said many days ago, it still hurts, doesn’t it, boys? 
 
I say that the voters of Saskatchewan spoke clearly on April 26, and they voted for change. They voted 
for a commitment to the return to the traditional principles of economic freedom, where the individual 
initiative and entrepreneurship would not only be allowed but, different from anything they’d know in 
the last 10 years, actively encouraged. 
 
More recently, the people of Prince Albert-Duck Lake expressed their pleasure with the economic 
policies of this government. As politicians, our barometer is the ballot box, and one cannot argue with 
the indications our barometer has been making with the political climate this year. 
 
So you can’t argue with the strong message that the people of Saskatchewan have sent to us, and you 
can’t argue with the results of our new economic directions. 
 
And let me just cite a few examples. We have the strongest economy in Canada. We have the lowest 
inflation and unemployment rates in the country. Saskatchewan is the only province in Canada this year 
to show a net increase in employment this year. In the midst of a worldwide downturn we are attracting 
investments and investor confidence. We created 1,000 new jobs in this province in the last year. 
 
The former administration saw it’s so-called (and I remember that phrase) family of crown corporations 
(and how it came to haunt you and your group), saw itself as the mainspring of developments. We’ve 
turned that around. We don’t want to fight with the business people of Saskatchewan. We want to work 
together with them, and that is a welcome change. And I walk out through Saskatchewan to the various 
towns, and I tell you, they say there’s a different climate here and we’re glad to see it. I think everybody 
in this House knows that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Our mortgage plan has proved relief for home-owners, and it has also put 
people back to work in the construction industry. Our housing starts are up, while in most parts of the 
country they’re down. While housing starts in Canada were 



 
March 9, 1983 

2747 
 

down 29 per cent, our starts were up 46 per cent in Regina, and 68 per cent in Saskatoon. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Our overall provincial starts are up 14 per cent. As a result of the 
government’s 3,000 build-a-home grant, our single-detached housing starts are up 394 per cent this year, 
a commendable increase. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — My friends, you can imagine what a difference this is making to the small 
builder who depends on the single-detached market. 
 
Are the people of Saskatchewan interested in the new programs initiated by this government? I an tell 
you they most certainly are. We received 5,000 requests for applications for the build-a-home program. 
 
As a direct result of this government’s economic direction, our oil industry is back at work. In eight 
short months, this industry has gone from being one of the downturn’s saddest victims to one of the 
heartiest survivors. Drilling was up 48 per cent in the last half of 1982, compared to the same period in 
1981. Land sales peaked for the first time in two years at $15.4 million in December. The oil supply and 
service industries are back at work in this province. We’re looking at 1,000 to 1,200 new wells for 1983, 
and I understand that 182 of them have been drilled so far this year. These changes are but a result of our 
package of royalty and tax concessions. They were designed, in consultation with the industry, to 
revitalize our oil industry and what is most important, the big difference, they have worked. 
 
Now, we talk about social programs. I remember the NDP saying how they were the great benefactors of 
social programs. I am familiar with the field of health, and I just want to indicate to you some of the 
areas in which this government, in the short period of 10 months, has improved the health services to the 
people of Saskatchewan: $26 million increase in this budget over the budget that you had come in with 
earlier; an improved construction grant, a grant that we were able to implement. Substantial grants 
totalling over $2 million have been made available to City and St. Paul’s hospitals in Saskatoon for 
pressing capital needs. Funding has been approved for major hospital construction projects in 
Lloydminster, Nipawin, Melfort, Yorkton and Cut Knife, for $43 million; and an extra $500,000 put into 
an ambulance system that was crumbling because of a lack of funding by the previous government. 
 
Just the other day, I was proud at the Telemiracle to commit $2.7 million to a children’s rehab centre in 
the city of Saskatoon, and that is done in conjunction with a voluntary sector, that fine group, the 
Kinsmen of Saskatchewan. The winter works program this year — $3 million at Pasqua Hospital; 30 
projects scattered around this province of Saskatchewan in various towns, in your constituencies and my 
constituency, providing winter works and jobs for people and, more important, renovating and 
upgrading the hospitals to the best standards we can provide. 
 
And then my colleague sitting beside me, the Deputy Premier and the Minister of Agriculture, has 
brought in a revolutionary program: the family farm purchase program, a very different, philosophical 
base than the state ownership of the previous government. And I want to tell you that since this program 
was established, the farm 



 
March 9, 1983 

 
2748 

credit corporation has interviewed 4,605 persons interested in the program and, of that number, 1,985 
have been identified as appearing to qualify for the program. Their mortgages would total $252 million. 
Going into the program, we have estimated 1,500 applications in the first three months. So let me tell 
you that the programs that the Devine government, the new Conservative government, the innovative 
government in North America, have come up with are working, and working well, to satisfy the needs of 
the people. 
 
There’s a lot more I could say, but I see it’s getting close to 1 o’clock. And I’m sure that with those few 
facts I think I have indicated that the rhetoric of the past premier, the now Leader of the Opposition in 
Saskatchewan, was only rhetoric. I can see he’s getting a little sleepy. He’s had a hard day; I can 
understand. So, to show that we are a compassionate and an understanding government, a government 
that cares for the elderly, I will cut my remarks somewhat short. I will tell you that the recession that 
may be here in North America will be hit head-on by the Devine government. We will be the leaders to 
come out of the depression, or recession, in Canada, just as we have been the leaders in the mortgage 
field, and in the farms program, and in the gasoline cuts. 
 
I have great faith in my colleague, the Minister of Finance. I think his mid-course correction was a 
necessary correction to the disastrous fudge budget that you people came in with that caused you . . . 
Yes, the fudge budget. More fudge figures than there is in a candy bar factory. And I just want to say 
that I have confidence in this government. I am proud to be a member of this government, and I an say 
that if there is a government in Canada that will guide their people’s interest to recovery in these tough 
and difficult economic times, it is the Devine government in Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division and bill read a second and third time. 
 

YEAS — 35 
 

Devine Boutin Gerich 
Birkbeck Bacon Domotor 
Taylor Sauder Maxwell 
Berntson Petersen Embury 
Rousseau Glauser Dirks 
Hardy Meagher Hepworth 
McLeod Schmidt Myers 
McLaren Parker Zazelenchuk 
Klein Smith (Moose Jaw South) Baker 
Katzman Martens Dutchak 
Duncan Rybchuk Folk 
Schoenhals Young  
 

NAYS — 7 
 

Blakeney Koskie Shillington 
Engel Lusney Yew 
Lingenfelter   



 
March 9, 1983 

2749 
 

ROYAL ASSENT AND PROROGATION 
 
At 1:08 a.m. His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor entered the Chamber; took his seat upon the throne and 
gave royal assent to the following bill: 
 
Bill No. 68 — An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the 
Fiscal Years ending respectively on March 31, 1982 and March 31, 1983. 
 
His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor was then pleased to deliver the following speech: 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of the Legislative Assembly; 
 
It is my duty to relieve you of further attendance at this Legislative Assembly. In doing so, I wish to 
thank you and congratulate you on the work you have done. 
 
You have established by legislation a mortgage interest reduction plan; a public utilities review 
commission, and a farm purchase program. 
 
To reduce the provincial cost of living you have passed legislation to repeal the provincial tax on 
gasoline. 
 
Amendments were approved to The Senior Citizens School Tax Rebate Act, The Renters Property Tax 
Rebate Act, The Property Improvement Grant Act, to raise the amounts payable to the citizens of 
Saskatchewan under those acts. 
 
You have passed measures to streamline the administration of justice and the administration of the 
finances of government departments. 
 
Amendments were considered and approved to The Workers’ Compensation Act to increase the level of 
benefits payable in certain circumstances. You’ve approved revisions to the system of holding municipal 
and school board elections by repealing The Urban Municipalities Elections Act. 
 
I thank you for the provisions you have made to meet the requirements of the public service. I assure 
you, on behalf of my ministers, that this sum of money is being used prudently and in the public interest. 
 
In taking leave of you, I thank you for the manner in which you have devoted your energies to the 
activities of the session, and wish you the full blessing of providence. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker and members of the Legislative Assembly, it is the will and 
pleasure of His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor that this Legislative Assembly be prorogued until it 
please His Honor to summon the same for the dispatch of business, and the Legislative Assembly is 
accordingly prorogued. 
 
His Honor then retired from the Chamber at 1:12 a.m. 


