






















































Hansard: December 06, 1984


265 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
December 6, 1984 

 
EVENING SITTING 

 
SPECIAL ORDER 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
ADDRESS IN REPLY (continued) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in reply which was moved by Ms. Zazelenchuk, 
seconded by Mr. Tusa. 
 
MR. MYERS: — Before we adjourned this afternoon, I was speaking on funding for universities, but I didn't quite 
get a chance to finish all the money that's been put into university funding this year. 
 
In connection with the $32 million per year over and above what it was three years ago under their government, 
and the $8.5 million for the Geological Engineering Building, this year we put $1.25 million into a special grant for 
libraries and equipment, which was the highest grant to any university for that facility in Canada. By comparison to 
university funding, Manitoba took a 3 per cent to 4 per cent drop. 
 
Not only, Mr. Speaker, have we put money into university funding, but we've also put it into technical institutes. In 
support of high technological advances in Saskatoon's Kelsey Institute, they have mounted a training program in 
computer-assisted design, computer-assisted manufacturing, and microcomputer technology. 
 
They say we've cut back in technical collegiates. We've put 13 additional new programs into Kelsey, more staff 
than we had there last year, more programs than we had there last year. Does that sound like a cut-back to you? No 
way. More into education. So you can't believe the NDP party — you just can't believe them. 
 
They say jobs are important, like we heard them in the press before the session began. Well, we've taken the lead, 
and here it is, here's a headline: — Moose Jaw Times-Herald — "Saskatchewan to Lead Country in Economic 
Growth, Board Shows Strong Economic Conditions Mean Jobs." You don't get jobs in poor economic conditions. 
 
"Ottawa Line: Saskatchewan next year will lead the country in economic growth according to the Conference 
Board of Canada." There it is. The board is predicting that Saskatchewan's real gross domestic production will 
increase 3.8 per cent in 1985, compared to 0.7 per cent for the country — way over and above what the rest of the 
country is doing, even NDP Manitoba. 
 
Here's another one. This one's from Report on the Nation, November, 1984: "1985 should see a rebound with real 
gross domestic product more than doubling the national average." And where are the jobs, they keep asking. Well, 
the oil industries — as I have mentioned before, 1,000 new jobs in the past year and growing, growing. 
 
Co-op upgrader: The Co-op upgrader which was announced in August '83 — 1,080 new permanent jobs in Regina 
— in this province; not in Alberta, not in Manitoba. 
 
Here's another one. Husky Oil upgrader, the one their former leader of their federal party is on the board of. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Former premier. 
 
MR. MYERS: — They don't mention . . . Oh, yes. The member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg says 



 
December 6, 1984 

266 
 

"former premier." Yes, but that was the CCF party; the caring CCF party — not the NDP party of today. I believe 
the only reason the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is complaining about the recently announced farm Bill is 
because it didn't include implement dealers, nor would it cover his $120,000 airplane. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Maybe we could consider a House amendment. 
 
MR. MYERS: — I don't know, maybe we could consider a House amendment. Oh, the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is talking out of the side of his mouth again. The last year the member from Shaunavon 
ran beer gardens, beer gardens. We all remember that. And they stand there criticizing. This year, this year the New 
Democratic Party, under different names, different names. . . You want to catch this one. In the paper, in the paper 
they're advertising a bingo, a bingo parlour. Sponsored tonight. Sponsored tonight. The Redberry SYND, 
S-Y-N-D. They don't bother to tell the people that it's the Redberry Saskatchewan Youth New Democrats. They 
don't come out and tell people that. They hide it away, just like they hide all the other things they do away. They 
hide it away. 
 
Not only that, but in the Saskatoon vicinity there have been nine bingos put on by a club which is a front for their 
party. And I was told of the nine bingos, Mr. Speaker, three, three bingos, not under their name. As a matter of fact 
it comes under Riversdale Community Recreation Club, a front for the NDP party to channel money into their 
political coffers. Right in there. Three bingos, the proceeds and revenues from three bingos, went to the NDP 
Redberry Constituency Association. One bingo went to the Westmount NDP Association. The proceeds for 
another went to the Saskatoon-Sutherland NDP Association, and another to the Riversdale. I haven't been able to 
track down two of the others. 
 
But people must realize, and they put it publicly in the paper, that they're taking out about $7,000 on a good night 
in these bingos, and it's going to finance their political coffers. Back in the old days of Tommy Douglas they got 
money from the people who give it honestly and knew what they were giving it for. Now they're collecting their 
money through bingos. Bingos . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And where is he? Well, he's working for Husky, isn't 
he? We all know that. Bingos. The bingo bunch there. They almost make up enough for a table. 
 
We have taken a reasonable outlook. And they talk about our record, our record in health. Well, let's look at what 
the NDP record in health was. While the NDP likes to portray itself in having a strong interest in health care, the 
actual record is contrary to that. Let's look at it. 
 
They put into place, and I'll give them credit for it . . . In 1973 they put in the Saskatchewan hearing plan, the 
elimination of premiums, the Saskatchewan Dental Plan, the Saskatchewan Prescription Drug Plan, the 
Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living, SAIL — very good organization. In SAIL they used to fund it every 
year, and that poor organization didn't know whether they had funds coming the next year. That's right. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — We started it. 
 
MR. MYERS: — Yes, but you didn't continue it. If you started it, you certainly didn't want to continue it. But let's 
look what happened when they started taking over potash mines. I mentioned it before: 1976, took 400 positions 
out of Saskatchewan hospitals; 400, I mentioned it before. Also in 1976 they deleted 43 positions in psychiatric 
nursing. In 1979, they deleted another 35 positions. They were too busy. Those just happened to be the same years 
and after elections. They never told the public they were going to delete positions before elections. They've done it 
afterwards. 
 
Let's look at their construction. No major construction between the years of 1977 and 1981, none whatsoever. Let's 
take a look at our record, accomplishments in health. We've recognized that for a long time health was improperly 
funded. We said it during our election campaign, and 



 
December 6, 1984 

267 
 

we've put money into it. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Tell them what we've been doing about it. 
 
MR. MYERS: — We support . . . As the member from Moosomin has alluded to, I should tell them what we've 
done. 
 
Well, numerous hospitals, numerous small hospitals throughout this province have been upgraded, and some have 
been rebuilt. We've brought about several programs. I'll talk about what we've done in Saskatoon; that just happens 
to be where I'm from. Saskatoon. 
 
A 50-bed nursing home, level 3 and 4 50-bed nursing home, being administered by the Alliance Church; good 
organization and will administrate it quite well. When this went through city council in Saskatoon several weeks 
ago, three city councillors opposed this building. Three city councillors opposed it. Who were they? Well, they 
were the former speaker of the House, Mr. Brockelbank; they were a former candidate for nomination for the NDP, 
Pat Lorje; and another one of their members, card carrying members, Kate Waygood; and they opposed 50 beds, 
level 3 and 4, to be built in Saskatoon. Fortunately, the city fathers saw fit to overturn the measly three who 
opposed this, and give them the right to build that building. 
 
Also in Saskatoon, 238-bed level 3 and 4 home to provide for our senior citizens, the ones they wanted to place a 
moratorium on, the ones they did place a moratorium on. They were great at building styrofoam models and 
winging them through the province, but did you see any of those styrofoam models ever built? Not one of them. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — They built liquor board stores. 
 
MR. MYERS: — Oh, they did more than build liquor board stores. They built a lot. We've also gone into a 
program, health care for the elderly; we've upgraded the senior citizens grant; we've also brought about $1000 in a 
five-year program for upgrading senior citizens' housing or houses so that they can live in them, because some do. 
 
But what's surprising about this province, we have got the oldest average population in Canada of any province, 
and the size of that is growing. It's growing by leaps and bounds. It must be a healthy climate out here since the 
change of government. 
 
The elderly make up about 12 per cent of this province's population. And by the year 2000, they'll account for 
about 16.5 per cent of the population. So now is the time to build the facilities, not later. Now is when we need 
them; now is when we should have them; and now is when we are building them. 
 
We also know that the elderly occupy a lot of our hospital beds. Approximately 25 per cent of our hospital beds are 
occupied by the elderly. And they're occupied by the elderly because there was no place to put them. In Saskatoon 
alone, it was estimated we had between 80 and 120 hospital beds in the three city Saskatoon hospital occupying 
beds. They talk about our waiting lists. They created the waiting lists by not building the nursing homes, by not 
allowing the elderly to move into the nursing homes. They've created the shortage. But we plan, we plan to change 
that, and we are. A five-year program, we have a five-year program to create 1,000 beds and replace another 500. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could say much, much more. I know the citizens of Saskatoon and my constituency, Saskatoon 
South, are deeply concerned about the shortage of nursing home beds. But I will assure them, I will continue to 
work and work hard in this Assembly in this building to try to allocate more funds for these projects. Particularly 
health, since it is the main concern in my 



 
December 6, 1984 

268 
 

constituency. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. YEW: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm very honoured, Mr. Speaker, to get up this evening and to say a few 
words to the members of this Legislative Assembly, to the people of Saskatchewan, on behalf of the Cumberland 
constituency. I want to present a few questions, a few thoughts, a few views regarding the fourth Conservative 
government throne speech that was presented here last Thursday. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, first of all, that I am proud to stand here in this Legislative Assembly for the people of 
Cumberland constituency. It's a very unique constituency. It's a unique constituency in that it is the largest 
constituency in the province of Saskatchewan. It is unique in the sense that the people and the communities in this 
particular constituency are proud. They're proud of their heritage. They're proud of the rich resources that they have 
had, the experiences that they have had, and the fight for their survival that they have experienced. 
 
Cumberland constituency is a unique constituency, truly, Mr. Speaker. It is a unique constituency as well, Mr. 
Speaker, in the fact that they booted out the Conservative government in the 1982 general election. They wouldn't 
have anything to do with the Conservative government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fourth throne speech presented here in this legislature is all too similar to the first two or three 
throne speeches that were resented to us by the Tory government. Similarly, once again, the issues confronting 
northern people, the northern families, the northern communities, were once again ignored. Totally ignored and 
totally neglected. 
 
In 1982, Mr. Speaker, when the residents of Cumberland constituency, when the native people all across the 
province learned of the Devine government's election victory, they expected the worst from this government. And 
the worst is what we got. And while this throne speech contained nothing for the people of northern Saskatchewan, 
nothing for the Indian and the Metis people of this province, it did indeed, Mr. Speaker, indicate pretty clearly a 
couple of things about this government. 
 
It showed us a government, it showed us a government that is badly confused, confused and uncertain. They are 
drifting, Mr. Speaker, drifting in search of a new slogan, a new slogan like the one they had, referred to as open for 
big business, which they refer to as a policy. The government's confusion and lack of clear direction is obvious to 
all members of this Assembly, although some of the members on that side of the House won't admit it. However, it 
is equally obvious to all of the people in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is confused, uncertain, and they are lacking leadership. You can see that by the 
performance of the members on that side of the House every day of this session. Mr. Speaker, a government that is 
frightened, they are as well and rightfully so, frightened by the billion dollar deficit that has piled and accumulated 
since they took office, frightened by the persistent high unemployment rates among our young people, frightened 
by its failures, and its uncertain leadership. That is what they're frightened about; that is what they're uncertain 
about. They don't have leadership. And badly frightened, rightfully so, Mr. Speaker, because it realizes that the 
people of this province, the people of Saskatchewan, have lost confidence of members opposite, the Conservative 
government of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has been a throne speech without policy, without purpose or direction. It was barren and empty, 
particularly for the people in northern Saskatchewan. This has been the most disappointing feature of the throne 
speech, Mr. Speaker. It is outright discriminatory against the people in the Cumberland constituency. 
 
There is no mention, as I've indicated before, there is no mention of the people in northern 



 
December 6, 1984 

269 
 

Saskatchewan, no mention of the North, and no mention of the desperately urgent and pressing social and 
economic problems confronting northern people. There is no understanding even, Mr. Speaker, by this 
government, of the increasingly desperate situation threatening northern young people and their families with 
unemployment, high unemployment of 95 per cent, welfare dependency rates that have sky-rocketed, family 
violence, alcoholism, hopelessness, and despair. 
 
There is no mention of environmental protection, and there is no mention, Mr. Speaker, of the vital, important 
issues — like the upcoming constitutional entrenchment discussions of aboriginal rights; native self-government; 
native self-determination; and the issues confronting the native people of this province. Not a word. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government which does not care about northern people, and particularly the native people. 
This government is a government, Mr. Speaker, which does not understand the unique traditional relationships 
with the lands, and with each other, and with their environment. A government which does not act in the interests 
of northern people, that is the Conservative government. 
 
As I have travelled throughout my constituency and other parts of this province over the past few months, Mr. 
Speaker, as I have listened to families and listened to young men and women, and listened to local government 
leaders, native leaders, and other people at the community level, I have learned, Mr. Speaker, that they are deeply 
concerned, and rightfully they should be. 
 
They ask me, Mr. Speaker, in different ways, this question: why is the Devine government turning its back on us? 
Why is that PC government down in Regina ignoring our lives, ignoring our needs? Why does this Conservative 
government always have to implement policies that benefit their corporate friends and their big-business friends? 
That is a good question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have noticed in this debate that none of the PC members, government members, are trying to argue that the 
Devine government has accomplished anything in the North. They are embarrassed by the truth, Mr. Speaker, 
embarrassed to admit that under this government unemployment has not been reduced, but rather it has increased. 
It has increased to 95 per cent and perhaps more in some of the more isolated communities. They are embarrassed 
to admit that they have not reduced the welfare dependency rates, but instead, Mr. Speaker, have forced more 
people on into welfare dependency. 
 
They are embarrassed to admit that they have practically abandoned northern local governments, northern leaders, 
native leaders, and they have abandoned northern capital projects and northern small businesses. Mr. Speaker, they 
are embarrassed to admit that they have not placed any priorities on hospital projects in La Ronge, and undermined 
the quality of health and education services throughout the North, as elsewhere in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to stop here for a minute or two. I have with me a clipping which says, "Government 
announces highway projects." Mr. Speaker, just recently, the first of this month, the Minister of Highways 
announced that there would be 11 projects tendered out. Something ironic about this press statement; it seems that 
projects are approved only on the government side of the House, only in areas where Progressive Conservative 
MLAs, only in constituencies where we have Progressive Conservative MLAs. Just the other day I heard mention 
of a hospital that will be priorized for the Premier's home riding. 
 
We have worked hard in northern Saskatchewan to try to improve our health facilities, and I particularly want to 
mention the facility that we had looked forward to in the community of La Ronge, a facility that was already under 
way with the previous administration, a facility that people in the community, the communities in the surrounding 
areas, were looking forward to for much needed improvements in terms of health and health-care facilities. But, 
Mr. Speaker, what do we get? We get the areas, particularly the northern administration district, ignored by the 



 
December 6, 1984 

270 
 

Progressive Conservative government of the day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people in my constituency, the residents of La Ronge, Creighton, Cumberland House, Sandy Bay, 
Wollaston Lake, Montreal Lake, just to name a few, and many of the other communities, those were the people 
who really see how this Devine government has turned its back on them. They have been neglected; they have been 
abandoned. On that side of the House, Mr. Speaker, there is nothing but uncertainty and confusion, and there is a 
lack of leadership. 
 
(1930) 
 
Let me turn for a moment, Mr. Speaker, just one example of how this Devine government has a double standard. 
One set of policies for its big business friends and its corporate friends, and one set of policies for the ordinary man 
and woman of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let's take a look, Mr. Speaker, at Sandy Bay, which is in the Cumberland constituency way up in northern 
Saskatchewan, where the residents are deeply concerned about the damage done to their local environment by the 
Hudson's Bay Mining and Smelting and its Island Falls power plant project. The local residents got no results and 
no satisfaction from the Hudson's Bay Mining and Smelting firm. So they came to the Devine government for help, 
but they discovered that this PC government has entered into a sweetheart deal with the Hudson Bay Mining and 
Smelting regarding their power plant, major hydro project at Island Falls. A profitable deal for the big corporation. 
And guess who is this corporation, Mr. Speaker. Well, we discover that the Hudson's Bay Mining and Smelting is 
just a subsidiary of Inspiration Resources Corporation out of New York. And it is, in turn, controlled by Mining 
and Resources Corporation of Bermuda. And it is controlled, Mr. Speaker, again by the huge Anglo-American 
corporation of South Africa with head offices in South Africa — a huge financial and mining corporation located, 
Mr. Speaker, located in one of the most viciously racist nations in the world with — how ironic — with its 
influence reaching all the way into remote Sandy Bay. 
 
And then further we discover, Mr. Speaker, that both in 1982 and in 1983 the Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting 
made financial, direct financial contributions to the PC Party of Saskatchewan totalling thousands and thousands of 
dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot understand the policies of this government. We have a government here that gives tax and 
royalty holidays to their corporate friends, their big business friends. 
 
I have some news clipping here, Mr. Speaker. Just recently, in the course of the last few days, statements have been 
coming out about how rich the banks have suddenly become. The national bank profits are up, Mr. Speaker. The 
one in front of me states that the national bank profits for this year have come to $114 million overall. 
Toronto-Dominion Bank profits for this year total $355 million. The Bank of Montreal, Mr. Speaker, reports a 
$283-million profit. The Royal Bank profits, Mr. Speaker, another $450 million. 
 
I cannot understand the logic, Mr. Speaker. I cannot understand the logic of this government's policy where it 
benefits a few, where this government's policy is to neglect and abandon and ignore an area such as the northern 
administration district that is in dire need of some government intervention in terms of our resources, in terms of 
jobs. Their policy benefits their corporation friends, the banks, the bond dealers for tax royalty holidays, but what 
do our people get in northern Saskatchewan? . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . I've got them heckling, Mr. Speaker. I 
must have hit . . . I'm sure that I must have hit a few sore notes on that side of the House. 
 
But the irony of it, Mr. Speaker, is the logic . . . What is the logic behind your policy? Why do you implement 
policies that benefit the rich, the well-to-do, the people that don't need the help? 



 
December 6, 1984 

271 
 

Your deficit . . . You mismanaged the administration of this province right from day one. Your accumulated deficit 
is $129 million. We are paying $11,000 an hour on the interest payment of that deficit. Pardon me, 829 million. 
You have got Saskatchewan into the red for $829 million. We're paying interest to the banks, the bonds dealers, 
your corporate friends — an interest payment of $92.6 million a year. And it's costing us dearly, Mr. Speaker. And 
so, Mr. Speaker, we understand a little better, a little bit better the PC policy of big businesses and the reason why 
they are turning its back on the people of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to turn for a moment to one absolutely critical issue that is so deep, that is deep — an 
increasingly concern by the constituents that I represent, and that is, Mr. Speaker, the government's obvious 
insensitivity to the natural environment of northern Saskatchewan — this government's obvious insensitivity to the 
traditional economic activities that Northerners carry on with nature, in harmony with nature and not against it. 
Hunting, trapping, fishing, wild rice harvesting, and sound forestry development practices — those are all 
traditional ways of life, Mr. Speaker, unique to the residents of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can remember days by in the early '50s when I and my family could rely, could depend on our 
traditional way of life. I could remember many days when I could harness up my dog team and go to some remote 
lake, remote region in northern Saskatchewan and rely on the natural resources of northern Saskatchewan; when I 
could leave my family behind, knowing that they were secure and vice versa, the family knowing that they were 
secure in terms of our needs for a living. They could rely on the natural environment in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could remember many a morning when I tied up my dog team, and I assured my wife that I could be 
home by 10 o'clock that morning with a carcass of caribou, with the carcass of moose or deer, meat for the table. 
And I could rely on my wife having that coffee ready at 10 o'clock, bannock and lard fresh out of the oven. And she 
could rely that I'd be home with meat for the table. 
 
But it's not so today, Mr. Speaker. We are losing that way of life in a pace that we can't seem to stop. Development 
has moved so fast, civilization has moved in so fast, automation, big industry, mining, forestry, etc. Major 
developments have happened so increasingly fast, Mr. Speaker, that it has begun to affect that traditional way of 
life. There are many, many people in northern Saskatchewan that rely on that way of life. But unfortunately, Mr. 
Speaker, that way of life is becoming pretty rare. 
 
This government has to realize that we have to protect our environment; that we have to do something about the 
environment. We are getting to a stage that our forestry resources are being depleted by major mechanical devices. 
 
This new way of life has many threats in front of us, Mr. Speaker. Just recently, we had to fight the issue of toxic 
chemicals. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, I look at Cumberland House. Just the other day I was crossing the ferry on my way into 
the community when the ferry operator, Mr. Hilliard McKenzie, came up to me and said: 
 

Lawrence, my MLA, we need some help. We are going to convince this government. We are going to convince 
big industry. We've got to convince those people that are developing those major hydro projects that we need our 
environment, we need the natural resources, we need some help in retaining what we used to have. 

 
They rely heavily on their wildlife habitat. The tourist industry relies heavily on it. The trappers rely heavily on the 
wildlife habitat. The fisherman rely heavily on the fishing resource. 
 
We have to have some emphasis and some understanding with governments and with big 



 
December 6, 1984 

272 
 

industry. The policies of this government, Mr. Speaker, are working adversely, have an adverse effect on many of 
the people of northern Saskatchewan. The people of Sandy Bay, Cumberland House, Sturgeon Landing, Mr. 
Speaker, know full well that the big business policies of the PC government is not working for them. 
 
This government is not interested in protecting the natural resources that we have. They're not protecting the 
critical wildlife habitat in northern Saskatchewan. The Nipawin hydro project . . . Time and time again I have 
called on this government to set up a monitoring committee, to set up an environmental advisory committee. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I ask you, have we got an environmental advisory committee for the Nipawin hydro project? No, 
we have not got an advisory committee. We have not got a monitoring committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been no involvement, no consultation, and no advisory, environmental advisory committee 
for the people that will be directly effected by that project, the people in Cumberland House and Sturgeon Landing, 
and the communities of Sandy Bay and Pelican Narrows. 
 
We fought in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, for the surface lease agreement. We wanted to see this agreement 
implemented. The Key Lake Mining Corporation as it is today has no monitoring committee to ensure that the 
people in northern Saskatchewan are getting a fair benefit form that development. Every day we hear about leaks in 
the Key Lake Mining Corporation's operations. Every day people in northern Saskatchewan wonder if they are 
getting their money's worth in terms of jobs and training. We have no input, Mr. Speaker, no involvement, no 
consultation, just total neglect from the government, the Conservative government of Grant Devine. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, before I go on, that the people in northern Saskatchewan have to be commended. Just 
recently, Mr. Speaker, members in government, particularly those involved in the Department of the Environment 
will know that people organized themselves. 
 
There is a group called the Forest Herbicide Moratorium Association. It's a non-profit organization. 
 
(1945) 
 
That group of people that represents people out of their southern part of this province and the northern part of the 
province had courage enough to get up on their own and oppose the spraying of toxic chemicals in northern 
Saskatchewan. And they won a major victory when the Department of Environment finally succumbed to the 
demands of that committee, that there will not be any spraying in the north-east area of the province. 
 
Your chief mandate, Mr. Speaker, is this, and I'll read it out to the members in government. They organize many 
themselves, Mr. Speaker, but only one mandate. Motion number nine says: 
 

The purpose of the Forest Herbicide Moratorium Association is to prevent the use of herbicides as a management 
tool in the forests of Saskatchewan, and to promote public awareness of the need for a broader vision on 
long-term forest management. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that we ought to give the people in that committee some recognition for the courageous 
position they took. They took the position that they did because they were concerned about the environment, the 
type of development, and the type of management policy that are coming out of this government, and the type of 
adverse development that has affected one of our rich resources in northern Saskatchewan. 



 
December 6, 1984 

273 
 

While I'm on the subject of environmental concerns, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to turn briefly to Wollaston Lake. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to deal with two issues that have been raised with me by a large number of my constituents 
and by a large number of other men and women throughout Saskatchewan. So those are the issues of nuclear war, 
the widespread opposition to the expansion of a uranium mine at Wollaston Lake, development of the Collins Bay 
B zone. 
 
And I have a petition with me, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to read that out to the members of the Legislative 
Assembly. It has been signed by many of my constituents and by men and women living from Melfort, Turtleford, 
Macdowall, Birch Hills, Meadow Lake, and many of the southern communities. Their petition reads in part: 
 

We, the undersigned, oppose the development of the Collins Bay B zone uranium ore body on the west side of 
Wollaston Lake. We also oppose explorations for uranium and the development of any uranium mines in this 
area. 
 
We recognize the aboriginal rights to this land of the 5,000 Chippewyan and Cree people of Wollaston post and 
the southern nearby communities of northern Saskatchewan and Manitoba. We realize that uranium explorations 
and mining releases radiation into the environment for thousands of years, which will harm and destroy all living 
things. We therefore support these people's demands that all uranium explorations and mining be stopped 
immediately. 
 
We, the undersigned, therefore request that the Department of Environment immediately revoke the license 
issued to Eldorado Resources Limited to develop the Collins Bay B zone ore body. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that is the content of the petition that has been initiated by the people of Wollaston Lake. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to add, that as my colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, said in his remarks on Monday, Mr. 
Speaker, "The people of Saskatchewan are being deeply disappointed." Disappointed by this PC government's 
failure to even acknowledge the moral issues which are facing Saskatchewan people today. Issues like nuclear war, 
cruise missile testing, and fundamental environmental concerns and protection of our environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all across the north . . . I want to talk about the housing program in northern Saskatchewan, and say to 
you, Mr. Speaker, as my friend and colleague from Athabasca has already mentioned, northern people are 
desperately in need of adequate housing. One of the basic human needs for a civilized life of dignity is basic 
housing. 
 
Northern people don't want, and they don't need huge, expensive houses like the one Premier Devine has here in 
Regina near the Legislature. They only seek basic decency where families can raise children in security. And they 
do not understand, Mr. Speaker, and no one in Saskatchewan can understand why this Devine government can find 
$89 million to assist an Alberta coal company to buy a Saskatchewan mine. Another big business, sweetheart deal, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Those type of policies have had adverse affects throughout, possibly even deliberate affects on us, because this 
government has stopped building houses in northern Saskatchewan for the people of northern Saskatchewan. We 
have communities where this government has boarded up as many as 13 Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
houses. Thirteen SHC houses were boarded up in Weyakwin, and in La Ronge, 30 to 35 houses boarded up. This 
has happened, Mr. Speaker, because we have an uncaring Conservative government. 
 
For the member, for the Minister of Co-ops' information, I was in the community of Weyakwin meeting with the 
local leadership where they expressed concern about a lack of housing programs initiated by your government. 
They invited me, and they invited officials of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, and they demanded to know 
why your government has stopped all housing projects. They wanted to know why, for your information, why you 
have 



 
December 6, 1984 

274 
 

boarded up 13 houses in an area where housing needs is urgent. 
 
And I have met with officials in La Ronge, my home community, and you will find, minister for consumers and 
co-operative affairs, you will find 30 to 35 houses boarded up in a community that is in dire need of houses. 
Certainly you can laugh. More than likely, more than likely, you are in no dire need of a house. 
 
All across the North, Mr. Speaker, as my friend and colleague from Athabasca has already mentioned, northern 
people are in desperate need of adequate housing programs. One of the basic human needs for a civilized life of 
dignity is basic housing. 
 
I'd like to turn now, Mr. Speaker, to forestry. Another major gap in this government's throne speech, Mr. Speaker, 
was its total neglect, this PC government's total neglect of our forestry resource across northern Saskatchewan. For 
in communities across the North, Cumberland House, La Ronge, Deschambault, Montreal Lake, I have listened to 
many of your expressions of concern in opposition to this government's policy. These people do not want the PC 
government to continue its sweetheart deals with Simpson Timber, MacMillan Bloedel, PAPCO, and other outside 
contractors from B.C. or Alberta. Instead what they want, Mr. Speaker, is real forestry opportunities for northern 
people and for northern local contractors. 
 
The Montreal Lake Indian Band, for an example, has developed a unique approach to developing the surrounding 
forestry resource. And they have done so in harmony with nature. They have done so to protect and preserve the 
forest resource for many future generations. They have done so to protect critical wildlife habitat, and they have 
managed to harvest sensitivity rather than adopt policies that work adversely against our resource. 
 
Such policy is a clear-cutting policy that industry, at this point in time, has advocated. And they have done so, Mr. 
Speaker, to use the maximum amount of local labour instead of expensive, capital machinery — a sensitive 
approach, Mr. Speaker, a very sensitive approach; an approach developed locally in the North by northern native 
people, the people of Montreal Lake; an approach, Mr. Speaker, which has been opposed and resisted by this 
government. 
 
In my concluding remarks in this throne speech debate, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to mention a few other 
reasons that this government's policies and this whole PC government are such a disappointment to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Nowhere, Mr. Speaker, does the PC government even mention the severe financial stress experienced by native 
students trying to upgrade their skills, trying to upgrade their skills and special trade qualifications in the work 
place. 
 
Nowhere does this government even acknowledge the unfair and arbitrary burden that is placed on the people of 
Creighton, Denare Beach, Beaver Lake, whose electric power costs have jumped by more than 100 per cent. 
 
Nowhere does this government even acknowledge how it has failed to meet its responsibilities to advance the 
vitally important constitution negotiations which affect, Mr. Speaker, the fundamental rights and interests of 
aboriginal people. Nowhere in that throne speech is there any mention for that special group of people. 
 
Nowhere, Mr. Speaker, does the government even acknowledge its responsibility, its responsibility to resolve 
clearly and quickly the outstanding Indian land claims. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, because this throne speech clearly reveals to us a government that is arrogant, insensitive, 
uncertain, confused, and lacking leadership, a government which is more interested in big business, in their 
corporate friends than in offering hope and dignity to the people of Saskatchewan. It is, Mr. Speaker, for all these 
reasons that I shall be opposing the main 



 
December 6, 1984 

275 
 

motion, and that I shall be supporting the amendment that was presented here by my colleague, the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. Thank you. 
 
(2000) 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON MR. HEPWORTH: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a pleasure to rise one again on behalf of the 
constituents of Weyburn and take part in this debate — the debate and address in reply to the Speech from the 
Throne. I, too, would like to join with many others of the legislature who have congratulated the mover and 
seconder, the MLA for Saskatoon Riversdale and the MLA for Last Mountain-Touchwood, who, I think, did an 
excellent job. And as well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the MLA for Saskatoon Riversdale for 
another convincing win, and I know that she will be there for a long, long time. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON MR. HEPWORTH: — I, too, Mr. Speaker, would like to congratulate you on your elevation as president of 
the Saskatchewan branch of the Commonwealth Parliamentary — or the Canadian branch of the Commonwealth 
Parliamentary Association — world, rather. 
 
And I also would like to say hello to my colleague across the way who we have not seen on a regular basis since 
we last recessed in March, and who, I'm sure, had a pleasant summer. I see by the newspaper that some had a more 
pleasant summer than others, and I think of the recent participation of many members in this House in the federal 
election, and so it was with some interest that I read of some of the exploits of some of the members opposite — 
the NDP members opposite, some of their exploits in the election campaign. And I refer to one article, I think this 
was in the Toronto Globe and Mail, where it referred to the former Saskatchewan premier, Allan Blakeney, "who 
was doing his bit to get Dartmouth voters on the NDP bandwagon yesterday, but it almost landed him in the 
paddywagon." So I can see that some had a more exciting time during the campaign than others. 
 
And as well, I see . . . I noted with interest that the leader of the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan, who was in the 
legislature the other day to listen to the throne speech, which, by the way, he said, as I recall his remark to the 
media afterwards, was that he "listened and listened and all he got out of it was a stiff neck." I suppose all I would 
say to that person is that we've listened and listened to him, and all I have out of him is a pain in the — well, I 
won't go on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to confine my comments tonight to three areas, Mr. Speaker. And the first I would like to talk on is the NDP 
agriculture policy as outlined by the Leader of the Opposition on Monday, and then I would like to, Mr. Speaker, 
spend a few moments talking about the Progressive Conservative agriculture policy, the policy of this government; 
and then spend a few minutes on some items of interest to my constituency, the constituency of Weyburn, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I would first, however, start with the NDP agricultural policy and make some comments in debate as it was raised 
by the Leader of the Opposition and the solution apparently, according to the Leader of the Opposition as he 
espoused it in debate earlier this week — Monday, Mr. Speaker, it was — was a four-point program. 
 
Some call the NDP solution a recipe for disaster; others call it blowing in the wind. On occasion we've heard it 
described as a six-point program; on occasion we've heard it described as a four-point program; we've heard it 
described as a five-point program; we've heard them talk of moratorium; we've heard them talk of per acre 
pay-outs; we heard them talking one day about, Mr. Speaker, the need for a gas rebate, a fuel rebate for farmers. 
The next day we see that they are asking for the removal of the federal taxes from farm fuel. 



 
December 6, 1984 

276 
 

One day we have them in the legislature here, snuffing out the lives of dairy farmers; the next day pretending to be 
the salvation and the saviours of the farmers. I think, Mr. Speaker, that indeed this party opposite has absolutely no 
clear direction in terms of agriculture policy. But to go into it in more detail, the four-point farm plan proposed, 
according to members opposite, the first part, of course, having some good long time ago The Family Farm 
Protection Act, an 18-month moratorium. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, we saw things like, and I guess this was from the September 26th, 1984 edition of The 
Commonwealth, and we had the hon. member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg writing to the federal Minister of 
Agriculture, newly-elected, reminding him of his promises and asking him to remove the 9 per cent federal sales 
tax on farm fuel. And wouldn't you know, by golly, it's done. It's gone, and I hope they have noted that, Mr. 
Speaker. But of course being that it was done, the opposition leader didn't happen to mention that in his farm 
policy outline for the NDP. I suppose it's a little embarrassing to admit that yes, when the Tories say they are going 
to do something and they deliver, they don't like to acknowledge it. 
 
So what did we see in the House on Monday? Well, he stood up. Now that the federal taxes were off farm fuels, 
what could he say next? What could he say next? Well, what he said was, "Now we need a rebate." Now we need a 
rebate. You know, flip-flop, literally. The point is, Mr. Speaker, and they have been harping on a 32 cent — I think 
it was — a gallon rebate for some good long time. Well, the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, the federal PC 
Tories have put in place a policy that we've have been asking for for some good long time. Certainly the Liberals 
never brought this program to bear, and it will amount to something like 48 millions of dollars in rebates to the 
people of this province, the farmers of this province. 
 
And what was the NDP rebate when we did have it, Mr. Speaker? Did it put $48 million in the pockets of 
Saskatchewan farmers? Did it put $38 million in their pockets? Did it put 20? No, Mr. Speaker. The answer is, one 
year I think it paid out 4.5 million and in one really big booming year where the average guy could actually get as 
high as $300, I think it paid out nearly $11 million, nearly $11 million. And then they did take it away. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, we note with interest that, although the Hon. Leader of the Opposition was up here on 
Monday talking about how farmers need assistance, and I note with interest a clipping from the Melville Advance 
August 29th. And in part it quotes, and they're referring to Mr. Blakeney's remarks, referring to the fact that: 
 

NDP members that have consistently represented the interests of Saskatchewan family farmers, and what a fine 
and consistent representation members opposite showed Saskatchewan farmers last spring. 

 
Do you remember, Mr. Speaker, how many farmers opposite in that NDP rank stood up in defense and spoke in 
defense of the dairy farmers out there and the dairy workers out on their strike. I remember well how many of those 
members got up and spoke on behalf of the farmers. The hon. member for Pelly, did he stand up on behalf of the 
farmers? No. His colleague, his seat-mate, the hon. member for Quill Lake, did he stand up? No. But surely, Mr. 
Speaker, the hon. MLA for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and the agriculture critic, certainly he would speak out in 
favour of Saskatchewan dairy farmers. Would he not? Would he not, Mr. Speaker? Well the truth is, Mr. Speaker, 
he never even got off his hands in that entire debate. 
 
And I suppose, Mr. Speaker, that leads me to . . . It brings me to the point where I guess I really have to agree with 
one of the comments made by a business editor of the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, and this was in the Star-Phoenix 
around September the 1st of this year, and the headline was, "NDP Farm Critic Makes Huge Fuss." I guess I have 
to agree with what she is saying here. I think she has seen through this facade, this portrayal of salvation, these 
empty kinds of promises to the farmers. And the lead line on this, Mr. Speaker, was, "NDP Agriculture Critic Allan 
Engel must think Saskatchewan farmers are stupid." That's what kind of support? Mr. 



 
December 6, 1984 

277 
 

Speaker, I guess all I can say is the people see through that party, they see through their policies, and, in fact, they 
don't have any policies. 
 
But it's not confined, Mr. Speaker, merely to the NDP in Saskatchewan. This same kind of policy vacuum occurs 
to the east of us as well. We only have to look at the Manitoba NDP government. And, Mr. Speaker, I think by 
every account and by the Farm Credit Corporation's own surveys, I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, the farm 
problem in Manitoba is every bit as serious as it is in Saskatchewan. And so I ask: what does the hon. members and 
NDP colleagues of our opposition here, what do they have in Manitoba for a farm policy? Well wouldn't you know 
it. They have a five-point program as well. 
 
Now we've heard members opposite calling for a full-blown debt moratorium. We've heard them calling for cash. 
We've heard them calling for gas rebates. But wouldn't you know it, the NDP government's farm policy in 
Manitoba has none of those. None of those at all, Mr. Speaker. Now does that mean to say, that when you're in 
government you try and be responsible, and when you're in opposition you can promise the world. Would that 
suggest that, Mr. Speaker? Or would it suggest that the NDP in Manitoba have no better feel for the farm problem 
than they do in Saskatchewan? 
 
You'll recall two and three months ago, Mr. Speaker, when members opposite were asking for the legislature to 
reconvene in Saskatchewan to deal with the farm problem. And so I ask members here tonight: if the farm problem 
is as serious in Manitoba as it is here, you would think the Manitoba legislature would be dealing with it? Well, I 
ask you: is the Manitoba legislature even sitting? And the answer is no. And do they have any intention of sitting 
and dealing with the farm problem? No. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on one hand we have the NDP being totally irresponsible in this province, living in a policy 
vacuum and certainly no attention being paid to the farm problem in Manitoba. In fact, the recent clipping from the 
Winnipeg Free Press on Thursday November 29th, describes, essentially, apparently, how the Hon. Minister of 
Agriculture there is handling foreclosures. And I quote, Uruski said: "he has promise to review the three 
foreclosures the Manitoba Agriculture Credit Corporation is involved in." But he stopped short of halting them. 
Apparently, we're going to have a one-man review board in Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, and that review board will be 
their minister. Now that would certainly be apolitical by every count, Mr. Speaker, apolitically by every count. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, we can look at the recent NDP annual meeting. And this headline in a recent issue of the 
Leader-Post, at the time of the convention, headlined, "they debated and debated," and so on and so on and so on. 
And among the resolutions, Mr. Speaker, not one thing new. A few references in a veiled sort of way to land bank. 
The same old stuff. No talk of their four-point, or five-point, or six-point program there. Just the same old land 
bank stuff. 
 
I would like to suggest, Mr. Speaker, in reviewing what the NDP's real policy is. I would like to suggest, Mr. 
Speaker, that they are really like a heroin addict. They're always looking, they're always looking for the fix. The 
easy fix to remove them from reality. The easy way out, the quick fix. They want to shoot up with the easy answer. 
They're a bunch of junkies, and they need a sugar-daddy to keep them going. They are always looking for a easy 
fix, the quick fix. They can't cope with the fundamental analysis and a fundamental grasping of the problem. 
 
(2015) 
 
But let's go into their policies in more details, enunciated by the Leader of the Opposition on Monday last. He says: 
"We should, as a government, put in place a full-blown debt moratorium legislation, not only involving 
foreclosures on land, but as well, seizures and sell-offs and freeze everything," he says. He says, Mr. Speaker: 
"Screw down the jaws of life on that small-business community out there. Every small-business man, whether he 
be in the implement dealer 



 
December 6, 1984 

278 
 

business, whether he be a fertilizer dealer, a chemical dealer, a fuel dealer, never mind — he's in small business, 
and squeeze him. 
 
But just a minute, Mr. Speaker. Did we not hear them, not that many days ago, talking about how they represented 
the interests of small-business men in Saskatchewan? Another flip-flop. On one hand, they say, on one day: yes, 
we represent and know what small business means in this province, and we are going to help them. And the next 
day they want to snuff the life out of them, given the hard times that exist in farm communities. They want to split 
the farmer and the farm community apart. They want to drive a wedge between the farmer and those rural business 
people and townspeople that they live and work with, and play ball with, and curl with in the winter-time. They 
want to drive a wedge between the farmer and his community by snuffing the life out of those small-business men. 
But they do say they speak for small business. 
 
And let's look at their second plank in this four or five or six-point program, Mr. Speaker. The Hon. Leader of the 
Opposition got up and said, "You Tories should make a $30 per acre, $30 per cultivated acre payment. Farmers out 
there need some cash." And certainly they do, Mr. Speaker. But they said, "You should make a $30 per acre, per 
cultivated acre, payment. You should quit giving those big-business oil companies, those friends of yours, those 
$150 million tax holidays, and take that money and make a $30 per cultivated acre pay-out." Well you know, Mr. 
Speaker that sounds not all that bad. I'm sure, as a farmer, I would like a $30 per cultivated acre payment. One 
hundred and fifty million dollars, Mr. Speaker — I don't know how much of a dent, quite frankly, that would make 
in a 600 million or a billion dollar problem. But certainly I think a lot of farmers would think, yes, that sounds 
good. I can always use that money. 
 
So on the surface, Mr. Speaker, it does sound good. I think it would probably sound good if I was farming in 
Meadow Lake, or in Forget in my part of the country, or in Gravelbourg, or in Nipawin, or wherever. It sounds 
good — $30 an acre. So I decided, Mr. Speaker, that yes, perhaps this should be an option. But then I started to 
check the arithmetic, and that's where it started to fall apart. That's where this easy fix fell apart. We have, Mr. 
Speaker, in this country, just short of 50 million acres of cultivated land, times $30 an acre. What does that equal? 
It equals 1.5 billions of dollars, Mr. Speaker. Not 150 million. It's 1.5 billion. 
 
Here we are faced again with a situation, Mr. Speaker, of when you come to deal with the truth and the facts and 
the reality, it's quite different than the mirage that they try to portray. So then that brings the question up, Mr. 
Speaker — I'm sure they knew what the true cost was — so how would they pay for it? Well we know, Mr. 
Speaker, that today, at least by the estimates that were presented in this House, that income tax in this province 
brings in something just slightly in excess of 700 million of dollars. Now it would seem to me if they are going to 
raise $1.5 billion to make this pay-out, what that would mean then to the taxpayers of this province is your income 
tax now will not be 50 or 52 per cent of the federal income tax, it will now rise to 156 per cent of federal tax. 
 
Well they say no, we wouldn't raise taxes. And doesn't this sound a little bit like Walter Mondale? We won't raise 
taxes, but maybe we'll have to let the deficit rise. Well what would that mean, Mr. Speaker? Would the deficit go 
up by 150 million? No, Mr. Speaker, the deficit would double. So now we have a party, Mr. Speaker, who, if you 
analyze it, the true colours show through. This is the old Mondale Democrats in disguise raising taxes. That's what 
they have in mind for the taxpayers of this province, Mr. Speaker, is raising taxes, and not by 5 per cent or 8 per 
cent; we're talking about raising taxes by 100 or 200 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take this argument a little further to even indicate the folly of it, really. Because, on the 
surface, Mr. Speaker, it would be nice, and it would be easy — it would be irresponsible as well, if you have a 
billion dollar farm problem, to throw a billion dollars at it. But, Mr. Speaker, would that really correct the 
fundamentals of agriculture? And I don't care whether you're talking about weather, about low commodity prices 
world-wide, and poor markets, international money situations. 



 
December 6, 1984 

279 
 

Only a couple of years ago, Mr. Speaker, in the U.S. of A., they threw $20 billion at the agriculture sector. And I 
would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that there are some states in that country today that have a farm problem that's 
maybe even worse than the kinds of problems we're experiencing here in our farm sector today. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, as much as I or the other members might like to come up with a billion dollars or 150 million or whatever 
to fix the farm problem, it isn't that easy; it isn't that simple; and it isn't a quick fix. 
 
I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, the NDP junkies are out of touch with reality. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that 
there is no quick fix for the farm problem. There is no black magic. You cannot take this problem and wrap it up 
into a neat little box and say, Mr. Speaker, this is the problems in the farm sector today. Similarly, any attempt with 
a 4-point, 5-point, or 6-point program to say that you can wrap up the solution to this problem in a neat, little box is 
equally as erroneous a conclusion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the farmers out there in Saskatchewan today are looking for, they're looking for a government 
that's prepared to deal in facts and reality. They're looking for a government that will deal with well thought-out 
policies, not simply a knee-jerk reaction. 
 
We heard the Hon. Leader of the Opposition say, because we've heard this as well over the farm sector, that we 
should address the interest rates. In fact, he said on page 50 of the Hansard record this past Monday, and I quote: 
 

the provincial government should provide a shelter or write-down for the farmers caught in the massive interest 
rate increase of the 1980 period. 

 
And I asked members of this House: who was in government in 1980? Why was there not an 8 per cent farm 
purchase program put in place? Why not, Mr. Speaker? Why not there? Why not, Mr. Speaker? Why not there? 
Why not, Mr. Speaker? 
 
If we'd have had, Mr. Speaker, if we'd have ad, Mr. Speaker, an 8 per cent program in place in the House in days of 
the 70s and the early 80s when interest rates were at 16 and 19 and 22 per cent, I would suggest to you and the 
members of this House that we might not have some of those farmers in trouble today. 
 
But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, members opposite have not been one to consult, to visit, to talk, to canvass the 
views of all the players in the farm sector, the farmer and the farm service sector alike, and of course that's why you 
see them calling for a full-blown, extreme, debt moratorium situation that would hurt very deeply that farm service 
sector. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are members on this side of the House, colleagues sitting beside me and around me who 
have taken the time over the past two months to canvass the views of others, members of our caucus, our Premier, 
Minister of Finance — and what have we heard, Mr. Speaker? We have heard a wide range of opinions and views 
and possible solutions, and as I said before, and I say again, everything has been an option. 
 
We heard some out there say, we heard some out there say, do nothing. We heard them say, do nothing, because 
they said some of those young fellows, and not so young fellows, that have got themselves in trouble bought too 
much land when they shouldn't have been. They paid too much for it when they shouldn't have been paying so 
much for it. Land bank was competing with them and driving the prices up, albeit. 
 
They said some of these young fellows out there, and not so young fellows, bought more equipment than they 
needed and paid for bigger equipment than they needed. They've even said some took holidays and bought satellite 
dishes that they shouldn't have. 



 
December 6, 1984 

280 
 

On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, — and I suppose one could say that some of them did get themselves in trouble — 
on the other hand, Mr. Speaker, apart from that group that said to do nothing, let the chips fall where they may 
because they did get themselves into their own kettle if you like. We had others, and in this group I would include 
on the far extreme on the other side, we had some out there, like the NDP and the NFU, say we must have a 
full-blown, debt moratorium legislation. 
 
Well, they tried to point out earlier, Mr. Speaker, and we had everything in between, we heard everything in 
between as well. On one extreme we heard, do nothing; on the other extreme we had the NDP extreme, the 
full-blown debt moratorium legislation. 
 
As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, there is no neat package to the problem. There is no neat, packageable solution. 
Public thinking, in fact, has not even crystallized on this, and that's why you get such a wide range of views. But I 
want to tell you where this government came to. We came, not from this extreme, and not from this extreme, but 
we came to that common sense middle-ground view. And that first piece of legislation that is suggestive of that 
very sensible middle ground is Bill 1 that is, in fact, before this legislature today. 
 
But one must not view that in isolation because it, by itself, is no black magic nor no quick fix. We will continue to 
attack input costs, whether they be interest rates . . .  
 
We are happy to see that the federal taxes on farm fuels have been lifted. And what else did we hear out there, Mr. 
Speaker, when we canvassed views? We heard, "Fix up the safety nets that exist. Fix up those insurance 
programs." And fix them we have done. 
 
And I would like to congratulate, if he was here in this House tonight, the minister in charge of crop insurance for 
making crop insurance what people wanted. I would like to congratulate the Hon. Charlie Mayer, the minister in 
charge of the wheat board in Ottawa, for his common sense judgement and his commitment to look at making an 
interim payment of the Western Grains Stabilization Fund, one that will be in the hands of farmers before this 
spring. And I would like to congratulate my federal colleague in Ottawa for their commitment to look at 
Agribonds, capital gains tax, and section 31. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what I am saying is that we must look at the cash flow, the cost-price squeeze, and Bill 1, and the 
safety net programs, as all part of a package, because there is no one simple single quick fix as hon. members 
opposite would have us believe. 
 
We will, Mr. Speaker, continue to take the common sense approach. We will give those productive farmers, who 
may have been farming eight, or nine, or 10 years, who are saddled with burdensome debts, some breathing room. 
We will give them an opportunity to get through this down cycle. We will give the farmers of this province, and 
the communities where those farmers work, and live, and pay bills — we will give them security, and confidence, 
and hope, because there is some, Mr. Speaker, fear and despair. And we will deal in reality, and we will deal in 
facts, and we will not deal in pie in the sky $1.5 billion hand-outs, when they know, and you know, and we know 
that that is not a realistic alternative. And any suggestion that it is, if it is, means that taxes will go up, and the 
deficit will double. That's what it means. We will give security and confidence and hope, and, Mr. Speaker, the sky 
is not falling in, as the NDP would have us believe. 
 
I see the hon. member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg braying from the benches. And, Mr. Speaker, when it comes 
to full-blown debt moratorium legislation, the one thing that they haven't told us about in the remarks either by the 
Leader of the Opposition or the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, the agriculture critic, today in this House 
when he spoke — they haven't told us when they brought in debt moratorium legislation in 1971, The Family Farm 
Protection Act, which by the way, Mr. Speaker, the minister who carried it that day called it an "experimental Bill." 
An experimental Bill and it was an experiment all right, an experiment that 



 
December 6, 1984 

281 
 

crushed the implement dealers. That's the kind of experiment it was. We have learned from experiments. 
 
(2030) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when that Bill was introduced, did they put any cash on the table for the farmers then? Did they 
put any cash? Did they make a $30 an acre pay-out, Mr. Speaker? No, they did not. But here's what they said they 
would do, and here's what they said they would do, and I quote from page 583 of the Hansard of the day. August 
9th, 1971, and I quote the hon. member who today is the agriculture critic in this House. And as he ended his 
speech he said, and I quote: "The third reason the farmer needs this Family Farm Protection Act," that is the 
full-blown debt moratorium legislation, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The third reason the farmer needs this Family Farm Protection Act on a short-term basis is that we have to help 
him hold the fort until the really big guns arrive. 

 
Now I'm reading that first sentence, I thought to myself, what were the "big guns" because I couldn't recall any, Mr. 
Speaker. And he went on to say: 
 

There is one program that would put him on his feet (him being the farmer) without having this big axe handing 
over his head. 

 
And the next line, Mr. Speaker, I almost fell down on the floor with laughter. And it went like this: 
 

The program I'm speaking about is this Land Bank Commission. It will take some time to set up this program, 
but this time is worth buying. 

 
Well, the annals of history, Mr. Speaker, the annals of history, Mr. Speaker, speak well for what the land bank 
commission did in this province. It drove up land prices 700 per cent, and in 10 years of operation helped only 
2,800 farmers out there. And of that 2,800 farmers, 152 went on to become owners of some of that land that they 
were leasing. 
 
But that was the "big gun." No cash; that was the "big gun" in 1971. We'll bring in a land bank, and instead of you 
owning the land, we'll own it. You certainly couldn't get foreclosed on it if the state owned it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think enough said, Mr. Speaker, about the NDP policy and its shortcomings. I would like now to spend a few 
minutes on why the hon. members opposite should be worried and, in fact, what some sensible policies look like, 
policies that have been put forth by this government, this PC government. And, Mr. Speaker, when I looked at 
what I thought I might say in this regard, I had to think, and hence, I had to bring out the pamphlet that for the most 
part was responsible for what has been called, on April 26th, 1982, as the Monday night massacre. And that was 
the night, Mr. Speaker, when of course, 56 PC MLAs behind their leader, the Premier of this province, Hon. Grant 
Devine, became government in this province. 
 
And part of the program and part of the pamphlets that went out in the last weeks of that campaign was one called 
"Commitment," and I referred to this in one of my first speeches when I sat over there as Legislative Secretary. I 
referred to this in one of the first speeches in this House, and the brochure was entitled "Commitment," and that's 
exactly what this government is all about. 
 
And although it talks about many things, eliminate the gas tax, and improved health care as my hon. colleague, the 
Minister of Health has done so well at, and a thirteen and a quarter per cent Mortgage Interest Reduction Program 
which to this day continues; one of the major tenets of this policy platform of this commitment, was this, Mr. 
Speaker, and I quote. It said, "Protect and 



 
December 6, 1984 

282 
 

preserve the family farm." That's what our government stood for when it was elected in 1982, and that's what we 
stand for today. 
 
And the Bill that's before this House at this very moment is part of us protecting and preserving the family farm. 
We said it then; we said it now. We kept our promises then, and I would suggest to the hon. members opposite that 
a government that keeps its promises is a government that the people will keep. And you have every reason to be 
worried by our commitment. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, let's look back and say to ourselves what in terms of agriculture policy today . . . Let's reflect 
over the last two and a half years, let's reflect over the last two and a half years. Two and a half years ago, Mr. 
Speaker, could a young farmer get 8 per cent money in this province to buy farm land, or irrigation equipment, or 
livestock? Could a young farmer get 8 per cent money, Mr. Speaker? I ask you, and the answer, of course, is no. 
But today, Mr. Speaker, two and a half years later, we have over 3,500 young farmers, one-half of them first time 
farmers, who have had an opportunity to start farming because of that 8 per cent money because of a Tory Farm 
Purchase Program, a promise that was made, a promise that was delivered. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, we hear lots of talk, even today and in this House today, about how tough it is in the 
farm economy. And I would just remind everyone here that every week that the Farm Purchase Program is in place, 
more new young farmers get started in this province by far, by far every week, Mr. Speaker, than those who go 
bankrupt or are foreclosed on a monthly or yearly basis. More young farmers started with this program than any 
other program in the history of this province. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Speaker, two and a half years ago, two and a half years ago were there any measures to provide 
some tax relief for farmers? Were there any measures like these home quarter tax rebates that puts $14 million 
back into the hands of rural Saskatchewan? Were farmers being charged E&H tax on their electrical bills? Yes, 
they were, but are they today? No, not today. And could, Mr. Speaker, could farmers invest in agriculture and 
receive a tax credit? 
 
You know they could invest in days gone by in MURBs, and cinemas, and RRSPs, and all those kinds of things 
and get tax breaks, but nobody had every thought to give a tax break to agriculture until the Devine government 
came along. And today, Mr. Speaker, they can get a tax break that will reduce their provincial income tax right 
down to zero in this province with the Livestock Investment Tax Credit that's working today in this province. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, two and a half years ago if you were a farmer and wanted to run a grain dryer with natural gas, or 
to heat your pig barn with natural gas, or to run your house with natural gas, or to heat your house with natural gas, 
was there a program that provided, number 1, low cost 8 per cent money to put rural gas in them, or was there even 
a rural natural gas program in place? And once again, Mr. Speaker, the answer is no. 
 
But today in Saskatchewan we have hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of farmers who have been serviced 
under the rural natural gas program, and I applaud my colleague, the hon. member from Yorkton, the minister in 
charge of Sask Power, for that kind of program. And I have had more than one constituent come and tell me that he 
has recovered his costs in less than a year by switching over to natural gas — his heating costs. Another promise 
kept; another promise working. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Speaker, two and a half years ago, were there insurance schemes in this province that were 
sensitive and meaningful? Did we have a feeder cattle insurance program? Did we have a crop insurance program? 
 
And this is something that the hon. member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg should be sensitive to, because he 
knows there have been inadequacies in the crop insurance program for years and years and years, inadequacies that 
the NDP government never addressed. He has heard, I have 



 
December 6, 1984 

283 
 

heard, all these members have heard about the fact that the scheme that was in place to buy crop insurance 
coverage always reduced everyone to the lowest common denominator. So the farmer who wanted to use 
chemicals and fertilizers, and whose yields on average were consistently higher than others, couldn't really buy any 
meaningful insurance. 
 
Well, now, thanks to our colleague, the Hon. Gerald Muirhead, and the Hon. John Wise in Ottawa, we have today 
farmers in this province who can have the option of 80 per cent coverage, individual coverage. And, Mr. Speaker, 
in terms of fixing up the safety net in these difficult times, I would suggest to you that that is one very important 
program, and something that has been called for for some good long time. 
 
I could go on, Mr. Speaker. Two and a half years ago, did we have the commitment to research in this province that 
we have today? And the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, when he put out his farm policy, didn't mention soil, didn't 
mention water management, didn't mention soil conservation. 
 
And I could go on about the policies that my hon. colleagues have developed through Sask. Water, and the 
irrigation programs where we have brought more land under irrigation in one year than happened in the past in two 
and three years. Programs that are working, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then that doesn't even touch some sector-specific ones, where, when you've had individual or community hurt, 
we've been prepared to address it. And I think of things like our emergency pay-out for lamb producers, our 
programs for livestock producers this past summer, whether it be for pasture, for water, or for winter feed stuffs. I 
refer to the programs where we helped out those farmers in the north-east who had been flooded year after year. 
Sector-specific help where they needed it, Mr. Speaker, compassion and understanding. 
 
And for those farmers who could not get operating loans, an operating loan guarantee program, a program when we 
brought it in Mr. Speaker, we said, "We will put $4 million in this fund, operated by farmers but funded by the 
government." 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg says that's a good program, and I will tell him that 
that program has been successful beyond our wildest dreams, in that not has there been $4 million guaranteed, Mr. 
Speaker, but the number today is closer to 8 millions of dollars. Not 4 million, but 8 million. And the hon. member 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . . I see I've hit a nerve, Mr. Speaker. And we've dealt with grasshoppers, and we've 
dealt with wheat midge as we had to. 
 
One other thing I would like to mention, Mr. Speaker. One other thing I would like to mention is in terms of 
specific programs, is the Prairie Livestock Drought Program, Mr. Speaker, the Prairie Livestock Drought Program. 
And this program is a typical example of how things can work for the betterment of all western Canadian farmers, 
in fact, when governments co-operate and work together. And it's something we haven't seen in this country for a 
good long time. And thanks to that recent fall election when we now have a federal government in place that for 
the first time in a good long time represents every part of this country. 
 
And not only that, Mr. Speaker, we have a Minister of Agriculture down there who is sensitive and understands our 
problems. And it wasn't two weeks that he'd assumed office and he was out here and with my colleagues from 
Alberta and Manitoba, signed a $60 million Prairie Livestock Drought Agreement. Co-operation, Mr. Speaker, 
working on behalf of farmers together for farmers. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I could talk about the co-operation we've received at recent ministers' meeting where we 
discussed farm financing. There's been numerous reports in the media about the positive attitude, if you like, of 
governments working together, lauding the steps of the three prairie provincial governments in co-ordinating our 
efforts. And in fact, of course, as the stock 



 
December 6, 1984 

284 
 

growers president in this province has said himself, referring to the prairie livestock program, Mr. Yahnke, and I 
quote out of a Star-Phoenix of August 15th. Yahnke praised the aid program for its universality and added his 
association doesn't believe the government should pay the total cost of the drought. The program leaves the 
management decisions to the producer, Mr. Speaker. A program well received. 
 
And I'm sure there are members in this House who recall how the NDP in opposition today, when they were in 
government, how they responded to the drought. Remember they had the fencing program. And I would suggest to 
you, Mr. Speaker, there are piles and piles of fence material today still stacked up out there under that ill-conceived 
program. Or that feed freight assistance program that they had. The feed freight assistance where everybody 
benefited but the farmer. Where everybody benefited but the farmer. 
 
And this has been what's made this program so successful, Mr. Speaker. It's been cash in the hands of the livestock 
producers. And they're the ones that know what is the least cost option for them and what to do. 
 
But this federal co-operation did not stop there, Mr. Speaker. It did not stop there. What else have we seen? And I'll 
go through these relatively quickly, although they do deserve time. What else have we seen? Well we've heard the 
opposition opposite bring about cuts and freezes. Cuts and freezes. Cuts at the federal government level. Well I'll 
tell you, Mr. Speaker, I was never so happy to see some of the cuts that were made by Michael Wilson's economic 
statement. One of their first cuts was: they cut the federal taxes off farm fuel, $48 million in rebates, 28 cents a 
gallon, something in that range, in rebates ultimately for the farmers out there. Money in the pockets. 
 
What was one of the other cuts, Mr. Speaker? Well, they cut the seaway toll increase on the Great Lakes, another 
$2 million saving for western Canadian farmers. What was another one of their freezes and cuts, Mr. Speaker? 
Well, they froze Farm Credit Corporation foreclosures until the new minister had a chance to get a handle on the 
situation down there. And what was the other major cut, Mr. Speaker, the other one that, interestingly enough, we 
haven't heard any braying from the opposition ranks on? And that was they cut Canagrex, a move that was 
applauded by virtually everyone in western Canada, because it was an unnecessary duplication in the first place. 
Now if these are an example of cuts, Mr. Speaker, I say give us more of them. 
 
And one other freeze . . . And I'm sure the hon. member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg would have mentioned this 
one today, but he did not in his agriculture policy statement. They froze rail line abandonments, and that directly 
affected him in his constituency, Mr. Speaker. And he should have got up and acknowledged it with thanks. But he 
prefers to overlook the fuel tax rebate, the federal tax remover. He prefers to overlook those things, as did the 
Leader of the Opposition when he gave his policy statement. They prefer to overlook these positive moves. 
 
But it doesn't end there, Mr. Speaker. They also prefer to overlook the fact that one of the first moves that the Hon. 
Charles Mayer made was a move that put several tens of millions of dollars into farmers' pockets. And that was 
moving the initial price of barley from 2.39 to 2.72. And then the Hon. Leader of the Opposition in his policy 
statement said we need a massive pay-out under the western grain stabilization — $250 million, I think, was the 
term he used. Obviously, he was not aware of the fact that the cheques were in the mail for the final part of a $223 
million pay-out to farmers. And I've got mine. I'm sure my colleague and seat-mate here has got his, and my 
colleague back here, and my colleague behind me. 
 
(2045) 
 
And I'm going to tell the Leader of the Opposition that the Hon. Charles Mayer is not going to stop there, and that 
this spring before the crops are seeded I have no doubt that there will be a payment that is even more substantial 
than what farmers have seen this spring. And that is the 



 
December 6, 1984 

285 
 

kind of payment that's going to go a long way to putting in the crops, and paying the fuel dealers, and the fertilizer 
dealers, and the chemical dealers, and that farm service sector that they want to squash the life out of. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — But they didn't stop there, Mr. Speaker. Another $35 million for Saskatchewan 
farmers by adjusting the computation of how the domestic milling price is set, another $35 million in the hands of 
Saskatchewan farmers. But, Mr. Speaker, did the Leader of the Opposition, who enunciated agriculture policy 
earlier this week, mention that? No. Once again looking for the quick fixes, the junkies out of touch with reality. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I've already talked about the Agribonds and the capital gains tax and section 31. And, Mr. 
Speaker, did the Hon. Leader of the Opposition talk about trade and developing markets in his agriculture policy, 
or research, or soil conservation, or water management? No. But, Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier and my 
Legislative Secretary, the MLA for Saltcoats, Walter Johnson, know what it means to develop markets and to 
penetrate in trading areas. And the most recent one, and one that was announced just during Agribition, and I must 
congratulate my Legislative Secretary and the Deputy Premier. 
 
Bulgaria buys 430 beef cattle. I want to tell you the story behind this one, Mr. Speaker, because those members 
over there have criticized this government for going and knocking on doors and getting deals. They've criticized us 
for setting up offices in Vienna because they don't want us to sell and be successful. Well, I want to tell those 
members opposite about this Bulgarian deal. Because I have, as has my colleague, I have had, on more than one 
occasion, chance to have lunch and dinner with the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Petkov from Bulgaria, and one of 
his officials, Professor Hinkovski. And, Mr. Speaker, when they came over here, what were they looking for? I 
think it was something in the neighbourhood of 50 head. Fifty head, Mr. Speaker. And what is the deal? What did 
we send them home with? Four hundred and thirty head, Mr. Speaker. And, I'll bet . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — And I will bet, Mr. Speaker, that they'll be back for more. They've had shipments 
in the past. I'll bet they'll be back for more, and my hon. colleague, my Legislative Secretary, Walter Johnson, is off 
to close that deal this December, and I wish him well on his trip. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think I've enunciated what a true agriculture policy looks like, and, before I close, I would like 
to spend a few minutes — and I didn't save my constituency for the last, Mr. Speaker, but I do want to spend a few 
moments talking about the very important part of my role here as MLA for Weyburn. I'm just going to walk you 
through a quick history, if you like, of the last 11 months in Weyburn constituency. I've had constituency tours and 
things have been happening down there, Mr. Speaker, and I think they're worth noting. And I'll give you a quick 
walk through of some of the things as seen through the eyes of the local newspaper there, the Weyburn Review. 
 
The first headline, Mr. Speaker — and this is a review, a year-end review, if you like, since we are into December 
— and what's happening in the Weyburn constituency. Headline, July 11, '84: "Twenty-one and a half million oil 
test project." Headline: "First in Canada", Mr. Speaker, jobs for people in my constituency. "South-east remains oil 
lease leader", thanks to my colleague the minister in charge of energy and mines in this province. 
 
My hon. colleague, the minister in charge of tourism, and that very innovative Venture Capital Corporation, 
spearheaded by a fellow by the name of Tom Hanley in the community. "Details unveiled of recreation complex", a 
joint funding proposal, Mr. Speaker, between the private sector and the public sector in Weyburn, Saskatchewan, 
building a community facility. "Chinese 



 
December 6, 1984 

286 
 

visitors at Weyburn Inland Terminal", Mr. Speaker. Another part of this market penetration and developing 
markets, and I'm very thankful to the people in Weyburn Inland Terminal for helping us host our very important 
visitors from China. 
 
Another headline, Mr. Speaker: "$26 million for cattlemen." Aid for those needing aid, Mr. Speaker. "Oil project is 
okayed." And here is one that I am particularly proud of, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to thank my hon. colleague, 
Graham Taylor, the Minister of Health, for this, because it's been a thing that's been a gnawing, a gnawing problem 
for some good long time in my area, and that's the issue of nursing homes and hospitals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Not only have we opened, in my constituency, a new nursing home in the city of Weyburn, but my colleague, the 
Minister of Health, was out and turned dirt on a new nursing home in Stoughton, and, Mr. Speaker, we have every 
reason to believe that Fillmore will receive a special care, integrated nursing home hospital facility, something that 
they've been wanting, I think, Mr. Speaker, for something in excess of 10 years. I say thanks to my colleague, the 
Hon. Minister of Health. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — And it goes on. And it goes on, Mr. Speaker. Stoughton gets $42,200 recreation 
grant, new dam dedicated, the city of Weyburn has their new dam. The bridge, the proverbial bridge in down town 
Weyburn that causes problems every time it floods there, a new bridge opened up that will help some of those 
problems. The Water Corporation, an important aspect of Weyburn, obviously, with the Souris river running 
through it, and the Souris river basin part of where Weyburn is located, opened the office down there. 
 
"South-East helped the province break drill record", and the headlines go on. And here's another one, Mr. Speaker, 
that all members of the House will be particularly interested in — "First Saskatchewan Oil Show to be here next 
June," here being Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, something that we can all look forward to. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — And another one, another one, Mr. Speaker, "Oil activity, economic booms." "Jobs 
in south-east Saskatchewan." "True to prediction, South-east leads sales." That's the oil land sales, Mr. Speaker. 
"Help for stock producers." "3.600 jobs for youth contained in the budget," Mr. Speaker. "A water system for north 
Weyburn," and here I'd have to congratulate my colleague, the Minister in charge of Supply and Services. The 
Western Christian College, a very fundamental part of the Weyburn community, now has a new water system, a 
project that had been on hold for years and years and years, Mr. Speaker. Twenty-eight million dollars, or rather 
$2.88 million Sask Power contract to one of the big employers in my town, Canada Wire and Cable — jobs for my 
people in Weyburn constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And here's another one: the Minister of Health, we've had hundreds of thousands of square feet of vacant space in 
the Souris Valley for years and years and years, Mr. Speaker, and now, thanks to the Hon. Minister of Health and 
his Legislative Secretary, Larry Birkbeck, we've had a space study down there, and somebody is finally getting 
their head around that vacant space. Payments of up to $2,100 per farmer, and I could go on, Mr. Speaker, but I 
won't, because that's what's happening in Weyburn constituency, Mr. Speaker. That's what's happening, and I know 
where there's some vacant space when it comes to agriculture policy, and it's right across there. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Right across there. There was nothing. There was nothing on trade. There was 
nothing on research. There was nothing on soil conservation. A vacant gap when it comes to policy. 



 
December 6, 1984 

287 
 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would like to end up on a rather sombre note. I would like to end up on a rather sombre note 
because there is no question, Mr. Speaker, that the agricultural community out there today is having its difficulties. 
But I would say, Mr. Speaker, that this is not new for this province. We have had our ups and our downs before. 
We have had our cycles, but we have one thing going for us — we have a very resilient and dedicated people. Farm 
people are some of the finest people in the world, Mr. Speaker. And just to make my point, Mr. Speaker, about 
how resilient people do get through cycles, I would like to share with the members of this legislature a few excerpts 
taken from my grandmother's diary through the years '30-35. 
 
Through the years '30-35, and I think all members will know and agree that those years were part of a very tough 
cycle. And because they survived, we today farm some of that land — and it is some of the most productive land in 
the world when it comes to crop and livestock production. And I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that although 
we have some tough times, maybe, to some degree, all that has changed is the names, the dates, and the places a 
little bit. And let's look . . . And I'll just share a few excerpts with you. 
 
We go back to April 1930, and what was my grandmother writing in her very private and confidential diary then? 
"Thousands of acres blown out." Is that not somewhat reminiscent of what was happening on some of the wheat 
plains this spring, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Or a little later, the next year, she said: "Been a terrible dust storm all night. Cannot see anywhere, cannot see any 
buildings." In that same year, a little later: "The cutworms and grasshoppers have eaten all our stubble crops." And 
certainly many members here will know the kind of grasshopper problem we had this past summer. 
 
August 18, 1930: "Too discouraged with the dry season to write more. No money for our work, just debts which 
we cannot pay." And still later: "We got hailed out on the homestead. The grandest looking crop — 80 per cent and 
90 per cent, all the oats gone. Disgusted with farming." 
 
We had hail this summer too, Mr. Speaker, and it did make some disgusted with farming. In fact, today I farm that 
homestead land, and even with less than two inches of rain we pulled off a crop of 28 bushels an acre. But to know 
how exasperated they must have felt, Mr. Speaker, and to put this next quote in context, you must know that my 
grandmother was one of the finest Christian women that ever lived. And when she had been hailed out on the 
homestead and was disgusted with farming, the despair that she must have felt when she wrote: "Must be the 
Devil's work. No crop, no money, getting tired of waiting for the crop we never get. Everything needs replacing. 
Cannot stand many more." 
 
Well, as I said, Mr. Speaker, my grandmother was one of the finest Christian people that ever lived. However, she 
did have one fault. April 10, 1935: "Had a Liberal meeting here. Set 120 eggs in incubator." Now, I don't know 
whether there's any relationship between the two. 
 
"First rain in 10 months," was a quotation in May of 1929. But here, Mr. Speaker, is the essence, I believe, of what 
Saskatchewan is all about. There's a couple of quotations made almost at the height of the depression in 1934, June 
5th: "We still live in hope, a great country, and great people to be able to live in it with." 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with a very great deal of pride and pleasure that I support the main motion. Thank you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HODGINS: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible) . . . I would like to congratulate the Minister of 
Agriculture on his very lengthy and inspiring speech. It is indeed my pleasure to be involved with this very talented 
man who . . . (inaudible) . . . 



 
December 6, 1984 

288 
 

Mr. Speaker, I am a capital "C" Conservative. I believe in free enterprise. I believe in the pioneer heritage that work 
and family are at the centre of our lives. I believe that these ideals are the foundation of our dignity as a free people. 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to be a Conservative. That is why I am in public life serving as the MLA for 
Melfort constituency. 
 
I support the goals and vision of the government of Premier Grant Devine. I support the policies, I support the 
programs, of this Progressive Conservative government. And for these reasons, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to speak 
in support of the Speech from the Throne. 
 
In the early part of this century, pioneers came to Saskatchewan seeking a promised land, seeking freedom. They 
believed in hard work and personal initiative. These same ideals and belief in freedom led to a massive rejection of 
an administration that had tried to destroy those ideals during the 1970s. 
 
Since 1982, thanks to the leadership of the Conservative government, the yoke of big government has been 
removed from around the necks of people in this province. 
 
In the spring of 1982 this Progressive Conservative government launched a new challenge in the history of 
Saskatchewan. They promised to all people in this province a new beginning, one filled with hope and promise, 
lasting prosperity, and a return to basic family values. 
 
Today, the people of Saskatchewan are benefiting from Premier Devine's strong leadership and vision. 
Saskatchewan is looking to the future with optimism and confidence. Opportunity, hard work, and faith in God and 
family are the building blocks of our future. 
 
This government has worked to restore basic principles and values for Saskatchewan. The Premier of our province 
is a leader all citizens can trust. As a result of his leadership, Saskatchewan is standing tall in the eyes of all of 
Canada. 
 
This is a good time, Mr. Speaker, for me to stop and review the record of performance of your Progressive 
Conservative government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Perhaps we can start with taxes. One key to economic growth is to see that taxpayers are not burdened with high 
taxes. That's why we have had tax reductions instead of tax increases. Basic tax rates have not increased here. We 
have made selective tax cuts along with tax credit measures that will stimulate economic growth. 
 
(2100) 
 
There has been no increase in personal income tax or in sales tax. We removed the sales tax from the household 
electricity bill. There is now no provincial gasoline tax, no provincial corporation tax on small manufacturing or 
processing firms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for years there has been talk of an oil upgrader for Saskatchewan. Your Conservative government has 
now signed agreements that will lead to the construction of two oil upgraders, one in Regina and one in 
Lloydminster. 
 
These, Mr. Speaker, will be massive economic projects. They will help thousands of families, individuals, and 
Saskatchewan businesses. Ipsco in Regina will be called upon to provide pipe for the thousands of wells to be 
drilled and for the upgraders themselves. This will create an enormous amount of work for Ipsco. Mr. Speaker, 
energy is one of the strengths here in Saskatchewan. These two upgraders will help to build on our strengths. 
 
I think the programs we have brought in for senior citizens, as well, have been particularly good. We doubled the 
payment for single seniors under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. I believe 



 
December 6, 1984 

289 
 

we raised it from $25 to $50. We raised the couples' rate from $45 to $75. I think it's important to know that those 
people had received only one increase since 1975. 
 
We recently announced a new home repair program to help them maintain their independent living. Under that 
program, seniors who own their homes may receive a grant of up to $1,000 to help repair them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for years seniors have been requesting a foot-care program. Now, for the first time ever, we have a 
province-wide foot-care program, and most recently, I was very pleased to take part in the opening of a Rocky 
Mountain Civic Health Centre. 
 
Our new bond program enables Saskatchewan people to invest in the future of our province by purchasing power 
bonds. That bond is guaranteed by the provincial government. I understand it will earn 11.5 per cent interest on 
your investment. Saskatchewan Power bonds have been sold at local banks, credit unions and trust companies for 
as little as $100. In approximately two weeks, $60 million worth of Saskatchewan Power bonds were sold. This 
only reinforces our government's belief that the citizens of Saskatchewan want to participate in the development of 
this province. 
 
It has always been our purpose, Mr. Speaker, to shield people from damaging economic forces beyond their 
control. That was why we introduced the Mortgage Interest Reduction Program in 1982. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. We're having difficulty hearing the member. There's something evidently 
wrong with your microphone. I'm going to ask the control to turn on the microphone next to you to see if that will 
correct our problem. 
 
MR. HODGINS: — Mr. Speaker, that Mortgage Interest Reduction Program ensured that no home buyer would 
have to pay over 13.25 per cent interest. The program has helped 40,000 families. The program was to run until 
1985, but with interest rates unstable, the Premier recently announced an extension to that program to June 1986. 
For the next four years any family buying a home will be protected from exorbitant interest rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, looking back I recall that when our Progressive Conservative government came to power in 1982, we 
found a huge and growing bureaucracy. We found falling revenues. Our young people were leaving. The needs of 
our seniors were being ignored. 
 
The people asked us to change all that, to form an efficient government, a government that listens to people. People 
said to make Saskatchewan proud again, to make this a province with a future for our young people, for our 
seniors, for our families, for each of us who call Saskatchewan home. And that is the goal, Mr. Speaker, to which I 
am committed. And that is why I'm proud to be here as a Progressive Conservative MLA for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Speaker, jobs for people is an important priority with this government, and I wish to take a few moments to 
discuss job creation. Our province's most important resource is our people, and that's why our government's 
number one priority is to create jobs. Every citizen who wants to work should have the opportunity for a job here. 
That is why there will be an all out effort by your government, working with business, working with labour and 
communities, to create those much-needed jobs. And I want to assure you, Mr. Speaker, we will not leave a stone 
unturned in creating work opportunities for Saskatchewan people. 
 
And I believe our efforts are paying off today. Saskatchewan has an enviable record of 44,000 new jobs and the 
lowest unemployment rate in Canada. Figures provided by Statistics Canada showed 464,000 people were 
employed in Saskatchewan in August of this year. That compares with 420,000 in April, 1982. The labour force 
today is 499,000 people, which is an increase of 51,000 over April of 1982. 



 
December 6, 1984 

290 
 

Look at our energy program. It has been more successful than anyone could have hoped in stimulating 
development and creating jobs. Mr. Speaker, with our oil industry recovery program we provided incentives to the 
entrepreneurs who want to invest their money and to work hard. As a result, over 250 new oil and gas companies 
and over 90 new service and consulting firms set up here. They have created over a thousand direct jobs since July 
of 1982, and at least a hundred more spin-off jobs. 
 
Those who don't understand what we have done have accused us of giving away too much to those entrepreneurs. 
Well the cost of our oil program has been 125 million in foregone revenue. But this has been more than offset by 
150 million in land sales revenue and 100 million in royalties generated by new activity. 
 
The oil upgrader announced in August of last year, and to be built in Regina, is another success of our oil program. 
By 1986 there will be 1,300 people working on that project. The Husky upgrader at Lloydminster was announced 
last June. It will involve 18,000 man-years of construction, and will create 3,600 jobs for Saskatchewan and 
Alberta workers. Our incentives for the mining industry are paying off as well. At Key Lake, a $500 million project 
will create 4 to 500 full-time jobs. At Kalium potash, a $100 million project will create 30 new permanent jobs, as 
well as 175 construction jobs. 
 
Of course, our government's direct action programs are also creating many jobs. Mr. Speaker, the Department of 
Health, which has upped its spending this year to $1 billion, has introduced an enriched construction grant formula 
for community and regional hospitals. 
 
As a result, new hospitals have been approved for Nipawin, Cut Knife, Lloydminster, and Maidstone. Major 
extensions will be built in Melfort and Yorkton. We're also funding major hospital construction projects in Regina 
and Saskatoon. A $17 million commitment goes to cancer treatment including a new $10 million Saskatoon cancer 
clinic. Wascana Hospital at Regina is being upgraded. The big nursing home construction program is going ahead 
across the province, and a new children's rehabilitation centre is being built in Saskatoon. All of these are creating 
jobs. 
 
Programs under Parks and Renewable Resources have been announced that will create 200 jobs over the next three 
years. And we have our student leadership program this past summer that trained university and technical students 
that created 28 or 29 jobs. The programs of Saskatchewan corporation's Build-A-Home Program created nearly 
6,000 jobs in the past two years. Over 100 jobs were created this year through the Saskatchewan Research Council. 
Mr. Speaker, our Department of Social Services created thousands of jobs through various programs, some of 
which were cost shared with the federal government. These focused on people who were receiving social 
assistance and could be put to useful work. 
 
Another 2,800 jobs were created through the Department of Tourism and Small Business in a program to assist 
small business through permanent job creation. Mr. Speaker, in total, we created 10,000 new jobs in 1983, and this 
year our job creation program are even more intense. Yes, the time for the full development of our resources is 
here. Our government is implementing plans that will enable the people of Saskatchewan to play their full role in 
doing that. 
 
Job creation is a priority for this government and will continue to be a priority for Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HODGINS: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a few moments to compare the positive, Conservative 
values and achievements with the policies of the socialist NDP opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the policies adopted at the recent NDP convention at Saskatoon, leave no doubt 



 
December 6, 1984 

291 
 

that the NDPer's still haven't got over their obsession with meddling in people's lives. For instance, they want to 
intrude into a farmer's decision making by imposing arbitrary size limits on farms. That's just another way of 
saying they want to prevent him from making his own decisions. Even if a farmer can get better returns by stepping 
up production in response to market forces, the NDP would impose some arbitrary limit. Undoubtedly, that limit 
would be set by some bureaucrat. 
 
But the NDPer's aren't going to limit their interference to matters of size alone. Their policy statements say they 
would ban the advertising of chemicals. Now this would keep the farmers totally in the dark as to what's new in 
these products. It would deprive farmers of the latest information on cropping practices, handicapping farmers in 
today's competitive markets. I don't believe that's help, Mr. Speaker, I believe that's harassment. Mr. Speaker, in 
fact, the NDPer's still haven't realized that prairie agriculture is on the leading edge of new technology, and it is a 
solid growth industry. They haven't become aware that one of the central weapons in the farmer's production 
arsenal is that of chemicals. They don't seem to understand that prairie grain is sold on fiercely competitive world 
markets. In fact, they seem unaware that it's the marvelous efficiency and productivity of Saskatchewan farmers 
that have kept them viable in years when grain prices have been so low. 
 
The NDPer's, Mr. Speaker, talked endlessly about more government ownership. Their resolutions were chock-full 
of references to nationalizing our resources. NDPer's are obviously intent on creating bigger and bigger Crown 
corporations. 
 
They said they want to nationalize the rest of the potash industry. They still don't recognize that we benefit from 
having diversified ownership of this vitally important industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the saddest part of the NDP convention was this: it revealed again that the NDP lacked faith in the 
ingenuity of the people. The NDPer's want to shove people into big bureaucracies rather than giving them the 
opportunity to use their abilities. The NDP's want a few politicians and bureaucrats to make the decisions for 
everybody. They just don't trust the people to make decisions for themselves. 
 
They don't seem to have noticed what happened to oil and gas exploration when this province introduced an 
incentive drilling program. They are blind to the fact that people responded in a way to make our oil and gas 
industry the most dynamic in the country, creating jobs and prosperity as we haven't seen in the industry ever 
before. 
 
The NDP's obsession with meddling takes it in strange directions. When we removed the gasoline tax, it was the 
largest single tax cut in this province's history; it saves every family $500 every year. But the NDP says that it 
would re-instate the tax. 
 
More farmers, Mr. Speaker, bought land in our farm purchase program in the first 10 weeks than bought land under 
the NDP land bank in 10 years. But the NDP wants to re-instate the land bank. 
 
The NDP even want to bring in an inheritance tax . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I am quite sure. 
 
Now the NDP are showing a shocking lack of concern for the huge investment Saskatchewan has made in uranium 
mining. They want to purchase . . . They want to phase out these mines. This would throw away that huge 
investment and the jobs that it created. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP problem is that it lacks faith in the people of Saskatchewan. Its ideology says that 
government must make the decisions, not the people themselves. The NDP sees the public simply as workers, not 
as mature people who want to accept more responsibility and make more of their own statements. The NDP 
underestimates the people of Saskatchewan. No wonder they cannot learn from their mistakes. 



 
December 6, 1984 

292 
 

(2115) 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture is very important to the Melfort constituency and, indeed, to all of Saskatchewan. I was 
proud to be in this legislature yesterday when the Minister of Agriculture introduced the most powerful and 
effective piece of legislation to protect Saskatchewan farmers for many months. 
 
Nineteen eighty-four has been a difficult year for our farmers, Mr. Speaker. The elements of nature — the weather, 
has not been good to our farmers. Burdensome costs and uncontrollable costs have hurt our farmers. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this government will not sit by and see the family farms suffer or lost. That is our commitment to the 
farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, common sense, caring, and conservative values are the guiding light of the government. As 
Saskatchewan enters its 80th year in the confederation of Canada, a most promising future is ahead of us. This 
government has the courage and the conviction to build on the values of our pioneers, forging ahead knowing all 
along that, yes indeed, our achievements and policies are working. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on for some time yet, but at this time I would like to turn a little bit to my own 
constituency, and just review some of the achievements that have been made in my constituency of Melfort. As I 
have stated earlier, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be a Conservative, and I've very proud to represent the fine people 
of the Melfort constituency. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we review the record of the past two and a half years, I stand all the more proud. And I 
speak of such things as a hospital being built in my home city of Melfort. I understand that approximately $8 
million is being spent on an addition to our hospital. 
 
I take a look at education, Mr. Speaker, and I can cite in this legislature that virtually every school in my 
constituency has been under some form of construction. We have three schools in Melfort that have had recent 
additions put on them, a new school in Star City. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have housing projects in my constituency of which I am also very proud. We have highways that 
are leading to our city and helping our farmers deliver that grain. And Mr. Speaker, the people of Melfort, Melfort 
constituency, are very proud of the achievements that we have in our home town. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think it's very, very important that we understand that the money that we have spent on behalf 
of the taxpayers of this province and my constituency have gone to things that, I believe, are traditional, and that I 
believe government should be spending money on: — health, and education, and highways. 
 
And I'd like to compare this, Mr. Speaker, with the record of the former administration. When those people had 
extra money to invest in the 1970s, what did they do with it, Mr. Speaker? They squandered it. And I particularly 
disliked the squandering of money in such things as uranium mines. And then those people on the opposite side of 
the House had the audacity to say that they don't think we should be in uranium mines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think when the public judges a government on their performance, they will look at the fiscal 
responsibility of that government. Did the government spend the taxpayers' money wisely? And, Mr. Speaker, I 
have no hesitation in saying that this government is spending taxpayers' money to the best advantage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to give some of my colleagues an opportunity to speak on the throne speech. I do want 
you to know that I will most definitely be supporting the Speech from the Throne. 



 
December 6, 1984 

293 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MORIN: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to rise in the Assembly tonight and participate in the 
Speech from the Throne debate. And before I comment on the Speech from the Throne, I'd like to congratulate you 
for the fine way in which you've handled some very trying days in this Assembly in the last few days. We count on 
you to keep decorum in the Chamber and within the past number of days you've been required to go above and 
beyond what that expectation should be, and I commend you for that. 
 
I'd also like to congratulate the member from Riversdale in Saskatoon for the very fine way which she moved the 
Speech from the Throne. The member from Riversdale is, of course now, one of the most often elected members in 
this Assembly. And as of that turn of three victories she's certainly showing herself to be doing a fine job here. I 
also would like to commend my colleague, the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood, for his seconding of that 
speech. 
 
We've heard, in the past couple of days, comments that the members of the government's side haven't been dealing 
with the Speech from the Throne. And we've heard comments that there was really not very much in the Speech 
from the Throne. 
 
I'd like to begin my comments tonight by dealing with the Speech from the Throne, page by page, and just 
commenting on the types of things that are in it. To begin with, within the first paragraph, this speech deals with 
unemployment and the problems of unemployment in our province. 
 
It goes on and talks about how we're going to deal with these problems by counting on the depth and strength and 
commitment of the Saskatchewan values, and self-reliance and co-operation of initiative and enterprise, and while 
at the same time it's doing that, that we're going to protect and enhance the quality of health care, education, and 
social services within the province. 
 
The speech talks about economic renewal. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, we need that economic renewal not only in 
Saskatchewan, but in Canada as a whole. 
 
The speech goes on and talks about new capital spending in Saskatchewan which in 1983 rose by 10.3 per cent, 
even though capital spending in the rest of Canada declined. 
 
It talks about crop production and the problems that we've had with the weather this year. And the fact that our 
harvest this year was down 20 per cent. And it talks about how it's going to address that problem. 
 
It talks about changes in the crop insurance Act which were much welcomed by farmers. Changes which allow 
farmers to individually insure their crops. Changes which this year in very, very tough times allowed farmers not to 
have to plow under their crops if they weren't going to combine them, but to save that money and simply have the 
adjuster in to adjust the crop. 
 
It goes on and talks about the operating loan guarantee program which we had last spring. Mr. Speaker, the 
members of the opposition are talking about plans and proposals that they've had for what should be done in the 
farm economy. Going back to last spring, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that our government at the time addressed the 
problem of the day, that the problem was that farmers were having difficulty obtaining credit or capital to put the 
crop in. And we addressed that problem, and we solved that problem for them. 
 
The opposition was talking about debt moratoriums and one thing and another in the springtime before we even 
knew what kind of a crop we were going to have. And it was clearly premature for them to be doing very much of 
any of that type of talking at the time. 



 
December 6, 1984 

294 
 

Further on in the speech, Mr. Speaker, it says: 
 

1984 has, however, been a particularly difficult year for farmers, and further government action is required to 
protect the family farm. Accordingly, my government intends to introduce in this session comprehensive 
legislation to provide security for viable family farms jeopardized by uncontrollable costs, burdensome debts, 
and the impact of adverse weather conditions. 

 
Yesterday in the House we saw that legislation tabled, and it was precisely what the situation calls for. I've talked 
to farmers in my riding, and I've talked to people who deal in the farm economy, and they tell me that their 
perception of that Bill is exactly what is required. It protects the land which our ancestors came here to farm. It 
protects the farmer from any difficulty that he may be having with a financial institution, and it gives him time to 
rethink his situation, to restructure his problems, and to move on into the future. Nothing radical, nothing foolish, 
just good common sense legislation to help the farming community. 
 
Further on in the speech, Mr. Speaker, we talk about water management. And surely, if there's ever a way that 
we're going to insure the province of Saskatchewan's agricultural base, it is going to be to drought-proof it. And 
how can we go on and take steps toward drought-proofing our province if we haven't secured the water resources 
that we need for irrigation. And I'd like to commend my colleague, the Minister of Energy and the minister in 
charge of the Saskatchewan Water Corporation, for the foresight that he's shown and the great work that he's done 
on this. 
 
In the Battlefords, we're fortunate to be the regional office of the Water Corporation. And from that office, the 
plans that we're making now to develop the North Saskatchewan River for not only industry but for agriculture, for 
tourism and recreation will benefit my region, the north-west corner of the province, for years to come. 
 
Further on again in the speech, we begin to talk about jobs and job creation. And one of the programs that has been 
very successful for us, the Saskatchewan Skill Development Program is mentioned. And that program has created 
3,500 jobs for people who were on welfare. Mr. Speaker, in my riding alone, there have been roughly 70 people 
given the opportunity to move off of welfare dependency into self-sufficiency. And those people have regained a 
measure of dignity and a measure of opportunity to contribute to society and participate in the overall scheme of 
our life-style. And they're grateful for that program. They appreciate the opportunity for a job and an opportunity to 
contribute to our society. 
 
In his response to the Speech from the Throne, the Leader of the Opposition ridiculed the training programs that 
we've come up with. He said they haven't worked. Well, clearly, they have, Mr. Speaker, if he would look at the 
people who are unemployed in our province, what he would find is that most of them are young people. Fully half 
of the people unemployed in the province of Saskatchewan are under the age of 25, and many of them have not 
either completed a high school diploma or have any particular training to make them more competitive, to give 
them a competitive advantage on the job market. 
 
What we have done as a government since 1982 is to increase the number of training spaces within the province by 
over 1,000. We will be providing additional capacity in the 1984-85 year. We have initiated a career counselling 
program, and we're expanding our community colleges. And this year, for example, in the Battlefords, the 
Mistikwa Community College allows students from our region to take their first year university completely in the 
Battlefords. First time in many, many years that that has ever been available. 
 
Now those type of things, although the opposition would certainly say that that doesn't put money into people's 
pockets or whatever, certainly it does. Because if you're a parent from my area and your child can take his first year 
and hopefully eventually the second and third year of university at home in the Battlefords, that's a considerable 
saving over what you would have to spend to 



 
December 6, 1984 

295 
 

send that child to university in either Saskatoon or Regina. And those things, the subtle things that can be done to 
help out the citizens of our province, are clearly an advantage to them in terms of savings of dollars, and, as you 
well know, Mr. Speaker, a dollar saved is very much the same as a dollar earned. 
 
In terms of our employment policy, Mr. Speaker, we go on in the speech, and we talk about Opportunities '84. We 
talk about the Students-in Industry Program, we talk about the Saskatchewan Employment Development Program, 
and we talk about the number of jobs which those programs have created. And they've created fully 8,000 jobs for 
young people, for students in our province to allow them to carry on with their education, to fund their education, 
to give them a measure of self-sufficiency and independence so that they don't have to be dependent either on 
government or on their parents, but to give them the dignity to go on in their own futures. 
 
Further to that, we've developed such things as New Careers Corporation. And I had the opportunity quite recently 
to spend some time with people involved with the Saskatchewan Sailing Association, and they're planning a large 
tourist attraction for Saskatchewan in your riding, I believe, Mr. Speaker, near the Elbow. Through the New 
Careers Corporation, there will be a park developed at Elbow, and a natural harbour to allow for what will be 
called "Sail West '85". It will be the largest sailing event in western Canada of the year. And it will go on in an 
ongoing basis. It will attract hundreds and hundreds of tourists into our province, which will be good, not only for 
the economic development of our province, but it will also be good to help develop the competitive spirit and open 
another avenue of recreation for our people. All that through the New Careers Corporation. 
 
In addition, we've done such things as Seniors' Home Repair Programs, which is a very popular program in my 
riding. I haven't kept count, but I must have given away 100 applications for Senior Home Repair Programs. 
 
(2130) 
 
Because many seniors are not capable of getting downtown to my office, I've delivered many of these to their 
home. And without fail, they're telling me that they're going to use the money to put in a bathroom, or to fix their 
sidewalk which is chipping out, because they don't walk well anymore, and they'd like to have a nice flat sidewalk 
so they don't need to be worried about falling, or they don't want to have to go up to their second floor bathroom. 
 
And these types of programs for people, Mr. Speaker, are very much appreciated and are going over very well. And 
the people remember who did this for them, and they will continue to remember. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we've all seen and looked at the problems of governmental co-ordination, and we've looked at 
operations like the Canada Employment Centre. And we've looked at DREE and we've looked at Advanced 
Education and Manpower, and all of the different programs in various levels of government who work on 
employment development. 
 
And often when we've looked at those things, what we've seen and what we said to ourselves is that they don't 
seem to know what they're doing. We've said they're all copying each other. One is going one direction; one is 
going another direction. They're both doing the same thing. There's no co-ordination. 
 
And recognizing that, Mr. Speaker, we've appointed a minister responsible for employment. And today, I guess, in 
the House we introduced the Act that would create the department that he'll administer. And that minister, with the 
use of Bill 2, the Act to create this employment agency, will co-ordinate the activities of government provincially, 
to ensure that we don't have the type, any waste or any inefficiency going on, but that we can get the maximum 
impact for each tax 



 
December 6, 1984 

296 
 

dollar spent in the area of employment and employment creation. 
 
Further in the speech, Mr. Speaker, we mentioned that we, in Saskatchewan, must learn to respond to events by 
adapting our traditional industries, as necessary, and by exploring the potential of new industries that may arise. 
 
The provincial government has a key note to play in its response, but others must be involved as well. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture talked about the export of cattle to Bulgaria tonight. And certainly, that's one area that 
we can be expanding in. We've expanded in a number of ways. We're looking at using our traditional products, our 
wheat, to break it down and use the starch for other than food uses. We're using starch from Saskatchewan wheat 
now in the potash industry, in my riding in the Battlefords, we're doing biotechnological research which will create 
new crops, new varieties of crops, new opportunities for farmers to become more and more self-sufficient. 
 
And these are all things, Mr. Speaker, that we want to remember that the farmers and the farming community of 
the province of Saskatchewan are looking toward the future. They're looking for opportunities to do more than 
simply grow grain, load it on a boxcar the way my grandfather and great grandfather did, and ship it out to a coast, 
and hope that it would eventually find its way onto a boat. 
 
We've got to do things within our province to utilize our own natural resources, to develop them and process them 
here to create jobs at home for our own people. And those are the type of things we are doing. That's the direction 
we're going. And thanks very much to the Minister of Tourism and Small Business and the Minister of Economic 
Development and Trade, we've made strides and progress in that area that had never been dreamed of in this 
province before. 
 
I heard when the member from Pelly spoke earlier. He looked at a program called . . . The name of the program just 
misses me right now, but it's . . . Don't overlook rural Saskatchewan. He talks about an ad running in a Vancouver 
paper. Well, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to tell you where that program came from. Prior to becoming involved in politics, 
I ran a development corporation in the north-west corner of the province. And one day we were at a meeting in 
Unity talking about how we could attract industry to the small communities in north-west Saskatchewan, and we 
were going around the table and we came up with a very novel idea. We said, "Why don't we tell people the 
opportunities that are here and ask them to come in, so we'll advertise." And we went to the provincial government 
of the day and we said, "Here's what we want to do. We want to go to small communities, the Battlefords, the 
Unitys, the Maidstones and we want to say, here's an opportunity. They need a barber, or they need a mechanic, or 
they need a new garage, or whatever, and we'd like to run an ad in the newspapers." We picked the Toronto Globe 
and Mail at the time. We said we want to run an ad telling people, "If you are fed up with life in Toronto, and 
you're fed up with big cities in eastern Canada, you want an opportunity, come to Saskatchewan. We have an 
opportunity here for you." And what do you think that former government told us? No money. No money. 
 
Since the change of government, Mr. Speaker, we've made that program a reality and the number of people who 
have come to Saskatchewan as a result of those ads in newspapers all across Canada has been incredible. We've got 
a terrific province here, and as a friend of mine from the United States is prone to say, he said, "You've got the best 
kept secret in the world, is in Saskatchewan." And the former government wouldn't let us tell anybody about it. 
They wouldn't spring for $1,000 to put an ad in the paper to encourage people to come into Saskatchewan and do 
business, to create jobs, and in small communities which they claim to be so in support of. 
 
We've done a few more things, Mr. Speaker, and we talk about them in this speech that they claim doesn't deal 
with anything. Further in the speech, we say economic activity in 



 
December 6, 1984 

297 
 

Saskatchewan has continued at an encouraging pace. My government's major projects inventory now monitors $9 
billion in large scale construction being planned for implementation over the next five years. What we've done with 
those large projects, Mr. Speaker, is break them up to make it attractive for business in Saskatchewan to bid on, to 
compete in. In the past that never happened. What used to happen whenever we had a large project was that they'd 
tender the whole project out and, naturally, because of our population base, we didn't have the size of corporation 
in the province of Saskatchewan that could handle the entire project, so they went to the Stearns-Rogers and 
Commonwealth Constructions in Vancouver and they went to Toronto and they went to Montreal firms who then 
came into the province. And what we've done is broken those contracts up to allow the smaller, locally-based 
contractors and service organizations to compete on them and to bid on them. 
 
And within my own riding . . . Something that the minister in charge of the power corporation has done is to take 
the $400 million that the power corporation used to spend outside of the province, and make a list of opportunities 
and make it public to the people of Saskatchewan. And within my own riding six companies are now supplying 
goods to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation which used to come in from outside of the province. They're 
employing people in my riding, keeping money at home, and we're looking after our own. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 
really what we should be doing in this province, and it's what many of us have called for for years and years and 
finally it's become a reality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I go on to the final page of the throne speech, where it talks about the industrial incentive program; a 
program that we introduced last spring which we took a considerable amount of criticism from the opposition over. 
And what has it done in a few short months: — created 1,500 jobs, Mr. Speaker, $40 million of new capital 
construction in the manufacturing and processing industry in our province. Here — not exported to Alberta, not 
exported to British Columbia, not exported to Ontario — here in Saskatchewan. And that, Mr. Speaker, is the type 
of thing that the people of Saskatchewan see. They see new corporations coming in; they see their businesses in 
their home community expanding and growing and hiring more people, and they recognize the benefits to 
themselves and to the province. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, we go on and we talk about Saskatchewan Heritage 1985. My original home is near Fort 
Carlton which is part of the Riel Rebellion scene, and 1985 will be a very big year for that whole stretch across the 
central part of Saskatchewan from the Battlefords through Duck Lake and Batoche and Carlton and on, and what 
we've done as the government is to recognize 1985 and not only the Riel Rebellion, but a multitude of other things 
that are going on that are being celebrated in 1985, and we're saying that it's time that the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan had a government back them up on their pride. 
 
Our people from all over — every corner of this province — came here from somewhere else with a dream and 
courage and not much more. They felt that they could do things here which would open opportunities to them 
which in their own homeland were not there. 
 
In my own case, my family in 1985 will have been here for 90 years. That's a good long time to be in a province 
that's less than that old and we'll be celebrating with pride on our land which Gabriel Dumont and Louis Riel used 
to ride over. And we'll be going down to Fort Carlton and partaking of the celebrations. And we'll be visiting the 
museum at Duck Lake and Batoche, and, certainly, in the Battlefords, where we have major celebrations planned, 
where I have had the good fortune to initiate a committee several months ago to make sure that we got in on the 
celebration of the North West Rebellion. And that committee is working hard to put on a number of different 
festivities which will celebrate the 1985 activities that took place there. 
 
We'll be doing things in and around the Battlefords to celebrate that, to attract more tourism, to encourage business 
and development. A lot of that will come as a result of a having a government that was committed enough to the 
people of this province, that they were prepared to stand behind them and put some money behind them, and say, 
"Go out and celebrate your heritage." 



 
December 6, 1984 

298 
 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is in that throne speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this speech is quite short. It's a mere eight pages. But what it is is a blueprint for progress in our 
province, the likes of which we haven't seen for years and years. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what do other people say about this, particularly the opposition? What does the Leader of the 
Opposition have to say about it? Well, to begin with, I refer to his comments in Hansard on December the 3rd, and 
he is not very impressed with the speech. In fact, as I already mentioned, he ridicules the training programs. He 
says they don't do anything. And I guess that his solution, in terms of the people who are on welfare, people who 
are unemployed, is simply to throw a little money at them, but don't throw any opportunity to them. Don't help 
them to develop skills and to develop abilities which will give them a competitive edge in the market-place. Don't 
do anything like that for them. 
 
He goes on in his speech, and he says that: "A recent study of the Farm Credit Corporation shows that farmers who 
are in the most trouble are the ones with the highest debt." I'm sure that we're all struck by the fact that that's an 
amazing revelation. My colleague from Prince Albert, I can see a smile on his face saying, "That's an amazing 
revelation." The guys who are in trouble are the guys who owe a lot of money. Of course. The guys who don't owe 
any money aren't in trouble. You wouldn't expect that. 
 
And he goes on, and he says: "But it goes to show that these aren't marginal farmers. Indeed, 33 per cent of the 
farmers with the highest debt produce 50 per cent of the farm products." And if you carry that argument on 
logically, then you end up in an argument that says, the more money you owe, the more productive you are, which 
is clearly ridiculous. Although, when you look at that thinking and that mentality, and you apply it to the way that 
they ran the Crown corporations, it's not far wrong. When you look at the huge, nearly $2 million debt in the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation, clearly that thinking was applied to that. The more you owe, the more 
productive you are. 
 
I'm sure that they thought that the way to get the Crowns productive was to simply get them into debt up to the 
eyeballs and everything would be good. Unfortunately, it didn't work that way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He goes on and he says, now what should we do for agriculture? And we've heard often in here their solution. They 
say all farmers need a fuel rebate. Alberta has a fuel rebate of 32 cents a gallon. 
 
Well now, Mr. Speaker, let's go back in time a little bit. Let's go back to the 70s in both Saskatchewan and Alberta. 
While the province of Alberta was accumulating the kind of money that they needed to pay farmers that 32 cent 
rebate on their fuel, what was the province of Saskatchewan doing with their resource money? They were pouring 
it into mines; they were buying potash; they were squandering it on anything that happened to come along; peat 
moss, factories, rabbit farms, on and on and on. 
 
Certainly now in tough times the province of Alberta can afford to rebate money to their farmers, because they 
managed good in the good times. And clearly that's what we didn't do here and what we're beginning to do now. 
 
And he goes on and talks about crop insurance, which I've already dealt with, with the very major changes that 
we've made as a government. 
 
I also want to deal tonight, Mr. Speaker, with the type of things that other people say about us. Within this 
Chamber, the Opposition have often quoted the Sask-Trend Monitor, and I have a recent edition here in my hand. 
But when they've quoted that, they've never been able to find anything good in it, and I thought it would make an 
interesting exercise to take the most recent 



 
December 6, 1984 

299 
 

edition and to go through it, and just see what it does say. 
 
(2145) 
 
So I begin on the front page, and I remind the members of the House, this is the fair and objective companion to 
the Opposition. This is what they stand up in the House and wave, and criticize our government. 
 
And what does it say? Well, on the front page under "Highlights" it says "Private Sector Leads Job Growth, Moose 
Jaw Wage Earners Smiling" — a terrible indictment of our government. It goes further down, "Employment," and 
it says "Still the best in Canada." And I go further into the magazine and it talks about job creation, and it says, 
"Last month's news-letter suggested that the private sector jobs had begun to move ahead. This trend has 
accelerated further. In October the year to year growth in private non-agricultural jobs was 6,000." 
 
And further on in this publication that's supposed to be damning to our government, they're talking about retail 
sales, and retail sales are a critical indicator of the direction that the economy is going, because when consumers 
have confidence they spend; retail sales increase. When consumers don't have any confidence, they save their 
money for the future, and therefore retail sales go down. 
 
And what does it say about retail sales? "Women's clothing stores have been able to increase their sales in August, 
in September, and will likely end the year on the plus side." That's fairly encouraging. The member from Prince 
Albert thinks his wife must have been in town, but I'm sure it must have been more than that. And further on it 
says, "Investment upturn continues. The dollar value . . . " I hope his wife isn't in the gallery. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — She is. 
 
MR. MORIN: — Investment upturn continues . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, well, I'd like to say that I'm glad 
she is in the gallery, because my wife is in the gallery too, and I would be afraid if they weren't both here they'd 
both be out improving the sales in women's retail. But the investment upturn continues. The dollar value of 
building permits issued for all three categories in construction rose by encouraging amounts in August in the range 
of 50 to 72 per cent. The new trend tends to substantiate the forecasts of an increase in investment which was 
highlighted in the August newsletter. 
 
And further on, farm cash receipts post a large advance. Farm cash receipts have picked up sharply over the last 
two months. Receipts to the end of September were ahead of last year by 9.2 per cent. Receipts under the Western 
Grain Stabilization Act, 56 million, and crop insurance, 61 million, accounted for about 4 per cent of the increase. 
 
And potash sales are impressive. Official Saskatchewan potash production numbers are only available to April. 
According to the Potash and Phosphate Institute, Canadian production during the July to September period 
increased by 35 per cent from a year earlier. Production is up 35 per cent. Gross sales are up 19 per cent. 
Manufacturing shipments up 7.1 per cent. 
 
And on and on and on. All of this terrible news for the province of Saskatchewan. Everything getting better. 
Everything going up. More jobs being created. Wages higher. Labour is smiling. All that bad news about the 
economy. 
 
And what else are we doing in the economy? Well, the labour force is up by 6,000, year over year. Manufacturing 
shipments are up by 7.3 per cent, year over year. Manufacturing production is up by 12.2 per cent, year over year. 
More investment is up 10.3 per cent, year over year. And investment in tourism and recreation sector is up 155 per 
cent, year over year. Now where's the bad news? You know, all we hear from the opposition is doom and gloom 
and terrible things. But 



 
December 6, 1984 

300 
 

we don't see any bad news. 
 
And what about the future, Mr. Speaker? Where are we going in the future? Well, Mr. Speaker, the report on the 
nation from the Financial Post deals with the provinces. And I have a copy here of a graph which I wish everyone 
could see. Growth in real domestic product, per cent in 1985, and they have a little bar graph above all the names 
of the province. And Saskatchewan is fully double virtually everyone else. And you look at Ontario and Quebec, 
they're traditional economic leaders in this country, and we're double Ontario and Quebec in percentage increase in 
production for 1985. Manitoba is considerably behind us, that's for sure. 
 
And the unemployment rate forecast for 1985, and again we're the lowest. Highest increases in production; lowest 
unemployment. Not very much bad news there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we've heard about the terrible, terrible times that we're going through from the members in 
opposition. And I'd like to invite the member, I'd like to invite the members of the opposition to my riding to 
preach that gospel. And I'll provide them with a forum. I'll find the most visible place in my riding and I'll put them 
up a soap box. And that place would be on the corner of 11th Avenue and 101st Street in North Battleford. Right in 
front of my brand new, eight storey office tower. The first office tower, the first office complex in the Battlefords 
to be above two storeys, ever. It started construction in the fall of '82 and went on the drawing board after the 
government changed, now completed and approaching being fully leased. 
 
And as the members of the opposition are standing there on their soap box in front of this beautiful new structure 
in downtown North Battleford, looking into the beautiful North Saskatchewan River valley, they'll see a $2 million 
water slide development begun last spring, opened last summer, and doing terrific business. Largely, one of the 
reasons, Mr. Speaker, that we had a record year ever for tourism in the Battlefords. And if they pick their eyes up 
from that and continue to look across the river valley, and they look to the town of Battleford, they're going to see a 
company called Lift Systems International, and what that company does is manufacture pump jacks. And they're a 
new company to the Battlefords; they're currently employing 15 people. They built a big new building in the 
Battleford industrial park. They're predicting that within a year they'll have 40 people. And those pump jacks, Mr. 
Speaker, are being used here at home. Built here at home, used here at home by Saskatchewan people to pump 
Saskatchewan oil. 
 
And as they turn around, they'll look over to a company called GLM Tanks which manufacture oil field tanks for 
the oil industry. And the owner of that company, Mr. Speaker, is on record as saying that if the government hadn't 
changed in 1982, he'd have locked his doors. Mr. Speaker, today that company employs 50 people in my riding. 
The heavy oil head office for Gulf Oil for Saskatchewan is located in the Battlefords. And they too are on record as 
saying, "If the government hadn't changed, they'd be gone, with their 40 jobs." Manufacturing in my community 
has never been that big, ever. We've never had as much optimism and activity going on. And certainly had the 
government not changed, we wouldn't have had it. 
 
You know I recall the Leader of the Opposition in his speech, saying that he had been down to the Agribition, and 
that the people that he met weren't overly optimistic. I can understand that, I can understand that, because listening 
to the opposition talk here almost depresses me, and I'm a pretty optimistic guy. 
 
But I suppose that there's another thing to be considered there, and that is this: that probably most of the people 
who were talking to the Leader of the Opposition were likely of the NDP persuasion. And I can imagine that 
looking at what's going on around the province today and the past two and a half years, and then talking to the 
Leader of the Opposition wouldn't give me much room for optimism either, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every year one of the newspapers in my riding publishes what they call a progress 



 
December 6, 1984 

301 
 

edition and they recently published that. And what's the headline? Mr. Speaker, the headline in the progress edition 
of the News Optimist for 1984 is that the Battlefords are expanding in every direction. And on the front page of that 
progress edition we see the water slide that I talked about that would've never happened. We see oil activity that 
never would have happened. We see a $4 million hotel being built, the first one in 25 years in the Battlefords 
which never would have been there. I had the pleasure to turn the soil when they broke ground for the construction 
of that hotel. And the owner of it . . . I said quite frankly, I said, "Why are you building your hotel now?" He said, 
"Finally, I've been in business here 28 years, finally the climate is right." 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MORIN: — And also on the front page of that, my eight-storey office tower, as I say, the first building in 
downtown North Battleford to be above two storeys. Mr. Speaker, I almost find it embarrassing to walk down the 
streets of the Battlefords. Things are so darn good there and then I come back here and all I hear is how tough 
things are supposed to be, and I feel a little guilty that they're so good in my area. And I don't get an opportunity to 
be out in the other regions of the province very much because I'm either in Regina or I'm at home. But I'd like to 
have the opportunity to go around and see if everything is as good in the other corners of the province as it is at 
home in the Battlefords. Because if it is, I'd like to take the members of the opposition around and tour them 
around and I'm sure that if they'd only get out of Regina and get out from under the dome that they would see the 
opportunities there are in our province now. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in considering the things that I said and the type of things that are going on here in our province, 
I think it's a very valuable exercise to consider the alternative. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have in my hand the resolutions from the recent NDP convention. And one of their first 
resolutions is: be it resolved that the Saskatchewan New Democrats affirm support for the socialist solution 
proposed by the Regina Manifesto, and called upon the party to adopt a settlement which builds upon those basic 
ideals. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what is the socialist solution? When the socialist solution was imposed on Saskatchewan in 
1971, 23,000 people left. When the socialist solution was erased from the province of Saskatchewan in 1982, 
25,000 people came back home. 
 
And when you look at probably the best example of the socialist experiment in the world, you'd see Germany 
divided by a wall, and one-half of it's one of the jewels of the western economy, and the other half is a disaster. 
 
But, finally, Mr. Speaker, dealing on the throne speech, what would their speech have been had they been 
government? 
 
I could go through a whole litany of things, Mr. Speaker, but the one thing I want to mention before I close is this, 
and that is that His Honour would have had to stand up and announce that the family of Crown corporations was 
pregnant again, and that it was going to be a multiple birth, that we would have had the Saskatchewan autobody 
group; we'd have had the Saskatchewan farm insurance; we'd have had Saskatchewan life, and that would have 
given a whole new meaning, Mr. Speaker, to the life insurance term,"On your side for life." 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can't imagine still living in Saskatchewan two and a half years later, if the government hadn't 
changed. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it will go without saying that I will be supporting the Speech from the Throne. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 p.m. 


