



















































Hansard: April 26, 1984


2081 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 26, 1984 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce to you, and to all members of the Assembly 
today, a large contingent of high school students who are visiting with us and seated in the Speaker’s gallery. A 
number of these students attend Luther College here in Regina which is situated in my constituency, and they 
are accompanied by a Mr. Cherland. 
 
And then we have 43 exchange students from the province of Newfoundland who are visiting with us today 
from Bishop’s College in St. John’s. We’re delighted to have you visiting with us. 
 
We trust that both groups of high school students will enjoy your stay here, that you’ll find it educational and 
informative. I shall have the opportunity to meet with you shortly after question period and I would ask all 
members of the Assembly to join with me in welcoming them this afternoon. 
 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the member for Regina Rosemont in welcoming 
the students from Luther College and from Bishop’s College in St. John’s, Newfoundland. 
 
One of the students from Luther College is my daughter Barbara, who I have seen on previous occasions this 
morning. And we have a number of the students — two of the Newfoundland students and one other 
out-of-province student — staying with us, the out-of-province student being someone who attends Luther. 
 
And we are delighted that they have had this opportunity to be here under the leadership of their choir director, 
Carl Cherland, who does such an outstanding job in leading the Luther choir. And we are most pleased to extend 
a warm invitation to the students and a warm welcome to the students from Newfoundland who come to us, for 
the most part, from Canada’s newest province, and Canada’s oldest city. 
 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to you, and through you to the Assembly 
here, some students from my home town of Hudson Bay again this week, and also from Carragana. They are 
seated in the west gallery over there. Their parents are in at the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation councillors’ 
annual meeting in Regina which we attended last night. I was very happy to be able to meet with them. A couple 
of them are in the gallery accompanying the children, or the students. 
 
So I would ask the Assembly to join with me and welcome to Regina, and hope their stay is both educational, 
and that they have a very safe journey home, and I’ll be seeing them probably on the weekend. 
 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 



 

April 26, 1984 
 

2082 

 

Media-MLA Hockey Game 
 

Mr. Gerich: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to report on the annual hockey game that occurred last night between 
the media and the MLAs. It was a hard-fought game. Standing in goal for the MLAs was J. Duncan. And the big 
upset of the evening was when Mr. Dale Eisler happened to get sat on by Mr. Bill Sveinson. 
 
The precision play in the evening, of the MLA team, was when Duncan and Gerich streamed in to make a goal. 
The most valuable player award goes to Mrs. Bacon. She fell on the puck in a break-away. The Melville rocket 
was streaming back and forth across the ice, and he never did touch the puck. George “Shut-Out” Bentley did 
his usual thing. He never did score a goal. 
 
And in regards to the media team, I really think that, if it wasn’t for the television technicians and the photo 
service people, that press would have lost. And they had a couple of other numerous imports for the media — 
was the French connection line from CBC, and they gave us quite a bit of hassle. 
 
The referee for the evening was Mr. Katzman, and he had a strenuous time in picking up the puck, so we 
employed a young man to go around and fetch it for him. It was then uncanny how the Minister of Social 
Services, Mr. Dirks, was always one step ahead of the press in solving his problems out on the ice, and Terry 
White, trying to trip him up. And we had “Tripod,” alias Sherwin Petersen out there, and he let go a blazing shot 
from the blueline, and it hardly reached in meeting his goalie. The real problem arose when Sherwin lifted his 
stick off the ice. Incidentally, the score was 7 to 2 for the media, but it was no indication of the fun that we had 
out there. We’re getting ready next month for the next fall’s game, or next spring’s game against the media. 
 
Thank you. 
 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Recession in Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Premier, and I note that after two years in office 
he’s still making his “we’re not participating in the recession” speech. “We’re open for business.” But I note 
that he no longer makes that speech within the province, only outside the province. 
 
And I point out to the Premier that his government’s own statistics show that in March of 1982 there were 
345,000 people working in this province in the non-farm sector, and that in March of 1984, after two years of 
his government, the number who are working in the non-farm sector was 339,000 - 6,000 fewer than two years 
ago. 
 
My question to him is this: can the Premier, in the light of these facts, still go about the country with a straight 
face making the speech, asserting that Saskatchewan is not participating in the recession? 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very happy that the member of the opposition asked this question on 
April 26, 1984, our birthday, our anniversary of the 1982 election. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot that I could say. I’ll say immediately that, yes, I will continue to 
talk about the success of Saskatchewan, about the pride that we have in  



 

April 26, 1984 
 

2083 

 

Saskatchewan and of the growth that we have in this province. 
 
In today’s Financial Post, Mr. Speaker, it says: 
 

The province survived the recession relatively easily. As grain export volumes offset price declines, 
provincial retail sales in February were up 24 per cent from three years earlier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — And, Mr. Speaker, I have here a summary, a very quick summary, of some dramatic 
changes in exports and in manufacturing and processing, and I’ll just briefly go down through the list. But, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s an interesting change from ’81 over ’82, and ’82 over ’83. 
 
Food and beverages: the value of shipments of goods manufactured are up 18 per cent; clothing is up 9.11 per 
cent; wood is up 36 per cent; metal fabrication is up 15 per cent; machinery (except for electrical) is up 37 per 
cent. Generally the total, Mr. Speaker, on manufactured goods exports is up 15 per cent in 1983 over 1982. 
 
With respect to job creation, Mr. Speaker, no other province in this country has a growth in the labour force, or 
has created jobs faster than we have in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
When I look at a major publication talking about the province of Saskatchewan, all it can say, Mr. Speaker, is 
that they have never seen, and there is no other province that can claim growth during some difficult economic 
times like the province of Saskatchewan. So, yes, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to be here during this second 
anniversary. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Does the Minister agree, does the Premier agree that 
according to the monthly statistical bulletin put out by the bureau of statistics, which operates under his aegis, 
the number of people (and again comparing 1984 with 1982), the number of people working in manufacturing is 
down 5,000; the number of people working in transportation, communication, and utilities is down 7,000; and 
the number of people working in trade is down 4,000. Does he believe those figures, and does he think that the 
16,000 additional people who are without jobs compared with two years ago share his euphoria, with respect to 
the election of his government? 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve said many times that the phenomenal growth . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Mr. Premier. 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, two years after we took government, two years ago today, there has been a 
phenomenal increase in the number, in the people, a phenomenal increase in the population of the province of 
Saskatchewan; in the number and the size of the labour force in the province of Saskatchewan; in the number of 
people employed in the province of Saskatchewan. In fact, we break all-time records in the number of people 
working in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
When we look at the potential that was here in this province by people not deciding to stay, by people leaving 
the province, and then look at what’s going on today, we’ve broken historic records in the province of 
Saskatchewan — comparative records, looking at provinces on either side of us. Mr. Speaker, we have one of 
the most dynamic economies anywhere in the nation, and I’m proud to be able to say that, after two years of our 
administration. 



 

April 26, 1984 
 

2084 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, one short final supplementary dealing with the phenomenal increases to 
which the Premier referred. Will the Premier agree, again referring to the statistical bulletin put out by his 
department, that the labour force has increased from 448,000 to 463,000 — not a surprising increase in two 
years — and that the number of people employed has changed from April 1982 of 420,000 to March of 1984 of 
419,000, and accordingly we are seeing no phenomenal increase in the number of people who are actually 
working, but substantially the same number — indeed, a few fewer. 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows that if you go from February to February in any 
particular year, you will see cyclical changes over going for the entire year. And he is always using, he is always 
using December over December or January over January. 
 
Did you take the entire year, Mr. Speaker? You take the entire year, January through to December, the entire 
year 1982 versus 1983, versus 19 . . . But the time we finish 1984, then you will see the relative, and the 
significant statistics. 
 
I can take, for example, September of 1982 and compare it to September of 1983, and I see a growth of 13,000 
people in the labour force — that month, 13,000. He’s picked February over February when he knows . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . All right, the last figure. 
 
Let’s look at every February that’s going through from the historic times. Let’s look at every March. Let’s look 
at every January. Let’s look at all of them. Then add up all the months, add up all the months in this province 
compared to the previous, add up all the months into other provinces, and we’ll rank, Mr. Speaker, as the 
province that creates the most jobs in this country in 1982 and in 1983. And, in fact, Mr. Speaker, we were the 
only province — the only one — to create new jobs in 1982. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Sale of Former SGI Head Office 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the minister in charge of SGI. It 
concerns the rather startling story which you told the House yesterday — startling, Mr. Minister, because it 
represents the third version of the full and absolute truth which we’ve had on this matter. 
 
Version number one: Mr. Miller was a mere minion who had no responsibility and did not pass on any 
expression of interest. Version number two, given last week: he did pass it on to the superiors. Version number 
three, given yesterday, was: he didn’t even show them the building. 
 
Mr. Minister, I am going to table immediately following question period — I would have tabled it earlier had 
the rules permit — I am going to table an affidavit by Sydney Lovell to the effect that he was shown the 
building by Gary Miller, and an affidavit by one Terry Bulych to the effect that he was in the company of Syd 
Lovell when Gary Miller showed them the building. My question, Mr. Minister, is: would you give us the fourth 
version of Mr. Miller’s involvement? 
 

Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the member from Regina Centre raised a point of privilege in 
this Assembly because he felt he was being hard done by. And it’s the kind of malicious slander that has been 
coming from the member opposite against people in this province, Mr. Speaker, that have no opportunity to 
defend themselves, that brought about his concern yesterday. 
 
He is talking about versions. He’s talking about one individual versus another. The Leader of the Opposition, in 
his questions to me last week, assumed exactly the same as I did, based on  



 

April 26, 1984 
 

2085 

 

information provided us by one Mr. Lovell, which we now find to be inaccurate in the sense of the time. 
Because it has been determined, not only by Mr. Miller, but also by the officials at SGI, that on July 13, 1983, 
Mr. Miller wasn’t even working for SGI — never even worked for them. That was the time he referred to, 
because . . . 
 

An Hon. Member: — No, it is not. No, it is not. Read this correspondence to you. Read the correspondence . . . 
(inaudible) . . . 
 

Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Because I’ll accept whatever affidavit he wants to table and send over to me, Mr. 
Speaker. And the lawsuit brought about by Mr. Miller against Mr. Shillington, the member from Regina Centre, 
is exactly contradictory. I am not going to get involved with statements made by members from the private 
sector, members outside of this Assembly. I am not going to slander them, Mr. Speaker. I have no intention of 
slandering the reputation of Mr. Lovell or Mr. Miller or anyone else, as the members opposite have been doing. 
 
I have taken, at face value, the information provided to me. I also have letters from Mr. Lovell, dated early 
August, contradicting what the member is saying. Mr. Speaker, we are prepared to make available to the 
members opposite information to the sale of this building, which was as straightforward a transaction as has 
ever been conducted by anyone. It was completely straightforward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can list to you a series of showings of this building — a series of them — of the year 1983, not 
only through Mr. Lovell, not only to Mr. Bulych, but many other people. I can start back into 1980 when they 
first sold it to Albertino’s Enterprises in Edmonton. They had sold it to them, but backed out of the sale. I can 
also table, Mr. Speaker, I can also table and inform this Assembly of offers of a million dollars that they had, 
that they had as an opposition when they were in government (and I’m referring to the members opposite), that 
they didn’t accept, for that same piece of property that they are now crying about. And I have that information. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if they want to open up a kettle of worms I am quite prepared to argue and debate the points 
brought out by the members opposite as to who that it was shown to, as to what offers were made, as to what 
expressions of interests were made by . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. I would caution the member when he is giving answers to be brief and to the point. 
 

Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, if you have read Mr. Lovell’s letters to you, you 
will know that he’s not talking about a visit in July. He’s talking about a visit in September when Mr. Miller 
was employed. Mr. Minister, his affidavit, Mr. Bulych’s affidavit says, “We know Mr. Miller; we could not 
have been mistaken about his identity.” Secondly, “He showed us through the building, and an expression of 
interest was made.” 
 
Mr. Minister, you must be driven to the conclusion that either Mr. Miller hasn’t been accurate, or that Mr. 
Lovell and Mr. Bulych aren’t being accurate. Do you not think that merits some further investigation than to 
simply, as the documents you tabled yesterday show, to simply call up Mr. Miller and say, “Were you 
involved?” 
 
Because that’s the extent of your investigation, Mr. Minister. You called him up and said, “Have you been 
involved?” Mr. Minister, my question is: do you not think that this matter merits some further investigation than 
that? 
 

Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Miller also categorically denies having showed it to Mr. Lovell. So it 
isn’t for me to say that one or the other is right or wrong, as the member opposite has been doing and 
insinuating since this began, slandering the people involved and saying that they’re wrong, that they’re lying, or 
whatever it is he’s trying to say. Those are the kinds of insinuations we don’t need, Mr. Speaker. It isn’t for me. 



 

April 26, 1984 
 

2086 

 

I have made an investigation. Mr. Fletcher of SGI admits having shown the building to Mr. Lovell. Mr. Fletcher 
admits that. Now, and I’m not . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Look, I am not going to get into a debate with the 
member opposite, Mr. Speaker, as to who saw it, who showed it. I have information given to me that I take in 
good faith and at face value. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have investigated the events that took place in the summer of 1983. I am satisfied that we acted 
in good faith, that there were no improprieties in the sale of the building. I am satisfied, Mr. Speaker, that we 
only had one offer. I am satisfied that the people at SGI acted in good faith. 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I’m not asking for protestations from the minister, but a simple answer to a simple 
question. 
 
Mr. Lovell asserts, in an affidavit form, that he was shown the building by Mr. Miller in September. My 
question to you is: have you investigated the matter, and are you able to say that, on the basis of your 
investigation, Mr. Miller did not show Mr. Lovell the building in September? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Mr. Minister. 
 

Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member from Regina Centre has just displayed a degree 
of intelligence. 
 
I am satisfied that the information that I have was given to me in good faith, and I have accepted it at its face 
value. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite should know, particularly since the two of them that have been asking me 
these questions are both lawyers, that there is a case today, a lawsuit that has been launched, and it will be . . . 
and the lawsuit is between the two parties you’re referring to — the two parties that both members are referring 
to. 
 
It won’t be my decision, Mr. Speaker, as the minister. It will be decided by the courts as to who is right and 
who’s wrong. 
 

Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Minister. All the documents, which you tabled yesterday, prove is that 
SGI called up Gary Miller and asked him if Mr. Lovell’s version was correct, and he said it wasn’t. Mr. Lovell 
went two steps further. He got an independent witness who swears to the same effect, and he provided a sworn 
statement. Mr. Minister, are you telling this House that this is the extent of your investigation? Is that what 
you’re telling this House? 
 

Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Mr. Speaker, again I repeat, and it’ll take some time for this to get through to the 
member from Regina Centre, and I know he’s slow in accepting anything. I repeat, this is now before the courts. 
The two parties involved will be in court over the matter. The member from Regina Centre continuously wants 
to slander someone in the private sector who has no opportunity to defend himself — none whatever. And that 
is all he intends to do, is to slander someone out there that can’t come out here and defend himself against him. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the courts will decide who is right and who is wrong. 
 
We have conducted an investigation; we are satisfied, from the information that we have, that everything that 
developed within the sale of the old SGI building was, in fact, very proper. And, Mr. Speaker, I will invite the 
members, I will invite the members opposite to sit down with me, and I will give them all of the documents 
available to them, with some confidential aspect to it — simply because I am not prepared to open personal 
negotiations in business for the public to 



 

April 26, 1984 
 

2087 

 

see — because that would be setting some precedent, and I’m not prepared to do that. I am prepared to sit down 
with the Leader of the Opposition, and to show him how the transaction was handled, how straightforward it 
was all the way through, how many showings we had, how many expressions of interest that we had. Any time 
you would like to see it, I would be happy to sit down and show it to you. 
 
There was nothing in the sale of that building that showed any impropriety of any kind. It was straightforward. I 
admit that there is a disgruntled loser, as you might put it, that didn’t get the building. That is unfortunate. But 
there are many of them who expressed an interest of purchasing that building, who lost out. There are many of 
them. There was only one that could buy it, and he bought it, and bought it in good faith. 
 

An Hon. Member: — How many offered more? 
 

Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — So, Mr. Speaker, I can show you many more. I will be happy to show them to you any 
time, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Reduction in Bursary Payments 
 

Mr. Yew: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Minister of Advanced Education and Manpower. I want to 
ask the minister why his department has cut bursary payments to Metis and non-status Indian students enrolled 
in the Saskatchewan Training for Employment Program sponsored by the Gabriel Dumont Institute of Native 
Studies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the midst of final exams this month, those students received notices from the department 
informing them that bursary payments were to be cut by an average of 25 per cent, effective immediately. As a 
result, many of the students now enrolled in this job training program will not be able to continue their studies, 
due to a lack of financial resources. 
 
I ask the minister: who ordered the reassessment of those bursary payments, and what possible justification can 
you give for cutting assistance to those native students in the midst of their studies? 
 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t have all the details at my fingertips right now. But I’m aware of the 
reasoning behind the decision that was taken by my departmental officials who have briefed me on this subject. 
 
Two things: (1) I will take notice on the precise details the member has asked for; (2) I will undertake to meet 
with the member in my office, or his, I don’t care where, as soon as possible, and I’ll go over the details with 
him. 
 
But I will, Mr. Speaker, come back with all of the details that have been asked by that member, and I’ll lay them 
out here for the media, for the gallery, for everybody else here . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And, Mr. Speaker, 
I’d be quite happy — if the member from megaphone could shut his mouth for a minute — I’ll be quite happy to 
go right through that in estimates. 
 

Mr. Yew: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister will know that his government’s record with respect to 
job training and adult education opportunities for Metis and non-status Indian people in this province is nothing 
short of deplorable. 
 
There are 25,000 adults in Saskatchewan who are either Metis or non-status Indians. More than 70 per cent of 
those people are in the unskilled worker category, yet only 517 are now enrolled in employment-related 
education and training programs across this province. 
 
If you truly have a commitment, Mr. Minister, a commitment to job training for native people, if you truly 
wanted to help native people learn to help themselves, you would be expanding job training opportunities . . . 



 

April 26, 1984 
 

2088 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member is on his feet to ask a supplementary. You’ve made a fairly lengthy 
statement, but you have asked no question. If you have a question, proceed with it. 
 

Mr. Yew: — My question, Mr. Speaker, then, is: I ask the minister, how do you justify cuts to the type that I 
have asked about today — the type of training and government encouragement requested, when you claim to be 
concerned about job training and skills upgrading for native people in this province? 
 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be happy to discuss this in estimates. I dodge nothing in estimates. If 
it’s an estimates question, I’ll go right through it. Let’s take a look at a couple of things then. 
 
Since we took office, and since I became minister in this particular portfolio, we have a northern manpower 
needs committee established, we’ve made space available in La Ronge for multi-purpose lab, for high-tech 
courses during the past two years. We’ve got a chemical technician program running, which you never had 
running; environmental technician program running, which you never had running; Gateway School in La 
Ronge is being made available for training spaces as of April of this year. We’ve computer literacy, data 
processing courses running, office education programs running as of April of this year. We are offering 
accounting, we are offering word processing. If the members opposite really want, I’ll be more than happy to 
run through all of the programs right now. It could take about 20 minutes. 
 
And as for the bursaries, the program to which they refer is a special incentive program. Now that particular 
program, as they should well know, that particular program is aimed at several groups in society who are 
considered to be disadvantaged. 
 
Under the terms of that program, the particular group to which the hon. member was referring — he referred to 
the Gabriel Dumont Institute — our student service branch personnel has been available for counselling to that 
group. There are a total of 191 Gabriel Dumont students, and they knew that it was for first-year people, the 
forgiveness that he’s talking about. I know exactly where he’s going on this one with the bursary, was for one 
year, not for anybody who was in the second or subsequent years of the program, as the member well knows 
because I know to whom he spoke about the subject, and who gave him his information. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Establishment of Review Committee 
 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I wish to advise this Assembly that I am proceeding with 
the establishment of a review committee under section 7 of The Department of Education Act — a review to 
examine and report upon various issues that have been causing difficulty between the board of the Moose Jaw 
Roman Catholic Separate School Division and the teachers employed by that school division. 
 
I am also pleased to advise this Assembly and the citizens of Moose Jaw, that the teachers and the children will 
be back in the class-room come Monday morning. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, the review committee will consist of three persons. The chairman will be 
Dr. John Egnatoff, who has had an outstanding career in education. 
 
He has served as president of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. He has served as president of the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, the Canadian School Trustees’ Association, and the Canadian 
Education Association — a truly unique set of accomplishments that has  



 

April 26, 1984 
 

2089 

 

earned Dr. Egnatoff the respect of the education community, not only in Saskatchewan but throughout Canada. 
 
The two other members of the review committee will be named after further consultation with Dr. Egnatoff and 
the Moose Jaw board and teachers. I am pleased also to advise that the board and the teachers have pledged their 
co-operation with this review. 
 
The review committee will be given the assignment of examining the interrelationships among the board, 
teachers, public, and students; local communications procedures; the processes and approaches used by the 
board and teachers in the conduct of their local negotiations; such other matters as the review committee itself 
considers to be appropriate in order to facilitate the efforts of the board and teachers to build and maintain 
relationships that are conducive to a positive, educational environment. 
 
The committee shall also be asked to look at implementation strategies for any recommendations which may be 
made by the committee on the matters they have reviewed. The committee will be given the freedom to 
determine its own procedures and processes on the understanding that all of the interested parties, including the 
public, will have an opportunity for input. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would have been preferable to have had a local collective bargaining agreement settled by the 
board and teachers prior to a review getting under way. In this way, perhaps the committee could have more 
readily concentrated on other matters of long-term interest in building positive relationships in a sound 
educational environment in Moose Jaw. 
 
Officials of my department worked intensively with board and teacher representatives around the clock during 
the past two days in an effort to assist the parties in coming to an agreement. Agreement was close, but was not 
achieved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am hopeful that in spite of the differences that currently divide the teachers and the board, both 
parties sincerely desire to build and maintain a more positive and constructive local relationship. I am also 
convinced that both parties wish to do so in the best interest in serving the children of that school division. 
 
This review presupposes no fault or blame on either side. And I trust that all concerned will look upon the 
review as an opportunity not to dwell on the past but to build for the future, a future that minimizes conflict and 
builds on positive human relationships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today our hearts and prayers go out to the Moose Jaw Catholic system (the teachers and the 
trustees) while they are endeavouring together to provide a quality educational program for our future — our 
children. Thank you. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to make a few comments. First of all, I want to say that I am 
particularly pleased, particularly pleased for over 1,500 students who can now return to their classes and 
continue their education. I am particularly pleased with the efforts of the parents, the concerned parents of 
Moose Jaw, who came forward prior to the strike with the very recommendation which has belatedly, has been 
adopted. 
 
We, in the opposition, have indicated to the minister that the teachers, the parents first of all, had proposed and 
requested this type of review. We asked her to use her good offices to bring the parties together with this type of 
solution. 
 
The teachers in the separate school system in Moose Jaw also requested a solution by setting up a review and 
returning voluntarily to work. Our regret in the announcement is the strike certainly  



 

April 26, 1984 
 

2090 

 

could have been averted had the minister indeed listened to the parents, to the schoolteachers, and to the 
pressure that the opposition had presented to her in the House. 
 
Certainly, I want to say that it’s regrettable that we are entering the fourth week of the strike. Obviously we 
welcome that the impasse has been, in fact, overcome, and we can only say that certainly in the future I hope 
that the minister will be more cognizant of what the opposition is saying and what the respective parties are 
saying, and certainly we could have resolved this problem at a much earlier date. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 51 — An Act to establish The Industrial Incentive Program 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to establish The Industrial Incentive Program. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 
 

Points of Privilege 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would like to respond to points of privilege that were raised 
yesterday. 
 
First, I would like to deal with the point of privilege that was raised by the Attorney General. Yesterday, the 
Minister of Justice raised a point of privilege stating that the member for Regina Centre had breached the 
privileges of this Assembly in his remarks. I have reviewed the transcript of yesterday’s proceedings and find 
that a prima facie case of privilege has not been established. 
 
Dealing with the point of privilege raised by the member for Regina Centre, yesterday the member for Regina 
Centre raised a point of privilege for which he submitted notice as provided under Rule 6. I thank the hon. 
member for his notice and for the concise manner in which he raised the points of order before the orders of the 
day. 
 
Privilege is one of the most important procedural points in parliament. A breach of privilege of parliament 
affects all members and parliament itself. I refer all hon. members to Erskine May’s Parliamentary Practice, 
20th Edition, page 70, for a general definition of privilege as follows: 
 

Parliamentary privilege is the sum of the peculiar rights enjoyed by each House collectively as a 
constituent part of the High Court of Parliament, and by members of each House individually, without 
which they could not discharge their functions, and which exceed those possessed by other bodies or 
individuals. 
 

And further: 
 

The distinctive mark of a privilege is its ancillary character. The privileges of Parliament are rights 
which are “absolutely necessary for the due execution of its powers”. They are enjoyed by individual 
Members, because the House cannot perform its functions without unimpeded use of the services of its 
Members; and by each House for the protection of its Members and the vindication of its own authority 
and dignity. 



 

April 26, 1984 
 

2091 

 

The rights and privileges of members evolved and were enshrined over many centuries in the development of 
parliament. The ninth article of the Bill of Rights of 1688 stated: 
 

“That the freedom of speech, and debates or proceedings in Parliament, ought not to be impeached or 
questioned in any court or place out of Parliament”. 
 

Bourinot, another parliamentary authority wrote: 
 

Among the most important privileges of the members of the legislature is the enjoyment of freedoms of 
speech in debate, a privilege long recognized as essential to proper discussion and confirmed as part of 
the law of the land in Great Britain and all her dependencies. 
 

Bourinot’s Parliamentary Procedure and Practice, 4th Edition, page 47. 
 
And further from May on page 82: 
 

The absolute privilege of statements made in debate is no longer contested, but it may be observed that 
the privilege which formerly protected Members against action by the Crown now serves largely as 
protection against prosecution by individuals or corporate bodies. Subject to the rules of order in debate, 
a Member may state whatever he thinks fit in debate, however offensive it may be to the feelings, or 
injurious to the character, of individuals; and he is protected by his privilege from any action for libel, as 
well as from any other question or molestation. 
 

Saskatchewan legislatures have recognized this important privilege by incorporating it into The Legislative 
Assembly and Executive Council Act, Section 27, as follows: 
 

27. — (1) No member is liable to any civil action or prosecution, arrest, imprisonment or damages by 
reason of any matter or thing brought by him by petition, bill, resolution, motion or otherwise by reason 
of anything said by him before the Assembly. 
 
(2). The immunity provided by subsection (1) applies notwithstanding that words spoken by a member 
before the Assembly are broadcast, whether the broadcasting takes place while the words are being so 
spoken or the words are recorded at the time they are being so spoken, and are broadcast at a later time. 
 

The member for Regina Centre, yesterday, in raising his point of privilege stated that a letter he had received 
from the law firm of Wilson, Drummond, Finlay and Neufeld, and a statement of claim issued out of the Court 
of Queen’s Bench, were threatening to him as a member of the Legislative Assembly, and served to obstruct 
him in the carrying out of his duties. The letter and the statement of claim arose out of certain remarks made by 
the member in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I refer all hon. members to Erskine May’s Parliamentary Practice, Twentieth Edition, page 157. 
 

To attempt to influence members in their conduct by threats is also a breach of privilege. 
 

And further, on page 158. 
 

Conduct not amounting to a direct attempt to influence a member in the discharge of his duties, but 
having a tendency to impair his independence in the future performance of his duty, will also be treated 
as a breach of privilege. 



 

April 26, 1984 
 

2092 

 

. . . It is a breach of privilege to molest any member of either House on account of his conduct in 
parliament. 
 

I refer all members, again, to The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act of Saskatchewan, section 
24: 
 

The Assembly is a court and has all the rights, powers, and privileges of a court for the purposes of 
summarily inquiring into and punishing: 
 
Any assault, insult or libel, upon or to a member while the Assembly is in session; and 
 
(j) The bringing of a civil action or prosecution against, or the causing or effecting of the arrest or 
imprisonment of, a member for or by reason of any matter or thing brought by him by petition, bill, 
resolution, motion or otherwise or said by him before the Assembly . . . 
 

Upon reviewing the point raised by the hon. member yesterday, and after having referred to Bourinot, May, 
Beauchesne, and The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act of Saskatchewan, I find that a prima 
facie case of breach of privilege has been established. 
 
I wish to point out that it is the role of the Chair to examine whether, on the surface, the privileges and rights of 
the members, such as freedom of speech and the freedom to fulfil their role as a member unimpeded, have been 
reached. It is up to the Legislative Assembly as a whole to act as it sees fit in this matter. 
 

PRIVILEGE DEBATE 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I would refer yourself and all hon. members to the Rules and Procedures of 
the Legislative Assembly, rule 6(3), which says: 
 

When a prima facie case has been established it shall be taken into consideration immediately. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I outlined yesterday what I believe were the grounds upon which the privilege of this House had 
been breached. It has been heretofore, I think, accepted that members should not be the subject of intimidation 
by letters from law firms which state that if remarks are not withdrawn, an action will be pursued vigorously, 
and imply that if remarks . . . that if a member continues to do his duty as he sees it, the action will be pursued. 
 
I think, Mr. Member, the privilege is not just mine. It must be remembered it is the privilege of all members of 
this House. Think of my colleagues from rural ridings who might way to say some things that Canadian Pacific 
Rail might object to. And if they’re going to be subjected to the kind of intimidation and harassment which the 
long pockets of the railway permit, then the nature and the tone of the debate in this legislature is going to 
change very significantly. 
 
As I said, I said all these things yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I don’t intend to repeat it. I assume that the normal 
course of the House will follow, in which, once a prima facie case has been established, it will then be left to the 
committee of elections and privileges to deal with and I, therefore, Mr. Speaker, move, seconded by the hon. 
member from Shaunavon: 
 

That the matter of a letter from Mr. Eric J. Neufeld to Ned Shillington dated April 19, 1984; and the 
matter of a statement or claim between Gary Miller and Silver Developments Ltd. as plaintiffs, and Syd 
Lovell, Fossil Fuel Developments Ltd. and Ned Shillington as defendants; and the circumstances 
surrounding both be referred to the Standing Committee of Privileges and Elections of this legislature, 
and that in the course of its investigation the committee call before it as witnesses: Gary Miller, Mark 
Silver and Eric J. Neufeld, among others. 



 

April 26, 1984 
 

2093 

 

I just add, in closing, this is precisely the wording of the resolution I said I would introduce yesterday. I include 

the three because I assumed that they would be given an opportunity to speak and put their case forward. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. In the question raised yesterday by the hon. member from Regina 

Centre, I took the opportunity, as Mr. Speaker has ruled with regard to Erskine May’s, and I think the material 

part is page 82 of Erskine May, which Mr. Speaker referred to. I think it’s important when we look at the 

approach of this particular question and that we look at, in fact, what Erskine May had to say: 

 

The absolute privilege of statements made in debate is no longer contested . . . 

 

It’s very clear. I think it’s been without question in court for some time. 

 

. . . but it may be observed that the privilege which formerly protected members against . . . the Crown 

. . . 

 

That’s back to the early days of parliament in Great Britain where the Crown was basically the action against it. 

 

. . . now largely serves to protect against prosecution by individuals or corporate bodies. Subject to the 

rules of order . . . 

 

Which is obviously certain privileged questions that are still subject to privilege of statements in the House. 

 

. . . a member may state whatever he thinks fit in debate, however offensive it may be to the feelings, or 

injurious to the character, of individuals; and he is protected by his privilege from action for libel . . . 

 

The early case of Dillon v. Balfour, again referred to in Erskine May makes it clear: 

 

In this action brought in the Irish courts in 1887 against a member of the House of Commons for words 

spoken in the House, the court being satisfied (this is important in that) the court being satisfied that 

those words constituted . . . an action, ordered that the writ and statement should be taken off the records 

of the court, the court having no jurisdiction in the matter. 

 

Quite properly as well, Mr. Speaker, you referred to The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act and, 

in particular, section 27, which basically says (if we cut it aside): 

 

No member is liable for any civil action or . . . damages by reason of any matter or thing brought by him 

by petition, bill, resolution, motion or otherwise or by reason of anything said by him before the 

Assembly. 

 

And I think that’s clearly the case. Mr. Speaker has ruled, I believe, quite properly that this is, in fact, a prima 

facie case of privilege. 

 

I suggest that the law on this particular matter, I think, is beyond question, that should that case proceed, does 

that case proceed, that the courts have over time, both in our country and in any other Commonwealth country, 

ruled that that type of evidence is not admissable; that an action founded on statements made within the walls of 

a legislature of a parliament are not something that can be used in court. That is clear beyond question, that is 

clear beyond question. It has constantly and on several occasions that type of matter has been brought to the 

courts. The courts have consistently, year after year after year, ruled against that. That’s the situation, Mr. 

Speaker. 



 

April 26, 1984 
 

2094 

 

This Assembly, therefore, should not — so it’s clear Mr. Speaker — should not in any way try to interfere with 

the statement of claim in the sense that the statement of claim does have the right to go to the court. And it’s not 

for us — and I believe the hon. member will agree with me here — it’s not for us to say that a statement of 

claim could not proceed to the court. Clearly it can. So we should not deal with that particular situation here. 

 

I believe, therefore, what we have is, quite frankly, an open-and-shut case with regard to privilege in this 

particular case, and, as Mr. Speaker ruled, privilege is something that should not ever be taken lightly by the 

Assembly for the importance of the Assembly and for the importance of parliament. Therefore, we ask 

ourselves: what should the Assembly do about this particular case? And I think that’s really where we come to, 

what we want to talk about, what we, in fact, should do. 

 

We must obviously ensure that free speech is always preserved. That’s the nature and the meaning of what our 

democracy is about. That’s the meaning and purpose of what parliament and the legislature is about. And I think 

it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that we constantly remind ourselves and remind the public and make statements 

with regard to the importance of free speech, and that you should not be interfered with that free speech. 

 

That, I believe, can be accomplished by this Assembly today, making a clear and unequivocal statement with 

regard to the principles of free speech, what it means, and what is important. 

 

As a lawyer by profession, I believe, and I’m confident, that a clear statement from this Assembly to the parties 

involved, a clear statement by this Assembly, should, to a large degree, offset any intimidation that the hon. 

member from Regina Centre should feel with regard to any letter or any statement of claim. That’s the thing that 

is advanced. 

 

But then we must ask ourselves: what would be accomplished, Mr. Speaker, by referring this question to the 

committee on elections and privileges? What would be accomplished by that? To determine the fact that there is 

a privilege; that has been determined. To determine, therefore, then, what sanctions should be taken by this 

Assembly against the person that has committed that privilege or breach of privilege, and that’s really what 

we’re asking ourselves. And I simply ask the members of the Assembly, that is really the function of the 

Assembly. 

 

What is going to be served by having this matter referred to a committee to recommend a sanction, or to further 

investigate the whole issue involved? I think it’s very clear that the committee, any reference to a committee of 

privileges and elections, should not deal with the question of the substance of the dispute presently involved in 

the community today and last week. 

 

In other words, they should not deal with the question of what A said or what B said, or who is right and who is 

wrong. That’s not the issue that we have before us. The issue that we have before us is, in fact, that a letter was 

sent to a member of this Assembly threatening legal action, in fact, followed with or accompanying legal action 

being taken on it. 

 

So I suggest that what we have, Mr. Speaker, is a situation where we make a clear and unequivocal statement by 

this Assembly, re-establishing, restating, if you like, the right of free speech in this Assembly, and the right or 

the lack of a right for anybody to try to interfere with that. 

 

And I would go further. And I will be moving an amendment to the hon. member’s motion at the end of my 

comments, Mr. Speaker. I would go further than that and ask that this Assembly request an apology to Mr. 

Speaker from the law firm that, in fact, sent the letter to the hon. member. A clear, unequivocal statement of the 

right of free speech, number one, Mr. Speaker, and an apology to Mr. Speaker, because that is where the breach 

is. The breach is not solely to  



 

April 26, 1984 
 

2095 

 

the member from Regina Centre; the breach is to this Assembly if we are to rely on the concept of the right of 

free speech. 

 

Therefore, I think those are the two things that I would suggest that we must look at, and what we should do. 

We look at some of the history that we can have in this particular Assembly. I believe . . . And I was not a 

member of the Assembly at the time. The last time the Committee on Elections and Privileges sat — I think it 

was in the session of ’75 to ’78 — it created, I think, a certain degree of animosity. A certain political element 

tended to creep into it, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t believe that that concept did anything for the betterment of 

parliament or the betterment of the legislature. 

 

The last and most recent case involved a breach of privilege against the member from Saskatoon Riversdale, 

about a year or a year and a half ago, in which case a particular individual lured that particular member from the 

House on false pretences in order to effect service of a document in the precincts of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

That was found to be a breach of the member’s privilege. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, the ruling of the 

Assembly was, in fact, Mr. Speaker, that that particular individual make an apology to the House. And that, in 

effect, I believe, was done. 

 

So in summary, Mr. Speaker, I would say three things. Number one: we must always restate, and I think it’s 

important to once again restate the position on free speech in this Assembly. That’s number one. 

 

Number two: I believe to provide an appropriate sanction besides that would be to ask for Mr. Speaker to ask for 

an apology of Mr. — I believe his name is Eric J. Neufeld, who, in fact, authored the letter, Mr. Speaker, to Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, though, I would like to say this: the principle of free speech is an important principle. 

It’s the principle upon which we’re all here, and the reason we’re all here. And some of those principles have a 

lot of time-tested rules by which we live by, if you like. And we have those rights fought for, won, delivered 

over a long period of history in the Commonwealth and the parliamentary system — some of those rights for a 

long time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we have to look at, Mr. Speaker, and I think what we have to look at very often is, along with all rights, 

Mr. speaker, goes responsibilities, and those responsibilities should be handled by elected members, I suggest. 

 

And I think something that we should also keep in mind at all times: those responsibilities are also not to use the 

freedoms that we have so importantly hold in our country, not to use those freedoms and those principles and 

those rights lightly. We should not try to hide behind principles, Mr. Speaker. We should not try to make 

statements that we can declare to be under those rights but are misguided in many ways, that can be using 

particular rights that we have been granted for our own advantage. And I think that’s a very important and 

fundamental thing that we should also look at, Mr. speaker. We should not hide behind this Assembly to be able 

to say things that we wouldn’t otherwise say other places, because to do that perhaps we start to abuse some of 

those rights and some of those principles that we hold so dear. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move an amendment to the motion of the hon. member that would be as 

follows: 

 

That all words after the word “That” be struck out and the following substituted therefor: 



 

April 26, 1984 
 

2096 

 

This Assembly asserts that freedom of speech in debate in the Legislative Assembly is an historic and 

essential privilege of every member, and resolves that in threatening the hon. member from Regina 

Centre with legal action if he did not cease making certain remarks respecting a Mr. Gary Miller, Silver 

Developments Ltd., their legal counsel, Mr. Eric Neufeld, were guilty of a contempt of the Legislative 

Assembly, and this Assembly orders Mr. Neufeld to apologize to the Legislative Assembly by way of a 

letter to Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would so move that amendment, seconded by the hon. member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to address a few remarks to the amendment. The amendment 

is a comprehensive amendment which, in effect, totally replaces the previous motion. It is not an amendment 

which changes its meaning mildly, but an amendment which changes its meaning totally. 

 

We are dealing here with, as Mr. Speaker has said, the very basis of the operation of parliamentary institutions. 

No parliamentary institutions have attempted to operate, certainly in the British Commonwealth, without their 

members having protection against being sued for statements they make within the Chamber, or bills they 

introduced, or petitions they may present. 

 

This is not only something which members claim because they wish to be protected, but it is something which 

members claim because only if they exercise that right will they have the opportunity to represent fully the 

electors who have elected them. It is a right which inheres not only in the member, but also in his electors. It is 

they whose voice is to be heard in this Assembly if we are to be faithful to the principles of popular government. 

 

We are here talking about that principle. We are not talking about any principle of law, by which an individual 

member who is sued may have a proper defence or may have a basis on which to have the particular statement 

of claim struck out. It is not something which is designed to help members win lawsuits. It is something 

designed to see that members are not subjected to lawsuits. And that’s an important distinction. 

 

Because all of us know that he who is sued must spend time and money in defending himself or herself. And if 

members who speak in this House, and say things which they think ought to be said, whether rightly or wrongly, 

are going to be subjected to lawsuits, then, very clearly, they are going to be inhibited from speaking in this 

House. They’re not going to say the things they would say in this House, even though they have an ironclad 

legal defence. Because the very fact of having to defend the action, instruct counsel, spend time, deflects them 

from their ability to serve as members — you can’t be in court and in the legislature at the same time, or you 

can’t be instructing counsel and doing your work at the same time — deflects them from doing their job as a 

member, and also runs them the risk of substantial legal costs. 

 

So what we are trying to do is to prevent members of the House from being subjected to legal action. And that’s 

what all of the authorities say. That’s what Bourinot or May or Beauchesne or any of the other recognized 

authorities say. 

 

So we are not now talking about legal defences; we’re talking about the fact that members are not to be 

subjected to lawsuits. Now we have here a case where a member was very clearly subjected to a lawsuit. The 

writ was issued, the statement of claim was issued, and it was served, and with it, a letter which I think, on a fair 

interpretation, is designed to inhibit what the member would say in the legislature. I choose my words to make 

them as inoffensive and lacking in emotion as I can. But the letter was clearly designed to restrict what the 

member said in the legislature. 

 

Now there may well have been, in the minds of the persons who issued that writ, some grounds  



 

April 26, 1984 
 

2097 

 

for so doing. It seems to me that two things ought to be established by this House. We ought not, totally, to 

prejudge the issue. We ought to give those persons who we say, on I think pretty good grounds, are violating the 

privilege of this House, an opportunity to be heard. And we ought also to ask them — and this is the other side 

of the coin — why they have taken the step they have done. 

 

It’s not only, I think, good enough for the House to say . . . It’s not good enough for the House to say only, “You 

should not do this,” when the House has clearly had it’s privileges assaulted in this way, in an almost 

unprecedented way, so far as this legislature is concerned, for many decades. We ought to obtain from the 

persons who have conducted themselves in this way, an explanation of why they have done so. 

 

To fail to do so, to fail to do so will mean that the sanction is simply to have a resolution of the legislature 

passed, and presumably in due course, having to withdraw the action in so far as it concerns the member of the 

legislature. That is not a very heavy sanction. That is not likely to prevent other people from launching legal 

actions against members of the House. And that is what we are trying to do. 

 

We are trying to get across the idea that being a member of this House does not subject one to legal action for 

what one does in this House. And we are trying to get across the idea that you do not have to have a long purse 

to be a member of the legislature. You do not have to have money to defend legal actions. There is no 

distinction, and ought to be no distinction, between members who have substance to deal with legal actions 

which may be mounted against them, and members who do not have substance. And that’s important. And no 

citizen should have a special advantage because he has substance and, therefore, is able to launch a legal action, 

and, therefore, able to inhibit what a member says over and against another citizen who does not have that 

substance, and is not in a position to launch the legal action. 

 

All those points are pretty fundamental to making a legislature or a parliament work and, therefore, I think we 

should find out from the people who launched this action what they had in mind. It is fairer to them, because 

they may well have something they wish to say. And it is fairer to us, because it asks them to explain themselves 

and, in the course of so doing, if they have no explanation, it acts as a further deterrent to other people 

attempting what was clearly attempted in this case: to influence the member. 

 

We have persons who are in business, and things were said about the manner in which they conducted their 

business with the government — and I do not want to talk about the details of this at all, but simply to structure 

it — and these business people, who are in a commercial operation, launched an action against a member. Now I 

think we have to be sure that this is not repeated, and the way to do that, it seems to me, is to ask for an 

explanation and, if one of not forthcoming, then we can be even more forthright. And the very fact of having to 

appear and giving an account will be an additional deterrent to any other large organization, be it business or 

trade union or other, which attempts to influence what a member says in this Chamber by launching a legal 

action against him. 

 

Accordingly, I will be opposing the amendment because, it seems to me, it removes from the motion all 

effective sanction, except the sending of a letter of apology, and leaves members open to be sued by anybody 

who will run the risk of having a motion of this Assembly passed and having their lawyer write a letter. Not a 

very large risk, and one which, notwithstanding the fact that there may well be a legal defence, will not be 

sufficient to deter people of substance from attempting to influence what is said in this Assembly if they do not 

like what is said in this Assembly. That, I think, is not good enough. 

 

We need to be a little more forthright in protecting members and, if I may say so, particularly members of the 

opposition in their ability to say what they think needs to be said in the legislature, without having any large 

organization, in this case a business organization, using the  



 

April 26, 1984 
 

2098 

 

threat of legal action to control what is said. I do not think the motion moved by the member for Kindersley is in 

any way effective in achieving what I think we all wish to achieve and, accordingly, I will be opposing the 

amendment and supporting the main motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now that the Assembly has determined that there was a breach of 

privilege . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well, that there’s a prima facie case; we are now debating that, we are 

now debating that and, I think, it’s been accepted by members of the Assembly. But how does that privilege 

arise? A privilege arises by the historic basis of the members of this House to freedom of speech. 

 

The rules of this House go back several hundred years, Mr. Speaker, and they, in many cases, are somewhat 

esoteric — some go back to 3 or 400 years — that we get brought forward from time to time. I think it fair to 

say that not many people in the public understand the rules, nor do we expect them to know the detailed rules of 

this Assembly. 

 

What we are trying to do with a motion . . . What we are trying to do with the amendment is make it clear, as the 

Leader of the Opposition says, that there is an absolute privilege to what members say in this House. And that is 

protected, that is protected as well by section 27 of The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council. It does 

not go as far as the hon. Leader of the Opposition has said, which he says is to protect members against lawsuits. 

It doesn’t go that far. To that it that far, as the hon. member said, to take it that far it does not protect against 

lawsuits. The hon. members know full well, know full well that an employee, now an employee of the Leader of 

the Opposition, through devious means, enticed a member out of the House to serve a court document; and it 

was done under The Elections Act to controvert an election. That doesn’t protect us against lawsuits. 

 

What it does is protect us against civil action or prosecution, arrest, imprisonment, or damage by reason of any 

matter or thing brought by him by petition, bill, resolution, motion, or otherwise by reason of anything said — 

said by him before the Assembly. Very, very narrow. Very, very narrow. And it does not protect all members 

against lawsuits. And I beg to differ with the Leader of the Opposition who, I think, put a rather extreme 

interpretation on what that privilege does. 

 

But what does the member from Regina Centre’s motion say? And I think it indicates . . . Really the intent of his 

motion is not to deal with the right of members to freedom of speech. It does not deal solely with his claim of 

privilege and his concern about the legal action, because if we read the motion, his motion, who does he want to 

call? Who does he want to call? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, no, he names them: Gary Miller, Mark 

Silver, Eric J. Neufeld. He doesn’t say anything about calling himself. He doesn’t say anything about calling 

other parties’ names who have been brought forward . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It does not. It does not. The 

design and the intention of the motion, Mr. Speaker, is abundantly clear. 

 

The intention of the motion is not really to deal with the privilege. It’s to deal with the witch-hunt, or the court 

action, and that’s really what the hon. member wants this Assembly to deal with. He wants — I don’t know for 

what reason — certain select members of the public, not any of the ones that he’s been referring to over the past 

several days of debates, very carefully that he has not given some of their names. He very carefully defined 

whom he wanted before this Assembly. So I think there’s not much doubt that the motion as proposed is really 

an investigatory process desired by the opposition. 

 

What really should be done? We should let the courts decide on the matters in dispute. The hon. member, the 

hon. member, my understanding . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You want us to question the statement of claim? 

I think the courts should decide that. And the question of privilege — I have before me a copy of the demand 

letter from the law firm in which they make  



 

April 26, 1984 
 

2099 

 

an allegation, correctly or incorrectly, but an allegation which I believe the courts decide, that legislative 

privileges does not appear to be a defence because the publication of an injurious falsehood and the tort so 

referred to. 

 

That is the allegation they make that should be decided by the courts, and I think all hon. members will agree 

with that. The courts may then rule that the claim of privilege applies, and that the action in tort is not a valid 

one. That is something for the courts to decide, and that is the claim. When the plaintiffs claim, Mr. Speaker, 

that this privilege does not apply — and that’s their claim, as I say, correctly or incorrectly, they make that claim 

— that is something for them to decide. 

 

Now I don’t know why the hon. member . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I can talk about suits. I mean, I can 

talk about Mr. Parker, and I don’t know what other allegations have been made from time to time, so let’s . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I rise on a point of order, and ask what relevance suits that have nothing to do with 

anything in this House that we’re not debating are, so that they are injected in this debate by the Minister of 

Justice. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I would ask that the Minister of Justice stay on the topic that’s before the House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I made reference to one particular court action because it, in my view, was a 

precedent and it indicates that, in fact, members can be sued — members of this Assembly, and it’s not the 

blanket statement made by the Leader of the Opposition,. 

 

I also, Mr. Speaker, brought to the attention of all hon. members what the motion, what the motion was really 

intended to do. And I think, as well, that we must take into account that there is an allegation in the claim that 

the legislative privilege does not appear to be a defence, because there is a tort, an allegation of the tort of 

publication of an injurious falsehood. That is something for the courts to decide. 

 

I think that is the proper course. The argument that it’s costly to defend, I don’t think has any relevance to the 

matters. I think that the hon. member may well have got himself in over his head, and I think that the hon. 

member is looking for an out, the hon. member from Regina Centre. 

 

And I can say that for another reason, Mr. Speaker, because if the hon. member, if the hon. member had the 

courage, and if he really believed what he was stating by innuendo over the last few days was accurate, why 

does he not say it beyond the boundaries of this Assembly? Why does he not? Mr. Speaker, I am giving the 

argument as to why the motion cannot be supported and should not be supported, and why the amendment 

should be supported, and I have given the reasons. I have given the reasons. I know the hon. members opposite 

do not like to hear this. 

 

We have a situation where a member is making statements to claim a privilege. It doesn’t bother him that he 

may be ruining reputations or whatever. So the courts should decide it. The courts should rule on the claim 

made by certain individuals, and the courts should rule as the claim is made, that because of the tort of injurious 

falsehood, the legislative privilege does not appear. So I’ve given. I’ve given, as I say, rightly or wrongly; that’s 

a claim made. And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve given every reason for rejecting the proposed motion. 

 

It specifically goes after certain parties. It looks very much like an attempt to avoid someone being held to some 

account. It looks . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well they say, exactly. We talked. We talk, and that’s precisely 

what the amendment says; that is precisely what the amendment says. It restates. It restates the historic right to 

freedom of speech, and I happen to believe that many people in the public don’t necessarily know all the rules of 

this Assembly and,  



 

April 26, 1984 
 

2100 

 

if they do necessarily know all the rules, that they may well have a claim that they make reference to in the 

demand letter. 

 

So what are we asking for? We are restating. We are restating the privilege set out in section 27 of The 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act. We are reaffirming it as a Legislative Assembly, and we are 

following a precedent. Someone from the public may have broken the rules of this House, that they apologize. 

Just as we ask others. 

 

So I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if, as the Leader of the Opposition says, we should be communicating a message 

out there, as to the protections that involve or that come to members of this Assembly, this will be more than 

adequate. I think it will make it very clear that we do have an absolute privilege, that the individuals who have 

breached that privilege will have to apologize to you, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s a more than adequate warning 

to the general public, but we also have to remember, we also have to remember that with that privilege goes 

responsibility. Unfortunately, in this case it didn’t, but it may be a warning to all members, as well, that with 

that privilege goes a responsibility. We could not make a more clear statement, Mr. Speaker, than to support the 

amendment proposed by the Minister of Finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I am speaking to the amendment. I don’t intend to be long. I do intend to 

suggest to this House that what is being offered by this amendment is wholly and completely inadequate, and 

would embarrass any government but this one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I asked members opposite and the Minister of Justice to read section 24(j) which I read yesterday 

in the House. I would ask the Minister of Justice, who is supposed, as all members are — but you have a special 

responsibility to uphold the laws of this province — to listen to this subsection. 

 

The Assembly is a court and has all the rights, powers and privileges of a court for the purpose of 

summarily inquiring into and punishing: (and the offence so stated is) the bringing of a civil action or 

prosecution . . . or the causing (of the effect or) arrest or imprisonment of, a member . . . by (the) reason 

of any matter or thing brought by him by petition . . . or otherwise . . . before the Assembly. 

 

The offence stated in 24(j) is the bringing of a civil action, and the amendment put forward by the Minister of 

Finance is utterly and completely silent with respect to the civil action. The civil action is never mentioned. 

 

All that this asinine amendment does is to say to the lawyers, “When you deliver a statement of claim on the 

basis of something said in the Assembly, don’t be too descript about it. Don’t suggest the obvious. But if you 

persist the action will be persisted in.” The statement of claim is never mentioned in the amendment. They are 

free to continue with the statement of claim, as they no doubt will. They are free to continue with the statement 

of claim and pursue it with all the consequences that entails. 

 

I suggest to members opposite that you are disregarding The Legislative Assembly Act, the protections given to 

me by the history and tradition of this parliament, and the protection offer is none at all, is none at all. Anybody 

who is capable of writing such a letter, I suggest to you, is quite capable of making an apology and continuing 

the action. 

 

All this amendment says is he shouldn’t have threatened you overtly. It does not say that the action shouldn’t 

have been brought. The Legislative Assembly Act says the action shouldn’t have been brought, but you people 

choose to ignore the legislation upon which this Assembly is based, and I say your response is wholly, and 

completely inadequate. 



 

April 26, 1984 
 

2101 

 

I say to you, Mr. Member, that isn’t relevant. What is relevant is what’s said inside this House because there 
will be times and occasions when members must raise issues which are going to step on the toes of some of the 
powers that be, and we, as practical politicians, know that some of those people will use whatever means are 
available to discourage a discussion of an issue. 
 
And I suggest to you that that is one of the effects of this statement of claim, is an attempt to discourage the 
discussion of the issue in this Assembly, and your amendment doesn’t deal with that at all because the statement 
of claim and the action are going to continue, by your own admission. Not only is it not mentioned in the 
amendment, by your own admission, that statement of claim is free to continue, and I say to you, Mr. Minister, 
you are ignoring the legislation upon which this House is based, and you are ignoring all of the precedents cited 
by me and all of the precedents cited by the Speaker in finding a prima facie case of privilege. 
 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It is true. Read section . . . Let me read again for the Minister of Finance, who 
seems to have difficulty with the English language . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I would think that The 
Legislative Assembly Act would have some precedence over Erskine May, and I ask that you listen again to this 
section. 
 

The Assembly is a court and has all the rights, powers and privileges of a court for the purposes of 
summarily inquiring into and punishing . . . 
 

and then he states a number of offence, one of which is: 
 

The bringing of a civil action . . . 
 

And I say you are, Mr. Minister, you are ignoring the legislation of this House, and you are ignoring a very 
important principle that we be free to raise issues on behalf of our constituents, which . . . and enjoy a freedom. 

 
The issue is not whether they can continue with the thing in the court. It is up to this Legislative Assembly to 
protect the privileges of the members. It’s not up to the Court of Queen’s Bench, as the minister very well 
knows. As the minister very well knows, it will be a lengthy period of time before a judge ever sees this thing. 
The responsibility lies on Mr. Speaker to defend the privileges of the members, and he has done so within the 
limits of the rules. And then the responsibility is on the House to defend the privileges of its members, and you 
seek to avoid that through an amendment which I suggest disregards the legislation. This is utterly and 
completely inadequate. 
 
Mr. Minister, I say as well that you are . . . I want to repeat what the member from Elphinstone said, and that is 
that the process which you choose is a breach of fundamental justice. As angry as I am about your behaviour, I 
am not angry enough to lose sight of the fact that the parties involved have a right to be heard. They have a right 
to state their case. Perhaps there is something . . . They have a right to state their case either before the bar of the 
Assembly, if you so choose, or before the committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that what I ask for myself, I’m equally vigilant in defending for others. I ask for the freedom 
of speech, but I’m quite prepared to defend Mr. Miller and Mr. Silver’s freedom of speech as much as I am 
prepared to defend my own. You’re denying them that. 
 
I don’t know if the speech given by the Minister of Justice is worthy of comment. Suffice it to say that the 
incident involving the member from Riversdale, as regrettable as it was, bears no relation to the present 
problem. The suit was not in any sense based on anything said inside the House. The witnesses named as those 
which should be called were, in my view, the parties whose rights would be interfered with if, in fact, what has 
happened is found to be a breach of privilege. It’s illogical. I’m surprised that even this government, in its 
bloated arrogance, has the face to suggest that you can call a letter a breach of privilege, but the statement of 
claim upon which the letter is based is not a breach of privilege. What you suggest is the letter will be senseless 
without the  



 

April 26, 1984 
 

2102 

 

statement of claim. The letter only has any meaning because it’s based on a statement of claim. If the letter is an 

offence against the privileges of the House, then surely the statement of claim is. 

 

It would have been clear enough, I think, had it not been for The Legislative Assembly Act, the authority cited 

by myself and by Mr. Speaker, and the act cited by Mr. Speaker, the act of some antiquity actually, whose name 

escapes me — all make it crystal clear that you don’t bring a civil action on the basis of anything said inside the 

House, and that’s not up to the courts to defend that privilege. That’s up to this House to defend that privilege. 

 

And I suggest to this House, and that includes all 55 members sitting opposite and to my right, to my left, have 

the same responsibility to defend that privilege as members of this caucus do. I call upon you to do your duty. 

 

The division bells having rung from 3:40 p.m. on Thursday, April 26 until 5:40 p.m. Tuesday, May 1, 1984: 

 

Amendment agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

YEAS — 49 

Devine 

Muller 

Birkbeck 

McLeod 

Andrew 

Berntson 

Lane 

Taylor 

Rousseau 

Katzman 

Pickering 

Hardy 

McLaren 

Garner 

Smith (Swift Current) 

Baker 

Hepworth 

Schoenhals 

Duncan 

Currie 

Sandberg 

Klein 

Dutchak 

Embury 

Dirks 

Maxwell 

Young 

Domotor 

Folk 

Muirhead 

Bacon 

Hodgins 

Parker 

 

Smith (Moose Jaw South) 

Hopfner 

Myers 

Rybchuk 

Caswell 

Hampton 

Gerich 

Schmidt 

Tusa 

Meagher 

Glauser 

Sauder 

Johnson 

Martens 

Weiman 

Morin 

 

NAYS — 8 

 

Blakeney 

Thompson 

Engel 

Lingenfelter 

Koskie 

Lusney 

Shillington 

Yew

 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Yes, I would like to move an amendment to the motion as amended as follows: 

 

That the following words be added after the final phrase, “a letter to Mr. Speaker”: 

 

and that this Assembly notes that the legal action commenced by the plaintiffs, Gary Miller and Silver 

Developments Ltd. against the hon. member for Regina Centre has been withdrawn; and further, that this 

Assembly accepts the letter, dated May 1, 1984, to Mr. Speaker, from the said Mr. Neufeld, as an 

apology to the Legislative  



 

April 26, 1984 
 

2103 

 

Assembly referred to above. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by my colleague, Mr. Lingenfelter, the member from Shaunavon. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

At 5:58 p.m. His Honour the Administrator entered the Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal 

Assent to the following bill: 

 

An Act for the granting to Her Majesty certain sums of Money for the Public Service of the Fiscal Year ending 

on March 31, 1985. 

 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 5:59 p.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 6:00 p.m. 


