



















































Hansard: December 14, 1984


541 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

December 14, 1984 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

CLERK: — I hereby present and lay on the Table the following petitions by Mr. Young, of Eric Reid, Douglas 

A. Schmeiser, Clarence J. Kirkpatrick, Phillip Griffin-Warwicke, and Donald W. Somers, all of the city of 

Saskatoon, in the province of Saskatchewan, and by Mr. Tusa, of the Saskatchewan Co-operative Credit Society 

Limited and Saskatchewan Co-operative Financial Services Limited, both of the city of Regina, in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Sixth Report of the Standing Committee On Communication 
 

CLERK ASSISTANT: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the Standing Committee on Communication, presents 

the sixth report of the said committee which is as follows: the committee has adopted the Saskatchewan 

Legislative Library's annual report for the period, November 1, 1982 to October 31, 1983 and the Records 

Retention and Disposal Recommendations of Sessional Paper 207 of 1983-84. 

 

MR. YOUNG: — I move: 

 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Communication be now concurred in. 

 

Seconded by the member for The Battlefords. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I would be interested to know what date that meeting took place that 

the report is coming out of. Members of the opposition, if it is a meeting that happened this past week, were not 

made aware of the meeting. in fact, we got a note which was subsequently cancelled by a phone call to our 

office, and I'd be interested in knowing the detail of that meeting. 

 

MR. YOUNG: — Yes, the meeting was duly called for this morning. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Minister, I move the debate be now adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on Tuesday next I shall move first reading of a Bill to 

amend The Occupational Health and Safety Act. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall, on Tuesday, move first reading of a Bill, an 

Act respecting Securities in Saskatchewan. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to you, and 

through you to the members of this House, a group 15 grade 12 students from Miller 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

542 
 

Comprehensive High School in the city of Regina. They are accompanied by their teacher, Vaughn McIntyre, 

and they're presently sitting in the Speaker's gallery. 

 

I hope that you find your visit to the legislature this morning both interesting and beneficial. I would like to 

inform you that I will be meeting with you immediately after question period in the rotunda for pictures and, 

following that, in the members' dining room for refreshments, and I would ask that the member of both sides of 

the House join in extending a warm welcome to our guests this morning. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RYBCHUK: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As Miller Comprehensive High School borders the constituency 

of Regina Victoria, I am sure that a number of those students must live in the constituency of Regina Victoria, 

and being their MLA for Regina Victoria, I would also take the opportunity to welcome them here this morning. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SVEINSON: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Deputy Premier in the absence of the Premier. It's 

now been 16 days . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. We were still on introduction of guests, and not it's oral questions. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Health Services in the Athabasca Basin 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my question this morning to the Minister of Health. 

Mr. Minister, my question is regarding the health services and the plans for hospital facilities in the far North. 

Can the minister tell the House the status of the Uranium City Hospital? With respect to medical doctors, is the 

arrangement of bringing doctors to Uranium City through the University of Saskatchewan working; and do you 

have plans to open hospital facilities of any kind in the nearby community of Fond-du-Lac, Stony Rapids, or 

Black Lake? 

 

HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the member's question regarding health services in the 

Athabasca Basin, at the present time it is the intention to keep the hospital at Uranium City open. We are 

coming forward with some plans that will certainly supply a constant supply of medical doctors into Uranium 

City and up the west side of the province in La Loche, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Uranium City. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Health. The minister will know that 

both Black lake and Fond-du-Lac fall under federal Department of Indian Affairs jurisdiction. Has his 

department been exploring the possibility of getting federal funds to help build hospital facilities in either one of 

those communities or in Stony Rapids? 

 

HON. MR. TAYLOR: — The discussions with the federal government regarding health services in the 

Athabasca Basin, Mr. Minister, have been basically on supply of physicians. And the arrangement that I will be 

announcing in due course, in the not too distant future, of an assured physician supply for that area, is a joint 

co-operative venture between the federal government and the provincial government regarding doctor supply. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — New question, Mr. Speaker, and by way of information, Mr. Minister, and I most 

certainly urge you to expand hospital facilities in that region. Is the minister aware of a case of Mrs. Albertine 

Roy of Stony Rapids . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, if the minister from Prince Albert-Duck Lake 

will just hold his cool for a second here. 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

543 
 

Mr. Minister, Mrs. Roy was 40 years old and a mother of nine children, and she had been suffering severe 

headaches for many weeks and had complained to the doctor who visits Stony Rapids once a week, and also to 

the nurse. The doctor had booked space in a Saskatoon hospital for her on Wednesday, December 5th. She was 

to be flown down on a scheduled flight Tuesday, December 4th. 

 

The day prior to that, on Sunday, her headaches became so severe that she went to the public health nurse and 

asked to be flown out immediately by air ambulance. She went there with her daughter, who I spoke to last 

night. She was sent home with pain-killers. Later that night, between 5 in the morning and 8 o'clock that 

morning, this mother, 40-year-old mother of nine children, died. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I do not blame the nurse. Throughout the North, life and death decisions, which should be 

handled by medical doctors and which require hospital facilities, are being forced onto the public health nurses 

in these small clinics. 

 

Is the minister aware of this case, and, if not, will he promise a full investigation and a full report to the 

Assembly? 

 

HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, I would have to inform the minister I'm not aware of the case. I'm sure 

he knows that I will do a full investigation of all of the situations surrounding this passing of this lady. I'm sorry 

to hear of that passing, and I think you know from my past reputation that there will be a very full inquiry, and 

I'll report back to you on Monday. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister will be aware that I have indicated to you on 

many occasions in here that health services in the far northern regions were dangerously low, and I urge him to 

take a serious look at setting up hospital facilities in that region in the Stony Lake area, and I'm sure that the 

minister will agree that cases like this should never take place. It's a serious situation. And I would also ask him 

when he is looking into this investigation, would he also investigate — there was a 12-year-old girl who also 

died en route from Stony rapids to Saskatoon, and I'd ask him if he would also investigate that situation. 

 

HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I'm saddened to hear of these cases. of course, there are deaths in 

Saskatchewan and in other areas also in the transport of people, sometimes inevitable. And we all feel deeply 

grieved when this happens. Certainly I will look into these situations. 

 

And I think, and I will get back to what I said earlier, the very fact that we have worked out a solution to 

physician supply in northern Saskatchewan, up the north-west side, which has been a problem for many years in 

this province — we have come to a solution between the federal government and the provincial government — 

I think that is an indication of the sincerity of this government to providing the best health services possible for 

the people of northern Saskatchewan and for Saskatchewan as a whole. And I thank you for bringing this to my 

attention, and you have my assurance that we will look into it in both cases and report back to you. Thank you. 

 

Waiting Lists in Saskatoon Hospitals 
 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I would direct my supplement to the Minister of Health, related to 

the question asked by the member from Athabasca. The arrangement that you have with the North is one of 

doctors flying in, and patients hopefully flying out, when hey need attention, to Saskatoon, a system that my 

colleague is saying and has said continually for the past year is not working because of the lack of doctors, the 

lack of hospitals, and the lack of air flights out. I would ask you as well, Mr. Minister, if the problem of waiting 

lists in Saskatoon does not also add to that. And I quote here from the Star-Phoenix which says: 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

544 
 

Almost 5,000 people are now on a waiting list at the three hospitals, some waiting as long as nine months. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would ask you whether or not you are doing some major readjusting of your budget around the 

cabinet table to take this into consideration that those waiting lists are brought down? 

 

HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Minister, in regard to . . . I think he asked two questions there. The first one was 

about people from the North, if the waiting list was affecting their getting into the hospital. I would just want to 

reiterate that there's the same number of hospitals in the North that there's always been, and I imagine the flights 

are the same, if not more. So, therefore, when people come out of the North into Saskatoon — where they 

usually go — they are emergency cases, and I don't think they're subject to any waiting list in that situation. 

 

I should also point out, in answer to that part of the question, which the member opposite obviously overlooked 

and his colleague knows well, that we are certainly using Uranium City Hospital for the types of procedures that 

can be performed there. But the people in northern Saskatchewan, when there is more difficult types of surgery 

and deliveries, require and would like to have the best services, the same as anyone else in Saskatchewan, and 

that may mean coming to the University Hospital or a Saskatoon hospital. and that is the type of service that is 

being provided. 

 

As far as the waiting list, which I think was the second part of the member's question, certainly there are some 

waiting lists in Saskatoon. I want to congratulate the people in the Saskatchewan hospital management who 

have worked very co-operatively with our department . . . (inaudible) . . . that the member full well knows — he 

knows — I explained to him in the last session certain things that have taken place. 

 

Renovations at the University Hospital have been set back a bit, so that people, level 4s could be accommodated 

there. We're working on using the nurses' residence at City Hospital for psychiatric patients. St. Paul's Hospital 

did not have their slow-down during the summer — did not have the slow-down during the summer that was the 

pattern of the NDP. That was their way. We went flat out with the A,B,Cs so more people could be 

accommodated. So I want to say that their waiting lists are being addressed. They're being done in co-operation, 

in co-operation, Mr. Speaker, between the Department of Health and the hospitals in Saskatoon. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, a supplement to the minister. And it has to do with the waiting list, 

which I asked in my previous question. you will know that the waiting list in Saskatoon is now 5,000. 

 

I would like to ask you, Mr. Minister, the joint planning committee of the Saskatoon hospitals recommended 

that renovations take place at the three hospitals — City, University, and St. Paul's — that would include 

spending of $250 million of 1982 dollars. 

 

I wonder if you can inform me whether or not you have cut that back to $50 million, and what was the rationale 

behind that, when the waiting list of 5,000 was to be partially solved by the spending of 250 million? 

 

HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, I answer questions when the facts are right. The minister — the 

member — is misinformed. He is totally misinformed. The joint hospitals' planning facility group in Saskatoon 

never ever recommended $250 million expenditure. 

 

MR. SVEINSON: — . . . (inaudible) . . . waiting lists. My question is again to the Minister of Health. But the 

waiting lists are a result of underfunding, and there has been an absolute 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

545 
 

underfunding by this government in health care in Saskatoon and in Regina. And I ask the minister if he has any 

plans for a pay-for-stay system that Alberta haw now implemented for hospital care, and if he feels that will 

improve the waiting lists in this province? 

 

HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. 

 

HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite again is wrong in his facts. He says that the 

waiting lists are all due to underfunding. He should know that the funding of the hospitals in Saskatchewan has 

increased over the last two years. He should also know, and if he would do a little more studying rather than 

talking about the United Appeal and not getting his facts right, that there are many factors that make up waiting 

lists in hospitals —referral patterns, various things. 

 

But I was interested, Mr. Speaker, I was interested to hear the member come forward with the Liberal solution, 

and that is to put on fees in the hospitals. And I'm very pleased, I'm very pleased to see the stance of the 

Saskatchewan . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please, order. Order, order. It's impossible to carry on question period with that 

much commotion in the House. 

 

MR. SVEINSON: — New question, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the Minister of Health. He indicates that 

funding has increased in Saskatchewan in the law year, and he's right. My facts aren't wrong. But also, the 

waiting lists have not improved in this province. Also, the hospitals are underfunded. Just talk to any of them in 

the city of Regina and I think that will be very well substantiated. The plan that you outlined in Alberta, which 

is pay for stay in hospitals, is not a Liberal plan, it's a Conservative plan. And there are indications that this 

government may implement that pay-for-stay plan. 

 

I want your answer, Mr. Minister. Will this government, will this government introduce programs in this 

province affecting health, which will cost the residents at the hospitals, at the hospitals — not through fund 

raising efforts — but will cost the residents at the hospitals for their stay in these hospitals? 

 

HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, to a very noisy question, a simple answer is no. It is the Liberal Party 

of Saskatchewan who today, who today, have put out very clearly what their plan for health care in this 

province would be, and that would be charges for people in the hospital. I'm glad, sir, that you finally had the 

courage to stand up and show your true colours. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — Mr. Speaker, the Liberal party has a plan, but it's a plan to fund hospitals, look after 

patients, waiting lists . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Order, please. The member is making a speech. If he has a question, a 

supplementary question, we'll take that. 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — New question, Mr. Speaker. New question. With respect to waiting lists, I think the 

simple denominator this government doesn't understand is it creates a great deal of consternation with the 

patient out there who is in a minority position with respect to our health care system. 
 
At the Plains Health Centre, in fact, if you need surgery, open-heart surgery, you face up to a two-month delay 

in getting into that ward. I would ask you, Mr. Minister: is there more funding forthcoming for the hospitals in 

Regina to allay the problems of delay in situations that are not 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

546 
 

tonsillitis or they're not a matter of tonsils that are being removed — they're serious surgery that has to be done 

today, not two or three months down the road? 

 

HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, again my friend from across the way is misinformed. If he would 

realize that last year at the Plains Hospital in Regina we put extra funds into the budget to increase the number 

of open-heart surgeries from 12 to 20 a week, I think that's evidence that we're working together with the Plains 

Hospital. 

 

And I say, "together." And you can go to any hospital in Saskatchewan, any base hospital, and they will tell you 

that that's a big change in the last two years, that we are working together to solve these problems. The 

Saskatoon joint planning facility is perhaps the best example of planning between base hospitals and 

government in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

Hospital for La Ronge Region 

 

MR. YEW: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my question to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, in view of 

the deteriorating public health facilities in the North and the increasing need for health services, can you advise 

this Assembly and the people of northern Saskatchewan — particularly La Ronge — what the status is with 

respect to the proposed hospital and a nursing care home for that particular region? 

 

HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Well, first of all, I question the words, "deteriorating service." I mean, you know, 

let's have some substantiation. I think you'd have trouble finding that. 

 

But as to the La Ronge hospital, yes. As with many hospitals in this province, there was a backlog in hospital 

construction. I had discussion with someone from La Ronge just not too long ago, a person from La Ronge who 

came in to see me because he felt perhaps maybe here was someone who would listen to him, a person who had 

his request fallen on deaf ears for a number of years. That person, Mr. Speaker, was none other than a 

gentleman I admire in La Ronge, namely, Norm MacAuley. 

 

MR. YEW: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. I'll just repeat my question to the Minister for Health. I ask the 

minister again: what is the status of the need, the direr need, of a new hospital in La Ronge? What is the status 

of his hospital and the nursing care home that was in the development stages that was a priority to the residents 

of this region some two and a half years ago? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, I must say that with people from La Ronge, and the latest was Mr. 

MacAuley who came in and said for years it was falling on deaf ears — he said, "Perhaps, Graham, you would 

be the kind of person that would listen to us." I was pleased to have Mr. MacAuley come in the day after the 

opening of the legislature. I believe Mr. MacAuley still is the true voice of that constituency, and we did discuss 

this, as I do with any other groups. 
 
And I'd be willing to discuss with the people from La Ronge, with their representative. As we know, if you want 

to . . . Mr. Speaker, if you would like . . . You know, I've heard many times the people from the other side say 

something about nursing home construction and special care homes. The member is asking about La Ronge, 

today. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. the members from both sides of the House have been excessively noisy the 

last two days. The minister is trying to give an answer to a question, asked by a member from this side of the 

House. He cannot be heard, the member cannot hear the answer, and I would ask for some decorum. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — And the short answer to the question is that we're . . . 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

547 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. It's impossible for me to hear what the minister is answering. You're saying 

what he asked about. I don't know what the minister is answering because I can't hear. 

 

HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I'll try again. The discussions with La Ronge are the same as any 

other community in Saskatchewan, where communities come in and lay out their case, as one of the members of 

that community did just the day after the opening of this legislature, and we had a good discussion about it. 

 

But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, if you would afford me the time, I hear the people opposite wondering about 

nursing home construction in this province. I would like to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Next question. Order, please. I'll take the next question. 

 

MR. YEW: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to tell the member, the Minister for Health, that I 

have fought and raised this particular issue in the House in the course of the last two and a half years, and to this 

point in time you are still evading the question. 

 

What is the status of this hospital? 

 

HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I am not evading anything. He raised the question. I went to La Ronge, met with the 

town council, met with the bands. I've been in discussions, the same as we do with any other community in 

Saskatchewan that wants to have a hospital, and the status is that we're undergoing discussions, the same as we 

are with many others. 

 

And I can . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If you would just be quiet for a minute I can give you . . . I'd be 

pleased, Mr. Speaker, to read that complete list of beds that have been approved in Saskatchewan since this 

government took office, and that is a great difference from a moratorium. And if you would like to hear that, I 

would be glad to share this with the members of the press, the people of Saskatchewan, and the people from the 

opposition. 

 

Wild Rice Industry 
 

MR. YEW: — A new question, Mr. Speaker, and I direct this to the Minister for Parks and Renewable 

Resources. 

 

Last week, on December 6th, Mr. Minister, I questioned you regarding your government's position on the wild 

rice industry. I asked, Mr. Speaker, if his government's review and study of the wild rice industry, one of our 

most valuable resources in northern Saskatchewan, would be burdened and disrupted by this government's 

policy review and recommendations. The minister did not deny or confirm my question. 

 

I ask him now, Mr. Speaker, will he assure this House and the people of the North that he will: (1) support the 5 

cents per bushel royalty structure now in place and not increase the rates on the wild rice growers; (2) will he 

support the orderly marketing of wild rice through the existing northern organizations now living in the northern 

administration district; (3) will he support the northern wild rice growers' co-operatives and associations who 

want to promote and market this valuable resource themselves; and finally, will he allow Northerners NAD 

northern wild rice growers living in the NAD and close to the La Ronge and the Nipawin provincial parks to 

seed and harvest wild rice within the parks? Will the minister, Mr. Speaker, agree with these points and thereby 

bring an end to the uncertainty which now grips the wild rice industry and growers in northern Saskatchewan? 

 

HON. MR. PICKERING: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member asked about seven or eight questions 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

548 
 

and I don't know how to reply . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It's obvious that you can't count. I know that. 

 

I would just like to indicate to the member from Cumberland that back in 1979 we only had 67 permits in the 

wild rice industry. Today, or this year, we had 1,700 active permits. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. MR. PICKERING: — Some of the permits are in the development stage, but there are 700 that are 

active. Now that's an increase, a substantial increase, since 1979. Besides that, I'm pleased to say that the 

Premier attended the official opening of a wild rice processing plant in the North in 1983. 

 

And as far as northern people, if they're interested in growing rice in the North — anywhere — we would 

appreciate them coming forward and asking for permits on any lakes or bodies of water. We invite them to do 

that. As a matter of fact, looking at the numbers that I've just mentioned, that's what we call economic 

development in northern Saskatchewan in creating jobs. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. YEW: — Mr. Speaker, I didn't ask the minister a question on renewable resources, or if he or his officials 

attended the grand opening of the wild rice harvesters' processing plant. I asked him specific questions about the 

about the promotion and the marketing and the encouragement to this valuable resource, to the growers of 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And I repeat my question, Mr. Minister: can you tell this House, and specifically the people in northern 

Saskatchewan, how much money his government has set aside to help promote and market this important new 

Saskatchewan product? Doesn't the minister understand that effective marketing, promotion and marketing of 

this product, could be the key to hundreds of new job opportunities in the North? What is he doing to promote 

and market this product, Mr. Speaker? How many dollars and cents are you prepared to put into this valuable 

industry? 

 

HON. MR. PICKERING: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the figures speak for themselves. In 1979, we had 67 

permit holders, and we are now up to something like 1,700. Now if that isn't job creation, economic 

development in northern . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. It appears that the members don't want an answer to the question. We'll 

proceed down the order paper. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 25 — An Bill to provide for the Postponement of the Tabling of Certain Documents 

 

HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to provide for the Postponement of the 

Tabling of Certain Documents. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Order! Before orders of the day, I'd like to reply to a point of order raised by the 

Leader of the Opposition yesterday. The Leader of the Opposition raised a point of order with regard to the 

procedure of a minister taking notice of a question, and responding on a 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

549 
 

subsequent day. I deferred my ruling at that time in order to review the verbatim record. 

 

There are no rules or specific parliamentary guide-lines to cover the point raised. I have reviewed the practices 

of the House with regard to the taking of notice of questions during oral question period. It appears to me that 

the minister on December 12 did offer to take notice of a question but never clearly stated that he would take 

notice. 

 

I therefore urge ministers to either answer the question, or in some cases where necessary, clearly state to the 

House that he will take notice and respond to the member on a later day. It has been the practice of this House 

when a minister takes notice of a question, that only a few supplementaries are permitted to expand and clarify 

the question, and the remainder are withheld until the minister has familiarized himself with the facts of the 

situation, and has reported to the House. I'm sure that this clarification of the practices of this House during oral 

question period will help to guide members in the future. 

 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 

 

MR. SVEINSON: — Mr. Speaker, I Mr. Speaker, I rise on a Point of Privilege that I raised yesterday during a 

brief intervention and prior to orders of the day, signalling my desire to raise the matter of privilege. I have 

written you, outlining somewhat the detail of the complaint. The subject matter of my question of privilege 

came to my attention just prior to question period yesterday so that at my earliest convenience I attempted to 

raise it, asking you yesterday to waive 6(2) in the rules. While you didn't waive the notice on that occasion, I 

think you'll agree, Mr. Speaker, that I've taken all possible steps to raise this matter at the earliest opportunity. 

 

My question relates to certain actions on the part of the Minister of Highways through his office in relation to 

persons that I employ, as an MLA, in my office. The minister's conduct, in my judgement, constitutes a 

calculated attempt on his part to harass and to intimidate those who are in my employ in my capacity as an 

MLA, thereby interfering with my ability to perform my duties as an MLA, and violating the privileges of a 

member. 

 

I am advised that on December 12 the minister instructed a person from his office or staff to call upon my office 

to determine the exact identity of an individual who works for me as a part-time secretary, and I might outline 

that that is part, part-time. I only am allowed a part-time secretary. I do have a full-time, part-time secretary, 

Mr. Speaker. This is a part, part-time secretary. It is significant to know that the spouse of this part, part-time 

secretary is an employee of this minister of terror who continues to harass people within his . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Order, please. This is an opportunity for you to raise a point of privilege. 

It's a very serious point. If you have a point of privilege, then proceed with it, but it's not a time to make 

accusations. 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My emotions carried me somewhat down the road. It is 

significant to know that the spouse of this part-time secretary, as I just mentioned, is an employee of the 

Government of Saskatchewan elsewhere in the public service which, in fact, is the Department of Highways. 
 
The clear implication of the call upon my office is that those in my employ are not looked upon favourably by 

this minister, or certainly by this government, and that they, or their immediate family members, could well be 

targets of retaliatory action. 
 
The incident related to above also coincided with certain telephone calls on the same day to my office, from 

unidentified persons in the building, to identify my part, part-time secretary. 
 
I believe this situation involving attempted harassment and intimidation of the employee of a member 

constitutes, at very least, a prima facie case of privilege, and I would invite you to so 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

550 
 

rule, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I will be pleased to elaborate further before the Standing Committee on Privileges and Elections. I would like 

the opportunity to call witnesses, Mr. Speaker, and I would like you to consider calling that committee together 

to consider the grave situation that has arisen. 

 

As further redress, I would also request from the Minister of Highways an apology for his engaging in 

objectionable conduct through his own ministry. 

 

I would also like to obtain an undertaking from the Premier that no such conduct is acceptable from any 

minister in his government, and it's not a policy of his government, and will not engage again in any such action 

by a minister in his government. 

 

I would also like to obtain a firm commitment from the Premier of Saskatchewan and his government that no 

member of my staff, or any immediate family, will be subject to any form of retaliatory action because of the 

fact that they have exercised their fundamental freedoms as expressed in the Canadian charter of rights. 

 

I can certainly read that into the record, Mr. Speaker, but I think we're all familiar with the Canadian charter and 

the outline of rights and freedoms that are included in that document. 

 

I believe it's a serious question, Mr. Speaker, and I would ask you to address it in a very serious manner. And at 

this time I would leave it in your hands. Thank you, very much. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I'd like to thank the hon. member for raising this point. He did have a letter delivered to 

my office some time early this morning. It was there by 7 o'clock this morning when I came in. 

 

I refer all hon. members to Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules and Forms, page 11, paragraph 16, which states 

as follows: 

 

Parliamentary privilege is the sum of the peculiar rights enjoyed by each House collectively as a constituent 

part of the High Court of Parliament, and by Members of each House individually, without which they could 

not discharge their functions and which exceed those possessed by other bodies or individuals. 

 

And: 

 

The privileges of Parliament are rights which are "absolutely necessary for the due execution of its powers". 

They are enjoyed by individual Members, because the House cannot perform its functions without unimpeded 

use of the services of its Members; and by each House for the protection of its members and the vindication of 

its own authority and dignity. 

 

The role of the Chair is to decide whether sufficient evidence has been produced and whether the point raised 

by the member is so urgent that the House must set aside all of its business in order to debate this pint. 

 

And further from Beauchesne's on page 25, paragraph 84(1): 

 

Once the claim of a breach of privilege has been made, it is the duty of the Speaker to decide if a prima facie 

case can be established. 

 

And 84(2): 

 

It has often been laid down that the speaker's function in ruling on a claim of beach 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

551 
 

of privilege is limited to deciding the formal question, whether the case conforms with the conditions which 

alone entitle it to take precedence over the notices of motions and Orders of the Day standing on the Order 

Paper, and does not extent to deciding the question of substance, whether a breach of privilege has in fact 

been committed — a question of which can only be decided by the House itself. 

 

I rule that the hon. member has not presented sufficient evidence to convince me that a prima facie breach of 

privilege exists. The member may initiate a debate on the matter with a substantive motion with proper notice. 

 

(1045) 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 18 — An Act to amend The Automobile Accident Insurance Act 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to introduce second reading 

debate today on Bill 18, an Act to amend The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. And before I move second 

reading, I have remarks to make about the legislation before us. 

 

The AAIA has become familiar to all of us in the legislature over the years. It's been around for almost 40 years. 

And when you consider that its basic purpose has remained unchanged, you know it's essentially a good piece 

of legislation. It was designed back in 1945 and came into line in 1946. Back then, the economic circumstances 

dictating its creation were different from today's. And back then, it's coverage and benefits were skeletal, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 
The Act has grown increasingly complex as these 40 years have passed, along with everything else in society. 

As the need for more comprehensive coverage evolved, so did the Act. However, the essential purpose of what 

is now the Saskatchewan Auto Fund remains the same as in 1946. 
 
It exists to provide basic, universal, no-fault insurance coverage for the average driver on a self-sustaining basis. 

It exists to create and provide coverage specifically for the unique Saskatchewan market, and it exists to call 

Saskatchewan its home base and keep insurance funds here in our province for investment on behalf of all 

Saskatchewan motorists. 
 
Over the years the AAIA has had success with these goals, but it is imperative that the auto act evolve with the 

times and respond to changing needs quickly, as necessity and economic conditions dictate. And that is 

precisely why I am standing before you right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The legislation before us today is testimony to the fact that major benefits have not changed for almost four 

years. Back in 1981, coverage was updated to finally bring weekly indemnity benefits and third party liability 

coverage into line with minimum benefits available in other provinces across Canada. 
 
In 1981, coverage had some catching up to do. Liability limits were raised from an unacceptable $35,000 to the 

more realistic figure of $100,000, given the fact of higher court judgements. Weekly indemnity benefits for total 

and partial disability were raised to $150 per week in most cases, again reflecting obvious economic changes, 

like inflation. 
 
The primary purpose of the Bill before us is to again increase public insurance coverage. The benefits we are 

proposing include raising third party liability coverage to $200,000 from the 100,000. This, Mr. Speaker, may 

well be expected and praised by all members of the House. The 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

552 
 

$200,000 limit is certainly more in keeping with the trend towards higher court judgements which are an 

economic reality, recognized by all. For incidental information, only four other provinces have a legal third 

party minimum of $200,000, the others being Newfoundland, Ontario, Manitoba, and the Yukon. To the best of 

my knowledge, all other provinces are at $100,000. 

 

We also propose to significantly increase death benefits. For example, death benefits for primary dependants 

would increase to $10,000 from the current $7,500, a 33 per cent rise. And in those cases where both parents are 

killed, payments to primary and secondary dependants would be doubled. If passed, significant changes in 

coverage regarding deceased children would occur. Everyone in this House would agree, Mr. Speaker, that it is 

impossible to place a monetary value on human life. And for that reason this area of the Act is very difficult to 

revise. 

 

But the current schedule badly needs to be revamped, and our legislation would do this. The specific benefits 

would rise to $2,500 from the current schedule which varies from $100 to $1,000 depending on the child's age. 

We think this is an important change. 

 

Other increases would raise limits to partly dependant persons by 25 per cent, from $2,000 to $2,500. In some 

other cases death benefits would almost triple by rising from $1,000 to $2,500. These provisions, of course, will 

be examined in greater detail during committee. 

 

We further propose to increase supplementary health allowance from $4,000 to $10,000 in a 150 per cent 

increase. This allowance pays for expenses not regularly covered under health plans — things like prescriptions, 

and wheelchair rentals, Mr. Speaker — again, an important and much needed change. 

 

And finally I this area, we propose a change that I know many of our senior citizens will welcome with open 

arms. And that is: we would abolish the current practice of reducing permanent disability payments by amounts 

received under the Canada Pension Plan and Old Age Security Act. This, quite simply, will put more money in 

the hands of people who clearly need it, and who clearly deserve it. 

 

Currently there are about 100 people whose weekly disability payments are being reduced and sometimes 

eliminated by the existing policy. The proposed amendment will restore the full $150 per week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a few moments ago I mentioned how important it was that the auto Act be able to react quickly to 

changing economic conditions. I want to stress this point with all members. Being able to react quickly to 

changing needs is more than just a phrase. it's people. We're talking about people receiving money from a social 

program. if it is to be an effective program, and we a responsible government, the benefits of the program must 

change as do peoples' needs. That, unfortunately, has not been the cases with the AAIA. 

 

Death payments have been unchanged since 1972. And the payment regarding deceased children hasn't been 

touched since the coverage was first introduced in 1947. In their 11 years in office, Mr. Speaker, the NDP 

increased benefits only twice, in 1972 and 1981. When we look generally at the level of increases we are 

proposing — 100 per cent; 150 per cent; 25 per cent, 2,500 per cent, in one case — I submit that changes to 

benefits have traditionally occurred too slowly, and the reason is simple. 

 

As legislation currently stands, all changes and benefits must be brought forward in amendment form for review 

by this Assembly, which meets only twice a year. Only twice a year for a total of perhaps 12 weeks. Now this, 

to me, is cumbersome, time confusing, and inflexible. It can even be argued that it does a disservice to the 

many, many individuals out there who rely on payments from the auto fund. 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

553 
 

Well to remedy this, this legislation proposes that, effective January 1st of 1985, changes in AAIA benefits be 

set out in regulations by the order of the Lieutenant Governor in Council. We propose this because we 

recognize that the Saskatchewan Auto Fund is a social program, and for its recipients it should function the 

same way other social programs do: by regulation. It can by compared to the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, or 

the Saskatchewan Income Plan in this respect. 

 

Our paramount concern in making this proposal is to be able to upgrade benefits quickly so that no recipient is 

forced to wait months, or even years, for us to play catch up. Social legislation that isn't responsible . . . 

responsive, isn't social legislation at all. I know members opposite will have plenty of comments on this, and I 

welcome them in due course. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those changes just outlined represent the most important features of the legislation before us, but 

there are several other provisions I want to mention as well. Several amendments relate to our system of driver 

surcharges. The principle of these surcharges will not be at issue here, Mr. Speaker. We firmly believe that 

drivers responsible for accidents should be penalized. The legislation merely proposes to streamline the process, 

and to make it easier for appeals to be heard. I think all members can appreciate reduced bureaucracy, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Currently, an individual wishing to appeal his surcharge must appear in provincial court and sometimes must 

wait months to tell his side of the story. These delays are unfair, poorly regarded by all including the courts. We 

would like appeals to be heard by either the provincial court of the Rates Appeal Board, a copy already 

established under . . . or a body already established under the AAIA. The individual appealing the surcharge 

would have the choice of the two. Mr. Speaker, this will make the process much more convenient to everybody, 

especially considering that eventually the Rates Appeal Board will operate out of every claims centre. I don't 

think my friends opposite should have too much trouble with this one. 
 
Another very positive change we have proposed is something my colleague, the Minister of Justice, and I have 

advocated for years before we became the government. A recommendation that was ignored, Mr. Speaker. We 

suggested splitting the deductible recovery when two parties are found equally responsible for an automobile 

accident. And that is what this legislation will do. It will mean that instead of getting nothing, which is the 

current situation, each party will receive $250 — a 50-50 split of the $500 deductible — Mr. Speaker, long 

overdue. 
 
This legislation proposes another change regarding the deductible, and that is to apply it consistently to all 

comprehensive claims. We propose that claims for hit and run losses be treated the same as claims for theft, fire, 

and claims be made subject to the deductible. 
 
This move, Mr. Speaker, would correct a continuing inequity best described by illustration. Currently the auto 

fund picks up all damages for hit and runs which exceed the $500, from zero dollars up. However, damages that 

are less than $500, the insured must pay. And the result, frankly, is absurd. The driver with $499 in damages 

pays the whole shot. The guy next door with $501 pays nothing. we think this is unfair, and propose to correct 

the situation. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, an amendment that I am particularly proud of will be the amendment giving the 

Saskatchewan auto fund authority to reward the safe drivers of this province with substantial cash bonuses. It's a 

move that gives me great personal satisfaction, and which I'm sure will be supported by all members, even the 

member from Regina Centre who belittles the tremendous accomplishment of SGI employees and provincial 

motorists who restored the auto fund to financial health. 
 
The rest of the legislation, Mr. Speaker, is substantially housekeeping, clarifying definitions and provisions, 

removing references which discriminate between husbands and wives, and things of that nature. 
 
To close, I want to say only that I hope all members will support this Bill. It's important legislation. 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

554 
 

that affects the lives of thousands of people. While I realize that it’s a large package, I ask all members to 

appreciate the urgency of its provisions and to act accordingly. I welcome your deliberations, and I thank you 

for your attention. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of Bill No. 18, An Act to amend The Automobile Accident Insurance 

Act. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, I think we could vote on this Bill. The opposition will not be opposing 

this Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1100) 

 

Bill No. 19 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Insurance Act 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Insurance Act. 

 

Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 9 — An Act respecting the Transportation of Dangerous Goods in Saskatchewan 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, I would now like to introduce second reading of the Bill respecting 

The Dangerous Goods Transportation Act for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

In speaking to this Bill, Mr. Speaker, I would like to touch on several important points members of the 

Assembly should be aware of. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, this government is deeply committed to consulting the public sector before bringing 

proposed legislation to this Assembly. Inasmuch as The Dangerous Goods Transportation Act represents 

another step towards ensuring the safety of our Saskatchewan families, it also demonstrates this government’s 

commitment to consulting those who assist towards ensuring the safety of our families. 

 

Early this year, every rural and urban municipality, city fire chief, municipal police force, and various 

transportation industry associates were sent a copy of our blue paper on the transportation of dangerous goods. 

The blue paper dealt with the intent of the proposed legislation now before us, Mr. Speaker, and we asked for 

the comments and concerns of those individuals. 

 

As a result, we now have a clearer understanding of the impact of the proposed legislation and those affected 

now have a better understanding of our intent in working towards this goal. 

 

All of the comments and concerns will be used to everyone’s advantage during the implementation of this Act 

and the regulations that will be adopted following the passage of this very important Act. 

 

One area that came to the forefront from the blue paper affects our agricultural community . As this Assembly is 

fully aware, Mr. Speaker, our farmers are having some tough times. This government has taken steps to assist 

with easing the financial burden on our farmers, and the Minister of Agriculture has to be congratulated for his 

wisdom in dealing with such a very 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

555 
 

difficult problem. 

 

The last thing our farmers need now is another unrealistic regulation that will further add to their ability to 

operate a viable farm. 

 

To that, Mr. speaker, this Act, and the regulations that will follow, address in a practical way how our farming 

community transports dangerous goods. I can assure our farming community that we will not burden them with 

massive amounts of paperwork just to transport a five-gallon pail of herbicide from the store back home to the 

farm. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this concludes the portion of my remarks. 

 

I would now like to turn to the particulars of the Bill. The intent of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is to promote the safe 

transportation of dangerous goods in all vehicles using our streets, roads, and highways. This bill will make it 

an offence to transport dangerous goods in any vehicle unless it is in accordance with safety requirements, 

safety standards, and safety markers, which will be prescribed by regulation under the Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by no means are we an island unto ourselves when it comes to the transport of dangerous goods. 

This Bill parallels and is complementary to the Transportation of Dangerous Goods Act of Canada. Our Act 

forms a framework for provincial participation in a national program on dangerous goods movement, and I 

would like to speak to that for a moment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The provinces and federal government, in consultation with industry, have been working towards a national 

uniform set of regulations. These regulations are being developed so that they will provide a single harmonized 

set of regulations governing the offering of transport, the handling and the transportation of dangerous goods by 

any means of transport every where in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

I might add, Mr. Speaker, that the program and legislation has been under development for a considerable time. 

With a new government in Ottawa, and a new era of federal-provincial co-operation upon us, this process has 

been given new leadership that was not in evidence before. The federal Minister of Transport is to be 

commended for his efforts since taking office regarding this legislation. I understand that the federal regulations 

will be published very early in the new year. 

 

Our participation in this program, Mr. Speaker, is not unilateral action, but rather co-operative effort with the 

federal and other provincial governments. As I said earlier, we have designed our legislation to apply to 

transportation of dangerous goods in vehicles using our streets, roads, and highways. For the benefit of all 

members of the Assembly, and the people of Saskatchewan, the transport of dangerous goods by air, rail, and 

marine modes, the offering for transport, and the pre- and post-transport handling activities of all modes will be 

regulated under the federal Act. The result, Mr. Speaker, is a program that will see all aspects of dangerous 

goods transported under the legislative umbrellas of the federal and provincial governments working together. 

 

To that, Mr. Speaker, the provincial Act allows for the province to enter into an administrative agreement with 

the federal government and other levels of government as necessary, outlining the various rules and 

responsibilities under the national program. This will ensure that the program will be applied to all modal 

aspects of dangerous goods transportation in an effective and efficient manner, and it is my intent to proceed 

with this administrative agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that this Bill will result in an increased level of safety for the transportation of dangerous 

goods on our streets, roads, and highways, and the people that will benefit are all of the people of Saskatchewan 

and Canada. 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

556 
 

No single piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, is going to prevent the occurrence of a dangerous goods accident, 

short of prohibiting their transportation. However, Mr. Speaker, I am confident that this Bill, combined with the 

excellent level of co-operation and consultation that exists between all parties involved, will benefit our 

families, our province, and our future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I invite and request, Mr. Speaker, that all members of this Assembly would unanimously support this very . . . 

(inaudible) . . . toward the safe transportation system for the future and the safety of our people. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I now move second reading of this Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the minister mentioned, this is an important piece of legislation 

regarding the transportation of dangerous goods in this province. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I think it's a Bill that 

has to be looked at very carefully, and I would beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 2 — An Act to establish the Employment Development Agency 

 

Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 
 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, what . . . (inaudible) . . . do you anticipate . . . I'm not asking you for 

your estimates at this point in time. What size of staff do you anticipate being associated with this agency? 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — We are budgeted for 35, but I do not expect that we'll be near that level. But that's the 

total staff budgeted for. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Will that staff have responsibility for research and development? I still don't have a 

clear grip on the range of functions. Will your staff be doing research as well, or will it just be a co-ordinating 

agency? I gather it will not carry . . . it will not be a program agency. 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — It will very much have a research capability in that we may propose new initiatives and 

then instruct a department to carry them out, or whatever. So it will have a research capability. And, as I 

indicated yesterday, we will be doing research in terms of establishing either sectoral goals, or defining where 

we think that the job potential is in the future for different occupations. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Do you anticipate that the agency will be responsible for the delivery of program at 

this point in time? 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — No. 

 

MR. SCHMIDT: —Mr. Minister, for a considerable long period of time my constituents . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . If my learned colleagues to my left have any questions, I’m sure they’ll get ample time to ask 

them. 

 

The question I have is that with respect to Canada Manpower and my constituency . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . I’ll have to shout so that my colleague, the Minister of Justice, can 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

557 
 

hear because there seems to be a lot of noise on this side of the House. 

 

There's been a problem in my constituency with respect to Canada Manpower and the matching of people for 

jobs. For example, I've gone to the Canada Manpower office, and I've seen three jobs posted. And I've asked the 

question: is that all there is? And they say, no, there are more. Those are just samples. It makes it difficult for 

people to find jobs when they can't even have them posted at Canada Manpower. 

 

I'm wondering if you could get in touch, or can give me an undertaking to get in touch with the federal 

government, as part of the duties of your new employment agency, and have the federal government try to 

improve the situation with Canada Manpower and with the actual matching of people to jobs. 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — Yes. One of the things the business community has made it clear to us is that there is, in 

many cases, a lack of confidence in the Canada Manpower centres in their ability to get people employed. 

 

We met yesterday with the Hon. Flora MacDonald who committed to us to a review of the operations to the 

Canada Manpower for that very purpose. The initiative came both from our request and a request to her from 

the federation of small business. Independent businessmen had made the same request. So that review is now 

going on. 

 

MR. SCHMIDT: — Thank you. I'm glad there's some progress being made in that regard. 

 

There's a second area that gives me some concern, and that is that, while jobs are scarce in the western economy 

these days, there still are some jobs. And we are now considering, and your department is going to consider, 

training and the direction of training for the jobs that exist. I'm wondering if your department could consider or 

undertake a study or set up a computer processing system so that people who do have jobs could phone them in. 

They could be put into a computer so you could get a print-out or a picture of what we should be training people 

for. 

 

Now I suspect that today there would be openings this very day for technicians who could repair electronic 

equipment such as computers, electronic typewriters, word processing machines. I know there's always a 

shortage of those kind of people, yet we don't know how big the shortage is. We don't know how big the 

shortage is. And I was wondering if your department could get this information together so that we could adjust 

the technical schools' and the universities' programs to meet the demand that's out there. 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — Well, we can't obviously adjust the university programming because that would be an 

interference in academic freedom. So that's not under consideration at all. 

 

But in terms of identifying the areas of opportunity for where we project future job opportunities will come, 

that's very much a part of our function. 

 

(1115) 

 

As I indicated yesterday, the federal government's statistics in this area, which are fairly recently developed, are 

national. They're not broken down regionally, and they're not broken down by province. We've asked the 

Government of Canada yesterday to begin to break that down by province so that we're not duplicating efforts. 

If they're not prepared to do it, we certainly are. 

 

MR. SCHMIDT: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it's not so direct to the minister, but I want to advise the members of 

the NDP that as a member I have the rights to ask questions here without . . . 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, please. Order. Does the member have a question of the minister? 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

558 
 

MR. SCHMIDT: — I think that my rights have been . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Sit him down. He is either asking a question or sitting . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — The member can respond to the Chair. 

 

MR. SCHMIDT: — Well I did have a question, but I couldn't be heard, so I won't bother with it today. 

 

MR. YEW: — Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I want to direct a question to the minister for the new Employment 

Development Agency with respect to this winter works initiative. 

 

Mr. Minister, with respect to the northern administration district, we have communities in the North that have a 

regular mail service. Communications and tough — is tough, pardon me — in many of the remote and isolated 

communities. Communications is a big problem. Many communities, as an example, are Wollaston Lake, 

Kinoosao, Southend, Sandy Bay, Sturgeon Landing, are very hard to get into, depending on weather conditions, 

road conditions, and so on. 

 

My question to you is this: will there be special consideration or recognition given to those communities 

pertaining to those circumstance? 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — Well I'll give you the assurance that the North will not be penalized because of either 

transportation or communication difficulties, and that they will have the access that I assured you of yesterday. 

 

MR. YEW: — With respect to your program, I know it's not going to alleviate or dint the high need for 

employment, but regardless, there's 140 opportunities for jobs there and a population of approximately 30,000, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

But with respect to that particular section, in the other section that you had mentioned last evening regarding the 

total package of this winter works initiative, will those other departments correspond with the question I placed 

before you? 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — It will all be co-ordinated through this agency. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — I would remind the committee we are on clause 4. Clause 4 is before the committee. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister of Justice, you realize that the federal government recently 

put forward their economic statement, and as a result of their actions, some 50,000 — according to the 

economists in reviewing the federal economic statement — that some 50,000 jobs would be lost across Canada. 

Some estimates go as high as 100,000 jobs. 

 

And what I'm asking the minister: have you made representations to your counterpart, your friend in Ottawa, the 

Minister of Finance, and made representations to ask him in light of the severity of the problems in 

employment, that he change his course of direction; and rather than cut out 50 to 100,00 jobs that he, in fact, 

work together with the provinces to increase jobs? 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — Well, they'd be given us the assurance that they will, in fact, co-operate and work 

together with the provinces, and we had a meeting to that effect yesterday. With regard to the direct job loss, I 

believe the argument is the efforts of the federal Minister of Finance to deal with the deficit, there is a counter 

argument. For example, initiatives announced the other day are projecting 500,000 new jobs as a result of the 

initiatives. 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

559 
 

So there will be the transition. There will be the transition on the federal level, from what I gather. The federal 

government believes in undue reliance on the public sector and a movement to the private sector. And the 

objective of the Government of Canada, and I think they've made that clear: public, is the overall objective, and 

the long-term objective is to create far more employment in Canada that exists today; and secondly, to make our 

work-force productive in international markets. 

 

There is finally a recognition in the Government of Canada that exists in the Government of Saskatchewan, and 

it is that we rely on international trade. We have to be competitive, and we have to sell ourselves on 

international markets. And the federal government is taking that initiative. So I believe the long-term strategy 

will be one that would be of benefit of all Canadians, and greatly increase employment. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Just in respect to the federal direction. Two areas that I raise for your attention: that is the 

massive cut-backs in the CBC across Canada — $75 million cut-back in budget — and a massive cut-back in 

the number of employees. What I'm asking you: in view of the fact that Saskatchewan is facing, as is other 

provinces, serious problems with employment, whether you have made any representations on behalf of the 

CBC employees who are scheduled to lose their jobs? And secondly, I note also that there's going to be massive 

cut-backs in medical research, and that is of a very major concern. And I'm wondering whether you have met 

with your counterpart and indicated any concern in these particular areas? 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — Well, I've had no request for representations from the CBC. It's certainly the 

Government of Canada, and I can't speak for the Government of Canada. If you're taking the position here today 

that there should be no cut-backs, no lay-offs in CBC, then I probably would suspect that there may not be 

much public support for your position. 
 
Having said that, I have made no representations. I have made no representations, nor do I intend to speak for 

the Government of Canada. The Government of Canada is going to have to make some very difficult decisions. 

I may agree or may not agree with all of them. I do fully recognize that the Government of Canada is going to 

have to make some major decisions, some very difficult decisions, to clear up some 15 years of 

mismanagement. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — In respect to the thrusts that you're purporting to make in respect to employment, I'm 

wondering whether, in drawing up a blueprint which you haven't announced yet nor have you made available to 

the public or to the business community and/or to the interested groups, I wonder, in drawing up this 

yet-to-be-revealed blueprint of job creation, whether you have, in fact, met with your federal counterpart, 

whether you have, in fact, got commitments of matching money in respect to any thrusts that you may be taking 

here? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — That was one of the areas of discussion yesterday. The federal government is in the 

process of canvassing. The Minister of Canada Employment and Immigration was in Saskatchewan yesterday 

on that very point as to what projects are available. She is a canvassing all provinces in Canada before they 

make the federal position. We certainly see an area of great opportunity for some participation in the short term 

and in the very near future. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — The minister has indicated he sees a great opportunity of working with the federal 

government. I would like to ask him: on what basis does he base that statement of great opportunity? Can he be 

specific as to what his discussions with the federal government has been in so far as commitment of matching 

funds and working out a unified plan, federally and provincially, together? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Well, we've certainly had the assurance of the Government of Canada that they are 

prepared to co-operate. I believe that my colleague, the minister responsible for Advanced Education and 

Manpower, can give you a lengthy list of areas of co-operation over the past year. And many of the programs 

that we've implemented — Access Youth, for example 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

560 
 

 — was administered in many cases by the Canada Employment and Immigration centres. It was a very 

co-operative effort. We look forward to others. 

 

The Government of Canada has made it clear that it is prepared to put up, generally, approximately $1 billion 

on rather immediate projects which will be determined by the end of January, or projects or initiatives. We have 

indicated that we will respond to the Government of Canada by the middle of January with our proposals. They 

indicated that they would like them as soon as possible. We're prepared to submit them by the middle of 

January. 

 

Clause 4 agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 agreed to. 

 

Clause 6 
 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Do you have in mind any advisory committees, or is this section was just here just in 

case you are smitten with a blinding light sometime? 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — We will be talking to various sectors in the economy, and I would expect that there be 

advisory committees. And they will be announced — either advisory people or advisory committees — will be 

announced early in the new year. 

 

Clause 6 agreed to. 

 

Clause 7 agreed to. 

 

Clause 8 
 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Chairman, there's a curious section in 8(1)(c). Is it the intention of the 

government to establish local employment offices in various centres throughout Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I've indicated at the press conference and otherwise that that is an option that we are 

very much considering, and that the concern about the ability of the local business community to match up with 

those seeking work is one that we're very much reviewing. 
 
No decision has been made and we would not look at making a decision until the Government of Canada, which 

announced yesterday its review of the manpower centres, whether we see a role or not. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I just make a comment, Mr. Minister, which is not a criticism of you or particularly 

of the federal government. But I think it would be most unfortunate if we have both the federal and provincial 

government. There are many areas in which both the federal and provincial government are providing the same 

services. It would be most unfortunate if that began to happen here. 
 
I think in many ways it's a service which could better be provided by the federal government than the provincial 

government. The federal government can co-ordinate job opportunities across the Dominion and not just in 

Saskatchewan, and I would hope the minister would urge the federal counterpart, your federal counterpart, to 

maintain and indeed expand the Canada manpower offices and not withdraw into the fortress Ottawa. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I would agree with the hon. member in principle. In response to an earlier question, I 

made it clear that there seems to be some — and I don't know the extent of it — concern amongst the business 

community that perhaps the manpower centres are not serving their needs in terms of matching jobs and those 

seeking work. 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

561 
 

But I've indicated earlier that, pending the federal government's review, if it perhaps can restore that confidence, 

then I do not see a necessity. But if it's not there and we're not getting that direct matching between jobs 

available and those looking for work on a very expeditious basis, I think we have an obligation as a government 

to try and expedite that process. 

 

But I agree with the hon. member, the preference would be that it remain in the federal government. It's not 

something that we're looking at as a first option. It's one that would be a latterly option, rather than an early one. 

 

Clause 8 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 9 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 12 
 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — It has nothing do to with Clause 12. It goes back to Clause 10. If I might, and I 

assume I have the consent: is it the intention of the agency that you will be making third party grants on any 

significant scale? I note section 9 and 10 which parallel the sections this Assembly approved yesterday in The 

Urban Municipality Act, and I was told that section 10 is in order, for the department to make — or the agency, 

in this case — to make grants and third party payments. And I'm wondering what exactly your agency might 

have had in mind with respect to section 10 in this case. I'd be surprised . . . Perhaps there are agencies 

somewhere which are going to be the recipients of this department's munificence, but I just don't know what 

they are. 

 

(1130) 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — A prime example is the programs we announced the other day and payments to third 

parties, municipalities, and things of that nature. We indicated yesterday we'll be looking to the private sector 

for some initiatives, community organizations, so it will be very much part of our mandate. 

 

Clause 12 agreed to. 

 

Clause 13 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister like to thank his officials? And I certainly thank them for . . . 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes, I thank Mr. Siu and Mr. Hewitt and Mr. Wensel of my 

office, and I thank the members opposite. 
 

Bill No. 11 — An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 
 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister introduce his officials? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: —Yes, Mr. Chairman, I have Doug Moen, Crown solicitor from the Department of 

Justice, to my left. 
 
Clause 1 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I would like to ask a few questions about the 

proposed amendments to the Bill. And I would like you to just take a few minutes, if you would, under clause 1, 

to stand up and just give me an outline. For example, I've been checking 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

562 
 

here and I'm not quite through it yet, but section 41, 42, and 43, if you would just, for me, outline the different 

areas that they would include. And I imagine your colleague from Rosthern who sits there would have those 

memorized and could give me a little outline. I basically know what you're doing here, but I want to go through 

each of these, one by one, and get a little list of them from you. 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Okay, well, Mr. Chairman, and for the hon. member, the legislation affects the 

following — and I believe I have the right quotations from the original Bill — the indemnity for members 

which is in section 41; the sessional allowance for members which is in section 42; the Speaker's allowance 

which is in section 60(1); the allowance for deputy chairmen, 60.1 (these are the sections, the numbers); the 

allowance for chairmen of standing committees, section 60.2; the allowance for the House Leaders, 60.3; the 

allowance for whips, section 61; the allowance for the Leader of the Opposition, section 62(1)(a); the allowance 

for the Leader of the third party, if that were the case in this House, as it isn't, and I pointed that out yesterday; 

the salaries to members of the cabinet and the Premier, section 76; and the salary paid to legislative secretaries 

which is section 80. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Minister, I want to ask that again, and are there any members or any 

categories that are left out of the so-called freeze that is suggested here? Are there any members, whether it's 

cabinet, Premier, whips, deputy whips, any groups that are left out of this so-called freeze? 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — No, Mr. Chairman, there are no categories left out as it relates to salaries for people 

in the general . . . in the legislative area here. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — The minister will maybe tell me exactly how this plan will work. I understand that 

the plan will freeze until the amendment expires, the date that is recorded in here. There is some thought around 

and about that at the end of the period the payment is made to the members, or that the increase will be lumped 

together, and there will actually be two increases when the period is over. And I want to get clearly from you 

that that is not the case; that you're not merely manipulating the rate increases and adding them on to the end of 

it. That's the question I want to ask you. 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I give the member, and the House, the assurance. The way it 

will work is that with the passage of this piece of legislation, the increase which would automatically have come 

in under the original Bill — which was based on the composite industrial index, I believe it was, if that's the 

proper terminology — will not take effect. And so at the end of the calendar year 1985, if we project ahead one 

more year, that Bill will remain in place. 

 

And unless there is a similar Bill or something to that effect, then the adjusted amount which comes into effect 

as a result of this Bill will be the base amount at the end of 1985, from which we would move ahead with the 

industrial index. 

 

That's my understanding. I hope it's clear to the member. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — The minister will know that the opposition, and where these decisions are debated 

and discussed about increases in the Board of Internal Economy committee . . . make it clear that the members 

of the opposition will be supporting this Bill. 

 

I want to make that very clear that in a time like this we agree that restraint is in order. And we have scrutinized 

the government over the last year and pointed out to you very clearly that there are many areas, not only in the 

salaries of MLAs and cabinet ministers and premiers, that we should be looking at trimming back in order to 

help the taxpayers. 

 

But I would like to say, as well, at this time, that I believe that this is part of a smoke-screen to 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

563 
 

cover off and make it look like the government is freezing spending in the area of MLAs and cabinet ministers, 

whether they are government or opposition. 

 

But I want you to know, Mr. Minister, that the public is not going to be fooled or lulled into believing that you 

are people of restraint when it comes to government spending, because we have documented here and outside of 

the Assembly that the spending on travel out of province by cabinet ministers during this time of so-called 

restraint is at record levels. We have documented trips by ministers to various parts of the world, whether 

Bulgaria or China or Austria or San Francisco, Saudi Arabia. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, that Bill is a very, very extensive one. So for you to come here and say that we are now on 

this track of austerity and saving the taxpayers money is part of a smoke-screen. 

 

And I'm sure that if you were in an honest mood today, as I'm sure you are, you will agree with this statement: 

that at a time when we have a record number of cabinet ministers — 25 to be exact — at record levels of salary, 

with record levels of staff in their offices, that you are hard-pressed to stand in this Assembly and say with a 

straight face that restricting the salaries of MLAs is the only area that you should be restraining. 

 

And I would challenge you to look at this Bill, and if you want to bring in an amendment, or make a statement 

here that you will cut back the travel allowances paid to ministers and their staff, that you will cut back on the 

amount of money that is spent by your personal staff in your office, or cut back a person here and there — and 

we know that there are literally 10's and 20 and 50 people who are working for this government merely to 

advertise and to promote the ministers and to get them re-elected — that at a time when you're doing that it is 

unfortunate that you would come here and self-righteously say that you are working in the best interest in 

cutting extravagance in your government. 

 

Because we believe that a government that increases the cabinet to 25, increases the number of Legislative 

Secretaries — I believe there are now 12, which is a 100 per cent increase since 1982 — each of those 

legislative secretaries not only et an extra salary, they get staff, they get an automobile, they get credit cards. 

And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that your budgets are far in excess of what you need to carry on your offices. I 

say to you that you have increased in the area of politics to get yourself re-elected, and then come in here 

sanctimoniously and say that we're freezing the salary of MLAs. 

 

And I want to make one more point, Mr. Chairman, before I take my place: that the government has a way of 

giving money and income to their members that the opposition, whether they are from the Liberal Party or for 

the New Democratic Party, do not have a chance to be involved in. And this is where the increase in the number 

of Legislative Secretaries and the number of cabinet ministers come into play, because I tell you they filled their 

own pockets for most of their members in the seats where they are having trouble getting re-elected, while at the 

same time are leaving out and freezing every member of the opposition. 

 

And I want that to be very clear: that not every member of the government have had their salaries frozen or 

restricted during the last two years. The people who were promoted to cabinet in the increase, or promoted to 

legislative Secretaries, or promoted in other ways, have had their income supplemented. 

 

But I want the people of Saskatchewan and the press to know that not one member of the opposition have had 

their status changed or have had a dramatic increase in salary the way the Legislative Secretaries have, the way 

the increase in the cabinet has, or the way the jaunts to exotic places that many members outside of the cabinet, 

as well as the people in the cabinet, have taken advantage of during this high-flying, travel around the world 

oriented government that we have today. 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

564 
 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member asked if I feel in an honest mood today, and the 

member will know that I am always in that honest mood. I will say to the hon. member, say to the hon. member 

very sincerely and very clearly: first of all, this Bill is not an attempt at all at a smoke-screen, as the member 

himself admitted a while ago. It's the Board of Internal Economy knew about this, members from his side. His 

leader yesterday said they would support the Bill, and we appreciate that. And we recognize that all members of 

the House — I believe it is, in fact, all members of the House — recognize the times of restraint that we are in, 

the times of restraint that the public service is being asked to exercise. And there's no question about that, and 

that are being very co-operative about that for the most part. 

 

What this does, as I outlined before, is that it freezes the salaries of all of us that are here as legislators at 

exactly the level for 1985 as what they are at 1984. We believe that's a responsible move. and as far as some of 

the other comments, which are quite unrelated to this Bill, Mr. Chairman, although I really should respond to a 

couple of them. As far as the member's continual harangue about the use by this government of our members — 

elected members by the people of Saskatchewan from the various constituencies — use of our members for 

roles as legislative secretaries, we do not apologize for that, nor will we apologize for that. 

 

I'm reminded of an example in the, I believe it's the Department of Highways and Transportation, where the 

Legislative secretary, my very competent and a long-standing member of this House, the member from 

Rosthern is a Legislative Secretary. We're pleased that he is. I believe the Legislative Secretary's salary is 

something in the order of 6,000-and-some-odd dollars. He does the work in the Department of Highways and 

Transportation. He does the work in the Department of Highways and Transportation, Mr. Chairman. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. Allow the minister to make his comment. 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — He does the work in the department of Highways and Transportation. Just for an 

example, a good deal of the same work in that department at the salary that I mentioned of one who is a former 

member of the legislature for the constituency which I represent, Meadow Lake, and your former minister of 

highways, had a defeated MLA from Meadow Lake as a special assistant in the order of 70 to $75,000. 

 

Don’t come into this House or anywhere in this province and lecture this government about restraint. Your 

colleague sitting beside you, the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, as a Legislative Secretary for the former 

minister of agriculture, was in Africa. Don't tell us about travelling around by Legislative Secretaries. So don't 

be sanctimonious in your little speeches regarding where your Legislative Secretaries have gone. 

 

We will not apologize, nor should we, nor will the people of Saskatchewan ask us to apologize for value for 

dollars spent when our ministers, our Minister of Economic Development and Trade, has been various places in 

this world. There is question about that. We do not apologize for that because the results are very clear, Mr. 

Chairman. The results are very clear. 

 

That government over there, that left-leaning government could not — could not, I repeat — attract the market 

in eastern Europe with cattle, very good breeding stock from this province. And we did. And the nation of 

Bulgaria is just the very first step in terms of the marketing of good breeding stock from this province. And our 

Minister of Economic Development and Trade worked that deal out, and it's ongoing, and we're on the second 

deal with Bulgaria. 

 

(1145) 

 

We do not apologize for the value that this province gets — or the people of this province get — for the travel 

of our ministers. There's no question about that. 

 

Getting back to the Bill, Mr. Speaker, the member from Shaunavon will stand here as he so often 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

565 
 

does, and as all of us here day after day will watch him in his sanctimonious way trying to lay out these things 

and talking about smoke-screens and so on when all of us who have been here for some time understand exactly 

where he's coming from. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe that this Bill is responsible. All members on this side f the House agree with it. All 

members on this side of the House, and I believe as the member has said in one part of his speech that they will 

support it. I would urge all members to support the Bill now in committee. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I would say to the minister, first of al, in his comments about the 

Legislative Secretary from Rosthern, I would never question whether or not that individual does his job because 

I know he does. In fact, I watched him from 1978 to 1982 work in this Assembly from the benches over here, 

and I would say to you and to the Premier that I would have put him as one of the 25 in cabinet. I say that he 

does do his work, and I'm not making any excuse. And I also say to you that you're not giving that individual 

the just reward that he deserves. Do don't talk to me about the individual from Rosthern as your explanation of 

have 12 Legislative Secretaries. 

 

But I want to say to you that having a budget for 34 trips out of Canada in the last year, costing the taxpayers 

$500,000, shows very little restraint in terms of the personal jaunts that you and your ministers are going on out 

of country. 

 

And I do call your attempt today to bring forward a Bill prior to the meeting of the Board of Internal Economy 

— and, Mr. Chairman, I want that to be perfectly clear that this Bill was tabled in this Assembly before the 

Board of Internal Economy met — makes one wonder whether or not the negotiating in that, that should take 

place before the Bill is introduced, actually took place. 

 

And I would like to ask the minister whether he based the different clauses of this Bill on a meeting of the 

Board of Internal Economy, or whether he and his cronies met and decided in advance tot he meeting where it 

was going. 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — I'm informed that . . . I believe the clauses of this Bill are, in fact, based on at least a 

discussion in the board of Internal Economy, although I'm not sure of that. I'm not absolutely sure of that. But in 

any case, Mr. Chairman, . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I'm not sure of that. Okay. But I will ask the member if 

there are any clauses of this Bill to which members of the opposition do not agree. I would ask them to say so 

now. Which clauses of this Bill will the opposition not agree with, Mr. Chairman? That's the question. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Minister, you did not answer the question. But I want to point out to you that 

the clauses of the Bill, like your farm Bill, do not go far enough. But we agree with the points that you raise 

there. We would have wanted you to have discussed it with the members of the opposition, be they of the 

Liberal Party or the New Democratic Party. That didn't take place, and I want you to know that the members 

who were at the Board of Internal Economy meeting met after this Bill was tabled in the Assembly — met after 

the Bill was tabled in the Assembly. So for you to say that this Bill has come out of compromise and discussion 

and reasonability, is not true. 

 

And I would also say to you, Mr. Minister, that your attempt to defend that this had been negotiated wasn't very 

articulate because you started out adamantly saying that it came out of that discussion and ended up by saying 

you weren't sure. And I would like you to now stand up and tell us whether or not the clauses of this Bill came 

out of the discussion of the Board of Internal Economy meeting, or where they came from. Because our 

members on the board did not discuss it prior to the Bill being tabled. 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — I'm informed that this was discussed some time ago in internal 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

566 
 

economy, but not this Bill as it now appears, not all of the clauses of the Bill. But I will go back to it, Mr. 

Speaker. I don't apologize for the fact that the government is putting this Bill on the table. 

 

And what I will ask the members in committee as we deal with this Bill: if they have problems with any 

particular clauses in this Bill, I would ask them today to lay them out here. I'm sure the people of Saskatchewan 

will be interested in what they're against. And what I'm saying is that it's on here. We're into third reading of the 

Bill. If there's anything that the opposition would like to raise questions about, this is certainly the forum in 

which to do that. 

 

MR. SVEINSON: — Well, I find it very interesting that the member from Meadow Lake has outlined a 

position where he's discussed it with the opposition. The first time I heard of the Bill was when it was tabled in 

the last two or three days. And I will say that I will not support the Bill. 

 

I feel that I'm at least worth the increase that inflation would allow me in this House. And I can appreciate that 

members opposite — they've got their back benches full of the idle — should, in fact, not accept a pay increase. 

I can also suggest that as a member of your government, I watched your 12 legislative secretaries. I did so very 

carefully. And there are a few that do the jobs they are, in fact, assigned to. And the member from Shaunavon 

alluded to one, and I know that he does his work. His pay should be doubled or tripled. He's here all the time. 

And I would even support that amendment for that particular member. 

 

But I can also say that there are members who, in fact, receive those increased perks. They're travelling the 

province at the expense of your government. One such member, the Minister of Health, in his estimates last 

year, indicated spent $20,000 in additional expenses over and above the six that he was allocated for income. 

And I would suggest to you that he would have a difficult time substantiating $20,000 worth of effort on behalf 

of that government. I realize that probably his expense accounts were tabled with the department and approved, 

but I would suggest to you that he would have an extremely difficult time outlining to the public where that 

money was beneficially spent. 

 

I understand the Bill to mean that we will not get a pay increase . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I didn't say I'd 

double Link's wages, I said I'd double the member for Rosthern who does his job. 
 
I think also that recently in Ottawa your federal leader took a 15 per cent reduction in pay. I think the front 

benches of your government should look seriously at that direction. If they feel that they're not worth an 

increase in 1984, maybe they should look at cutting their salaries. 
 
I could also say that the people in the back benches who have decided to make politics a full-time career, that if 

you look at the salaries they presently collect, you would have difficulty bringing people into the political 

forum, who, in fact, expect to be back-benchers, and live on the salaries that they are going to be paid as 

members of this Assembly. 
 
I believe the back-benchers of this House and the members of opposition deserve an increase relative to 

inflation. And I think if all MLAs in the House were, in fact, given the increase, it would also increase the 

salaries of cabinet by only a small amount. 
 
But I suggest again you look at freezing cabinet salaries. The member from Shaunavon alluded to the travel that 

this government has undertaken. I suppose all governments . . . I don't think that they were angels in respect to 

travel. I'm sure they were down the — I'm sure they travelled down the rivers of the world as well. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — put up the facts, don't think. Sweeping statements, not facts. 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — Well, I can make sweeping statements because I know they're true. I know this 

government's . . . The NDP government, as a government, probably travelled as widely as this one, but that 

doesn't make the travel dollar spent by this government money well spent. 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

567 
 

I think initially they undertook to bring in industries from around the world. I'm still waiting, and I'm sure the 

people of Saskatchewan are still waiting, although there may be some indication that this could, in fact, happen 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I see the member from Swift Current suggests it has. I would think that if you 

look closely at Swift Current, there have also been several business bankruptcies, and I'm not going to get into 

that area right now because we're talking about the worth of MLAs, and why they should have to take a 

reduction in pay. 

 

I can appreciate the government and several of their back-benchers and also some of their minister. You've got 

the minister of co-operatives whose whole department's budget is only $3 million, and you refuse to give him 

any extra responsibility. 

 

You've got the minister of crop insurance in the same position. You've got 25. It doesn't really affect your 

government because 37 of you are either on ministerial payroll or legislative secretary payroll with other perks. 

So certainly the back-benchers, are they going to get up and refuse to allow your government to move? 

Absolutely not. Why would they? 

 

So I didn't hear the basic reasons outlined by the minister earlier in the debate as to why they've decided to 

freeze salaries for 1984. But I would like to ask the minister to rise now and substantiate his reasons for freezing 

salaries in this House. 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as far as the basic reasons were outlined in the second reading 

speech, but I will say that we are freezing salaries for 1985, the year that's coming, when anticipating next year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, there were some interesting comments coming from the lone Liberal in this House. 

He talks about . . . He says that he . . . He introduces the idea to the debate here of merit pay for what is a 

member worth, and individual members. And he introduced the idea — the member for Rosthern, the member 

for Shaunavon, different members — what each one is worth. 

 

The last person in this House, I would submit to you, Mr. Chairman, — the last member in this House who 

should introduce the idea of merit pay, unless he wants to be really a hungry person, would be the member from 

Regina North West, in terms of being paid on terms of the contribution. And so there's a very interesting 

argument coming from the lone Liberal member. 

 

He talks about the federal government, the new federal government and the new cabinet in Ottawa, taking a 

reduction. No question about that. In these times of restraint, that was a good move. We must remember what 

that reduction was from. That reduction was from the salary level, the level of excesses that were demonstrated 

by his colleague, the member from Winnipeg, Mr. Axworthy — which has been well documented in the press 

in recent days — the kinds of things that went on in the last days of that Liberal government in Ottawa. 

 

And the member from Regina North West who represents that group, will come in here and argue on behalf of 

those excesses of Mr. Axworthy and others of that former Liberal government, and then say in these times of 

restraint, he says, that the Liberal Party's position is that legislators should not take the lead and force 

themselves to take the same freeze which we are asking others in our society to take. 

 

We on this side of the House, and I understand the official opposition as well, believes in what we're doing here. 

Certainly, Mr. Chairman, all people in our society — whether they be in the public service, whether they be in 

my former profession as teachers, whatever — everybody believes that their particular job is very, very 

important. And the very hard-working people in nay of those certainly are worth what they're being paid. We 

don't question that. And the member from Regina North West says or talks about what members are worth and 

so on. That's a point another debate and there's no question about that from our side of the House either. 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

568 
 

But I would say that in the times of restraint, responsible people will take responsible positions. I believe that is 

what the government is doing. I believe that is what the official opposition is saying in this debate. once you get 

through some of the other posturing that's going on — and I recognize that because of the nature of the forum 

that we're in. 

 

But I am very, very shocked, Mr. Chairman, at the position taken by the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan — the 

Liberal part of Saskatchewan's position that legislators, those of us that are elected to lead, should take salary 

increases while we're asking other people in this society to exercise restraint. 

 

MR. SVEINSON: — Listening to the minister, I find it very interesting that the argument that I presented on 

merit pay for members would be taken as read. I simply indicated that there are members in this House whose 

efforts — they are not paid for compared to other legislators who in fact sit with them, and some of them in the 

front benches of that government. 

 

He talked of level of excesses. I understand that recently the executive assistants to the ministers all received 

their annual pay raise, and it was of maybe not of an excessive nature, but certainly it wasn't a freeze. it was a 

pay raise, and these people work directly for the ministers in their offices. 

 

(1200) 

 

I would just like to ask the member from Meadow Lake if he can substantiate those raises. And I would also 

like to ask him at the same time that one of his employees, one Dan Stephens who lost the federal election this 

spring as a Progressive Conservative, whether or not Dan's pay has been increased. I understand the level of pay 

is around the  

$60,000 level. And has his pay increased — been comparable to the other executive assistants who work for the 

ministers? 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure if this is related to the Bill. I'm certainly not 

worried about answering the question as far as the . . . But that is certainly in committee of finance. And I'm 

sure we can get into that. 

 

The particular questions he asks about Mr. Stephens, though, I will give you the answer just so that you . . . 

You're misinformed. Once again, Mr. Chairman, he's misinformed, and he's totally out of the league in terms of 

the salary. And if the answer to the question, "Has there been any increase?" . . . It's no. So there's no . . . The 

member is once again misinformed or going on some whim which I'm not sure of. 

 

But in any case, it is not related to this Bill in any kind of a direct way. and I'm certainly willing to answer those 

questions at their proper time in this House, as the member will know. Or at least I would hope he would know 

that he can ask those in committee of finance. I'd be more than willing to answer those questions. 

 

MR. SVEINSON: — The minister has suggested that the legislators should take a leadership role in pay 

freezes. I would suggest to the minister that his immediate employees, his executive assistants, have recently 

received a substantial pay increase. And I would just like to ask the minister how he, in fact, explains that pay 

increase, and exactly what was that pay increase received by the executive . . . 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. That is a question for committee of finance, and I would ask the member 

to relate to the Bill. 

 

MR. SVEINSON: — It simply develops, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the argument that it's just window-dressing as 

far as freezing salaries within the structure of this government's front benches, because their executive assistants 

did recently receive a pay increase. 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

569 
 

And I would suggest that if it's a leadership role they're taking, certainly the people within their own offices 

should follow that leadership, and maybe even refuse that pay increase. 

 

With respect to Mr. Stephens, maybe my figures aren't accurate. I know in the committee of finance it was 

raised at one time that the gentleman was being paid 37,000. That was prior to his — that was prior to the 

federal election. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — These questions relate to committee of finance. They do not relate to this Bill. And the 

bill relates to the members of this Legislative Assembly and their pay increases, and I would ask the member to 

say on the Bill. 

 

MR. SVEINSON: — I thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Basically, the minister was developing an argument of 

leadership and how, as leaders, we should be willing to freeze our salaries. I would find that very difficult as a 

Conservative philosophy that leadership, with respect to salaries, should come from a position of no increase. 

 

I would suggest to the minister that, as a free enterpriser out there in the community, I think that any 

businessman wants to increase his profits — wants to increase the return for the work he does. I mean, I can 

understand the benches to my right, who stand behind a philosophy that suggests that people should work for 

the state, and work for the state at the state's given compensation. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Well who do you work for? 

 

MR. SVEINSON: — I work for the state, certainly. But I'm not of the philosophy that I shouldn't be paid for 

the work that I do. I'm of the philosophy that I should be paid if I'm in business or in politics. I should be paid in 

an equitable fashion. 

 

The socialists possibly don't agree with that. Recently in this House one of your own members, the member 

from Melville, suggested that yes, we're practising socialism. The NDP are now preaching it. 

 

Well, I suggest that your leadership doesn't bode well out in the community. I feel as leaders we don't 

necessarily have to take a pay increase, but we should at least be honest about why we are not taking that pay 

increase. And I suggest to the member from Meadow Lake that his only reason for not taking a pay increase is 

political. It's absolutely political. It's unfounded. 

 

I mean that an increase to this Assembly based on the last year's inflation rate or some other tool that could, in 

fact, kick in to give us an equitable raise would, in fact, be refused by his membership as a result of his 

leadership. But I would like to ask the member if he feels that his responsibility as an MLA, and maybe as a 

part-time MLA — because I don't imagine as a minister he gets back to Meadow Lake that often — whether he 

feels the compensation received doesn't require, or in fact shouldn't be subject to a non-political review. 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, where do you start, as one of my colleague says? I wonder whether it's 

worth starting. it's a very interesting proposition. I am sure for every member of the public in Canada, not only 

in Saskatchewan, but in Canada, to think that a Conservative government — the one here in Saskatchewan, any 

of our colleagues across this country who govern most of the provinces in Canada, and this party which governs 

this nation today — should in any way shape or form accept a lecture in leadership from a Liberal. There is no 

one in Canada who would suggest that that should ever take place in these days. 

 

So I would say to the member, while he leaves many, many openings for one to get into a debate, would want to 

get into a debate with the member from North West. I would just say, once again, Mr. Chairman, I would ask all 

members to support this Bill. I'm disappointed that the member of the Liberal Party has indicated that he will 

not support the Bill which is, in fact, 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

570 
 

presented in just that way — a sincere attempt at restraint in a time when we're asking all of our citizens to 

exercise that restraint. We think it is just that, Mr. Chairman, leadership. 

 

MR. SVEINSON: — I hear from my colleague from Shaunavon, he suggests it's a bad political move. it looks 

self-serving. Well the argument presented here by the minister is that we are, in fact, in a leadership role as 

legislators. From that leadership role we're going to freeze our salaries, not do it in any structured fashion. We're 

just going to freeze it for the time being, and when it's politically expedient once again, we'll come into the 

House, and on the last day of the session we'll again increase our salaries and march on. Well, I suggest to him 

that it's strictly a political move. If his reasoning was based on anything other than politics, I could maybe 

accept it. But I know it's not. MLAs in Saskatchewan are not overpaid. Cabinet ministers may be; MLAs are not 

over-paid. 

 

I think that you should review some of the structures within your own office and possibly, as a minister, start 

from that posture rather than suggesting that because we are in the public limelight that we are going to be the 

great leaders, and from a position of freezing our salaries we're demonstrating to the people of Saskatchewan 

that restraint that's required. 

 

Well I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that that restraint has certainly not been felt by the oil industry in this 

province. Three hundred million dollars in profits later, and I don't decry that those profits are excessive; I 

suggest that with respect to that program I find it a very interesting and innovative program that should have 

been here long before. under an administration of Allan Blakeney that wasn't available. 

 

I'm not suggesting that it's an unacceptably high profit level, but I'm suggesting to you the reason they are in 

this province is simply because of the leadership in this province. They're here to make money. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order, order. I don't see the relevance between the member's statements, the 

statement the member is making to the Bill, and I would ask the member to stay on the Bill. 

 

MR. SVEINSON: — Well, Mr. Speaker, . . .Mr. Chairman, I'm sorry, the member for Meadow Lake, behind 

closed doors and with his own cronies, developed a position and came charging into the legislature very 

politically to freeze the salaries of MLAs. 

 

If the arguments for that freeze were anything other than political I could probably accept it. I could probably 

accept it. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — You want more money, eh, Bill? 

 

MR. SVEINSON: — More money? No, I'm not asking for any more money. I'm just suggesting to you that, 

yes, I would accept an inflationary raise in my . . . I would. And I'm sure that you could go through the back 

benches of this government and find many people who have, in fact, committed themselves full-time to politics 

and are in a position where, on an MLAs salary, it's very difficult to live. 

 

I can suggest that there have even been bills paid on behalf of some of your members out of your research funds 

in your caucus office as a result, as a result of the lack of income paid to the MLA who isn't able, who isn't able 

to function because he's not paid enough. I don't say the ministers are not earning enough money. They're at a 

very comfortable income level, and some of them are very hard-worked individuals, and I don't argue that they 

should be well paid. They should be well paid. 

 

But I do suggest to you that if an MLA were to get an increase that would be relative to the level of inflation, 

that would be accepted by every minister and every MLA in the House. And it's a 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

571 
 

catch-up game. The ministers are all very comfortable. there's 25 of them. Almost half your caucus are 

ministers. So who's really receiving the penalty of a freeze on legislators' salaries? It's not the ministers . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Certainly I am, and I'll accept that. I'll accept that. But I'll tell you, the Legislative 

Secretaries aren't either. It's the back-benchers. It's that row, that fertilizer row you have back there, those 

gentlemen who are working just as hard in many areas as the front benches of that government. Those are the 

guys that have to suffer. 

 

And I see the minister staring me down. he thinks, boy, I'll tell you, we'll make those boys suffer because they'll 

never go anywhere anyway. And I agree that they won't. They won't go anywhere in your government. And 

you're going to penalize them once again by giving them less than enough to maybe live on as full-time 

members of the government, as people out there who are required in their constituencies to go out and carry the 

message. 

 

Let's fact it, at your recent meeting in Saskatoon it was agreed that the message wasn't getting out there. Maybe 

the back-bench members of your government need a more full-time position. Some of them undoubtedly are 

part-timers. 

 

But I'll accept this. I won't vote for the Bill. I'll reluctantly accept the increase. I don't think it certainly affects 

any of the front benches of your government. I don't think . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — I think he's changing his mind here. 

 

MR. SVEINSON: — I'm saying I'll reluctantly accept the freeze. okay? They're saying, "What increase?" 
 
I see the member from P.A. laughing and giggling at the back of the House. Well, that member looks after a 

very small department. He's a minister without portfolio, but he's on a minister's salary. He can afford to laugh 

and giggle in the House when we're talking about salaries that might affect the member for Saskatoon Eastview 

or the member for Moose Jaw South or North. 
 
Are those people in positions, politically, where they're self-serving if they require an income that can support 

themselves and their families as politicians? I don't think they are. 
 
I still haven't heard anything other than a political argument from the member from Meadow Lake on why there 

is going to be a political freeze, and does that translate throughout the government? Does that translate in and 

out of scope, and can all people in this province expect a political freeze as a result of our leadership? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Chairman, I think it would probably suffice to say that the member of the 

Liberal Party is laying out very, very clearly today the position of his party, which is what every member in this 

House should do. And he's doing that very well today, and we're pleased to hear what the position of the Liberal 

Party is. 
 
We've always known what it was at the federal level. We've seen the excesses of that former federal Liberal 

government. We now are given to understand here in Saskatchewan that the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan 

believes in those excesses and would, in fact, institute them here if they ever came into any position to be able 

to do that. 
 
(1215) 
 
So what I'm saying, Mr. Chairman, without getting into a long debate with the member from Regina North 

West, I'm just pleased that he put his feelings on the record. 
 
And I would say to you, Mr. Chairman, once again that the Bill is presented very, very clearly — a Bill of only 

three clauses which exercises the restraint which we believe is extremely important in these times and is, in fact, 

a step in leadership which this government will continue to do in this 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

572 
 

area and in other areas, as we have done for two and a half years and will continue to do. 

 

MR. SVEINSON: — I'd suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that it demonstrates a lack of leadership, not leadership. 

 

But the question I asked you was not related to the diatribe I just heard. The question is: as leaders, Mr. 

Minister, can you please outline to this House whether you will expect all employees of this government, in or 

out of scope, in or out of scope, to expect a freeze on their incomes in 1985 as well? 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, that particular position has nothing to do with this particular Bill. What 

I'm saying to hon. members and to the public of Saskatchewan, that we expect all legislators who are elected to 

responsible positions to take a freeze in their salaries in 1985 in these times, and we would ask members of the 

public, whether they be in the public or the private sector, to exercise that restraint. Many in our society have 

been exercising that restraint in a co-operative way with their government. We appreciate that. We congratulate 

them for it, and we would ask all members of the House to also exercise restraint and support this Bill. 

 

MR. SVEINSON: — Well, I have no qualms of exercising constraint, but the argument I heard earlier was 

simply that this Bill — and it relates to the Bill because it was introduced by the minister — was introduced as a 

form of leadership by legislators. I don't dispute the fact that as legislators we should be leaders, but I think he 

implicates that because we're going to take a freeze in our income as legislators, that he'll expect others within 

the government service to follow suit. And I would ask him if, as a minister and as a front-bench minister who 

makes the decisions in cabinet — will you be requesting, will you be requesting other departments who are 

under the auspices of your government to accept the freeze in 1985 as well? I didn't hear the answer clearly. 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Chairman, I'm sure the hon. member will know that we are . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . well, I shouldn't be so . . . I'm a little too generous probably. But I will continue to be generous 

with the member, Mr. Chairman. I would hope that the hon. member would know that we are in a collective 

bargaining position with the public service and the various unions which public servants are represented by. 

Collective bargaining goes on and will continue to go on in its normal course. 

 

On the clauses of this Bill, Mr. Chairman, I believe there is no reason to be debating what the collective 

bargaining position of the government will be, and we won't get into that today, Mr. Chairman. 

 

MR. SVEINSON: — I wasn't debating the collective bargaining position. It was just the leadership role that 

this gentleman indicates as a result of a freeze on our salaries, we are undertaking. I would ask the minister 

then. I'll rephrase the question. 

 

We all appreciate that many people in -Saskatchewan have had — they haven't had any choice. They've had to 

take a position of restraint. in order to put supper on the table they've had to take a position of restraint. They 

don't have ministerial credit cards that they can use for supper every night. In fact, at the end of the month 

they're digging, they're digging just to put soup in the house. 

 

Now we're taking a leadership role. I've heard from the minister of jobs today with respect to the role he's 

undertaken, the $15 million which will not result, I wouldn't think, in a single job, a real job. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — I don't see where that relates to this Bill. It's a very short Bill, with three clauses, and I 

would ask the member from Regina North West to stay on the Bill. 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

573 
 

MR. SVEINSON: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was just trying to establish an argument that has been raised 

by the minister relating to the Bill that is one of political leadership. And I'm wondering who, in fact, he 

includes as followers within the structure of this bill if it's being tabled as a leadership attempt by legislators in 

this House who he's asking to freeze their income. 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I said that in a very general way. We have asked all sectors in the 

province, have been successful at that in terms of the co-operation that's been provided by people in all of the 

various sectors, both public and private, to exercise restraint; and in most cases that has been the by-word in the 

last year or two. 

 

All I'm saying is that there is a need for a continuation of that, and all I'm saying in this bill — and it's very clear 

and very straight forward, Mr. Chairman, — is that we're asking members of this Assembly, elected people who 

are elected to positions of leadership, to exercise restraint, ourselves, for the year 1985 upcoming. 

 

MR. SVEINSON: — I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, it's almost an admission of defeat. I find it very difficult to 

understand how that, in fact, is any leadership role that can be undertaken. It is an admission that the economy 

of this province is in worse shape than maybe any of use care to believe. It has a psychological effect on many 

people out there when their legislators, and their ministers in the front benches of the government, and their 

backbenchers, and the whole government, admits that the economy is in extremely serious shape, and that one 

of the ways we can work our way out of the hole is to freeze the incomes of legislators in this House. 

 

I hear the member from Maple Creek suggesting if I don't like the pay, quit. Now I can suggest . . . I could 

answer that, but I choose not to, choose not to. I have to stay on the Bill, but I still have not had answers to the 

questions that the member has, in fact, initiated in the House, the member for Meadow Lake. 

 

This Bill is strictly a political cover-up for the ineptitude of the government, and while I accept that people in 

this province are required to accept restraint, voluntary restraint in most cases, I do not question the position of 

freezing our salaries. I question the logic that was arrived at that position on behalf of this government. And I 

would again ask the member from Meadow Lake if he can substantiate his logic outside the realm of politics. I 

don't believe he can, but I'll give him another opportunity. 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there is no real reason to attempt, I don't believe, to get into a 

discussion of logic with the member from Regina North West. He has not brought logic to this argument this 

morning. This Bill, as I said, is a very straight forward Bill. Everyone in the government benches, all of our 

people, every member of the official opposition understands what it is. 

 

I believe that the member from Regina North West understands the Bill. I thin it's very straightforward, and I 

don't think there is any . . . The time and interests of the committee are not served well by getting into a debate 

with the hon. member for Regina North West on the whole of the provincial economy and etc., etc., etc. 

 

So I would say to you, Mr. Chairman, I would ask that in the interest of the good workings of this committee 

that we get on with the discussion of the Bill and its clauses. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Chairman, I rise, not to deal wit the substance of the Bill itself. There's more 

than one way to look at it. The position of the government's arguable and defensible, and we don't quarrel with 

it. 

 

I do want to complain about the way the Bill was handled. And its not no much a problem with this Bill, 

because I don't think it would have affected the outcome, but it is symbolic of a larger 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

574 
 

problem. The House Leader and the assistant House Leaders are running this House as if they're driving a 

bulldozer. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I have been a member of the legislature since 1975. I was associated with its workings for the 

four years before that. Never has a pay increase been dealt with without prior consultation. and this was not. 

Nor was there any pretence, apart from the minister's rather weak effort this morning, nor was there any 

pretence that there was. 

 

This House will not function unless there is a degree of co-operation between the government and the 

opposition, and that's not going to happen if the government House Leader continues to treat this House as if he 

were riding a bulldozer. He has got to learn to work with the opposition, or the Assembly is not going to 

function, and we will all be the losers for it. 

 

As I say, I complain, not so much about this Bill, because I don't think it would have affected the outcome, but 

it is symblomatic of a larger problem, that the House Leader is running this House as if he were driving a 

bulldozer. And it isn't going to do much to improve the functioning of the House. 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as it relates to this Bill, there has been ample time to relate, to 

debate this Bill. There's no question. There's no attempt to, as the terminology the member uses, bulldoze this 

Bill through the House. That's not the case at all. You've had ample time. 

 

The hon. member . . . I just guess I could say, on behalf of the government, we just reject the suggestion that the 

hon. member's making. It is just not the case, and the record of this House in the last number of days, since the 

opening of this session, will not bear out his remarks. That has not been the case, and it does not show. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd just like to get back specifically to the Bill. And I'd like to ask 

the minister if he could outline the rationale for the introduction of this Bill. 

 

When I ask you to set forth ere rationale, I'm asking you whether it is your view that regardless of what increase 

there is to public service, regardless of what increases there are to teachers, regardless of what increases there 

are to other members of society, that you feel that in your austerity program that it will be justifiable that to civil 

servants, conceivably, if you have some rationale, that top civil servants should be getting 5, or 6, or 5, or 4, or 

3 per cent increase at a time when the legislators are reduced to no increase? 

 

So what I'm asking you, in setting forth this Bill here to the House: is it relating to a general strategy of 

government dealing with the very difficult problems of lack of funds, huge deficits, and waste within your 

government? 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Chairman, just in a general answer to the member's question, the rationale for 

the Bill is as I've said before. We believe it's important for legislators to take a leadership role. As far as relating 

to the member saying about senior civil servants and increase of 4 and 5 and whatever other percentage points 

that he cited, you will remember that my seat-make, the Minister of Finance in last year's budget, froze senior 

management positions within the civil service at zero. That was the case. Certainly there are people within the 

civil service who are extremely hard-working people and who believe that a zero was a very difficult pill to 

swallow. 

 

What we're saying, at the time that we imposed that, that we believe that it's a pill that we ourselves must 

swallow, and we will, in fact, swallow it. And all members on this side of the House agree with what we're 

doing. 

 

So the rationale is very simply and very straightforward. We believe in the responsible leadership 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

575 
 

role which we were elected to exercise, and we are exercising it in introducing this Bill. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — I'd like to also ask the minister if indeed you feel it's necessary to have restraint, will it be 

the government policy that not only MLAs will be a parcel and part of the restraint package, but other civil 

servants and employees of the government? Is that the consistency of your program? It seems to me that . . . 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. If the member wished to get into the broad debate of the Bill, he could have 

done it in second reading. This is in committee, and I would ask the member to confine his remarks to the Bill. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — I'm in the general clause, Mr. Chairman, and certainly we have always been the tradition 

that we can go into a general discussion in detail — general discussion pertaining to the Bill. And I challenge 

your ruling on that. I certainly do. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — I would just ask the member from Quill Lakes to keep his questions on the Bill. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your overruling of your previous decision. I will proceed. I 

want to ask the minister then, in respect to the package here set out in the Bill where you're indicating no 

increase of salary for the MLAs, could you indicate the estimated amount of savings relative to taking that 

action? 

 

(1230) 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Chairman, I don't have the number. I don't have that number here. I can 

certainly . . . I would be willing to provide it to the member. But I would say to the member, and I think it's 

important and I believe that all members understand this, the reason that this Bill is here now and, in our view, 

must be passed in this fall session is because, as the member knows, the increases which would automatically 

take place, will take place according to the other legislation. It will take place on the 1st of January unless this 

Bill is passed. I want that to be very clear to all members that that is the case, and that's why the Bill is here 

now. 

 

And in terms of the numbers, in terms of the exact savings in terms of dollars, I don't have that number. But I 

can say to the member if you can take your salary and your calculator and work it, by the number of members in 

the House or whatever. But certainly, it will be significant. And the important thing, once again, is that there is a 

signal here from all of us who are in leadership roles that we exercise the leadership which is entrusted to us. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Chairman, I am very, very surprised that the minister, who is introducing a package 

here of no increase to the MLAs, cannot in fact indicate to this House . . . He says it's very significant, but I 

don't know the amount. Now how can he stand up in this House and say it's very significant when he says in the 

first hand that I don't know how much it's going to save. 

 

And so what I'm asking the minister — he has officials there — I would like him to put forward the amount that 

this provision is going to be saving the taxpayers. Can you bring that information forward? Can you ask your 

officials, your Legislative Secretary, your other officials, have you got any idea, a ballpark figure of the 

amount? 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Chairman, I have said to the member, and I will say once again that I will 

provide that number to the member. And while I have a great deal of confidence in my colleague from 

Rosthern, who is attempting to figure it here now, I will give a very accurate figure to the member, and I won't 

give it to you today. I won't give it to you today . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I won't be able to give it to you, 

let's put it this way, before 1 o'clock. But the leadership I will provide to you is that I will give you exactly that 

figure early next week. 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

576 
 

MR. KOSKIE: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm going to suggest that it's hard to believe that the minister would 

come in introducing a no increase in the salary of the MLAs, indicating that it is a very significant saving to the 

taxpayer, and we are leading the way in so far as it deals with austerity. 

 

And it's very difficult because I think that what the people of Saskatchewan will say is that if they look at the 

size of this cabinet, the largest in the history of this province, and we calculated that the increase from 19 

cabinet ministers to 25, plus all of the legislative secretaries, that that little package cost the taxpayers of this 

province over $3 million. 

 

Now I'll tell you if this government was serious about helping to meet the problem of a deficit, helping to meet 

the problem of introducing austerity, that what they would do, in fact, is to reduce substantially the size of 

cabinet and legislative secretaries. 

 

And I would also ask the minister: how does he justify the lack of consistency in the policy? Because it comes 

to my information that you bring in a Bill here which says no increase for the MLAs and, at the same time in the 

board of economy, the secretary to the Speaker is reclassified, salary readjusted, and a 10 per cent increase in 

salary. Where is the logic of the approach of this government? What you are doing is simply window-dressing 

and why don't you come clean with the public of Saskatchewan? 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — To China? 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Yes, to China. Mr. Gerich. Ministerial assistant went along. And this is the hypocrisy of this 

government. This is the hypocrisy of this government. They are bringing out a Bill pretending that they are 

really putting forward an effort here to save the taxpayers' money when, in fact, all of the evidence indicates 

clearly that this has been the most wasteful government that this province has ever seen. 

 

I ask the minister who is introducing this Bill to take a look at some of the ministerial staff, and you will find 

Minister of Health, two legislative secretaries. He has a staff of seven or eight people which runs at $240,000 a 

year for a private staff. And what I'm trying to point out here, Mr. Minister, is what you're doing is just putting 

forth a smoke-screen. You have no sincerity about the taxpayers' money. You have wasted it on 34 international 

junkets costing over $500,000. The Minister of Industry and Commerce, when he first go elected, took a little 

trip down to Europe — $33,000. He came back with nothing, got kicked out of the department because he 

couldn't run it. And that's the waste that's going on in this province. 

 

And we have 12 legislative secretaries, the largest cabinet in the province, and they still can't handle it. They've 

got ministers without portfolio. They've got a minister that's getting paid 65, $70,000, all expenses paid, and all 

he does is the crop insurance. And how can you justify that this has any sincerity behind it? 

 

I ask you to justify to the people of Saskatchewan that you are, indeed, sincere in cutting back on the expenses 

of the government. 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Chairman, a couple of points to clarify here. The member from Quill Lakes 

mentions, I believe, the secretary to the Speaker, I believe it was that he mentioned, which is dealt with in the 

Board of Internal Economy which all members here will know is representatives from the official opposition; 

representatives from the government are on the 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

577 
 

Board of Internal Economy. Members of that official opposition, NDP party, voted for the increase that was 

given tot he secretary for the Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I'm told that that was the case. I myself, 

Mr. Chairman, am not on that committee. I was not there, but I am told by one of our members. 

 

But in any case, Mr. Chairman, in another forum at another time, we, as we have been in the past and as we will 

continue to be, will be very willing to compare any of the expenses of ministers, which are incurred by 

ministers of this government, with the expenses of ministers of the former government in terms of where they 

went, the proposes of various trips, and so on. We will be very willing to compare that at any time with the 

former government. 

 

So without getting into the long debate on that on this particular Bill, but there's no question, there's no 

question, Mr. Chairman, that we'll be willing to debate that, and I'm sure it come forward in committee of 

finance later in this session. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — I asked the minister whether or not he could provide to the House today, the amount of the 

cost saving in respect to the putting into effect of this Bill. I take it that the minister has that information, but he 

is embarrassed to bring it forward. I would ask you to ask your officials. And are you saying that you and your 

officials here do not know the amount of the estimated savings by the implementation of this Bill? 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Chairman, once again, I have said to the committee, and I will not have that 

number before 1 o'clock, and I believe, and I'm not absolutely sure of this but I will share this with the House. I 

believe that the industrial composite index, which the increase if this Bill does not pass, the increase which 

member would receive was based on — the industrial composite index — I'm not sure if that number is, in fact, 

available. I'm not sure that that number is, in fact, available right now. Now it may well be, but if it is, it comes 

out in the month of December and I'm not sure that it is out. 

 

But in any case, I have undertaken to provide to the member what the saving will be once you take the industrial 

. . . (inaudible) . . . in this. Okay. I don't have it. I'm sorry about that. But I will say just this, Mr. Chairman, the 

one thing that is very obvious in all of this is that we know if an increase is at 4, or 5, or 6 per cent, whatever, 

that it would kick in if this Bill did not pass. Anybody would know that that would be a significant number of 

dollars if you just add your 5 per cent or whatever the salary is, the total sum salaries of all of us in this House. 

So certainly, regardless of what the exact number is, we know that a freeze in 1985 to the 1984 level will be a 

saving to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. That's what we're proposing, and I would urge all members to support 

the Bill in all its clauses. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — I was wondering if the minister has made any other comparisons that may save the 

taxpayers' money. Have you taken into account that if you cut back the number of cabinet ministers by five that 

you would save more than, indeed, cutting back on the individual MLA's increase? Have you taken a look at 

that possibility of saving money for the taxpayers? 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Well, Mr. Chairman, once again the member will want to debate various 

expenditures of the government in various areas through the various departments which my colleagues handle 

very, very well. Those questions will certainly be debated in this forum, in this House, at the proper time in the 

committee of finance, and the members will have their opportunities. 

 

So in terms of whether this saving to the taxpayers, and how it compares to other savings to the taxpayers which 

go on in the various departments of this government, is not relevant to this Bill. What I'm saying, the relevant 

part of this Bill is the fact that there will be — is that there will be a saving to the taxpayers when the salaries 

are frozen, if — if all members of the opposition will support the Bill or not. The fact is we would like to pass 

the Bill because we believe it's the reasonable thing to do, and I can assure you, Mr. Chairman, and the public of 

Saskatchewan that 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

578 
 

every member on the Progressive Conservative benches, the government side of this House, will support this 

Bill because we believe in exercising the restraint which many, many people in our society have been 

exercising. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to follow up in the questions of my colleague from 

Quill Lakes, and it would be this, Mr. Minister. I would ask you, sir, whether or not you can confirm or give us 

an indication whether or not, since you came to government — and you will know because you are in the 

cabinet — that you have taken in excess of 34 trips, this is your cabinet, out side of the country, costing the 

taxpayers $500,000, in excess of $500,000? And I would be interested to know when you are explaining cost 

savings for the government, how much you have spent on trips around the world. The saying is out in the 

country, in my constituency, "Join the Tory cabinet and see the world." And this I say to you, Mr. Minister, is 

unfortunate that today you would come in here and say that you are saving the taxpayers' money. I believe that 

the savings to the taxpayers from this Bill, and you can confirm or deny it, is between 50 and $75,000 — 

between 50 and $75,000. 

 

And I would say to you that the minister from P.A., the minister without portfolio from P.A.-Duck Lake would 

save you more than that if you were to do away with his position, and many people in the province would thank 

you for it. Not only would you save the money, but many people would thank you for it. 

 

And I would like to say to you, Mr. Minister, whether or not you would consider as well, when you're thinking 

about this proposal, cancelling any trips that ministers are planning to take this winter out of the province — to 

travel to New Zealand to study the aboriginal people, whether they're travelling to, oh I don't know, some place 

in Bulgaria, some place in Saudi Arabia, or whether they're going to Austria for a little skiing trip — whether or 

not you will take it on yourself to cancel those trips to try to save some money for the taxpayers. 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I said to you before, the various cost savings which come 

from the various departments will be debated in the committee of finance. I will not get into that. I will neither 

confirm nor deny the number of trips. I don't know the number of trips. How would I know that in my notes 

here today? I don't know the number of trips. 

 

I do know this. I do know this, Mr. Chairman. The member mentions a trip to New Zealand to see the aboriginal 

people, and so on, and our cabinet had no control on Mr. Hammersmith who went to New Zealand to look at the 

aboriginal people proposals. We had no control on Mr. Hammersmith, who was a member of their cabinet. 

 

This cabinet had no control on the fact of whether or not a former minister, Mr. Gross, from the constituency of 

Morse, travelled across North America looking at various hot spots in North America to look at water slides, 

Mr. Chairman, which was what went on. I mean, those are the kinds of things. So I mean it's really a strange 

sort of, it's really a strange sort of a debate we're into. 

 

(1245) 

 

But as I said before, to make it very simple, Mr. Chairman, this government and this cabinet will compare 

favourably — will compare and be willing to compare any trips that are made by ministers here, any expenses 

which are incurred by ministers here, with expenses which were incurred by the former government any time. 

 

And certainly there will be an opportunity in this forum to make that comparison. And there's no question, Mr. 

Chairman. We all know it. And we would look forward to the day when the people of Saskatchewan can make 

that comparison and realize just the kind of restraint that is exercised by people on this side of the house. 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

579 
 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, there would be many people in the province who would disagree 

that having a record-sized cabinet of 25 — having a record number of legislative secretaries, complete with 

secretaries of their own, and automobiles — is restraint. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Minister, if you were serious, and if the Premier of this province was serious about the 

spending record and saving the taxpayers' money, the Premier himself would look in his own area. He would 

look at the increase in the spending in Executive Council, look at his advertising program of some $12 million, 

would look at things like the chauffeur that he has, spending on things like that to drive him that whole block 

from his house to the Legislative Building, which is walking across Albert Street, and I believe we could save a 

great deal of money. 

 

And I say that this Bill which we are dealing with today will save you between 50 and $75,000. That is 

significant. But when compared to the waste in many other areas, it's peanuts, Mr. Minister, and you know very 

well. 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Chairman, we are now seeing . . . We heard in the early stages of debate here in 

committee from the members of the official opposition that they would be in support of the Bill. And now after 

what appears to have been a very convincing argument by the Liberal member, now it appears that the members 

of the NDP opposition are joining ranks once again with their bedfellows, and are now arguing that the savings 

which would be incurred by the people of Saskatchewan and by the taxpayers would not be enough to warrant 

passing this Bill, because they'd make various other . . . So they're now arguing on behalf of or alongside the 

Liberal member who argues that he would like to have an increase, and we are now seeing the absolute position 

of the NDP. 

 

I can't believe what I'm hearing. I did believe them before in the sense that they said they would be with us. I 

now hear from the member from Quill Lakes, the member from Shaunavon, and others who are arguing against 

this Bill, and I can't understand the reason. For the life of me I will not ever understand how a legislator in these 

times can argue for an increase in salary which, as we all know and which I mentioned before, will kick into 

place automatically on the 1st of January, 1985. That will kick into place in 1985. That piece of legislation came 

into place under the former government and that will kick into place. 
 
And if this Bill is not passed, and it appears now that the delay tactics that are being put on by the two 

opposition parties are for just that purpose, to delay this Bill so that the increase will automatically kick into 

place. And I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, I'm very, very disappointed in members of the official opposition that 

they would take that stand. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I just want to pint out clearly the hypocrisy of the minister and the government — total 

hypocrisy — and the public will realize what you're doing is hypocrisy. What I can't understand is how the 

government can justify paying to Dennis Ball, a part-time job in the Labour Relations Board, $95,000 — more 

than the Vice-President of the United States. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! I don't see where this pertains to Bill No. 11. I would ask the member to 

keep his questions on the Bill. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I want to indicate, Mr. Chairman, that we have a Bill here which they're hoisting before this 

legislature, putting before this legislature, indicating that they are on a direction of restraint. I certainly can go 

on to indicate other actions of the government does not support the sincerity of the proposition that they're 

putting forward. And that is precisely what we're pointing out, that they have no sincerity by putting forward 

this. You can't even come to this legislature and indicate what amount of money is going to be saved. 
 
On the other hand, what are they doing? They're taking Dennis Ball, a part-time employee, paying him $95,000, 

and they say they're on a course of restraint protecting the taxpayers' money. That is total hypocrisy. And 

exactly the same happens with respect to the personal 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

580 
 

services contracts. We have evidence here before that this government introduced and supplied to us, a personal 

services contracts for up to $410 a day for political hacks. And here they come forward pretending that they are 

putting forward a restraint package. 

 

This is total hypocrisy. The size of the cabinet indicates it. The size of the number of legislative secretaries 

indicates no sincerity. The expenditures and all of the international trips, some 34 international trips sending 

along the back-benchers, not even legislative secretaries to trips into China, all indicate that this is just smoke 

and mirrors. There is no sincerity by this government. 

 

They are the most wasteful government that this province has ever had to endure. And I'd like the minister to 

justify how bringing this here, this Bill, justifies the amount of waste in other areas of government? 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Chairman, I believe I have not only exercises restraint in the introduction of this 

Bill, I believe that we on this side of the House have exercised some restraint in listening to some of the 

arguments from that side of the House today. 

 

The hon. member from Quill Lakes, who was much more able to have a family reunion in the days of his 

government because they all worked for government here in Regina, will know about exercising restraint, Mr. 

Chairman. There was no restraint in the Koskie family when they were all working for the government. 

 

One of the things that the members continue to raise, Mr. Chairman, one of the things that the members 

continue to raise is about the use and the various jobs and responsibilities that are given to members of this side 

of the House, all of our elected members, by our Premier. One of the things which we will never apologize for, 

because the people of Saskatchewan have asked for this, that when we become government, they said be sure 

that the elected people have the say in the way in which government operates. And that is what happens under 

this Progressive Conservative government, Mr. Chairman. We will not apologize . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — We will not apologize for replacing tasks which were formerly done by socialist 

planners and planners and technocrats which were a very big and major part of any socialist government with 

elected representatives of the people from every corner of this province, in every constituency in this province. 

We will not apologize for putting our members to work as ministers in effecting policy and changing policy. we 

will not apologize for appointing good members of this legislature to legislative secretaries' positions so they 

can carry out the wishes of their constituents who sent them here to effect changes in the way in which this 

province is run. 

 

Those changes, we have seen. The people of this province have seen the results of the work that's been done by 

members of this side of the House, in every row on this side of the House. And I would like to add, for those 

people in this province who don't every day come into this legislature, to realize that most of the members on 

that side of the House, as well, are our Progressive Conservative members. 

 

The reason for that and the reason there are so many so many Conservatives and will continue to be the 

representatives of our party in this House is because we told people that we would exercise restraint; that we 

would govern as they asked us to govern; that we would change policy in this province as they asked us to 

change it; and that we would keep in touch with time through putting their elected members to work in this 

legislature and throughout this province. 

 

We will never apologize for that, nor should we ever apologize for it, Mr. Chairman, because the people of 

Saskatchewan have asked us to run this government in just that way. 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

581 
 

As a result of just that, this Bill is one more in a long list of bills which have been presented in two and a half 

years to this House. This is just one more Bill in a long list of Bills which are presented to this House on behalf 

of the people of Saskatchewan and presented by the members on this side of the House, who represent them all 

very well in every part of this province. 

 

Mr. Chairman, other Bills which are here . . . The members want to talk about what kind of restraint do we 

exercise? What kind of representation do our legislative secretaries and our cabinet ministers and all of our 

members from this side of the House — what kind of representation do they give their people? 

 

Our people went out there and listened, and they listened to farm groups; they listened to agricultural people; 

and they said, "Introduce Bill 1." And it's significant that in this session which we are now in, that Bill No. 1 is 

just that. An agricultural Bill to save agricultural people out there is number one in this session. 

 

They said to us, "Put some priority on jobs for our people in this province." And it's significant that our 

ministers which they criticize, our legislative secretaries which those NDP members will criticize, and all of our 

MLAs from all of the constituencies around this province, in every corner of this province, brought Bill No. 2 to 

this House. 

 

What does Bill No. 2 deal with? It deals with a jobs agency — a jobs agency. Bill No. 1, agriculture, Bill no. 2, 

a jobs agency, and here's Bill No. 11, another in a long serious of Bills which represent the feelings of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And they elected us here to present those. and I can honestly say to you, Mr. Chairman, as I have tried to say to 

you in a restrained way two or three times this morning in this debate, that this Bill No. 11 — An Act to amend 

The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, which really deals with the salaries which are paid to all 

of us who are elected here to positions of leadership . . . 

 

What we are saying by this Bill is that we accept that leadership and the responsibility that's been given to us by 

the people which we're sent here to represent, and we will continue to represent them that way. 

 

This Bill shows restraint. This Bill shows restraint, Mr. Chairman. It's important that it does. It's important in 

these times that we . . . It's important in these times that all of our citizens, whether they be in the public sector 

— people that we deal with directly every day, those of us in government — whether they be in the public 

sector or people who have come upon some difficult times ion the private sector, have been exercising restraint 

in this province for a couple of years. They've been doing it very co-operatively with out government. They 

received very, very favourably, the budget which was presented by my seat-mate, the Minister of Finance, last 

year, and it talked about just those kinds of things — zero increases. And we encourage people to take those for 

the betterment of all of our society, and the co-operation that was shown by people in the public sector, the 

private sector, with the government, we appreciate very much. 

 

And what I'm saying now: it's time for us as legislators to reciprocate. It's time for us as legislators to 

reciprocate, and we would say it's very, very important, Mr. Chairman, that this Bill receives, I would hope, 

unanimous consent, and I believed — in fact, I was so naïve as to believe, Mr. Chairman, that all members 

would see this as a reasonable approach. 

 

As we have seen here today by some of the displays, the display of the Liberal member, he has held this Bill up 

today, for his own greed. We have seen a couple of other examples in this House in recent days and recent 

debates, where the member form Regina North West, because of his own particular greed in looking at the 

various clauses and the various books around, and say, "How can I get my hands on some more money?" Now 

he holds up this Bill, which is a responsible restraint Bill. He holds this Bill up so that he can say, give me more 

money. Maybe this 



 

December 14, 1984 

 

582 
 

Bill won't pass . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Maybe at the beginning of 1986. Maybe at the beginning of 1986. 

Maybe at the beginning of 1986, says the member from Regina North West and the NDP members who have 

joined forces with him in the last few minutes here — who at the beginning of this debate said that they were 

for the Bill, and who now say they're against the Bill. 

 

(1300) 

 

So I cannot believe the flip-flop which has taken place by the NDP. They're more interested in their own 

well-being and filling their own hip national pocket than they are in the restraint and its exercising 

responsibility which, because we represent people well and because we exercise the responsibility that they 

have given to us, that we present this Bill. 

 

We will be voting for it. The members of the opposition of both parties represented over there obviously are 

going to vote against it, and it will be a sad day for them when the people of Saskatchewan see the 

irresponsibility they've shown here today. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Chairman, I see that it's past one o'clock. I move the committee rise, report 

progress and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:05 p.m. 


