






















































Hansard: December 04, 1984


149 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
December 4, 1984 

 
EVENING SITTING 

 
SPECIAL ORDER 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
ADDRESS IN REPLY (continued) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in reply which was moved by Ms. Zazelenchuk and 
seconded by Mr. Tusa. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased today to join into this debate on the fourth throne speech of 
this government, Mr. Speaker — the fourth throne speech, and I think I'd have to say it is probably the worst. 
Traditionally, Mr. Speaker, the throne speech sets out the government direction, its policies, and its priorities, sets all of 
those out for the year ahead. But this throne speech, Mr. Speaker, is very disappointing. Instead of setting out the policy 
and the direction and the programs that they are going to put in place for this year, Mr. Speaker, all the Premier did was 
give us a distorted history lesson. That's all that this government did, Mr. Speaker, in this throne speech. 
 
This document doesn't provide any decisive leadership. All it does is offer a little bit of drift and confusion. This throne 
speech, Mr. Speaker, replaced a concrete legislative plan with a vague and many idle promises. No concrete plan, Mr. 
Speaker. Idle promises that nobody believes, because they have proven that in the past. In fact, the government 
members are so embarrassed of that throne speech that they wouldn't even talk about it, Mr. Speaker. They wouldn't 
even talk about it. Every speaker that got up in this House yesterday talked about everything else but what was in that 
throne speech and all the good things that they were going to do for the people of this province in the next year. They 
talked about the NDP, Mr. Speaker, because they couldn't talk about the speech. So you try to get the people's minds off 
what's actually in front of this House and talk about something different. And they couldn't think of anything else to talk 
about, but they talk about the NDP and what they didn't do in the past. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this government has been in for almost three years, and it's time that they told the people of 
Saskatchewan what they are going to do. It is time they set out some beneficial programs for Saskatchewan, programs 
that would help farmers, would help business people, would help workers find employment. But that throne speech, 
Mr. Speaker, provided nothing. 
 
Some of the members talk about all the jobs that they have created in the past two and a half years or so, and one would 
have to wonder where those jobs are, Mr. Speaker. The Premier talked about training people, training people so they 
would be able to find a job anywhere in this country. Well, Mr. Speaker, I have letters from outside of my constituency, 
people that are looking for work. University graduates, that have student loans to pay back, can't find a job. And yet this 
government says that there are many jobs that they've created, and there is work for everyone, only some of them have 
to be retrained. Well, Mr. Speaker, why do university graduates have to be retrained? 
 
I've got a letter from a tech graduate. He went to technical school. He got his special training, yet there is no job 
available. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — In what? 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — And the members opposite are saying, "In what?" Well, Mr. Speaker, it doesn't seem to matter 
whether you went as a welder, a mechanic, plumber, electrician, anything you want to mention. Try and find jobs out 
there. It is not possible. These students are trying to find them; they can't find them. 



 
December 4, 1984 

150 
 

What this government seems to be saying now: that you should forget about all these other jobs and only concentrate on 
the high-tech industry. That's what they are saying, Mr. Speaker. So we have to train everybody on computers now, and 
nothing else. Well, Mr. Speaker, there are many people out there that have specialized training, and they are looking for 
jobs, and they expect a responsible government to provide those jobs. But that is not happening; that's not happening, 
Mr. Speaker. And yet this government continues to tell these people — the young people of this province — that there 
are many jobs available. All they have to do is go out there and find them. 
 
Well that is not what I hear, Mr. Speaker. That's not what I hear from my constituents, and it's not because they aren't 
prepared to go and look for work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a letter from one man that says he would be prepared at this time to take any kind of job. He has 
been out of work for over a year, and he says he would take a job even at the lowest salary that's being paid, as long as 
he could have a job. That, Mr. Speaker, does not sound like a man that is not interested in working. He is prepared to 
take any job, and he says this government keeps talking about all the jobs they have created and yet, even at the lowest 
wages possible, he can't get a job. That, Mr. Speaker, I think is despicable, when a person is willing to work and the 
jobs are not available. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker, don't the members of this government, in their speeches to the throne speech, talk about one of the 
most important industries in this province? And that's agriculture, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, agriculture has to be one 
of the most important industries in this province, and yet this government totally ignores agriculture. They talk about 
many programs for agriculture. They talk about all the good things that they are doing for agriculture. But yet, Mr. 
Speaker, when you look at the record, what is there for agriculture in this province? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, all that we see in agriculture right now is that farmers are losing their land, losing their equipment, 
and losing everything that they have worked for for many long years. They're losing it at about 50 a month, Mr. Speaker 
— farms being lost, equipment being repossessed, 50 a month. How long can that continue before we come to the point 
where members of this government, where some of the economists and the banks have been indicating that we should 
be eliminating a good portion of the farmers in this province, get rid of at least two-thirds of them and leave the 
one-third of those efficient, prosperous farmers of this province? That's what we should be doing, Mr. Speaker, and this 
is where it's heading now. 
 
They are little by little eliminating the farmers. Every month you see 50 less farmers out in this province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it is time that this government put forward some positive assistance for the farmers of Saskatchewan, and I 
mean assistance that would do some good, not just a lot of rhetoric, not idle promises. But they should be putting 
forward programs that are going to assist farmers to keep their farms, that are going to give them some revenue, that are 
going to give them at this time an opportunity to stay on that farm and eventually be able to get themselves out of the 
deficit that they are in. And not one that they have created, but one that has been created through high interest rates, 
high land prices, bad weather conditions — that is what put these farmers in debt, Mr. Speaker, and this government 
just totally refuses to help them. 
 
Some of the members opposite talk about the Bill. Yes, they introduced a Bill today, Bill No. 1, I believe it was. And 
this is the Bill that they've been talking about all summer. They were talking about a Bill that was going to solve all the 
problems that farmers have. Well, Mr. Speaker, I had just a short opportunity to glance at that Bill this evening, and I 
can see from what I read in that Bill that to this point that there's not going to be one red cent provided by this 
government to the farmers of Saskatchewan — not one cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They talk about helping the farmers of Saskatchewan with this Bill. All that they are going to do is maybe save a few 
farms from bankruptcy, from repossession in this next year. But how are they prepared to help the farmers, Mr. 
Speaker? How are they going to get them out of the deficit 



 
December 4, 1984 

151 
 

that they are in, and, as I said before, not because of something they did? And we would only have to look at what 
happened to the farmers in north-eastern Saskatchewan. And they have a problem out there, and it's not because they 
are poor farmers, but it's because they have had two and three years of bad weather conditions that kept them from 
getting a decent crop in that part of the province. And this government totally ignores them. They couldn't find the 
money to help these farmers out. 
 
We told them last spring that this situation was developing, and not that it was only developing. It was there last spring 
in the last session. And we kept telling them that all summer, and they kept studying the situation. But no assistance 
arrived. When they finally did come up with some assistance, from the $20 million that they promised the farmers that 
they would pay them in north-eastern Saskatchewan because of the floods, they finally came up with about 7.2 million, 
Mr. Speaker. They found $7.2 million. Well, Mr. Speaker, that's a long way from 20 million. 
 
They found money in a hurry when they needed it to guarantee a loan for Bill Hunter's skating rink in Saskatoon. That 
was no problem. Thirty-two million dollars wasn't hard to find. They could find $300 million for the oil companies. 
That wasn't hard to find. They could guarantee $89 million from Manalta Coal to sell one of Saskatchewan's coal mines 
to a company from out of the province. They found $89 million there. 
 
But they couldn't come up with 20 million for the farmers of north-eastern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. A long way 
from 89 million, only 20 million, and they couldn't come up with that money. There was plenty of money for the 
railways. In fact, they even helped to get rid of the Crow. They said the farmers could afford to pay more. And now the 
farmers have to have an additional cost to what it cost them to produce that bushel of grain. There's a transportation 
cost, because this government felt that the railways deserved the money more than the farmers did. That, Mr. Speaker, 
is what this government continues to keep telling the farmers of Saskatchewan, that, "We can't find money to help you. 
We can't find money to help you because we've got to help the oil companies, the mining companies, the railways. 
We've got to help all of those first. And if there's anything left over, then maybe we'll give a little for you." But most of 
what the farmers get are promises, Mr. Speaker. Promises and no cash when they need it. 
 
(1915) 
 
The flood assistance program of 7.2 million, Mr. Speaker, was given to the farmers designated on the flood area using 
R.M. boundaries. Now, Mr. Speaker, rains and floods don't come according to R.M. boundaries. I have never seen a 
rain yet that followed R.M. boundary lines. Why didn't this government, Mr. Speaker, make a pay-out to those farmers 
similar to what they do in crop insurance, on the basis of the farmers that had a loss because of excessive moisture? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What about when we got dried out? 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Why didn't they pay on that basis, Mr. Speaker? And as my colleague has mentioned, a similar 
situation developed in the South where they had the drought this year. But this is one year that they've had the problem. 
The farmers in the North have had it for two and three years, and they can't possibly cope with another loss in crops 
without any assistance. 
 
But it seems this government is saying that there is no assistance for them, there's only a small amount of money. No 20 
million, only seven. The federal government before the election promised to match that 20 million, and what happened 
to that promise, Mr. Speaker? We've got a Tory government in Ottawa now, and all of sudden what they're saying is the 
best they can do is match what the provincial government had put forward. The best they can do is maybe match that $7 
million. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the farmers in north-eastern Saskatchewan are prepared to accept that. I don't think they 
are. I don't think they can afford to have governments that are going to 



 
December 4, 1984 

152 
 

ignore agriculture, and ignore the need of farmers that, because of climatic conditions, had failures for year after year. 
Those farmers can't afford that, and no government — no reasonable, compassionate government — would allow these 
farmers to go under because of climatic conditions. 
 
But I'm not sure we have a compassionate and reasonable government here. We have a government that wants to 
eliminate a good number of farmers. And that is what they are doing. 
 
What they should be doing instead, Mr. Speaker, is coming up with the $20 million for those farmers, and making sure 
that they can continue to farm until things turn around. They could be providing a fuel rebate for all farmers in 
Saskatchewan. That would help all of agriculture. They could be looking at interest rates, and maybe trying to help the 
farmers to bring down those interest rates. 
 
The farmer has no control on what he gets for the product he produces. So it is only reasonable that he would expect a 
government to assist him when something beyond his control threatens the industry that he is in. It is only reasonable 
that one would expect that. 
 
If the farmer could set the price on this grain, he wouldn't ask the government for assistance. Farmers don't want 
hand-outs. They are hard-working people. But all that they are asking for is what is fair and reasonable. 
 
But I suppose, Mr. Speaker, that's a little too much to ask for from this government, and it's not likely that agriculture is 
going to receive it. Along with agriculture, Mr. Speaker, if one had a strong agricultural sector, that would spill over 
into business. Our small-business people would do well, too, but because agriculture is suffering, many of our 
small-business people are suffering. 
 
And what has this government done for small business? Well, Mr. Speaker, small business hasn't received very much 
from this government because this government has talked about the open for business policy that they brought in when 
they became government, and one would have to say that that open for business philosophy has failed. All that that has 
promoted and all that it has assisted was not the small-business people of this province, but it has assisted the 
big-business people of this province. The oil companies, the multinationals, they are the ones that benefited under the 
open for business policy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The PC government has failed to recognize the important role that the small-business people play in this province, the 
important role that they play in the economy of this province. Mr. Speaker, there are about 35,000 small-business 
people in Saskatchewan. And if this government put forward a program that would allow these business people to hire 
at least one individual in addition to what they have on staff, just think of what that would do to bring down the 
unemployment problem we have — just one individual per business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is how important the small-business people of this province are. They can generate a lot of employment, but you 
have to have programs that are going to address the problems that they face, and unless they are addressed, we are 
going to see small-business people that are going to go out of business; we are going to see unemployment increase; 
and we are going to seen an economy get even worse than it is in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have, on this side of the House, said many times, and we'll keep repeating it, that if the government 
would put forward programs that would help agriculture, and help small-business people, the economy of this province 
would grow overnight and would improve. We would be able to eliminate the majority of unemployment we have in 
this province. Mr. Speaker, unemployment has gone up, virtually, double from what it was when this government took 
office. And they brag about all the jobs that they've created. Unemployment has doubled. That is what this government 
has done in Saskatchewan. 



 
December 4, 1984 

153 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, they made many promises in the last election, many promises that would have helped, I suppose, 
improve our economic situation. They had promised to eliminate the 5 per cent provincial sales tax. Mr. Speaker, that 
didn't happen. 
 
That may have encouraged the public to spend a little more, but that's a promise that they decided they wouldn't go 
forward with. They promised a 10 per cent cut in personal income tax. That, Mr. Speaker, would have possibly put a 
little money into the business place in Saskatchewan. But that hasn't been acted on either. They also promised a 9 and 
five-eights per cent interest rate for small -business people. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, those business people are waiting for that 9 and five-eights per cent interest rate, and that 
hasn't been coming. And they're getting down to three years in office, the business people are closing down their shops 
. . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Giving up. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — As my colleague said, they are giving up. They've waited and they've waited and they've waited. 
and it got a point where they couldn't wait any longer, and there was no assistance coming forward from this 
government. 
 
They also promised a five-year utility rate freeze, Mr. Speaker. And what have we seen happen in that? If we'd had a 
five-year utility rate freeze for farmers and small-business people and consumers, we would have had some savings. 
But what did they do? They froze it for a short while, and then they increased it in leaps and bounds, Mr. Speaker. They 
more than made up for that freeze that they had on for the one year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all that this government has ever done for small-business people is created a bureaucracy that cost the 
people more than it ever has in the past, created a bureaucracy that virtually eliminated the fair tendering process 
amongst contractors, because now you don't tender on a job any more, or a project. You make a submission to the 
government and they decide who they're going to hire. It's not a tendering process any more, Mr. Speaker. And one 
would only have to contact some of the contractors and find out just what has been happening. They don't know any 
more whether their bid was a low bid or if it was the high bid. The bids are opened behind closed doors and the 
government makes the final decisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that tendering process that is being used now is putting more small-business people out of work than any 
tendering process ever has in the past. It is closing down small-business people because now the government is starting 
to compete with the small-business people in this province. 
 
And one can go, Mr. Speaker, and the government seems to be a little surprised at what I said. Well, I'll give them an 
example of what I'm talking about, a good example, Mr. Speaker. Sask Tel was in this province for a long time. There 
were business people operated in this province that were able to continue operating for a long time and never had any 
problems. Now we have business people, small firms in this province that install in-house communication systems, 
in-house stand-alone systems, Mr. Speaker. They were operating in this province for the last 30 or 40 years along with 
Sask Tel. They had no competition from Sask Tel. They knew what they could do, they knew what Sask Tel provided, 
and what they were doing, and they made money. 
 
Today these small-business firms that provide the in-house systems are being underbid by Sask Tel, not through a fair 
tendering process. They're being underbid with submissions. You look at what the submissions are that come in, and 
then you tell the school or the nursing home that as Sask Tel we're going to compete; we're going to give it a little 
cheaper. And you'd better take it from us because we're the government. That's what's happening out there. 
 
They are closing down small-business people. And Mr. Speaker, all they have to do is ask some of 



 
December 4, 1984 

154 
 

those that are involved in installing in-house systems, and they will tell them exactly what's happening. They will tell 
them that now they have to compete with the government where they didn't have to before. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — That is what's happening, Mr. Speaker. Those businesses now have to close down. And some of the 
government says they weren't . . . I believe it was the Deputy Premier that says those businesses weren't even around 
when we were in power. Well, Mr. Speaker, I can give him a few names, and I can tell him who these firms are, and 
they can contact them, and they can find out for themselves what is happening today. These people are on the verge of 
being closed down. And the Minister of Tourism and Small Business should be aware of this, and he should check into 
it. He should not allow the government to compete unfairly with some of our small-business people in Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — They don't mind fair competition. But when they start to compete unfairly, Mr. Speaker, that is 
when these businesses do not appreciate the government at all. And I think in the next election they will tell them that, 
and they will tell them that very clearly. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Speaker, small-business people in my constituency have been saying that for the past 10 years we were in 
government they were making money. Today they are closing down their doors. Farm implement dealers, Mr. Speaker, 
are closing down because they can no longer continue to operate with high utility rates, high taxes . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Competition by the government. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Fortunately, the government hasn't got into competition with the machine manufacturing industry 
yet — not yet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the small-business people that are going under today are saying that this government is not helping 
them at all. They are not helping the economy. They are not helping small-business people, as they had promised before 
the election. They said that their priority was going to be small business. Their priority was going to be farms. But, Mr. 
Speaker, that was a priority prior to the election. It seems to be no longer the priority since they've been elected the 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other things that has been happening at Sask Tel, and I'd have to say the minister responsible 
for Sask Tel isn't here tonight, but he has made a submission to CRTC, a credible submission I might add, objecting to 
what might happen if the long distance communication service was turned over to CNCP and B.C. Rail, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I'd have to say that one group that has done about more than the government on this issue are the telecommunications 
workers themselves. They have been out there trying to tell the public what's going to happen should the CRTC 
approve this application and turn over the long distance service to private enterprise. What they're saying, Mr. Speaker, 
if that ever happened, we would see telephone rates for business people, for consumers, that would triple and maybe go 
four times as high as they are now. That's what would happen, Mr. Speaker, if the private sector ever got hold of the 
long distance communication service. 
 
Everyone in this province knows that the Crown corporations, Sask Tel or nay other government-owned 
telecommunications service in the provinces, uses revenue from long distance service to subsidize the rest of the service 
provided in the province. That's what Sask 



 
December 4, 1984 

155 
 

Tel has been doing, Mr. Speaker. They have been subsidizing service throughout Saskatchewan using long distance 
revenue. Should we let that revenue go to private companies, then, Mr. Speaker, I think we would see that without 
question the rates would certainly go up and that the losers would be the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I would like to see this government put more pressure on the CRTC and on the federal PC government, and impress 
upon them the need for the provincial governments to have control of the long distance service. That is what they 
should be doing. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if they do as much with Sask Tel communications as they have for the Crow rate, then I think one 
might expect that very likely the long distance service would be lost in this province as has the Crow rate in 
Saskatchewan. That, Mr. Speaker, is what this government has been doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Highways made a few comments yesterday in his speech, and I intend to say a few words 
about highways; and I will only say a few words about the Minister of Highways and highways, because I think one 
would have to say that his record hardly deserves more than a few words, hardly deserves more than a few words. As 
my colleague said, one could spend a whole evening on it, but it would be, I think, an evening not spent wisely, because 
the people of Saskatchewan know what the conditions of our highways are. They know what this minister has done 
since he's been in the Department of Highways, and one would only have to look at what's happened in the past two and 
a half or three years. Look at all the highways equipment that's been sold off; look at the condition of the highways. 
They are in about the worst condition that they ever have been since, at least since the Liberals were in power from '64 
to '71. Mr. Speaker, the highways today are in the worst condition that they have ever been since at least 1971. 
 
And what has the Minister of Highways done to improve that? Do you see him putting more highways crews at least to 
repair the highways? No, he hires out-of-province repair crews to patch a little here, and to patch a little there, and by 
the time they finish patching, a few vehicles go through, we've got pot-holes again. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it doesn't matter how many reports they get from private consultants. It doesn't matter how many 
reports they get from them, and how they try to make the people believe that they still have the best highway system in 
Saskatchewan. The people that drive these highways every day know the condition of those highways; they know that 
this government has neglected highways. They have cut their budget for constructing highways and for repairing 
highways, and they put more money into PR, Mr. Speaker. That's what the Minister of Highways did. He increased his 
PR budget by about 72 per cent. 
 
And that has gone through every department in this government. They're not building highways. They're trying to 
convince the people, through the media and through the papers, that we have the best highways in the country. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, people aren't going to believe that very long. I think that money that they spent on PR is going to be a 
waste of money, because the people know better. They know how bad the highways are now, and how they've 
deteriorated in the last three years. They know that, Mr. Speaker, and they will be telling this government what they 
think of their PR program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to, before I conclude, just make a few points, make a few points on some of the comments that 
were made by a few of the members. Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the member for Melville said that this government will 
save all farmers who have worked hard and deserve to be saved. This government will save all farmers that have 
worked hard and deserve to be saved. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think he must have read the Bill that this government put in today because it might save some of 
those that, in their version, deserve to be saved. And if you're talking about the one-third of the farmers that they say 
should be farming and the two-thirds that shouldn't 



 
December 4, 1984 

156 
 

be there, well, maybe what he really meant was that they are prepared to save that one-third of the farmers that they 
think should be farming and let the other two-thirds go. Maybe that is what the member for Melville was saying, Mr. 
Speaker, because in that Bill the government is saying that they'll have a board set up — another bureaucracy that's 
going to cost money — a board set up to look at who should be saved. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What did he say about the banks? 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — And my colleague mentions, what did he say about the banks? Well, Mr. Speaker, he did mention 
the banks. The member for Melville did mention banks. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — He said they weren't making enough money. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — And it wasn't only the member from Melville that said the banks weren't making enough money, 
but the member for Prince Albert, I think. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I didn't say that. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Saskatoon. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Member for Saskatoon. Pardon me. A correction, Mr. Speaker. The member for Saskatoon, a 
banker himself, said that the banks weren't making enough money. Well, Mr. Speaker, when one looks at the bank 
statements, you find that the banks have been making more profit than they ever have, along with oil companies, along 
with all the multinationals in this province. They have been making more profit than ever, and yet this government says 
that the banks should be making more money. 
 
So who do you think that they are going to help? When they say that the banks aren't making enough money, the oil 
companies aren't making enough money, who are they going to help, Mr. Speaker? 
 
It is not likely that they are going to help the small-business people. They are not going to help the farmers, and they are 
not going to help working people of this province, Mr. Speaker. They are not going to help any of those, and that's been 
quite evident. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only ones in this province that are going to get any assistance, that are going to get any help from this 
government, are the big businesses of Saskatchewan that support the Tory party. Big business that gives large donations 
to the PC party: the Royal Banks, the Imperial, the Nova Scotia, the Montreal, and everyone that's been giving $30,000 
donations to this government, those are the ones that they are going to cater to, and those are the ones that they are 
going to help, Mr. Speaker — not the ordinary people of this province. 
 
I think it's unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that this government would decide that a few large multinationals deserve the 
money more, in a time of need, than do the farmers and the small-business people and the working people of this 
country. 
 
The young people, they are without jobs. They do not have the same respect from the government as do the 
multinationals. The young people that are looking for jobs, that want jobs: those, Mr. Speaker, do not have the same 
response as do the multinationals when it comes to giving money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people in my constituency, and people in every constituency, I think, are saying that this government has 
failed. It has failed miserably. And unless they turn around what they are doing now, and put more emphasis into 
providing programs that are going to save our farms, providing programs that are going to keep our businesses in 
operation, and create some type of 



 
December 4, 1984 

157 
 

program that will put people back to work . . . Until they do that, Mr. Speaker, I think that there isn't much hope for 
Saskatchewan. The people are starting to realize that, and all I can say is this government should call an election, and 
give the people a chance to make a decision what direction they want to go in, and they should do that soon, because 
the people can't afford this kind of government for very much longer in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Speaker, I will be voting against the motion that has been placed before this House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Speaker, it's a real pleasure for me to have the opportunity this evening to speak in 
reply to the throne speech that was given the other day. 
 
Before I start, I do have prepared a prepared text, but I cannot let the opportunity go by without rebutting some of the 
things that the member from Pelly has said in his remarks previous to my standing up. Mr. Speaker, it is beyond my 
comprehension, and I'm sure beyond the comprehension of many people that are watching the proceedings tonight, that 
the member from Pelly and some of his colleagues in the NDP party can actually get up and speak on small business, 
on agriculture, on competition. 
 
I've been involved in politics probably since the early '70s and a member of this House since 1978, and I can say, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the NDP had 11 long years to show small business in this province what their party had to offer, and 
they had nothing. The didn't know small business existed in the province, and it would appear, Mr. Speaker, that I'm 
probably touching a nerve. 
 
The member from Pelly gets up tonight and says, "The people of Saskatchewan don't like the Tories because they are in 
competition with small business." I might remind the opposition party when they wanted to do something for small 
business they created a darn Crown corporation to use our tax dollars to be directly in competition with the small 
businesses of this province. 
 
(1945) 
 
And that showed up, Mr. Speaker, the results of their folly showed up very, very resounding on April 26th, 1982. And I 
might add, Mr. Speaker, that they are probably still smarting from April 26th, 1982. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I read with interest, I read with great interest some of the resolutions passed at the recent 
convention held by the New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan. I must say, Mr. Speaker, that the one that really caught 
my attention . . . Actually there was two, but the one that really caught my attention was this one, and this one's a 
resolution that was proposed, and by the way carried: 
 

Be it resolved that the Saskatchewan New Democrats affirm support for the socialist solution proposed by the Regina 
Manifesto and call upon the party to adopt a statement which builds upon these basic ideals. 

 
I would venture to say, Mr. Speaker, that there are many, many uninformed, misguided new New Democrats who 
probably have never seen or read the Regina Manifesto. I would like to read a few of their plans into the record tonight, 
Mr. Speaker, and the one that I like and it's rather a long and involved process, this was adopted at the first national 
convention of Co-operative Commonwealth Federation program, adopted at the first national convention held in 
Regina, Saskatchewan, July 1933: 



 
December 4, 1984 

158 
 

We aim to replace the present capitalist system, with its inherent injustices and inhumanity, by a social order from 
which the domination and exploitation of one class by another will be eliminated, in which economic planning will 
supersede unregulated private enterprise and competition, and in which genuine democratic self-government, based 
upon economic equality will be possible. 

 
They go on to say that: 
 

This social and economic transformation can be brought about by political action, through the election of a 
government inspired by the ideal of a Co-operative Commonwealth and supported by a majority of the people. 

 
This was written in 1933 and they have been waiting many, many years to bring in the co-operative commonwealth 
across Canada, because the majority of people do not agree with their rather radical approach to our way of life. It goes 
on to say, Mr. Speaker, that: 
 

It is a democratic movement, a federation of farmer, labour and socialist organizations . . . 
 
And that sounds all innocent and probably very appealing in 1933, but then they go on to say how they are going to 
accomplish this, and they get into the planning. What they want to do and I quote: 
 

The first step in this direction will be setting up of a National Planning Commission consisting of a small body of 
economists, engineers and statisticians assisted by an appropriate technical staff. 

 
That's not democracy, Mr. Speaker. What they want to do is superimpose the thinking of a very small band of people 
upon a whole country, and to me, in my right way of thinking, that is totally unacceptable. But they go further, Mr. 
Speaker. The first step, and I quote again: 
 

Control of finance is the first step in the control of the whole economy. 
 
The whole economy. And, Mr. Speaker, the New Democrats, even they do not call themselves CCF any more, they call 
themselves New Democrats. But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that that is their hidden agenda, and they have not ever 
forgotten that hidden agenda. 
 
And we might go on further, Mr. Speaker, to one more resolution that was passed at their convention, and I'll refer 
shortly back to the manifesto. In their "Labour and NDP" section, and this also was carried, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We propose that we seek ways in developing a more organic (whatever that word means — organic. I mean I can 
think of other words, but) organic relationship with the labour movement in our province. 

 
AN HON. MEMBER: — It sounds like something in a test tube. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Right. Actually, I went and looked it up in the dictionary because "organic" to me means 
something that creeps and crawls and whatever, but it also means it's made up of systematically, interrelated parts, or 
inborn. Inborn: that's even better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you go back to what the movement started out as, a federation of farmer, labour, and socialist 
organizations, well, I would say some of the labour movement has stayed with the NDP. The farmers haven't. Or from 
the beginning the farmers started out with the CCF, but they learned that the CCF movement's approach to agriculture 
was total domination. 



 
December 4, 1984 

159 
 

And it really came to a forefront when they, the former New Democrats, introduced the infamous land bank 
corporation. That was one of the reasons . . . I think the farmers at that time realized that the ultimate goal, no matter 
how long it would take, whether it would take 10, 20 or 100 years, the ultimate goal of the NDP was to have complete 
control of all the farm land in Saskatchewan, and farmers from that day forth would be no more than serfs on their own 
land. 
 
Let's talk about socialist organization. What does that say to the volunteer organizations in our province? What does 
that say to the Kinsmen who do such a fine job? What does that say to the Elks, to the Lions that run the eye bank? 
They're surely not socialist organizations. Does that say that they are precluded? What about private ownership? Private 
ownership under the NDP, and that's what really amused me with the member from Pelly. When they talk about what 
we should be doing as the government, they do not believe in private ownership at all. Their approach to private 
ownership: it will not pile up a dead weight burden of unremunerative debt which represents claims upon the public 
treasury of a functionalist owner class. What does that say to small-business men? What does that say to the farmers 
that own their own land? It tells them that New Democrats do not want them, nor should they even consider going over 
there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said before, It is a pleasure for me, as the member for Maple Creek, to participate in this throne 
speech debate. I think that the priorities of our government have been clearly laid out, and they could not be more 
timely. In the throne speech the other day, we said succinctly and directly what we were going to accomplish in this 
session. We have plans for a new and long-run thrust for job creation and job training,; we have introduced immediate 
action to protect the family farm; we have given a renewed commitment to our small-business community; and we will 
continue our efforts towards maintaining the best health and education system for every citizen in our province, 
because, Mr. Speaker, I believe it is really not very hard to get enthused about this province and about what's happening 
here. You just have to look around Saskatchewan and you really can't help but being excited, and it surprises me the 
amount of doom and gloom that come from the New Democrats, and, as I say, it's probably they're still smarting from 
the defeat, the tremendous defeat, in 1982. 
 
When I look at our province, Mr. Speaker, I see that we have the enormous good fortune to have a resource base that is 
the envy, not only of the country, but of the world. We have over half of the land base of the prairie basin; we have 40 
per cent of the good land right here in our province. And that land, and the people involved in it, Mr. Speaker, give us 
the potential to become a much, much greater force in growing and processing food for world markets. And of course, I 
think that it goes without saying that the most important resource that our province has is our people, and now, 
thankfully, the people of this province and their government are, for the first time in a long, long time, on the same 
wave length. 
 
I believe that in his recent televised address to the province, Premier Devine left no doubt of that when he said, "It is not 
the government that is making this province great. It is the people." In that speech, he expressed his views clearly that 
today this government and its bureaucrats are the servants of the people, and not the masters. I believe that his message 
went to the very heart of the matter. He was providing, to those of us at the convention, and those of us watching the 
telecast, an insight into this province that is sometimes forgotten. He referred during his speech to three ladies that he 
had met at Maple Creek on a visit he had made there some months ago — three ladies who were pioneers in our 
province, who faced loneliness and hardship, who faced unknown terror being alone in the prairies in the winter, who 
married and brought up their families. These are the type of people that laid the foundation for the great province that 
we live in, and, as I said, Mr. Speaker, these three ladies are from the town of Maple Creek, and I must say I'm very 
proud of them. 
 
What the Premier said was, he said you have to really marvel at their conviction and at the strength and determination 
shown by these three ladies when they first came to settle in what was at that time the Northwest Territories. And he 
asked the question, and what he was really asking all of us is: what kept them going when they experienced that doubt, 
when they 



 
December 4, 1984 

160 
 

experienced fear and pain, loneliness, and family tragedy? Well they told him, because he asked them. And they told 
him of the faith they had, and the determination they had, and the friends they had, and the love they had, and of the 
God they had. 
 
Those women believed in God; they believed in themselves; they believed in their families and their friends; and 
nothing could change that. Even to this day, 90-some years later, those hopes and those aspirations and those 
convictions haven't changed in those three ladies. They lived and worked and played, and they prayed together. And 
they built a new land called Saskatchewan. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this government shares the hopes and aspirations that these pioneer ladies held. And there is 
no doubt in my mind that the people of Saskatchewan today have the same strong spirit and the same determination that 
drove our pioneers in those early days. 
 
To me, Mr. Speaker, it is clear that the programs of this government are the kind that the people want, and the kind that 
people respond to. I see it in my own riding every day. 
 
About a month ago I took part in the official opening of a Hatton gas project at Richmond, and I think that one project 
reflects the big developments that are taking place all over this province, and what's happening in our gas industry, 
particularly in the south-west. The particular project that I had the pleasure of attending was the second phase of a $200 
million project. A $200 million project, Mr. Speaker, and that is only one but of the six or eight major companies who 
are doing exploration in the Hatton gas fields right today. 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people of my area realize the impact that a project of this magnitude has, not only 
in our province, but on Canada as a whole, and probably even the world. And if ever the future of Canada was evident, 
Mr. Speaker, or could be seen at one glance, it was that day in Richmound, Richmound in my constituency. We have 
the energy; we've got the agriculture base; we have the service industry: the three greatest components that Canada will 
need to call on to renew our place in history. 
 
But that opening, as I said, was more than just a local achievement. Many of us in Saskatchewan have literally been 
spared the ravages of the recession that has gripped Canada in the last number of years. But I can tell you we, as a 
government, have been aware of it, and aware of the political fall-out, and I think nothing showed that better than the 
results on September 4th. But I can say, Mr. Speaker, with confidence, that with our new government in Ottawa we are 
all looking ahead to rebuilding our country with a renewed spirit, a renewed spirit of co-operation and dedication. And 
as I stated at Richmound to the people that came that day, none of us should doubt the importance of our province and 
of our resources in the job ahead — the job in rebuilding the Canadian economy. 
 
(2000) 
 
I'd been in Ottawa the previous week and attended a seminar on the new government, and we were very fortunate to be 
given a glimpse of the planning that is going on to get this country back on course. We heard from the new Minister of 
Energy, the Hon. Pat Carney, a Westerner. I'm pleased to say we heard from representatives from energy companies, 
manufacturing companies, and other businesses which make a vital, vital contribution to the total economy of our 
country. And I can tell you we were left with no doubt in mind as to how crucial the Canadian energy industry is to our 
economy. 
 
There is enormous power and enormous clout in energy today, Mr. Speaker. The oil and gas industry has the potential 
to provide rapid job creation, and that Canada is probably one of the few countries left in the world with that potential 
in the energy field to create jobs. So in that respect, Mr. Speaker, we are very fortunate. 



 
December 4, 1984 

161 
 

As Ms. Carney said, the federal government's prime challenge today is jobs, and that it is committed to putting 
Canadians back to work, and that it will act. Canada's energy industry provides permanent jobs for 200,000 Canadians 
today. But with encouragement, with incentives, with some of the simple approaches taken by the Saskatchewan 
government, this industry alone could create an additional 300,000 jobs by 1992. And we were told that even with the 
present world price structure, and the present drop in the demand for oil, those 300,000 jobs still could be a reality. 
 
And I think it was very indicative when, shortly after the federal election and the appointment of Ms. Carney to the 
energy portfolio, she immediately came out west to initiate discussions with her western counterparts to help her begin 
to develop a new policy that will do that job, and that is to create jobs. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, Canada's energy industry is of enormous importance to our recovery, and it's about to get a new 
deal, and, I think, a fair deal. And I think we should never underestimate the impact that Saskatchewan will have. 
Saskatchewan will be a major, major player in this new game. I think that all of us should recognize that the exploration 
of the Hatton gas fields and the area for what it is. It's really a symbol — a symbol that Saskatchewan is coming of age, 
Mr. Speaker, and that we are grabbing hold of our destiny. 
 
A few members of the opposition are continually trying to question our energy policy. But as the Premier said today, 
there are a few New Democrats outside our province who agree with what we did in Saskatchewan to get those jobs 
and get the industry moving again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote from the recent issue of the Maple Creek News, and I think it will indicate to you 
just what our policy means to small town Saskatchewan, and I hope the members of the opposition pay particular 
attention because it really does carry a prudent message. This is from the Maple Creek News and the Richmound news 
section, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We hear so much about the natural gas sellout to big companies, but those of us who live in the Hatton gas fields 
were always envious to see all those gas wells going up across the border, but none a few feet away in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now there is activity all around, and, with revenue coming in to land owners as well as to the businesses in the area, 
it has brought a halt to the rapidly declining population and an increase in the local economy. 
 
Saskatchewan Power has completed the installation of natural gas to the farm population. Pipelines and compressor 
stations are popping up all over the place, and all this means employment to local people. 
 
Presently in Richmound, 12 families make their living directly from employment in the gas and oil patch. We must 
also consider the indirect benefits generated by these activities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that's from the fellow that does the social notes for the town of Richmound, and really he is saying what 
we have been saying all along, that there's benefits that we all can have. Benefits don't go to one single person. Benefits 
are shared throughout the province and throughout the country. And I can say, Mr. Speaker, that the energy program is 
only one of the many programs that our government has already introduced. 
 
I can say that thanks to our government, we now have the lowest interest rates for farmers — 8 per cent under the farm 
purchase program, and also home owners will never have to worry about floating interest rates for the next number of 
years. Home owners buying a home today or next year or the year after will know that no matter what interest rates do, 
they will never have 



 
December 4, 1984 

162 
 

to pay more than 13 and one-quarter per cent. 
 
You know, we continue to have the lowest unemployment rate in Canada, and in Regina, the lowest in the country. And 
we're proud of that, but that doesn't mean we're going to sit on our laurels, and that's why the Premier announced the 
jobs minister, and one of his functions will be to co-ordinate all job creation in the province using the private sector and 
the public sector. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, I can remember in opposition days when we would say there's 27,000 unemployed, all the NDP 
ever did was say, well, we have the lowest unemployment rate in the country. We have the lowest unemployment rate 
in the country, and they sat back and didn't address what is really a key problem. What do we do about the 9,000 or 
10,000 young people that aren't employed? The young people between the ages of 15 and 20, who have dropped out of 
school, who do not have the educational skill, who do not have the marketing skills to get a job? 
 
Last week, I believe, the independent businessmen's association of Canada said that there was 170,000 jobs available 
right now, today, in the country, but there is not enough skilled people to fill those jobs. And I think, Mr. Speaker, the 
people of Saskatchewan recognize that we recognize that problem in 1982, and we started by doubling the technical 
capacity seats in the province. We've done a lot of things in that area, as I said, Mr. Speaker, but we won't just sit back 
and rest on our laurels. 
 
We can look at the welfare system and the changes that have been brought about. We inherited a welfare system from 
the NDP that did little more than just simply send out cheques month after month, year after year. It didn't help people 
to develop skills. It didn't provide incentives to go back and be re-educated or complete their education. Really what it 
did, when you send out those cheques month after month, it really locks people into a vicious, vicious syndrome that's 
very difficult to get out of. But I was really pleased when the Minister of Social Services initiated welfare reform in the 
province. A first in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what does that mean? We're providing educational opportunities, and job training opportunities, and work 
experience opportunities for over 6,000 people. And these people will benefit from that, Mr. Speaker, because they will 
gain or regain the skills necessary to go out and get one, or two, or 1,000, or 6,000 of those 170,000 jobs that are 
available today. 
 
I would like to now, Mr. Speaker, make a few remarks about what I think is our most basic industry and probably our 
most important industry of all, and that is agriculture. It's been a very difficult year for farmers. But let's not forget that 
in the long term, our greatest resource is our land, and will continue to be our land. In fact, I suggest that Canada's 
greatest resource of all is our over 100 million acres of good prairie land. That land and the people involved with it, Mr. 
Speaker, give us a great potential to grow and to process much more food for world export and world markets. 
 
Canada has one megaproject year after year after year, and that is seeding, growing our crops, harvesting that crop, and 
moving it to market. Mr. Speaker, the opportunity exists to build that industry even more in response to world demand. 
When I look at this province with over half the agricultural land in the prairies, over 40 per cent of Canada's good 
agricultural land, I am convinced of one thing, based on agriculture alone, Saskatchewan must become a much more 
important member of our confederation. We have the land. We have the people. We have the people who can do the 
job. We have been a nation that has sold our raw materials. And now the opportunities are emerging to further process 
more of that food before we ship it out to world markets. 
 
And I'd like to put that in proper perspective, especially for the members of the opposition, because I believe that the 
legacy in agriculture that the NDP left us after 11 years was a legacy of lost opportunities for our agricultural sector. 



 
December 4, 1984 

163 
 

I would like to read from an article from Milling and Baking News. It's a U.S. magazine focusing on the grain industry, 
Mr. Speaker, and I think it highlights the importance of food processing, the food processing industry. And I would like 
to quote this into the record: 
 

The food and agricultural processing sector is the nation's largest industry. It accounts for about one-fifth of the U.S. 
gross national product, $433 billion, and has assets in excess of $1 trillion, nearly 50 per cent of the combined assets 
of manufacturing, retail, and wholesale industries. It is the nation's largest employer, providing 24 million jobs both 
on and off the farm, nearly 25 per cent of the total labour force. 

 
Mr. Speaker, when I see figures like that, it indicates to me the enormous potential for our own prairie provinces, for 
our own prairie agriculture. And I suspect that the potential for our government and this province is just unlimited, 
because I have no doubts that, were we to put energies into food processing and manufacturing, that we wouldn't 
compare with figures like the U.S. The figures that we could come up with would be startling. And I also believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that under the leadership of the government, and the initiatives that the people of the province have, I have no 
doubt that this will happen here. 
 
You know, we have brought into place many programs in recent months to support our farmers in difficult days, and we 
recognize that they are going through difficult days. Today, the Minister of Agriculture introduced what I think will be 
probably one of the most important bills to come before this legislature, and that, of course, is the land security Act. 
And it was introduced to give farmers the time they need to work through their financial difficulties. And this Act will 
stop foreclosures against farm land beginning December 4th, 1984, and continue until December 31st, 1985. And we 
also have the flexibility, Mr. Speaker, that if economic conditions warrant it at the end of next year, that this period can 
be extended for another year until the end of 1985. 
 
I think this Bill supplements the many other bills that we have brought in, Mr. Speaker, to support our agriculture 
sector. And some of them that have been brought in include the farm purchase program, Home Quarter Tax Assistance 
Program, the counselling and assistance for farmer program, Prairie Livestock Drought Assistance Program, and, of 
course, the feeder-finish beef stabilization program. 
 
All these initiatives represent a heavy financial commitment from the government of Saskatchewan to our agriculture 
producers, but we do have faith in the long run, Mr. Speaker. We have faith in our producers coping with the conditions 
that have been around for a number of years, coping with the drought of this last year, and we'll support them in every 
way possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I would just like to say a few words on my own department, the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs. I believe that the activities of my department are vital in creating an environment within the 
province in which the people of this province can also reach their full potential. 
 
(2015) 
 
Our concern basically within the department is the market-place as it affects not only producers, but consumers too. I 
think that our goal is to work towards a market-place that is seen to be honest and fair, a market-place that has integrity, 
a market-place that serves the interests of consumers and the interests of business. 
 
Because I really believe, Mr. Speaker, that the alternative to a sound market-place is an ever-growing bureaucracy. And 
I think that the Acts that we administer are designed to see that needed regulations are developed and adhered to, and 
that's part of our role. We don't see ourselves, our role as being adversarial. We don't see ourselves as being a consumer 
advocate, nor do we see ourselves as being a producer or a business advocate. Our goal, as we see it, is to bring about a 
balance in the market-place and probably to bring about a balance of trust. And I 



 
December 4, 1984 

164 
 

think we've come a long way. Consumers want to know their rights. Business men want to know their rights and 
responsibilities. And I think the people in my department have done an extremely fine job under some difficulty in the 
past year because we've been reorganizing, we've been moving, consolidating the department into one building, so their 
work place hasn't been that pleasant at all times, but I think they've done just admirably. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that these are days of challenge for our province and our country. I have a basic faith in the 
people of our province, and I think the prospects for the province are extremely bright, and I think as we move into an 
era of renewed confidence and renewed optimism, I know that the people of Saskatchewan would want us to work in 
concert with the federal government to get our energy industry moving, get our agriculture industry moving, get our 
tourism and service sector back on track. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing, I would like to say it has been a pleasure for me to participate in the throne debate, and it's a 
pleasure for me to fully endorse the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Thank you. 
 
HON. MR. FOLK: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great deal of pleasure to rise on this occasion 
and take part in the throne speech debate. 
 
But first of all I'd like to congratulate two of my colleagues, the member for Saskatoon Riversdale who moved the 
motion so eloquently the other day, and the seconder, the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood. Congratulations on 
a job well done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to rise and represent the constituents of Saskatoon University, which is 
basically the area around the University of Saskatchewan up in Saskatoon. In a lot of ways it is a real melting-pot of 
different mixes of people, different kinds of housing, etc. in our city of Saskatoon. The ages of the people, as well as 
being from different multicultural backgrounds, ranges from the very young, of course, the children, to a large number 
of students going to university, middle-aged people who are, you know, working, professional people, all walks of life, 
right up to seniors with senior citizens' homes, and many seniors still in their own homes. 
 
As well, the type of housing in our constituency is very varied, from student residences to high-rises to apartments to 
homes of various ages, styles, and sizes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don't think I would be one bit remiss if I said that the constituents of Saskatoon University are very much 
enjoying the tenure of this Progressive Conservative government. 
 
And the throne speech today outlined some of the direction that our government will be taking in the near future, and as 
well indicates that we will be continuing with a lot of the very positive programs that we have brought forth. And I'd 
like to touch upon a few of those right now. 
 
In the area of housing, our government brought in the mortgage interest reduction plan. It was brought in at a time, in 
1982, when the home owners in our province needed it the most. It was brought in at a time when the government of 
the day, the NDP, completely neglected that problem, didn't listen to the people of Saskatchewan. Rather the 
Progressive Conservatives did, and brought in that program. And just recently, Mr. Speaker, the Premier announced 
that this program will be extended to 1988. 
 
In the area that is of concern to many of my constituents, and that is the cost of services and, of course, reducing those 
costs, I'm proud to say that this government has certainly been moving in that direction. 



 
December 4, 1984 

165 
 

Of course, we removed the gasoline road tax, which saves the average driver $200 per year. And I believe the NDP 
position, as stated a while ago, is that they would reinstate that gas tax. I know exactly what the constituents of 
Saskatoon University would say to that NDP proposal. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, we removed the sales tax on electricity consumed in homes, farms, and recreation complexes. As 
well, we moved immediately to establish the Public Utilities Review Commission, and also our government froze the 
rates in 1982 while the commission was being established, and indeed, today the utility rates in our province are the 
lowest in Canada. 
 
Another example of our government efficiency is in the operation of Saskatchewan Government Insurance, which, 
through proper management and proper direction, this past year has shown a surplus for the first time in a long time. 
 
In agriculture, of course, the farm purchase program was brought in very early in our term and of benefit to about 3,100 
farmers. And I contrast that with the NDP land bank program, which benefited very few except for the government of 
the day, which was, of course, the NDP. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I'm very proud of the Bill that came forth today, the farm security Act which, of course, the Minister 
of Agriculture will be elaborating on further in the days to come. 
 
In the oil industry, one that is becoming of super importance here in our province, the land sales in our province was 
over $100 million in 1983, coupled with a record 1,843 wells drilled in 1983, which was up 128 per cent over the year 
previous. And, Mr. Speaker, I need not remind everybody in this Assembly that two operators have been announced, 
ones which were talked about subtly by the previous government, but ones which were acted upon by this government 
and will be coming to fruition in the near future. 
 
In business incentives, which is very much a big part of our province, the business sector, we've had numerous 
programs. The small-business tax reduction plan from 1983, created 4,000 new jobs. The industrial incentives program 
this past year, 1,500 new permanent jobs. And of course, Opportunities '83, 4,300 student jobs; and Opportunities '84, 
over 4,500 student jobs. Also we created the Venture Capital Tax Credit, which is to encourage residents and citizens 
of Saskatchewan to invest in small manufacturing, processing, tourism, and research companies. And I understand 
there's been quite a few companies created already, with others coming forth to help out in Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the lowest unemployment rate in all of Canada. And the number of people 
employed in Saskatchewan has increased over the past few years, and my numbers have it about 44,000 new jobs in 
just over two and a half years. 
 
In the areas of health care, which is so important to my constituents, we have record health care expenditures now over 
$1 billion, and over $1,000 for each man, woman, and child in our province. In Saskatoon, we have $50 million 
allocated to replace the outdated facilities in the hospitals, the three major hospitals in Saskatoon. And the Minister of 
Health, to his credit, has got the three hospital boards together to decide on their own priorities and allocate that money 
in the best possible manner. 
 
Also a $17 million commitment to a cancer treatment centre set up by the University Hospital; and as well, at Brunskill 
School site, the Kinsmen's Children's Rehabilitation Centre. Mr. Speaker, in the area of health our government has done 
very well. Nursing homes: five year, $25 million nursing home construction program was launched in 1984 to add 
1,000 new beds and upgrade another 500. 
 
This contrasts quite sharply with the NDP moratorium on nursing beds that was announced in 1976, and, I believe, 
carried out right till 1982. And in my constituency of Saskatoon University, the long awaited addition and renovations 
to the Lutheran Sunset Home, which the residents 



 
December 4, 1984 

166 
 

and management of that home applaud very loudly. 
 
In the areas of seniors, which are a very important and ever increasing population in our province, the Saskatchewan 
Income Plan for seniors doubled from $25 to $50 for singles monthly, and from $45 to $75 for couples. And also this 
government set up the seniors' Bill and developed a task force report on seniors' housing. As well, recently announced 
by the Minister of Sask Housing was a Senior Citizens' Home Repair Program which gives grants up to $1,000 
available to help seniors repair and modernize the homes they live in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'll touch briefly on education. We have two new high schools coming up in Saskatoon, and I had the 
privilege of being at the opening of the Marion Graham High School with Her Honour the Governor General of 
Canada. The reason I bring that up, Mr. Speaker, is that indeed we do have two new high schools that went up in 
Saskatoon under this administration, and they are the first new high schools to go up in Saskatoon in 17 years. Mr. 
Speaker, I don't think I need to remind anyone here that Saskatoon had one of the steadily increasing populations, and 
certainly one point that was sadly neglected, once again, by the former NDP government. 
 
As well, expanded technical spaces throughout our province, as was announced by the Minister of Advanced Education 
and Manpower, which has dramatic increases in the number of training spaces available, and, of course, the Prince 
Albert Institute which has now come into fruition under this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the area of universities, because the University of Saskatchewan is a large part of my constituency, 
there has been a lot of concern, but I would like to point out to this legislature that since this government took office 
there has been an over 30 per cent increase in the operating grants in two and a half years, coupled with a new 
geological science building that was undertaken by this government, and one which, I might add, Mr. Speaker . . . I 
notice the Leader of the Opposition made reference to it in his remarks yesterday. He said that the blueprints were 
already there when their government left. Well I did some checking on that, Mr. Speaker, and I found out that indeed 
maybe the blueprints were there, but they started talking about that project in 1974 and 1975. That's how quickly the 
NDP reacts. So, Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to say that our government has carried out with the new geological science 
building. 
 
And as well this government has seen fit, because of the increasing enrollments, to add, last year and this year, 
supplementary grants to both universities in Saskatchewan, and I believe the figure is $550,000 to the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
One other area I'd like to touch on briefly here, Mr. Speaker, is the area of labour relations. In 1982, which was a 
contract year, there were 416,000 person-years lost due to strikes. I contrast that with 1984, which is another contract 
year, and there were less than 12,000 person-years lost due to strikes. And I believe commendation is due to our 
Minister of Labour for the fine job he has done in that area. As well, in July and August of this past year represents the 
first time since 1975 that there were no strikes during the summer months. Mr. Speaker, another flower for the Minister 
of Labour. 
 
I'd now like to turn back to a few comments made by the purveyors of doom and gloom, better known as the Leader of 
the Opposition. He made reference on page 52 of the Hansard to Darke Hall and to the Norman MacKenzie Art 
Gallery. In reference to Darke Hall he said: 
 

Maintained by the Government of Saskatchewan, the University of Regina, for 50 years, is closed because of neglect 
of maintenance by this government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, he is very correct in saying that Darke Hall has been here for 50 years, and I beg all members to the 
Assembly to just think, if after 50 years and Darke Hall is condemned after one year of our administration, is it this 
administration that abandoned Darke Hall? Is it this 



 
December 4, 1984 

167 
 

administration that did not keep it up? 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is the sole neglect of the NDP. And Mr. Speaker, another prime example of that is the Norman 
MacKenzie Art Gallery, another example of NDP neglect and, as a matter of fact, the Leader of the Opposition makes 
reference to that. We are proud to contribute some funds to a feasibility study for a new project for the Norman 
MacKenzie Art Gallery. And the door to my office is open if they wish to come in and continue discussions and 
proposals. Certainly we will discuss them with them. 
 
And also he made reference to recreational facilities here in Regina, and it looks like he took a little bit of credit for 
building the Agridome here in Regina. And as near as I can tell, not one penny was put up by the provincial 
government of the day, rather by the exhibition boards, the city of Regina, and the population of Regina. 
 
And also, he said there's been no major recreational or cultural facilities come to Regina. Well, he's right to a degree. 
Indeed, funds are available to the city of Regina, but they have had the vision to do a major study to decide exactly what 
they need. They're not going to be told by any government what they need, rather they want to identify where to put 
their dollars to the best use. Mr. Speaker, that's a very forward looking attitude by the city of Regina and, indeed, all the 
communities across our province. 
 
(2030) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to turn the attention to my department of Culture and Recreation and, in my department 
alone, I'm pleased to say that there has been 47 major programs and initiatives in sport, culture, and recreation. These 
programs and initiatives all add up to the enhancement of the quality of life for Saskatchewan residents. And Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to just outline a few of those at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Heritage Conservation Grant Assistance, approximately $700,000 is being paid out which leads to a 
total of about $5 million in capital funds and then the economic spin-offs. Mr. Speaker, the designation of 17 provincial 
heritage sites and 250 municipal heritage properties. The Organizational Development Program has been developed by 
our government, by our department, and Mr. Speaker, this new program will involve over 500 municipalities or 
community organizations serving sport, culture and recreation in our province. 
 
The Youth Leadership Development Pilot Project is now in effect. The Municipal Innovative Grant is now in effect and 
has already had an upkeep from the centres in Melfort, Regina, and Moose Jaw. The Volunteer Recreation Award 
Program has been well received out in the communities. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, now I come to the Provincial Cultural/Recreational Facilities Grant Program, and here once again I'd 
like to refer to some comments made by the head purveyor of doom and gloom, the Leader of the Opposition. Mr. 
Speaker, and I quote, the Leader of the Opposition said: 
 

I could talk about recreational facilities, the number of rinks, and swimming pools, and parks that have not been built 
across this province in the last two and a half years, but the public knows the facts. They know that things are not 
happening in their communities — not happening because our government lacks the commitment to make them 
happen, lacks the vision to understand that community projects and community facilities are what make 
Saskatchewan the distinctive and special place that it is. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot believe that the member from Elphinstone, the Leader of the Opposition, makes those remarks. I 
happened to get a few figures here, and I wish the members of the opposition maybe listen for a second or two, that 
there has been approved in the province of 



 
December 4, 1984 

168 
 

Saskatchewan since April, 1983, 515 projects around the province of Saskatchewan. That totals a contribution from our 
department of $8.9 million, and that has generated $40 million in construction activity throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that the Leader of the Opposition completely missed in his assessment, because, maybe he likes 
to believe that he or the government can make these decisions for the communities. But in my travels across the 
province, and certainly what is alluded to by the member from Morse here today, how much these community projects 
are appreciated in the various communities and is the initiative that takes place at the community level, the people 
pitching in and helping, developing their projects, and building together for their future recreational needs. That is what 
makes this province tick — not, I suggest, the attitude of the NDP. 
 
And continuing along in the same vein as some of the accomplishments of our department of initiatives, the facilities 
division of our department conducted nine energy conservation seminars across the province which was attended by 
250 people from 129 communities. The Saskatchewan Express, which is the talent show, toured Saskatchewan last July 
and played to over 300,000 people in July of this year. The Heritage Languages Curriculum Guide was developed and 
published by our department. The Resident Artist Program, we now have three resident artists placed throughout the 
province. 
 
The Tourism, Travel, and Culture Conference, the first time ever that there was a conference of this nature, was held in 
Saskatoon a couple of weeks ago, and from all indications was an unqualified success in getting together people from 
two different industries to compare notes and build for the future in our province. 
 
As well, the Western Development Museum, on Friday of last week I had the opportunity to go to the official opening 
of the WDM service centre to which this government has contributed $7 million. Mr. Speaker, this is also another 
example of what was needed by the WDMs for at least ten years, but ignored totally by the previous NDP 
administration, but one that has come to fruition under this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another success in this past year was the 1984 Saskatchewan Summer Games held in North Battleford, I 
had an occasion to be a part of that and be at the opening and closing ceremonies, and I congratulate all the people that 
were involved with those summer games, certainly a tremendous success and a tremendous contribution by the many 
volunteers. 
 
As well, the government of Saskatchewan had the opportunity to host the largest number of Saskatchewan Olympic 
athletes ever that have competed in the Olympic Games. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, it was our privilege to host them a 
couple of months ago and pat them on the back for their contributions, their hard work, in representing our province so 
well at the Olympic Games. 
 
Another program that was instituted this year is the Saskatchewan Athlete Assistance Program, another program that 
has been called for by various universities and sporting groups throughout our province for many, many years, one 
which has just come to fruition, and the results of that, I'm sure, will show up with the performance of our athletes in 
various competitions in the years to come. And lastly on here that I'll make note of right now is the World Youth 
Baseball Tournament which our government contributed to. And certainly the town of Kindersley, for holding a 
world-class event like that, did just a fantastic job, and certainly I'd like to see another world baseball tournament come 
to Kindersley, or to our province, which can be magnified by what the people of Kindersley did for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one other point that was referred to in the throne speech was Heritage 1985. This is a program that we are 
getting under way, that is developing the theme, "Commemorating our Past, Building our Future." Mr. Speaker, we've 
hired an executive director and so far a small staff 



 
December 4, 1984 

169 
 

to carry out the preliminary work with the heritage year 1985. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Who's that executive director? 
 
HON. MR. FOLK: — Mr. Speaker, the executive director, as one of my colleagues is asking, is Mr. Cy MacDonald. 
And what's going to happen in Heritage '85, Mr. Speaker, is basically broken into three parts. Certainly there is the 
heritage year aspect, which every community in the province can take part in. Every community in the province has a 
diverse history, and the various communities may wish to commemorate a certain part of their history that would be 
different from another town or city down the road, and certainly the response in developing local heritage committees 
has been excellent so far. 
 
The second portion of it, of course, is perhaps the most significant historical event that has taken place in our province 
of Saskatchewan, and that was the 1885 uprising or the North West Rebellion. Mr. Speaker, that is going to be a very 
big event. There's committees organized in North Battleford, in Saskatoon, in Prince Albert, and they are starting on 
their activities, planning for them, and I think you'll find that the spring and summer of 1985 will be very active in that 
area. 
 
And the third area which is perhaps the most important of all, it's International Youth Year in 1985. Mr. Speaker, we 
have had our people go out to every community in Saskatchewan and every organization, asking them to get involved 
with Saskatchewan Youth Year 1985, and the response has been tremendous so far. 
 
So at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to congratulate the people that are working on Heritage '85 and the fine job 
they have done so far. And also, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take the opportunity to thank the many staff and the 
employees of Saskatchewan Culture and Recreation, both here in Regina and all throughout the province, for the 
manner in which they conduct themselves, develop policies, and relate with the people of Saskatchewan. I've heard 
basically nothing but good remarks about their attentiveness, their thoroughness, and their willingness to deal with the 
people at the community level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'll be closing my remarks at this time, and it's been a pleasure for me to participate in the throne speech 
debate, and undoubtedly, without no further ado, I'll be supporting the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. PICKERING: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise this evening to participate in 
this debate. I'm especially proud to speak on behalf of the constituents of the Bengough-Milestone constituency. The 
people that live in my constituency are hard-working people, proud and down to earth. Because these people have an 
agricultural background, they have a sense of pride in their land and in what they do. The residents of 
Bengough-Milestone are well aware of the issues facing the farmers today because they live in the middle of the 
drought region. They look to their government for guidance and help. These people have faith, Mr. Speaker, and look 
for positive programs which will help them during this time of economic crisis. 
 
This government recognizes these points, and has in the past formulated and implemented policies which benefit 
farmers. In keeping with this concept, the Hon. Lorne Hepworth has introduced new legislation which will further help 
the men and women in the agricultural industry. This new Farm Land Security Act will stop foreclosures against farm 
land. It has been introduced in the best interests of farmers of all Saskatchewan. I'm quite sure that the residents of 
Bengough-Milestone will join with me in congratulating the Minister of Agriculture for a job well done. 
 
Let us imagine, Mr. Speaker, what the NDP would do in this situation. They would try to solve 



 
December 4, 1984 

170 
 

the problem with policies such as buying farm land, buying resources, and buying the spirit of the Saskatchewan 
people. This, Mr. Speaker, would be what the NDP would do if they were in power. They would borrow money from 
the Crowns to buy the land from the farmers. We all know what they would do for the farmers, the same as they tried to 
do in the past. They would drive the prices of farm land up so high that the young farmers would never have the chance 
to own their own land. The sense of pride that a young farmer has because the land is his would be eliminated. It would 
cause huge deficits in the government budgets. In turn, they would borrow money from other Crown corporations to 
cover this up, and cook the books as they did in the past. So in fact, Mr. Speaker, the opposition would have you believe 
that it could solve all the problems of the people of Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, we all know that is not so. 
 
I would like to turn to my department, Mr. Speaker, because we've had some very positive programs take place over the 
past two and a half years. This government has many priorities, Mr. Speaker, job re-creation is one of those. 
Traditionally, my department has been involved in the area of job creation. The work being done in my department is 
providing that resource protection and development is crucial to the financial health of this province, and that boils 
down to jobs for Saskatchewan residents, Mr. Speaker. 
 
How does a department concerned with wildlife natural resources create jobs, Mr. Speaker? The answer to that 
question is a story of innovation and hard work. The type of work that will turn this province's economy into something 
to be proud of, not only in Saskatchewan, but across Canada. 
 
I'm speaking of recent innovations such as the New Careers Corporation, Mr. Speaker. Here is a corporation that gives 
people on social assistance hope for the future, a program that trains and pays people for days of work, that removes the 
stigma of receiving social assistance, and that does it with honour and dignity. People being trained under the program 
do an honest day's work, Mr. Speaker, and they receive an honest day's pay. 
 
Not only are they working for their money, they are receiving on the job and classroom training. This corporation has 
employed numerous during the past summer months. Eighty per cent of these employees were formerly receiving social 
assistance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have initiated three projects that are giving these people the training they need for a new career. All three projects 
involve our provincial park system. This summer a work crew renovated the offices of the New Careers Corporation in 
Regina, Mr. Speaker. This same crew built boat launches and prefabricated cabins at the Duck Mountain Provincial 
Park. Another crew built a boat launch at Douglas Park. They also did landscaping and built a recreation site and 
restroom facilities, Mr. Speaker. Yet another crew has been involved in the construction of 5.5 miles of road at the 
Meadow Lake Provincial Park. The crew there is now starting to work on the campground. 
 
(2045) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this winter many of the trainees will receive accredited courses of study. This is in accordance with their 
approved career plan. The rest of the trainees will receive additional education on the project site. This supplementary 
education will allow these trainees to take accredited courses next winter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm talking about people that were on social assistance, people that had little chance of finding gainful 
employment, people who are willing to work but who lacked the necessary training, the necessary opportunity also. 
People who were looked down upon, if you will, by others of our society, simply because they did not have a job. All 
these people needed, Mr. Speaker, was an opportunity for training and for the dignity that comes with gainful 
employment. Mr. Speaker, this is only the beginning of the work planned by the New Careers Corporation. It is clear, if 
they have some training and some 



 
December 4, 1984 

171 
 

job experience, they can be a productive member of society, not only for their employers, but for themselves and for the 
people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, with a creation of New Careers Corporation I've had to rethink the whole area of 
social assistance. It is not enough to allow people on social assistance without jobs or training. We are actively 
integrating these people back into the job market. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am extremely pleased to inform you that we have already had people who have worked for the New 
Careers Corporation have found jobs in the private sector. This, in my opinion, is a measure of this program's true 
success. And this is just the beginning. I will have further job creation announcements in the near future under the New 
Careers Corporation when the jobs minister announces some of the programs that will be coming down for the winter 
months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this department is creating productive jobs in other ways. My colleague, the Hon. Jack Klein, Minister of 
Tourism and Small Business, has been working hard to increase tourism in Saskatchewan. This will further stimulate 
the economy with an influx of tourism dollars and will provide and protect jobs in the hospitality sector. Mr. Speaker, 
without a sound resource base I'm afraid this would not be possible. 
 
This is why this government has developed initiatives such as the Fish Enhancement Fund. Although a Fish 
Enhancement Fund had been requested for many years by the people of the province, it took a Progressive Conservative 
government to bring it into reality. Sportsmen groups have long recognized the need for such a fund. I am amazed that 
the previous government ignored this request by the people of Saskatchewan. Without the fisheries resource a major 
contributor to the economy of this province would be lost. A major contributor to our quality of life would be lost. 
Sportsmen, commercial fishermen, outfitters, anglers — all recognize the values of the fisheries resource. That is why a 
portion of the money to purchase a fishing licence now goes to the fishing enhancement fund. This will be used to 
rehabilitate our lakes and rivers and to replenish the resource that we once thought inexhaustible. We have learned our 
lesson. No longer will the fisheries resources of this province lack funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are not talking about pie in the sky developments under the fishing enhancement fund. As a matter of 
fact 160,000 walleye fingerlings were released from a rearing pond into Delaronde Lake this fall; a rearing pond 
established with money from the provincial fisheries enhancement fund, Mr. Speaker. People love to fish. Tourists will 
pay good money for the kind of fishing that Saskatchewan has to offer, but not if we ignore the resource, Mr. Speaker. 
This is but one project developed by my department. 
 
Under this fund, we are developing new spawning areas. We are constructing rearing ponds. We are expanding the 
provincial stocking program. We are developing angling opportunities near major urban centres. And we are doing it 
with revenue generated by fisheries itself. 
 
In 1984, more than $300,000 was spent on 13 major fish enhancement projects by my department. This money was 
made available through the Fish Enhancement Fund. We are reinvesting it in our province so that the fisheries resource 
will continue to attract tourists, so that Saskatchewan will maintain its reputation as a fisherman's paradise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is important to all of us, economically, and a source of recreation for the hard-working people of this 
province. And, of course, all these initiatives create jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, fishing is not the only contributor to the economy entrusted to my department. I spoke earlier of the 
farmers of this province. Farming is the economic backbone of the province as we all know. In the past, the needs of 
our wildlife resources and the needs of our farmers were often conflicting. However, my department has proven that 
this does not have to be. Our projects have shown that in most cases the resource can coexist with agricultural needs. 



 
December 4, 1984 

172 
 

Mr. Speaker, I will be introducing amendments to the Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act this session, to fine tune 
this important piece of legislation to make it more workable for farmers and conservation interests. These amendments 
are consistent with the original intent of the Act, and that is to protect critical wildlife habitat. These amendments will 
serve to better accommodate all users of Crown land, without, I may add, harming the wildlife that depends so heavily 
on them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the needs of our wildlife resources and farmers are not going unnoticed by this department. We have 
shown that wildlife resources and farmers can both benefit from wildlife projects. 
 
A very successful project in this area is Ponass Lake, the first heritage marsh in Saskatchewan. Some would say this is a 
wildlife project. Others would say it's an agricultural project. Call it what you will, but problems such as flood control 
and other agricultural interests have been solved, and we have also been able to deal with the problem of water-fowl 
damage. 
 
This important wetland preservation scheme has paved the way for four more heritage marshes within our province. We 
have worked with Ducks Unlimited, the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, and the local landowners. We have served 
the needs of all these groups at Ponass Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I humbly submit the needs of Saskatchewan farmers and wildlife needs are advanced by these projects. 
Consequently, Saskatchewan's economic needs are also being served, the point being, Mr. Speaker, that our natural 
resources are an important contributor to our economy and to our way of life. We have taken steps to ensure that they 
will continue to be an important part of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like now to turn to forestry, Mr. Speaker. Under the former government, small operators were literally booted 
out of the forests in 1973. We have decided that small operators were virtually ignored when the timber resource was 
allocated. My department is negotiating a new generation of licence agreements. These new agreements will provide 
for more efficient distribution of timber supplies to the industry and will assign excessive forest management 
responsibilities, including forest renewal, to the licensees. 
 
My department is reviewing the role of the small operator in the Saskatchewan forest industry in conjunction with a 
review of the entire provincial timber supply,. These new arrangements with major industry and small operators will 
result in increased benefits for small operators and many jobs for the people in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to now turn, Mr. Speaker, to the parks. We are concerned with preserving our natural resources so that we 
can continue to reap economic benefits from them, but we are also facing tough economic times. This is reality, Mr. 
Speaker, and this department is actively grappling with this problem in even more direct ways. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, the operation of our provincial parks is a costly undertaking, and the people of the province 
expect first-class services in our parks, and rightly so. Our parks attract thousands of people from out of province and 
tourists each year. The problem, Mr. Speaker, is how to increase services in the parks without costly public works 
programs that would have added to our taxes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We invited the private sector to come forward with business proposals to increase the services in our parks. The results 
were amazing. In 1983, 10 new businesses opened their doors in our parks. In 1984, eight additional businesses joined 
them. This has provided a half a million dollars of capital investment — not to the taxpayers; by the private sector — 
but also provides eight person-years of construction employment and 13 person-years of ongoing employment. 



 
December 4, 1984 

173 
 

Mr. Speaker, even now we are working on bigger projects. Proposals are being examined by my department very 
carefully, and some of them are coming in to the tune of $2.2 million in capital investment. Thirty years of construction 
employment and 21 years of ongoing employment, Mr. Speaker. And this is not all. This only represents proposals put 
forward by the private sector. These are projects where businessmen approached us asking for the opportunity to invest 
in our parks. It shows what the people of this province can do by themselves simply by being given an opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my department is now actively advertising for major projects for other parks within the province. These 
projects are over and above the ones I just mentioned. These projects are aimed at providing major services and 
accommodations in our provincial parks. In conjunction with Tourism and Small Business, my department, and the 
private sector, we will provide the services that we need to increase our tourism potential and to provide a level of 
service in our parks that was not possible previously. 
 
We are now inviting people to work with the government to build business in our parks — businesses that have already 
and will continue to provide jobs for Saskatchewan residents, construction jobs, hospitality jobs, service jobs. We have 
shown that these projects are feasible, Mr. Speaker. This is not a phoney or false economy. New businesses are 
operating in our parks and will continue to be built in our parks, and they will pay their own way, Mr. Speaker. And 
they will provide employment for Saskatchewan residents. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, this has been the basis for the success of my department and this government's programs, 
co-operation, and the ability to work with all members of our society. We are training people formerly on social 
assistance to enter the job market. We are working with farmers to serve wildlife interests and agricultural interests. 
Together we are creating jobs in the tourism industry with the provincial Fish Enhancement Fund. We are providing 
opportunities for business in our provincial parks. We are undertaking a major review of the Saskatchewan forestry 
resource. These programs are not vague concepts, Mr. Speaker; they are happening in Saskatchewan today for the 
benefit of all of us. And they will continue to happen, Mr. Speaker, because we are protecting our resources for the 
future. I will definitely be supporting the motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
(2100) 
 
MR. SMITH: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Fellow colleagues, I certainly enjoy listening to the remarks of the official 
opposition. I sometimes wonder whenever I get up if they feel they want me to sing instead of speak, but I'll probably 
be having an audition in the Centre of Arts in '85, so I'll send you complimentary tickets to it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was an honour and a pleasure that I may rise in this Assembly tonight to speak on behalf of the 
constituency of Moose Jaw South, and to reply on the throne speech debate. Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the mover for 
Saskatoon Riversdale, and the seconder from Last Mountain-Touchwood for his seconding of the Speech from the 
Throne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been a pleasure for me to represent the constituency of Moose Jaw South. These constituents, in 
Moose Jaw South, are of many cultures, and all of them I am very proud to represent. Mr. Speaker, for approximately 
two and a half years I've represented the constituency of Moose Jaw South, and these constituents have been good and 
co-operative with me in working with me at all times, which I certainly appreciate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are in the constituency of Moose Jaw South senior citizens, labour from city, railway, hospitals, 
nursing homes, Valley View Centre, and many more. And I might just add that at Valley View Centre alone, we 
employ over 500 employees there, which I'm very proud to represent. 



 
December 4, 1984 

174 
 

May I, first of all, Mr. Speaker, remind the citizens of this province if we were all to be positive in our approach 
towards this government and work for the economy instead of against it, I'm sure that we could reach the goals in which 
we are expected to reach in government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment a little bit on the opposition. As we all know, they say that the PC party will do 
away with medicare. But I oft-times wonder why it was that the NDP some many years ago — I just forget how long 
ago it is, six, seven, eight years ago — they closed down one of the floors in the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. But they 
never tell these things, what they close down and what they left open. And I'm quite sure that under the banner of the 
PC government we will open that floor again some day. 
 
I would like to touch on the new farm security Act, which was brought into the legislature today. I feel that this good 
move for farmers of the province — and I'm quite that it'll be a benefit to them in their upcoming year, which has been 
devastated by droughts and flood and whatever. And I'm very sure that it'd be appreciated by many people. And I'm 
quite sure that we, as a government, will proceed with it in those early days to get it through the House. I'm also pleased 
with the approach in which our government is taking in the avenue of getting the unemployment back to work, by 
getting a new minister in there with some heads with him to perform in regards to getting the unemployment back on 
the road again and get them to work. 
 
I am very pleased also, as my colleague from Moose Jaw North is, to have announced a couple of months ago that the 
new water Crown building will be built in the city of Moose Jaw, which will employ a great number of people when it's 
finished, and hopefully by this time next year that building will be opened and off the ground. 
 
I'm also very pleased, Mr. Speaker, that they have at the present time another senior citizens' high-rise going up in 
Moose Jaw, which is five-storey. And I'm quite sure that the citizens of Moose Jaw will appreciate it very much, 
especially the senior citizens. I am quite sure we all realize that Moose Jaw is about one of the largest proportion of 
senior citizens of any city in the province of Saskatchewan in line of population. And I'm quite sure that this will be a 
reality some time in '85. 
 
I'd like to take a moment to remind the people of the province about a few giant facts. We have had many good years 
from early '50s to the late '70s. In that period of time most people felt bad times would never return to this province. 
That is what happened to the previous government. They had no outlook on the future. If they would've had an outlook 
on the future whenever times were good and not spent so much foolish money and wasted so much, we would be in 
good condition today with the poor time in with which we are having at the present time. 
 
The previous government, which we defeated in 1982, spent the taxpayers' money as there would never be a poor 
economy ahead. Therefore, when we took over, the financial pots were empty. We must look ahead for the future, as 
well as provide programs for the present. We, as a government since 1982, I feel, have certainly improved many 
programs such as health care, nursing homes, senior citizens' needs, and farm programs, and many more. I could quote 
figures on many of these items, but I'm sure that they've all been quoted before tonight, and I'm very sure that we don't 
want to expand too much on these things as it does bother the opposition. 
 
We as a government must keep our priorities in line with the needs of the people. I'm sure that that is what we as a 
government are doing at the present time. 
 
I would like to also say that we have a diversified service building going up in Moose Jaw which the present 
government has assisted in the funding to a great deal. The diversified services branch in Moose Jaw has put a great 
deal of money into it, and also the Kinsmen telethon foundation put a great deal of money into it for us. They gave us a 
donation of $450,000 on it. It's going to be a very large building, all on one floor. It's pretty well shelled in at the present 
time. It's 



 
December 4, 1984 

175 
 

28,000 square feet all in one area, and I'm sure that the disabled people in Moose Jaw are looking forward to the day 
whenever we will be opening that building. 
 
I'm quite sure that we shall be, quite positive that I'm saying, that it will be open by April, and I think that the people in 
Moose Jaw in general are very happy to see we, as a government, and the people of Moose Jaw are very happy that they 
have assisted in helping to get this building on the road, and I'm sure that, above all, the disabled people of Moose Jaw 
will look forward to working in a new building when that time comes. 
 
I'm positive that we will be bringing in more positive legislation in the present session, and I would urge all members in 
this Assembly to work seriously together for the good of this House and the province. We must remember that, when 
we are sitting in here, we are the business people for the rest of the province and, if we do not perform good, then we 
should not be in here. 
 
I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, some of us in this House can recall the '30s when times were tough. But we must remember in 
them days the people were tough also, and they didn't expect so many hand-outs, and I think that this is a little of our 
problem today. We must realize that we've got to pull our load, the heavy part of the load as well as the other people. 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I say we citizens today must be tough in times that are tough, be positive. We must admit we 
have a good standard of living, and we have a lot to be thankful for. And I'm sure that there's not . . . There is a lot of 
repetitious stuff said in the debate of the throne speech, and I don't feel that I would want to take up any more of your 
time, but I am certain that if we do positive things the people out there will think positive of us, and if we don't perform 
then we can't expect to be thought that well of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'll be supporting the Speech from the Throne. Thank you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HAMPTON: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thank you. Right. My comments tonight to Mr. Deputy 
Speaker are going to be very short. I consider it a privilege to be able to be here representing the constituency of 
Canora, and to pass my comments on my views with respect to the Speech from the Throne. 
 
There were two very, very important things that came forward to me from the Speech from the Throne: the job creation, 
and what we intend to do for the people involved in agriculture and the related industries. And I want to take a moment 
and first talk about job creation. And I feel that we as the government should be very proud, very proud of our record 
because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, since we have formed government in April of 1982, I understand there are now 33,000 
people more in the work-force. And out of that 33,000 people more, our unemployment rate is still the lowest in 
Canada. And I understand that the city of Regina enjoys the status of being the lowest of anywhere in Canada. That's a 
very, very . . . (inaudible) . . . thing to be proud of. 
 
I personally feel that all jobs should be created through the private sector. I have never been a person to believe in large 
bureaucratic governments. So I'm proud of the public sector, or the private sector, I should say, for creating the new 
jobs that they have done. I also look at the oil and gas industry, and I understand that directly they are now employing 
over 2,000 more people in that oil and gas field than what was prior to the April, 1982. And I also understand that there 
may be as many as 5,000 more temporary and indirect jobs which are also related to that. 
 
I take a look at our Opportunities '84 Program and how it worked in my constituency. I've had the pleasure recently of 
going around the constituency and delivering some cheques to some of the small-business people of that constituency. 
And they like that program. They like that program very much . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, they're good ones. 
And they enjoy that program very much, and they ask and express their concern that we would continue to have it in 



 
December 4, 1984 

176 
 

the year of 1985. I have asked the minister and he says if it's at all possible it will be continued. The people out there 
really like it. 
 
(2115) 
 
In my constituency I noticed the difference, and can see the difference, in the job creation over the last year and over 
the last two and a half years. I'm especially thankful to the cabinet ministers for their willingness to put out, to put out 
the things that are required on a non-partisan, non-political basis across the entire province. It had been, in particular in 
my constituency, that it was neglected under the previous administration, except for a few election goodies that came 
out now and again. The cabinet ministers that we have on this side of the House have the wisdom that they have equally 
provided or doled out what has been required to the constituency — fairly, justly, and non-politically. 
 
In the town of Preeceville we have a new complex there, a new town hall, and provincial office building complex. I've 
seen a couple of schools with major renovations and additions, quite a few new Sask Housing houses, enriched housing 
for senior citizens in about four or five different communities, a new piece of highway north of the town of Preeceville 
up to the north end of my constituency. These things are good and they were needed, and the ministers have been very 
fair to me and to the people of my constituency. 
 
So I am very pleased and, as I say, even when I go into the local restaurants and cafes, I see more people working than 
there were two and a half years ago. And I think, again, that a lot of the credit has to go to our provincial government 
programs. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, I took the opportunity of looking at some of the NDP resolutions. And I couldn't help but shake my 
head when I read their resolution no. 164 where they recommended, and it was carried, the closing of the uranium 
mines in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I just thought for a moment that if we, Mr. Deputy Speaker, were to adopt that resolution, that we would probably 
eliminate something like 10,000 jobs, directly or indirectly. That would be a total undoing of everything that we've 
accomplished up to now. I'm sorry when I look at the members of the opposition and say: fellows, sorry, we don't do 
flip-flops like that; we're accountable.  
 
Then another one that I looked at was resolution no. 68, and that resolution said: to make money available to farmers at 
the rate that the government borrows at. The members opposite you know very well that we have got agricultural 
programs in place where our farmers today can borrow money at 8 per cent, and they're good programs, excellent 
programs. 
 
I then went and spoke with the Minister of Finance for a moment to confirm what I want to relate to you tonight. Since 
we have been in government never has there been a time that our administration has been able to borrow money 
anywhere at less than double-digit interest. Why would you recommend and pass a resolution that would, in fact, mean 
that you were prepared to make farmers have additional input cost by raising the interest rate from 8 per cent to 
something in double digit? Again, that must be a flip-flop. 
 
I don't know why you want to increase these costs unless you truly are planning to go back to state farms which existed 
in this province before we became government. Or if you chose to chase the young people out of the province as you 
did when I was a young fellow — have to leave the province to find decent employment because there was nothing 
here. Or if it's just another one of the things that add to it, along with the way that you used to balance your books, by 
using those hidden deficits in the Crown corporations. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — The old NDP tricks. 



 
December 4, 1984 

177 
 

MR. HAMPTON: — The old NDP tricks. And last but not least I think that, reading through the resolutions, I was 
somewhat shocked and surprised to find, the way I interpret it, you were prepared to put an abortion clinic on every 
corner. Now I don't know. In the major urban centres they have service stations on every corner. I'm somewhat 
surprised at you people wanting abortion clinics on every corner. 
 
And the final thing is that you would increase the civil service. You would increase the Crown corporations and the 
bureaucrats. Would this only happen to be that it would be to guarantee your re-election? Because I do believe that was 
a ploy that you used in days gone by. 
 
It was unfortunate that a Bill had to be introduced in the legislature today for The Farm Land Security Act, but I'm 
proud of our minister and proud of our government that this Act was introduced today. I believe that it was necessary, 
and I believe it is going to be helpful to many, many of the farmers in my constituency, in the Pelly constituency, and in 
all other parts of Saskatchewan. 
 
When I say it's unfortunate that it had to be introduced, I don't believe that it was our government that caused this 
problem. I believe it's been coming for some time, but it was rather interesting to hear an economist say the other day 
that the real problem started back in about 1974 or '75. And that's precisely it. I hear one of my colleagues saying: who 
was in power then? Who, in fact, was in power in 1974-75? Who, in fact, just prior to that had a debt moratorium 
legislation in place? 
 
The real root of the problem goes all the way back to the opposition when they were over here in government. I think 
that if anybody wants to lay the blame anywhere that's where it should be laid. And I think that we are doing an 
excellent job in getting the farming community back on their feet, and I'm thankful that our minister did introduce this 
today, and I know that it will save a lot of the farmers in my area. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in winding up, I think that I would only like to say to the Leader of the Opposition, no, to the 
Leader of the Opposition and to the members over there: gentlemen, I really do believe that you're away out in left, left 
field. I think that just a few days ago when I heard the Leader of the Opposition sitting in his desk there calling over 
here: call an election, call an election. Boy, if you guys would only wake up and realize that if, in fact, the Premier had 
taken him up on that and said I'll call one tomorrow that everyone of you that are sitting over there tonight would be 
long gone. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in winding up, I would say that probably the only person that I have noticed and that's come to my 
attention on more than one occasion that isn't working, or if they are it's minimal, has to be the member from Pelly 
constituency. He showed four letters here the other day in the Assembly, and I believe that's the only four letters that 
he's got in the last two and a half years. I'm having to do all of his work over in my constituency and therefore I feel he 
must be the only one that really isn't working. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would say, in summing it up, that I think that the Speech from the Throne is good, and I will be 
standing in favour of the motion. Thank you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MEAGHER: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thank you very much. I appreciate the opportunity tonight to 
join in on this throne speech. I found it extremely stimulating, particularly some of the comments that have been 
forthcoming this evening. It's quite obvious from my seat-mates to the right here of me that they don't understand or 
aren't getting a great deal of education from the comments tonight, but they don't intend to understand this throne 
speech because it talks about things that are completely out of their terms of reference. 



 
December 4, 1984 

178 
 

I would like, as well, to start with . . . I'd like to congratulate my seat-mate, the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood, 
on the tremendous job he did seconding the speech, as well as the member foe Saskatoon Riversdale for her 
tremendous job that she did in moving the speech. 
 
As well, I think that it's appropriate for me to congratulate her on her victory in the courts. She's had a long battle, and 
I'm not unfamiliar with that kind of a situation. Having won my seat by some 26 votes, I was quickly dubbed 
"Landslide Paul" in Prince Albert, taking over from the late member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake, Dave Steuart, who 
used to win seats by there by 15 and 20 votes. It's not uncommon, But in Saskatoon, I want to congratulate her for that 
victory. 
 
Also, as well, I'd like to congratulate my colleague, the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake, in his efforts in putting 
together an Opportunities North conference that we had there in Prince Albert. That conference was very successful. He 
and the Chamber of Commerce sponsored it, and I suppose the Chamber of Commerce could be accused of being 
political. If support of the business and open-for-business concept is political, then they're political. 
 
I took part in that conference on behalf of PAPCO and forestry, and we have so many exciting opportunities in forestry 
in Saskatchewan as a result of this new government, and the new optimism, and the new spirit that's all across the 
province, and I believe that that conference there in Prince Albert sort of demonstrated what the theme of this throne 
speech is all about, and the reason they don't understand it. 
 
I've coined a little title to this speech. It's "Find New Ways to Succeed and Not Old Ways to Fail." That's the theme of 
this speech, and that's the theme of this government. 
 
We're talking about economic development by people, not by government. That's the reason that it's so 
incomprehensible to the NDP. They simply don't understand the people can generate economic activity without big 
government. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition's remarks, I went over them in Hansard, and they just are so clear on how negative, how 
negative their attitude is. They're not listening to the people. They're not listening to people. They're listening to special 
interest groups. Many of them are radical. Some of the them are even weird, but the general theme of his comments, the 
general theme is they want a depression. Mr. Deputy Speaker, they want a depression. They need a depression. The 
member for Regina North West says we've got a depression. Well, I can tell you, I can suggest to you, that the only 
depression that we have is the one descending upon the socialists and the media and their allies. They are in the 
depression because we've got everybody against us but the people. And that would create a depression, too, if I were 
them. 
 
They seem to . . . I should also apologize, I think, in the House. I was sitting back thinking of a comment I made a year 
or so ago. I made reference to the previous administration as spending money like drunken sailors, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and really that's not fair, it's not true. Drunken sailors, it's really not true. Drunken sailors spend their own money. And 
that's the basic difference. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MEAGHER: — They don't want small business to generate work and jobs. They want mega-projects, 
government mega-projects. The media don't want to publicize it either. If it isn't a government job, it doesn't get press. 
If we're laying off one or two government employees, that's headlines. If private business employ hundreds of new 
people, it doesn't even made the press. 
 
In Prince Albert, for an example, I made a phone call today. Just since from January to November of this year, there 
have been 45 new businesses opened in Prince Albert, created 135 new jobs — not one mention in the press of any of 
those new jobs, not a word. 



 
December 4, 1984 

179 
 

But there is some good news to the people that isn't shared by some of the media and the socialists, but they haven't got 
much credibility. Nobody believes them. They've got a credibility problem. The majority don't believe them. 
 
Well, the Leader of the Opposition made reference to issues of really, really vital importance to the Saskatchewan 
economy like famine, world-wide famine, and nuclear war. Page 61 of Hansard I note that he said, he speaks 
particularly of the issues of famine and nuclear war. He goes on to say, "They have offered no hope, no new hope, no 
new vision, no blueprint for a better Saskatchewan in a better world." Because the throne speech was silent on these 
issues, he's not going to support it. 
 
Well, those are the very things that we do offer, exactly those things: new hope, new vision, new beginnings. How can 
we help people who are suffering from famine and drought in the other parts of the world if we haven't got our own 
house in order, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we're suffering from a deficit economy in Ottawa and 15 years of Trudeau 
socialism? We're a practically bankrupt country here. How can we help other people? We have to share our system. We 
don't need to be shipping simply food to these socialist countries. We should be shipping them a system that can help 
them feed themselves. The whole western world has suffered from this illness of socialism, for a better term of 
semantics, I suppose, but socialism will serve as a term. It's an illness. It's a social disease. 
 
(2130) 
 
But it's not what your allies in the media and you'd have the public believe. They'd like us to believe that it's some kind 
of an expression of distressed underdogs. They wouldn't want us to believe that it's a disease that's prevalent among 
some well-fed intellectuals. When I look over to the corner here, I see that they're well fed. I'm not so sure about the 
intellectual part of it, but . . . 
 
Well, there's tremendous power in the media spreading the message and hoping for knee-jerk response to scare words 
— I can remember their taking away medicare — all these scare words. The member for Regina North West fired one 
across the House here in his comments a few days ago. He used the term "McCarthyite." This government is a bunch of 
McCarthyites. And he made reference to that . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I was just referring to your Minister of Justice. 
 
MR. MEAGHER: — He called him the junior senator from Wisconsin. So I thought, you know, if I'm going to be 
called a name like that, that strikes terror into the hearts of millions around the world still after years and years, I 
thought, if I'm going to be called a McCarthyite, it concerned me a little bit, especially coming from the member from 
Regina North West of all people to be calling anybody a McCarthyite. 
 
But I decided to do a little research, and I did. And I reviewed the statistics on the so-called McCarthy reign of terror. 
Here are some figures I'd like to share with you tonight: numbers of persons killed, zero; number of persons wounded 
or injured, zero; number of persons tortured, zero; number of persons arrested without warrant, zero; number of persons 
held or imprisoned without trial, zero; number of persons evicted, exiled, or deported, zero; number of persons deprived 
of due process of the law, zero. It's no wonder it strikes terror into the hearts of people around the world. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MEAGHER: — Compare that with the record of some of our socialist allies who imprison people and murder 
them in a matter of course. But it's a tactic. It's a word. And they use scare words. You remember Reaganomics? Why 
that was just a dandy. That just conjured up pictures 



 
December 4, 1984 

180 
 

of starving masses in the streets, but they've dropped that about a year or so ago because it wasn't nearly so negative as 
it was then. Reaganomics now spells prosperity and work and . . . So we'll quit that. 
 
They've tremendous power in spreading this illness around the world, and it scares you sometimes, but words are 
thrown out. Like when the member throw out that term, I'm sure he didn't do much research. I don't know what 
McCarthyite means to him. But anyway, they don't work as well as they did, as Reaganomics demonstrates. The scare 
words aren't nearly so scary. In fact, in response to the leader's comments about our primary concern of nuclear war, I 
would say to suggest to him, that as a member of the Saskatchewan Legislature and as a citizen of Canada, I believe 
that our defence is best served by a healthy America, and a strong America. And I say thank God for America. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MEAGHER: — I mean, next to the scare words like McCarthyite, the attack from the member from Pelly that he 
delivered a few moments ago was devastating as well. He accused me, of all things, of saying that banks make money. 
Well I'm here to put into the record I didn't say any such a thing. I've been subjected to some vicious attacks. Now, I've 
been known to accuse banks of creating money, and printing money, performing functions that they're improper, but 
never of making money. 
 
But this illness, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is being arrested around the western world, thank God. It was arrested in Britain. 
It was arrested in the United Stated. It was arrested last September in Ottawa. And it's under arrest in Saskatchewan, 
and this throne speech is making the new beginning real for many people in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MEAGHER: — As I say, the only depression we've got in this province is descending upon the Socialists, and 
the media, and those who don't want this to succeed. 
 
I'll just share with you a few figures about Prince Albert, the things that are happening in Prince Albert. I'll show you 
how this Tory times . . . There's another scare word, Tory times are hard times. Well, these are the kind of hard times 
that we can do more of. We'd love to have more of in Prince Albert. 
 
The overall construction permits for 1984, in Prince Albert, showed an increase of $3 million. Increase such as this is a 
degree of confidence in the economy and in our city. We presently have approximately $50 million worth of 
construction under way in the city and a considerable number of new projects with anticipated starts this fall. 
 
Major construction projects under way in Prince Albert, at this time, include a $26 million technical institute at the 
stage where pilings are being placed, and tenders for the general contractor has been let. 
 
A $5 million senior citizens' high rise on First Ave. E. is well under construction, a $1.5 million air terminal building, a 
$1.7 million dairy processing plant, a large addition to the Prince Albert Credit Union, plant alterations to the rape-seed 
plant on 14th St. E. And rape-seed, I have to share with you, that's not a scare word. 
 
Extensive office renovations to the McIntosh Mall, a $1 million apartment development on River Street, the Prince 
Albert shopping plaza on 2nd Ave. W., Rose Beverages industrial plant expansion on Marquis Road, alterations to the 
station office complex down town, a waterslide development in the Imperial 400 Motel, Prince Albert Housing 
Authority developments, the Connaught School division department developments, commercial expansions at Inn on 
the 



 
December 4, 1984 

181 
 

Park and a hotel development, conversion of leased government office buildings on 15th St. E. to a rental commercial 
mall. Tenders closed on September the 20th for a $1.5 million Saskatchewan Telecommunications main exchange 
building. 
 
Real estate sales in 1983 in Prince Albert on existing properties exploded with a 48 per cent increase in the sales value 
over 1982. Some depression. Sales volumes have not maintained this frantic pace for 1984, but are showing overall 
appreciable gains. 
 
The total sales volume to the end of July was $20 million, representing a 7 per cent increase over 1983. Residential 
sales increased 17 per cent, with an average residential selling price of $54,298, or 8 percent increase over 1983. 
 
Business in Price Albert remains buoyant. We are open for business in Prince Albert, and we aren't participating in any 
recession. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MEAGHER: — Retail sales generally in Prince Albert are showing an acceptable increase, with some 
classifications experiencing a 26 per cent increase over last year. 
 
An amazing amount of interest is still being exhibited by retail businesses in demanding more strip malls and small 
shopping plazas. New malls are generally 80 per cent to 100 per cent leased before construction ever starts. Our down 
town business core is to be commended on their aggressive advertising and promotional campaign and entertaining 
functions they have hosted this past year. 
 
They don't believe we're in a depression. They don't believe Tory times are hard times. They're showing confidence in 
this economy. They're doing the things that this throne speech are calling for. 
 
This association in Prince Albert has passed on a message to Prince Albert and district shoppers, that their businesses 
are open and anxious to do business. They are, Mr. Deputy Speaker, open for business. Some 32 new business licences 
have been issued to the end of July. As I pointed out, 135 new jobs created this year. 
 
Included in these new businesses and industrial plants, commercial enterprises and a varied cross-section of retail 
businesses. Within the next two months, we should expect substantial addition to these numbers through the opening of 
the new mall on Second Avenue West; conversions of an office building to the commercial mall; opening of new 
businesses in the major malls; and renewed activity in the central down town business core. 
 
Our agricultural economic scene is varied at the moment. Freight rates, fuel costs, and operating costs have increased 
substantially, more than the price of grain products. Canola is an exception, with the market demand creating 
substantial increased prices for the product. 
 
Generally, grain quality and yields are turning out much better than expected, and some farm districts to the north-west 
are enjoying bumper crop situations. Sale of grain at this time seems to be no problem, which will certainly help the 
farm community with cash flows and operating funds. 
 
After all, Prince Albert is still primarily an agricultural service community, and when the farms are doing well in our 
district, our city prospers. We appreciate the farm business that we get in Prince Albert, and we do what we can to 
service that part of our economy. 
 
Production levels in our forest industry has to be the best that we've experienced in several years. With the introduction 
of poplar, or aspen, to the production of kraft pulp, it has opened a 



 
December 4, 1984 

182 
 

whole new field of raw product supply requirements and has created a stronger employment situation for all persons 
involved in the forest industry. 
 
Prince Albert has recently been highlighted throughout North America as the forestry capital of Canada. We are going 
to take this opportunity to promote Prince Albert throughout North America as the forestry capital, and we believe that 
will bring added benefits to Prince Albert and to all of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
In addition to excellent publicity created for our city, it has created a need for a Canadian forest service office and an 
addition of 12 new staff. Federal and provincial governments recently signed a five-year, $28 million agreement 
designed to strengthen forest resource management in Saskatchewan. 
 
Tourism, our number three industry in the district, experienced a bountiful season this year. Several factors contributed 
to the growing popularity of northern Saskatchewan being accepted as a tourist Mecca: federal government marketing 
of national parks; our government boosting its tourism advertising budget by 650 per cent, Mr. Speaker; production of 
quality booklets and brochures; and government sponsored promotional tours to the United States and other provinces. 
Radio, television, and print advertising have done much to encourage Saskatchewan people to experiment with 
vacationing within their own province. Economical transportation costs are also the contributing factor to the tourist 
traffic in the province. 
 
The mining industries have taken on a renewed enthusiasm in recent months. Mining has been one of the industries that 
has a tremendous amount of potential and has been stifled in this province for years. The Key Lake mine is operating at 
full production with a number of Prince Albert personnel employed and various commercial outlets in Prince Albert 
benefiting from the Key Lake supply requirements. Eldor mines have commenced a $100 million expansion and 
equipment modification at their Rabbit Lake mine, some 480 kilometres north-east of Prince Albert. It is hoped that 
Prince Albert businesses are exploring the supply and service opportunities that exist with this expansion, and the 
follow-up requirements once the expanded operation goes into production in late 1985 or 1986. 
 
Both the stabilization of gold prices and the demand for gold as a hedge against inflation created considerable 
exploration and development activity, and it's about to take place in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They haven't 
heard about the socialist depression either in the mining industry. And it's been suggested that Mahogany Mineral 
Resources have tapped into the richest gold deposits in Canada. Their location is at Mallard Lake. Similar findings have 
been reported by Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation and Starrex Mining Corporation Ltd., at nearby Star 
Lake, some 145 kilometres north of La Ronge. 
 
The member for Athabasca last evening made a lot of negative comments about northern Saskatchewan and the lack of 
development in northern Saskatchewan under the Tory government. Again he's labouring under the illusion that unless 
the government employs you, you're unemployed. Well these facts and figures that I'm speaking of tonight indicate that 
the new spirit of optimism in Saskatchewan extends to northern Saskatchewan. And, in fact, those are where the real 
opportunities in the decades ahead lie in this province. 
 
There's a great deal of confidence in Prince Albert, in the business community in Prince Albert, and in particular, in the 
mining community. And if the member for Athabasca wants to get on board, he can start making some constructive 
suggestions in this House, and back home to his folks, about training and opportunities and do something constructive 
for a change. 
 
I just hope that the member for Athabasca north-west asked me if any new mines were opening in Regina. Well, I 
thought he said in Regina. I have a suggestion for him that may be pertinent to that question, that if I were in his 
position, politically, I would think of a new career. Mining may be one of the . . . 



 
December 4, 1984 

183 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MEAGHER: — Mining may be one of the options that may be — appear viable to someone of his political 
persuasion; mining may even seem attractive. But this mining company, Mahogany, has committed $1.5 million this 
year, to expansion of their mine. Starrex is considering mining underground and building a mill on site with estimated 
development costs of $13 million, Mr. Speaker. Some depression. Some recession. A gold mill has recently been 
erected near Creighton on the east side of the province. Waddy Lake Mining is searching for development partners to 
develop a gold mine on known rich deposits in the vicinity of Waddy Lake. 
 
(2145) 
 
Other companies are in various stages of exploration, development, and negotiating with other mining companies in the 
area to construct common-use milling facilities to semi-process products on site and eliminate costly freight factors, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The reason some of this activity is taking place, and the new enthusiasm, is because they don't have to be saddled with a 
partner, the Government of Saskatchewan. They can go because of policies introduced by this government; they are 
free to explore and develop their products, their mines, their locations in northern Saskatchewan without having to be 
saddled by government partners. 
 
The city of Prince Albert and district has experienced a profitable season from the convention business. Clubs, 
organizations, and companies jumped on the bandwagon to encourage their associates to meet in beautiful Prince 
Albert. Convention promotion by the Chamber of Commerce and banquet subsidies, and subsidies from this 
government, and its policies, did much to propel this economic activity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
All industrial sectors present a mass of opportunities for development in manufacturing, processing, service industries, 
tourism development and commercial enterprises. I could go on. P.A. has an industrial development office and an 
officer. The city of Prince Albert, they're not — they don't believe that we're in a depression. They've decided to 
participate in the new wave of optimism that's taken place, and I believe the city of Prince Albert is to be congratulated. 
This development officer would be pleased to review any investment opportunities that may be presented to them by 
investors. They're doing a good job. 
 
They're doing much to assist entrepreneurs in establishing new enterprises. The most popular assistance programs 
include grants of approximately 25 per cent of capital costs for new or expanding manufacturing or processing 
operations and some tourist-related enterprises; incentives of up to 25 per cent of capital costs provided by way of wage 
subsidies amounting to $7500 for each permanent job created; fixed rate financing guaranteed by the province; venture 
capital programs with a 30 per cent of their investment as a tax credit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These are positive programs that are being taken advantage of by investors in the city of Prince Albert and in northern 
Saskatchewan. We believe that . . . I believe that because of the position taken by this government, and as demonstrated 
by this throne speech, and the theme that I believe is so popular, northern Saskatchewan is going to be the brightest spot 
in North America. It will be a Mecca for investment capital in the decades ahead. 
 
We've got marketing assistance programs; the elimination of the provincial corporate tax on small manufacturing or 
processing firms. These are other programs that we've introduced. These programs have been proven to be successful in 
Prince Albert. We have the statistics to prove it. There's research and development grants and many more. 



 
December 4, 1984 

184 
 

All of this constitutes a package of extremely bad news for the NDP or any of their allies who would like to see this 
revolutionary concept, sometimes referred to as free enterprise, succeed. They don't want it to succeed. They want it to 
fail. They want a depression. They don't really care about the welfare of the people of Saskatchewan. They care about 
their political hides. They'll use interest groups, special interest groups. They'll develop negativism to the level of 
policy. 
 
I challenge them. I challenge the NDP and the members of this legislature to bring forward constructive suggestions if 
they think that these programs can be improved upon. If they really want jobs in northern Saskatchewan, if they really 
want jobs in the parts of the province that are having more difficulties than others, then they can bring forward 
constructive programs. 
 
They're not doing that, Mr. Speaker. They're not doing that because I suspect their motives. Their motives are not to 
help, but to hinder the development of this economy. They're here to hinder and obstruct and attempt to do everything 
they can to throw cold water on this new optimism in Saskatchewan. 
 
I don't think they're going to be successful; I think their credibility is in serious jeopardy, but I believe this throne 
speech is working very well. But it being near 10 o'clock, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, just prior to adjournment, I wonder if I might have leave of the Assembly to 
introduce a motion with regard to committees. I have a series of four motions with regard to membership on 
committees. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The minister has asked for leave to introduce motions. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave is granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Membership of Committees 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That, notwithstanding the previous order, the membership of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts be 
increased to 10 members. 

 
I so move, seconded by my colleague, the member for Kindersley. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, with leave I would move: 
 

That the name of Mr. Young be substituted for that of Mr. Martens, and that the name of Mr. Muller be added to the 
list of members comprising the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 
So moved, seconded by my colleague, the member for Souris-Cannington. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave of the Assembly to move the following motion: 
 

That the names of Mr. Boutin, Mr. Tusa, and Ms. Zazelenchuk be substituted for 



 
December 4, 1984 

185 
 

those of Mr. Garner, Mr. Sutor, and Mr. Young on the Standing Committee of Crown Corporations. 
 
So moved, seconded by my colleague Mr. Currie, the member for Regina Wascana. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — And finally, Mr. Speaker, with leave, I would move: 
 

That the name of Mr. Morin be substituted for that of Ms. Zazelenchuk on the Standing Committee on 
Communication. 

 
So moved, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Currie, member for Regina Wascana. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:54 p.m. 


