



















































Hansard: May 31, 1984


 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 31, 1984 

3257 

 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Domotor: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, a group 

of grade 6 to 8 students, numbering 29 in total. They’re located in the Speaker’s gallery. They’re accompanied 

by their teachers, Bill Steckly, and Dennis Huebert, and will be meeting with them at 3 o’clock for pictures in 

the rotunda area. 

 

I hope they have an enjoyable trip and find the proceedings this afternoon informative. I’d also like to point out 

that the Hon. Minister of Social Services, Gordon Dirks, used to be the principal at Guernsey school one time, 

and I’m sure that they’re going to . . . (inaudible) . . . and enjoy the afternoon. 

 

Again, I would like to ask the members of the Assembly to welcome them here this afternoon. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muller: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. It gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you, and 

through you to this legislature, a group of students from Christopher Lake, Saskatchewan. This is quite a 

famous tourist area in northern Saskatchewan or north-central Saskatchewan. It’s not quite as windy as some 

other areas in this province. 

 

I met with the students and had drinks with them just prior to coming in at 2 o’clock. I certainly wish them an 

enjoyable stay in Regina. I hope they’ve enjoyed their visit to the legislature, and I hope it’s very educational 

for them. I understand they’re going to spend another day in this fine city before they get back into that good 

country again, and I would ask all members of the legislature to greet them. Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to, as well, introduce some guests to the legislative Assembly 

— 41 grade 12 students from Lumsden High School in Lumsden. They are accompanied by their teachers, Ken 

Langford and Gordon Bonokoski, and I would like them to stand and be recognized. 

 

And the hon. member, cheap-shot artist, as he’s known to most people throughout the province of 

Saskatchewan, was talking from his seat again. It’s unfortunate, Mr. Chairman. 

 

However, we don’t let that take away from the welcome that I know all hon. members wish to extend to the 

students. I hope that your tour was enjoyable, that you find the afternoon interesting as we proceed with the 

estimates, which is the detailed budgetary expenditures review of, in this case, Executive Council. I hope you 

find it informative and interesting, and I look forward to meeting with you after about 2:30. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Young: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. On behalf of my seat-mate, the member for Turtleford, I’d like to introduce 

28 students accompanied by their teacher, Bill Kresowaty, from the Turtleford School. I’d like to advise them 

that Mr. Maxwell will be meeting with them at 2 o’clock for drinks, and I’d ask all members to join in 

welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

May 31, 1984 

3258 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to add my word of welcome to that of the Minister of Rural 

Affairs to those students and teachers from Guernsey — I certainly enjoyed my years there — and also to those 

students and teachers from Lumsden High School. I had the opportunity of being an administrator of that high 

school for two years as well. And should my political career ever come to an end, and I expect that that will be 

some years down the road, I anticipate, perhaps, that, when my hair is greying, I may have the opportunity to 

return to either Lumsden or Guernsey. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 10 

 

Item 1 (continued) 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, just as we were dealing with matters at 12 o’clock, I had 

asked the Premier whether he would give a short statement of his policy with respect to development in 

northern Saskatchewan generally, employment in northern Saskatchewan, and other issues surrounding that. 

 

And I postulated his policy, I stated what I thought he had stated in earlier occasions, that the policy was to treat 

northern Saskatchewan the same as southern Saskatchewan. And I asked him whether he thought the level of 

services in northern Saskatchewan was approaching that in southern Saskatchewan with respect to roads, 

schools, hospitals, and the like, and I’d be interested in his response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, there are two or three important things to note with respect to 

development in northern Saskatchewan. One: there are about 25,000, I believe, considered to be in northern 

Saskatchewan, out of a population of a little over a million in the entire province. What we have attempted to do 

in the last couple of years is knit those 25,000 people in isolated communities into the mainstream of 

Saskatchewan. We have designated programs that will go right across the province, as opposed to having just a 

separate form of government, as was the case in the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, just for north 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I will mention, for example, our whole tourism thrust. Most of that increase in expenditures in tourism is 

now being spent — or certainly a very large part of it — towards northern Saskatchewan, towards the lakes and 

the fishing and the recreation and so forth, and the jobs that come with that. Certainly the Northern 

(Saskatchewan) Outfitters’ Association, which has been encouraging Americans to come into northern 

Saskatchewan, would be indicative of the kinds of things that we would see for northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Similarly, with respect to mining, we see both in terms of the announcements of the new gold mines in 

Saskatchewan and northern Saskatchewan — with the activities of the uranium mining. That is part and parcel 

of mining across Saskatchewan, not only in the South but indeed in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Similarly, with respect to forestry, Mr. Chairman, our forestry policy and the development of pulp, paper, and 

timer has, in most areas, and with respect to most people, tied to northern Saskatchewan. And we are obviously 

focusing on the strength that we see in the North; that is, the tourism ability, the water, the recreation, the 

mining, the agriculture, and the forestry. 



 

May 31, 1984 

3259 

 

Now there’s another area where we have spent money quite specifically, and I would refer to things that we’ve 

done with respect to job creation and training. We have a program, for example, the employment opportunities 

program. The description is called job creation and training, particularly targeted at native or northern 

individuals, and the budget for any of the disadvantaged and/or women is something like $370,000. This is to be 

transferred from Advanced Education and Manpower to Social Services. 

 

The forestry program is vocational, and it’s in training, and particularly designed for the residents of northern 

Saskatchewan, with a budget of $181,250. 

 

The native career development program — to describe that, it would be, more or less, training to assist 

employers to recruit native people, particularly in northern Saskatchewan. It’s targeted, I might say, Mr. 

Chairman, at unemployed and underemployed native adults, and obviously that would apply to a large part to 

northern Saskatchewan, which is, as I mentioned, something in the neighbourhood of 25,000 people. And the 

budget for that particular program is $403,000. 

 

Then there’s a northern training program. To describe that would be course costs and training allowances for 

individuals to be upgraded. It’s for Northerners that may be ineligible for other training assistance. So it’s to 

target people that may be left out of various training programs. That budget alone is $2.3 million, Mr. 

Chairman. Approximately 67 per cent of that will be recovered, we hope, from the federal government. 

 

There’s a Special ARDA (Agriculture and Rural Development Act) program. We can describe that as: to 

encourage natives to identify and develop economic opportunities. And certainly we’re targeting rural 

individuals of Indian ancestry, which includes a great number of the people in northern Saskatchewan. And that 

would be something like $500,000. 

 

There’s also the Saskatchewan Skills Extension Program — technical institutes that will credit off-campus 

activities. And we’ve targeted groups that are geographically in positions of remote areas, so that would apply, I 

would suspect — and the Leader of the Opposition would recognize that — as a disadvantaged group, or those 

in northern Saskatchewan that are removed a long ways from the central flow of economic activities in their 

isolated communities. The budget there is $4.96 million. So, in terms of our tourism, our mining, our 

agriculture, our forestry programs, and general economic opportunities that were linking the North with the 

South in the entire province, I’ve outlined several million dollars worth of specific programs for education and 

training in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And I would add, finally, that we have no intention, as the hon. members have said that they would do, to just 

holus-bolus close all the mines in northern Saskatchewan at a time when there’s very high unemployment. And 

I don’t believe that would be a responsible position, and I don’t know how the Leader of the Opposition can 

think it would be responsible, but certainly to put an additional 10,000 people out of work in the northern half of 

Saskatchewan would indeed be unfair. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, first, with respect to the Premier’s statement of the 

policies of our party, they are as defective as the statements he makes about what is happening in the province 

that I was illustrating this morning, but we are not debating that. We are talking now about his policies. He has 

been Premier for two years. Does he say that more people are gainfully employed in northern Saskatchewan 

now than two years ago? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I would suspect that unemployment in northern Saskatchewan would 

reflect national conditions with respect to relative terms; that is, unemployment in all of Canada is up compared 

to two years ago. Unemployment in northern Canada is up as well, and in the province of Saskatchewan we’ll 

find that it is similar to the province of Alberta, the province of Manitoba, and other places. 



 

May 31, 1984 

3260 

 

Yes, unemployment is up across Canada. Unemployment is up in Saskatchewan, and unemployment may be up 

in northern Saskatchewan as it is in northern parts of the rest of the continent. So it would reflect, I would 

suspect, the normal changes across Canada that have occurred over the last two years. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, thank you for at least that admission that 

unemployment is up in northern Saskatchewan, and it’s up massively, as you will know. You will also know 

that the number of welfare recipients is up, and up massively. 

 

I’m going to ask him just a relatively simply question, and this has to do with the need to provide employment 

for people in northern Saskatchewan. I think we would all readily admit that our first preference would be to 

provide employment by having private sector jobs that would be available to Northerners. Let’s concede that 

out of hand. But if they’re not there, which they are not, is it better, in the Premier’s opinion, to follow the 

policy he is following of having massive increases in welfare recipients, or would it not be better, let us say, to 

construct roads in northern Saskatchewan which will, I predict, be needed for future mineral development, by 

using those same Northerners to work at gainful employment of constructing, in my instance, roads, but many 

other public facilities. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, in my view the best long-run solution for residents of northern 

Saskatchewan, and particularly people who don’t have the opportunities for employment, the best solution is 

education and training. That’s why we have identified several million dollars worth of economic activity 

targeted to training and education, including a brand new technical school in Prince Albert, which is one of our 

most northern cities, to train people in northern communities to take advantage of tourism and resource 

development and economic activities. 

 

Now if you have roads built, and people are unable to take advantage of economic activity because they’re not 

trained, then they will remain and sustain position of high unemployment. 

 

So if you can get people through public school and through high school and through technical school and 

through other forms of education or on-the-job training, it seems to me that the money spent today on training 

and education, not only for northern Saskatchewan, but particularly for northern Saskatchewan, that it will reap 

benefits in the future far above us now saying we’re going to just spend money on the creation of a short-term 

public project. 

 

Now a road may be some time. But a road going into northern Saskatchewan should allow people in northern 

Saskatchewan to participate in the economic activity associated with that road. It would seem to me this should 

be a balance, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, with respect to educational and training development as we provide 

these opportunities as I’ve mentioned in mining and tourism and so forth, which involves roads and waterways 

and resort facilities and so forth. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, it’s rather clear that he doesn’t feel his government 

could run a training program and road-building program at the same time, because he feels, they’re alternatives. 

I have no quarrel with his training programs. They’ve been going on for a good number of years, and we hope 

they continue to go on. 

 

The question, the rather narrow question I asked, is this: why do you think it is better to have a large number, 

and an increasingly large number, of people on welfare, and a much smaller number of people building public 

projects like roads, instead of the reverse? Instead of taking some of those people who are now on welfare and 

have them do things like road construction, street construction — all the other construction which is necessary 

in northern Saskatchewan to bring services to those communities up to some level approaching what we have in 

the South. 



 

May 31, 1984 

3261 

 

Why isn’t it better to have those people working at improving their communities rather than simply getting 

welfare? 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member standing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, can I have leave of the Assembly to introduce some guests, please? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to ask you and the members of the Assembly to direct their 

attention to the Speaker’s gallery, where it is my pleasure to introduce to you His Excellency Wolfgang 

Behrends, the Ambassador of the Federal Republic of Germany, who is visiting with us today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — As I look at the biography I’ve been handed, Mr. Behrends certainly has had an 

interesting career. His studies have taken him to Germany, and England, France, the U.S.A. He is fluent in three 

languages, French, English, as well as German. His professional career — he has spent time in Hong Kong, 

Paris, Bonn, New Delhi, Vienna, Egypt. Of course, now he is visiting with us here in Saskatchewan. I know he 

has met with a number of our ministers, and will be meeting with the Premier, and it will be my pleasure to 

meet with him later this afternoon. 

 

Accompanying His Excellency is Mr. Erwin Boll, the Consul-General of Germany, centred in Edmonton, and I 

would ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in making them welcome to Regina and Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 10 

 

Item 1 (continued) 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, everyone agrees that it is much better to have people working than it is to 

have them unemployed. There’s no question about that. And that’s why we have been working hard to make 

sure that we have the lowest unemployment in Canada, in all the programs that we’ve had. And we’ve spent a 

great deal of money in public projects. I want to make that very clear. 

 

We’ve got new nursing homes; we’ve got expansions to hospitals; we’ve got power projects; we’ve got natural 

gas distribution projects; we’ve got road construction; we’ve got handicapped centres. We have hundreds and 

hundreds of millions of dollars of public funds, of public funds that are going into economic activities and the 

creation of jobs. 

 

I want to point out, Mr. Chairman, that at the same time we can find that individuals that are untrained, and 

uneducated, and untrained, can get trapped, get a perpetual system of welfare. 



 

May 31, 1984 

3262 

 

And everybody across Canada knows that. And you can spend hundreds, and hundreds of millions of dollars, 

and you could target that in a community, and you still might not resolve some of the welfare people, welfare 

problems associated with people who have got trapped in that at an early age. 

 

And I take my own community in the riding that I represent. There is at least $100 million has been targeted 

into the Estevan community by the energy people — economic activity. And there’s all kinds of employment. 

You can’t find a house. There’s businesses that are doing very well. The town is bustling. The community is 

bustling. And there still are untrained, uneducated people on welfare. 

 

So what do we say? We say, money alone isn’t sufficient. You can’t just buy your way out of this. You can 

spend hundreds of millions of dollars and target it on the community, and it won’t resolve the welfare situation. 

What you have to have is training and education targeted at those individuals that are unskilled, to provide them 

with the wherewithal to take advantage of the opportunities that are there. 

 

That’s why we have opted for a great deal of money, extra millions of dollars, for training, education and their 

facilities, as opposed to — and we’ve already spent a great deal of public money, hundreds of millions publicly: 

power projects, roads, hospitals, nursing homes, and so forth — all public. But as opposed to just spending 

more money chasing the same untrained people, we say let’s start training more of them, particularly at an early 

age so they can take advantage of opportunities when the economy turns around, and when they, in fact, turn 

their own resource capacities around as individuals. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, I was asking about northern Saskatchewan. I’m not 

surprised with your record at northern Saskatchewan that you want to talk about the constituency of Estevan, 

which, I think, is the farthest constituency from northern Saskatchewan. At least it abuts on the U.S. border. 

Will you answer the question with respect to northern Saskatchewan? We all can see that training is a great 

idea. You apparently think that training can only take place in an institution, that nobody can learn to build a 

highway by building a highway, that nobody can learn to do by doing. Well, I tell you, sir, that dozens, indeed 

hundreds of people learn to handle heavy equipment by building highways in the North by the simple process of 

being there, watching somebody doing it, and being instructed on the job. And that can happen. And I invite 

you, sir — I won’t belabour this — but I invite you, sir, to stop your idea of doing no road construction in 

northern Saskatchewan and to commence once again to train people on the job, as well as in institutions. 

 

No one is quarrelling about technical institutes. But your supposition that you can only learn to build a house in 

a technical institute and you can’t learn to build a house by building one, is, I think, an unsound supposition. 

And I think you should look at the prospect of training some of these people by the very fact of building roads 

and streets and the rest in northern Saskatchewan. And instead of having massively increased welfare loads, as 

you have in your last two years, and a massive decrease, which you have in road construction, street 

construction and the like — and that’s what you’ve done. You’ve cut back sharply on road construction, street 

construction and the like, and your welfare rolls have gone up markedly. 

 

And again, let’s not hear about training; we agree with it. Let’s not hear about private-sector employment; we 

obviously agree with it. And I say to you that your welfare rolls are going up massively. Your expenditure on 

public projects where people can learn and can work and can get a salary is going down, and in that you are 

serving the people of northern Saskatchewan badly, and ultimately serving all Saskatchewan badly. There are 

many more people on the welfare treadmill, the welfare cycle, now, than there was two years ago, and any 

simple look at those welfare rolls will tell you that. And we obviously have to break that cycle, and we can 

break some of it by training. Good. We can break some of it by finding jobs in the private sector. Good. 



 

May 31, 1984 

3263 

 

But I suggest to you that, rather than simply saying that’s the end, there is another avenue, and that is to proceed 

with public projects in order to bring services in northern Saskatchewan up to approaching the level that we 

have them in southern Saskatchewan, which you say is your ultimate objective. If that is your objective, why do 

you not pursue that objective by providing employment for people now on welfare? Surely your agree it’s better 

to pay people to work than to pay them not to work. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, let’s make some assumptions. Let’s assume that the Leader of the 

Opposition and I agree that it’s better to work than it is not to work. But it’s a question of priorities: how do we 

get from A to B? And the Leader of the Opposition would do two things; quite clearly, he would do two things. 

He’d build more roads, and he’d close the mines. 

 

Now if his argument is right that you train people on the job, why would he want to close the mines? I mean, 

let’s talk about it. We maintain those jobs. We are building economic opportunities for tens of thousands of 

people, training on the job — training on the job. 

 

And what would you do? Build roads to nowhere? If you close all the mines in northern Saskatchewan, there’d 

be nothing to go there to do, particular . . . unless you look at some tourism. 

 

I agree. We want people to be gainfully employed. I agree, training is important. I believe now the balance is on 

training and education, as opposed to more roads. 

 

We are also spending money publicly. We spend it on hospitals and nursing homes and on power projects and 

gas distribution programs into the billions — public money. 

 

But the North doesn’t just need public roads. People in northern Saskatchewan need to develop their own talents 

so they can take advantage of opportunities, not only in mines, but in all kinds of other things. 

 

So if it’s a question of disagreeing on what comes first — education, or more roads now — all right, I choose 

education and training as opposed to a multiple increase in expenditures on roads, particularly when we have 

economic opportunities tied to tourism and forestry and mining and the whole complex of things you can do in 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And, as well, we spend untold millions on public projects. So I go back and say, all the public projects of the 

past clearly didn’t train these people well enough, because now they’re untrained, and the children are 

untrained, and the parents are untrained. 

 

The key is in the long run, so five years and 10 years from now they can take advantage of the North, is to be 

trained and have a skill so that they can take advantage of roads that we build in t here, and not just build into 

nothing with no training. 

 

So if we have to agree to disagree, I believe the training and education are extremely important now, more so 

than an increase in public road construction to some community that already has a road. 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I would ask leave to introduce guests, please. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — The minister has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is that agreed? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 



 

May 31, 1984 

3264 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the members of the opposition for granting me leave. 

 

It’s my pleasure to introduce to you, sir, and to the other members of the Assembly today, a group of students 

— they’re in the west gallery up here — from the school of Turtleford in the constituency of Turtleford, the 

constituency which I’m proud to represent, the jewel of the North. They are accompanied today by teachers, 

Bill Kresowaty and Rick Webb. I hope you’re going to have a pleasant stay in Regina and here in the Assembly 

today. And I’ll be meeting with them in approximately 10 minutes in the rotunda. Thank you. Would you 

welcome with me, please. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 10 

 

Item 1 (continued) 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I think we’ve heard the Premier’s answer. He feels 

that the YES (youth employment services) projects which he kept mentioning, of which there are none in the 

North, and other projects are likely to provide employment. 

 

I hope that gold mines go ahead as he suggests. And if they do, virtually everyone who works there who is a 

Northerner will be someone who was trained on road construction or similar construction, and who learned his 

skills in handling equipment there, as has been the case with respect to other projects in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

But we’ve heard the Premier’s pronouncement. I asked him very, very clearly and very distinctly: didn’t he 

think that it was better to go ahead with public projects — not only roads, but public projects — rather than 

welfare. And he said: I won’t answer that question; I want to talk about training. 

 

And that is all too indicative of this government. They simply will not face the fact that there are massive 

welfare rolls there and that they ought to be reduced and they ought to be reduced by training if possible, 

obviously, but if not, then by proceedings with public projects. That has been clearly rejected by the 

government, and I think the people of the North know that. 

 

I want now to pursue this question that I asked him before as to whether or not he has had approaches with 

respect to the purchase of Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation. He gave a guarded answer to that. I 

think he said “some approaches, but not many,” and he wouldn’t go further than that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — That’s accurate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, would you indicate whether or not you’ve had one 

. . . you had a proposal from a financial organization known as Burns Fry Ltd., and you received written 

proposals from Mr. Latham Burns, the president of Burns Fry Ltd. To proposing some arrangements with 

respect to SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) — I think he’s chairman of Burns Fry — 

and what your reaction and response was to the proposal set out by Mr. Latham Burns, the chairman of Burns 

Fry? 



 

May 31, 1984 

3265 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I said clearly that there were some people that may be interested. I also 

said that I wasn’t going to jeopardize people being interested in the province of Saskatchewan, either in new 

developments or joint ventures or any other combination thereof, by talking about who it was, and how much, 

and where they live, and so forth — because they obviously inquire into the province of Saskatchewan in 

confidence. And the Leader of the Opposition, having sat in this chair, understands that. 

 

So I’m not going to get into specifics. I don’t think it’d be in the best interests of the province of Saskatchewan 

or in economic development. And yes, there are some people who are interested. Yes, economic developments, 

hopefully, will continue to take place. But I won’t jeopardize that by giving names and addresses of people who 

may come to inquire about Saskatchewan on a confidential basis. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, would you make any statement as to the 

policy of the government with respect to disposing of the Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation or 

any of the major assets of that corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, our policy to date in the province of Saskatchewan is one of allowing 

more and more of the public to participate on a first-hand basis, that is, to begin to buy their own shares in 

resource development in the province of Saskatchewan. We are starting with power bonds and then energy 

bonds, and there may be more bonds in the future, because people do see a difference between individual 

ownership and government ownership. And government doesn’t necessarily represent the folks. The people 

themselves want to be able to participate themselves, in their own right, as opposed to the government. 

 

So the policy, the policy is very clearly that we are managing the corporations that we have inherited. We’ll 

manage them to the best of our ability. We’ve put them on a profit and a dividend oriented philosophy to pay as 

much money as they can to the people of Saskatchewan. If we can allow the people of Saskatchewan to 

participate by buying bonds, like in the case of Sask Power bonds or energy bonds, and they like that, then they 

will be allowed to do it. And that’s the basic philosophy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, thank you for that statement. I don’t know how 

wide-ranging you wish it to apply to. It seemed to me you were saying that the Crown corporations — and I’m 

going to ask you to clarify this — are being operated so as to generate substantial dividends. 

 

Now, I want to know whether you agree with the statement of the hon. member for Bengough-Milestone, the 

Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources (whatever his portfolio now is; I believe that’s right) when he 

talked about, in this House on March 26th, when he talked about hidden deficits of the previous government — 

that was the crutch he hung it on — and then he said: 

 

How are these deficits hidden? How, Mr. Speaker? They bled their crown corporation to give artificial 

transfusions to the government financial operations. Funds that rightly belong to the crowns, hundreds of 

millions of dollars, were siphoned off . . . 

 

Now, I want to know whether you believe that payments by Crown corporations to the Government of 

Saskatchewan amount to bleeding off funds, siphoning off funds, that belong to the Crowns? Or do you believe 

that those are proper payments to the owner of the Crown corporations? What is the policy? 

 

I note that the member for Bengough-Milestone uses colourful language dealing with what he calls: 



 

May 31, 1984 

3266 

 

They bled their crown corporation to give artificial transfusions to the government financial operations. 

Funds that rightfully belong to the crowns, hundreds of millions . . . were siphoned off . . . 

 

That is an odd phrase, but I ask you whether or not . . . that is, whether he was speaking for the government in 

suggesting that no money should be siphoned off from the Crowns to the government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the Leader of the Opposition raises a very interesting point with respect to 

Crown corporations. We’ve had some of this discussion before — last year’s estimates with respect to 

dividends. I think it’s fair to point out at the outset, Mr. Chairman, that there are obviously two kinds of basic 

Crowns, one in the resource business, one in the utility business, or those in the resource business, those in the 

utility business. 

 

And there are two points to be . . . that were brought up. As you mentioned, the member from Bengough 

brought up two points. One was the question of balancing the books and balancing the budget, and the other 

was with respect to Crown corporations being robbed of their dividends. So we’ve got balancing the budget on 

one hand through the Crown corporations, and the other is with respect to whether they should be paying 

dividends or not. 

 

Now let me just . . . The last point first. Should Crown corporations be paying dividends? Obviously resource 

corporations, if they weren’t tied up to pay dividends, goodness knows what they were set up for. They should 

be paying dividends to the province of Saskatchewan as fast as they can, and as well managed as they can, and 

so forth. 

 

And we are working as hard as we can to make sure that is the case. The Crown corporations are not there just 

for some social or political reason, but an economic reason — to provide money for the people of Saskatchewan 

to use that money to build roads and hospitals and education and so forth. That’s the resource Crowns. 

 

Now with respect to the whole question of utilities, the question is: do we use a utility as a form of taxation to 

build roads and highways and so forth? All right. Now, the former administration did that. You taxed Sask 

Power, for example. You would say, please send me a dividend this year and I will stick it into general revenue 

and I will go and build and do things. 

 

So you use the power corporation as a means of taxation to build. So you look at the power corporation, and 

since, well, from 1968 to 1982 a little in excess of $104 million was taken out of the power corporation, taken 

out of the power corporation and used in general revenue. And some years it was as high as $20 million, taken 

out of Sask Power to balance the books in general revenue, or it certainly contributed towards it, even at a time 

when Sask Power couldn’t afford it. 

 

And, in fact, if we go back and look at the Crown investments corporation, the Crown Management Board, 

saying . . . and the Auditor General . . . I believe 1984 . . . This is the compendium of management letters 

issued. He talks about a disclosed deficit of $50 million incurred by Crown Investments Corporation. And in a 

discussion of the public accounts, and I’ll just read this out so that we know where the money’s going, and this 

is the chairman of the CIC saying: 

 

I think that the motivation of the Provincial Auditor’s concern was a situation where the Crown 

investments corporation found itself in a negative retained earnings position, and was making dividend 

payments. 

 

Dividend payments even though it was in a negative retained earnings. 

 

And if you look at the management letter of the Provincial Auditor, you can see that it has been  



 

May 31, 1984 

3267 

 

true for the Crown investments corporation, 1978. And I’m quoting this as April 26, 1984, page 279; 1978, and 

again in 1979, and again in 1980. And since 1978 was in a positive, was in a retained earnings position of 

negative retained earning position, and in those early years, and in fact in 1982, were in a negative retained 

earnings position — negative - $50 million negative. 

 

So the question that is raised by the member from Bengough-Milestone is this: if you were putting the Crown 

investment corporation into a negative position and still demanding revenues to balance the books, then it 

doesn’t really look like you had a balanced budget at all. 

 

And I go back to Sask Power, and Sask Power has a pretty difficult debt/equity ratio as a result of some of this. 

But here are funds that go through to government: from 1968, 3 million; ’69, 3.5 million; 1970, 8 million; 1971 

(your first year of administration), 10.4 million; 1973, $20 million; 1976, 3.6 million; 1977 (from Sask Power to 

the government), 10.2 million; ’78, 8.2 million; ’79, 10.3 million; 1980 (and this is again with a negative 

retained earnings in the Crown investments corporation) you asked for another 16.5 million from Sask Power 

due to the general revenue in the Government of Saskatchewan. In 1981 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 

then, who did you give it to? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay. And they’re negative. In 1981 there was 

another $10,275,000. 

 

Mr. Chairman, that adds up to $104,975,000 that was taken from Sask Power which is not a resource Crown. 

That’s a public utility where you go out and you bill people. You bill people. And you didn’t bill them to build 

power projects. You billed them to take dividends of over $100 million and then put it into CIC. Then you draw 

the money out of CIC and you do whatever you like with it. 

 

Now I don’t believe that public utilities were set up as a source of taxation, and I’ve said that to you before. I 

agree that public utilities should be able to create enough dividends to help pay for their projects, and they 

should be self-liquidating, and they have to contribute towards the interest, and you agree with that. I mean, we 

have to find the interest money some place. But I don’t believe they should be used as a source of taxation to go 

build hospitals, because the reason they are in the public sector is because they are a natural monopoly, and we 

don’t want to use them to unduly tax people as a natural monopolist would. 

 

That’s precisely what the member from Bengough-Milestone was talking about. He said Sask Power is in a lot 

of trouble because you took over $104 million out of that Crown corporation, put it in CIC, then took dividends 

out of CIC when it was broke, and then you spent it and said you balanced the books. Well the people of 

Saskatchewan were getting tired of paying power bills so you could balanced your books and then go build 

things. 

 

And then we go back and look at the debt/equity ratio in Sask Power and it wasn’t for power projects. And you 

can go back today and say, well the debt/equity ratio is higher. All right. It’s higher today because we’re 

building Nipawin. We’re putting natural gas distribution systems all across the province, and you didn’t do 

those things. I believe money should be spent in public utilities building public projects for the public good. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — And the problem with this is not mentioned by the member from Bengough-Milestone. 

The problem with this is that you used a utility, you used a utility to put money into CIC, and that’s why you set 

up CIC, to take money out of CIC. And as the Auditor General said, even when you’ve got a $50 million debt 

you still took money out of there as dividends to the province, and then you spent the money. And obviously 

you could balance your books, or do whatever you like with it. But you must admit it was a source of taxation 

on a public utility, and public utilities, to my mind, were not set up to do that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, we have a very clear statement of  



 

May 31, 1984 

3268 

 

policy that public utilities should not be paying dividends, that public utilities should not pay dividends. If they 

make a profit it would be reinvested. That is what the Premier said. If he said anything else, I’m amazed. That’s 

what he said. 

 

Now I want to ask him whether or not that policy has been followed by his government with respect to Sask Tel 

and whether in each year that he’s been in office he hasn’t taken a dividend out of Sask Tel? Isn’t that true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — We have three public utilities. We have utilities that are in a great deal of financial 

trouble because of what’s going on in the past. All right? That’s for sure. Here’s $104 million that wasn’t linked 

to projects. All right? To date, we still have financial difficulties in the public utility sector. We’re trying to 

resolve those difficulties in the public utility sector. And we’re working very hard to resolve them and put the 

debt/equity ratios back on track. That’s what we’re trying to do. 

 

In principle, this is not what a public utility was set up to do. Not at all. And the hon. member knows that. He 

may believe that you can use it as a source of taxation. We have got some significant problems today and we are 

working hard in the public utility sector to resolve those. And yes, Sask Tel has paid some dividends recently, 

only because we’ve got such significant problems in power as a result of it being robbed for years. 

 

But as a matter of principle, those utilities should stand on their own two feet and should not be used as a source 

of taxing to build anything else that may be at the whim of government. And that’s why they were put in the 

public sector. In theory, I’m sure the hon. member would agree, and in practice. But in practice it’s got us into a 

lot of trouble in the past. And as a result of that we’ve got to work hard to resolve it. 

 

There’s no question about resource Crowns. They should be paying dividends. Public utilities should put . . . 

create enough to pay for their own projects, to protect against the interest rates they’re going to have to carry, 

and so forth. But as a form of taxation this has to stop. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, that’s an interesting comment, because prior to his 

election there was a general policy of paying half of the profits of power and half of the profits of telephones 

into CIC or the public purse — the recipient was varied. Since his election, there has been not one single change 

in that policy. One-half of the total accumulated profits of both of those have been paid over. There hasn’t been 

a single shift in policy. There’s only been a shift in rhetoric. He’s taken just as much money as before — half 

the profits. 

 

The fact that he didn’t make any profits in power is hardly applicable to previous administrations. Because his 

administration, if he thinks the problem is debt/equity ratio, in every major utility we have — power, 

telephones, it’s true of STC as well — the debt-equity ratio has got worse. It’s got worse, worse since he came 

to office — worse in telephones, worse in power. And his theory that Nipawin is the first major capital project 

we’ve had is simple nonsense. 

 

The facts are that he is pursuing precisely the same policies, and he has simply changed the rhetoric . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Indeed, indeed we had rhetoric. Indeed, we had a simple rationale. You can accept it 

or not as to why the corporations were asked to turn over half of their profits. We don’t need to go into that. 

That was past. But we’ve given it many times. 

 

The Premier says it was the wrong policy. It was the wrong policy, but we’re going to follow it because we 

need the money. It was the wrong policy for telephones, but we followed it each year we’ve been in office. 

That’s what he says — because we need the money. It was the wrong policy for power, and we’re not following 

it because we’re not making any profits. And that’s true. We’re not making any profits in power, and not 

because of any particular rate freezes, but because of the fact that less power and less gas is being sold . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Oh nonsense. 



 

May 31, 1984 

3269 

 

The Premier tries to tell us that the growth in load for power has been at the regular level in 1982 and ’83 and 

’84. That’s not true. The load growth, the load growth has been lower rather than higher. And a simple look at 

the potash mines that were closed down and the rest will indicate what . . . But if, in fact, I’m wrong, and if, in 

fact . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Well, of course. I am not suggesting that the consumption went down — I 

am talking about load growth. Didn’t you hear those words? The load growth has gone down. The rate of 

growth has gone down. 

 

If anyone believes that the economy of Saskatchewan is in such a disastrous state that power consumption is 

actually going down, not even I would allege that of this government. I’m just saying that it flattened out 

compared with previous years. The load growth reduced — that’s what I said. And I said it as clearly as the 

English language permits it to be said. And I am saying that happened, and if these people are denying it, let 

them deny it, because their figures contradict what they say. And it went down, and because it went down, the 

profits of the power corporation went down. And that is what has happened. 

 

The point I want to make is this: while the government opposite says that it’s going to operate the utilities 

without taking dividends, when it has any profits to take, it has taken them. It has not taken one cent less, not 

one cent less than would have been taken out under the old policy. And if the Premier wishes to deny that, let 

him quantify, let him tell me how much less they have taken out than 50 per cent of the combined profits of 

power and telephones — not a penny less. 

 

That’s what they would have got under the old policy. That’s what they got under this policy. They’re saying 

that they’ve got a different justification for it. But when it came to grabbing the cash, he grabbed exactly the 

same amount. And that’s all I wanted to underline. He took the same amount as under the old policy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the Auditor General said the CIC is $50 million in the hole. We inherited 

that situation - $50 million in the hole. You talk about the Heritage Fund. I mean, why was CIC in the hole - 

$50 million in the hole and in a lot of trouble, paying a lot of interest payments? 

 

So we go back and we look at both the resource Crowns, Mr. Chairman, and the utility Crowns. And I don’t 

mind seeing dividends to the extent of $104 million over 10 years from a resource Crown. But why an 

individual or a government would jeopardize a corner-stone of the Saskatchewan economy, like Sask Power, 

and put it into that much debt — like the interest on $104 million, even at 10 per cent, doubles. That’s over 

$200 million that we sacrificed in Sask Power. So Sask Power is in a great deal of financial trouble because you 

took money out of it even when it was in trouble. 

 

Now we have to put the utilities in good shape. We have to put the utilities in good shape. We don’t believe in 

using the utilities as a source of taxation when we’ve got resource Crowns that should be paying dividends and 

utilities, and if some of the debt/equity ratios are up today it’s because of capital projects. And they should be 

for capital projects, and I don’t think you’d disagree with that. If you’re going to build a power project, if you’re 

going to build something else, then you’d borrow the money to do it. If you’d have left the money in Sask 

Power, we wouldn’t have to do it. You wouldn’t have to do it. 

 

We have to go into the market, for example, for a Nipawin power project for several hundred million dollars. 

But why wouldn’t you allow power to remain strong? And it didn’t. The debt/equity ratio increased and 

increased, and not because you were building things. Because you were taking money out to do something else 

with it not associated with power. 

 

Now we have inherited a difficult situation in power. And we want to make sure that the utilities look after 

themselves. So in this situation where we have utilities, some utilities that can  



 

May 31, 1984 

3270 

 

contribute and help this other utility, we want to make sure that they’re in good shape. And the resource sector 

should be paying all the dividends that we can muster. 

 

But the whole principle of robbing a Crown corporation like a power corporation, which is the corner-stone of 

this province, or any other province, to take the money and to jeopardize its position internationally and 

financially, and put it into a Crown investment corporation and then have that $50 million in the hole too, and 

year after year take money out of there just to balance the books, is not appreciated by the people of 

Saskatchewan, and that’s why they were upset with it. That’s why they wanted to see it stop. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — One simple question then, Mr. Chairman. Are you . . . Did you take a dividend out of 

Sask Tel? Do you deny that the answer is yes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, we took a dividend out of Sask Tel for one reason. One reason. One 

reason. And the reason is that Sask Power is in such financial difficulty that the other two utilities, without any 

doubt, are forced to contribute to the financial wherewithal of the utilities. 

 

And there’s no alternatives. $104 million plus interest is over $200 million that was taken out of Sask Power, 

put it in terrible position. And the demand for electricity is growing in Saskatchewan because the population is 

growing, and the consumption will be going up, and the forecasts are very large. And we have to be building 

power projects. 

 

So we don’t want to get caught in the situation where we use a utility to tax for nothing else. Think nothing else. 

Not for the project. Not for power. Not for a telephone system. But for whatever the government decided to do, 

as it did in the past. 

 

So you could take this money, for example, out of Sask Power, and you could go and buy farmland with it. I 

don’t believe in that. You could take Sask Power’s money and you could go buy a uranium mine with it — now 

the ones that you want to close. For all I know, the $104 million out of Sask Power went to buy uranium mines 

that now you want to close the whole works. We don’t believe in that. 

 

We have inherited a difficult situation, and we are going to resolve it to the best of our abilities, allowing those 

utilities to work together as best they can to resolve it. And the only reason that we would accept any money 

from Sask Tel, dividend, is to repair the damage in a sister utility that has absolutely been bankrupt by the 

previous administration taking over $104 million plus interest out of it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I find that a remarkable statement, but I want you to tell me why you feel that Sask 

Power was in a difficult position on May 1, 1982. In what did its difficulty consist? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, very briefly, the difficulty is a very high debt/equity ratio, and paying a 

very high debt/equity ratio, having paid dividends of over $104 million which it could not use. So any kind of a 

project that it wants to get into or build, it is out 104 million plus interest. And it had no idea where that money 

went. 

 

And you agreed. In fact, you initiated research on a power project — the Nipawin power project. And yet you 

would take $104 million plus interest out of that corporation, and then decide to put the corporation to build the 

power project. That’s the reason it was in trouble — because it would have had more debt than equity that was 

necessary. 

 

And compared to other public utilities, and other people involved in those kinds of industries, you take $104 

million . . . Even the principle is wrong, but the fact even financially that you’d do that, and not spend the 

money on a utility, is a serious mistake. And that’s why the power corporation’s in trouble. 



 

May 31, 1984 

3271 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, I asked you fairly simply in what the difficulty 

consisted, not your story of how it came about, but what do you say was the trouble with the power corporation 

on May 1, 1982. Is it you’re saying that the debt/equity ratio at that time was too high? Is that what you’re 

saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I’m saying precisely this: the debt/equity ratio was $104 million too high. You had taken 

over $104 million plus interest out of that Crown corporation, and you spent it on whatever you liked to spend it 

on. But it wasn’t on power, it wasn’t on natural gas, and it wasn’t on power projects. The debt/equity ratio, if 

you hadn’t taken that out, would be something like 70:30, as opposed to 86:14, or 86 whatever the difference is. 

 

And that is a significant difference. And people have a right to know: what are we doing with our power bills? 

And you said, well, we are paying dividends with your power bills and we’re going to buy farms with them. Or 

we’re going to go off buying something else. And people said, that isn’t what a utility was set up for. And they 

don’t like that. And I’ll admit they don’t like it. And we’re not going to do it by robbing utilities, just on a 

whim. That money that’s coming in from utilities is going to be based and working on utilities to get them in 

good sound financial shape, because when we received them, they weren’t. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, you did not tell me in what the difficulty consisted, 

other than you said that the debt/equity ratio was higher than it would have been, had the dividends not been 

taken out. That is self-evident. That is self-evident. 

 

But let me tell you this, sir. The policy you are now stating is totally inconsistent with what your colleagues 

stated when they were in opposition. They consistently stated that there should not be a profit in the power 

corporation. They said that over and over and over again. 

 

Now, obviously you cannot reinvest profits if there are no profits. The old policy was to reinvest half the profits. 

The people like the member for Indian Head-Wolseley said over and over again, there should be no profits. 

Therefore, the debt/equity ratio should be 100 per cent debt, and no equity. That was their position, and that is 

the position which now the Premier is decrying. How they change when they cross the floor! 

 

They took a position that there ought not to be profits. They now say, yes, there should be profits, but there 

shouldn’t be dividends. A very, very different position. 

 

Now you, sir, are saying that the debt/equity ratio in April or May of 1982 was too high. I ask you: what target 

are you aiming at, and what progress have you made towards your target? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, we certainly believe that public utilities can generate income. The income 

should be used in the public utility to pay its debts, to build projects, to contribute towards interest — all those 

things. The principle is simply this: not to use the public utility as a source of taxation to go do other things, 

because people don’t like to pay their power bill, to think that the money’s going to go off on something that 

has nothing to do with power. And any place you go in the world, the reason you set up a public utility is to 

make sure people don’t do that. 

 

And, for heaven’s sakes, we must admit that, let’s say, a reasonable NDP-CCF, left-wing government would 

believe in that as a public good. Why would you exploit the people on low income who pay their power bill, 

and take that money and go play with it? That money should be used to provide power cheaper, not more 

expensive. And that’s the point. 



 

May 31, 1984 

3272 

 

Now, you say, what is our objective? Our objective is to put those utilities in a healthy debt/equity ratio position 

and not rob them so that they are in a very vulnerable financial position which may result in higher, higher 

utility rates, to be spent on something that people don’t believe in and certainly isn’t associated with the utility. 

 

Now the debt/equity ratio was high when we got it. We have some power projects to build. So we have to go 

blow the money, because you didn’t leave any money in it. What would you have us do? Not build the power 

project and rely on somebody else that could rob us of millions and millions of dollars? 

 

We decided to build the power project, as you did, but the problem was Sask Power didn’t have the wherewithal 

to do it inside and internally. And there’s nothing wrong with a utility making money, spending it on itself — 

paying debt, paying for projects, paying interest rates — but not on other things, because that isn’t what it was 

set up to do. 

 

And that’s clearly the difference between you and me. You would use that utility to tax people, to go buy 

whatever you liked. The money coming into utilities in Saskatchewan today is going to be used for utilities 

only. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, that’s what the man says but that’s not what the man 

does. He’s just stripped off dividends from Telephones two successive years, and not for telephone expenditure, 

and he’s made that abundantly clear. 

 

So what I ask you again, sir: what debt/equity ratio are you aiming at? You say that it was too high in May. 

Whether or not you admit it, it’s gone up since then, now down. Now what are you aiming at as a desirable 

debt/equity ratio at the end of your four-year term? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, it is our intention to reduce the debt/equity ratio. Clearly. And there’s a 

couple of ways to do that. You can do it through management and to run it as efficiently and effectively as 

possible. And you can do it by not robbing the corporations of dividends to use on other projects. Those two 

things are very significant and those two things are exactly what we’re going to do. 

 

The money that is being used in utilities today is to resolve the situation that we inherited. And the debt/equity 

of Sask Power will be up if we build a power project, because you didn’t leave any money in it. So you can’t go 

trucking around the province saying, “Well, the debt/equity ratio is higher than we got it,” if we’re building 

projects. I wish this had been spent on projects, but it wasn’t. We could have had a quarter of a billion dollars 

worth of projects. You talk about roads in northern Saskatchewan. You could have developed projects for 

northern Saskatchewan, had them paid for. But we don’t know what you did with this money. 

 

You obviously balanced the books. Every year you said, “Well, it’s balanced; it’s balanced,” and you balanced 

the budgets. I mean, this tells me that you’re taking from a public utility to balance the books in the province of 

Saskatchewan. You’ve led people astray for years. They thought that it was balanced by itself. But you set up 

the Crown corporations and you duck in for $20 million, $16 million, $10 million here or there. That’s a lot of 

money. Plus the interest. 

 

All I’m saying, Mr. Chairman, is that we are not going to jeopardize the role or the health of these Crown 

corporations, these utilities, by robbing them to do other things. They will be put on a sound management 

footing. We’re going to have to continue to build public projects. If that means we have some debt, then we’re 

going to have to incur that debt because that’s the way we inherited it. 

 

If those utilities now, one or two are in a healthy position, that money will be used — and you  



 

May 31, 1984 

3273 

 

can mark my words that money will be used — for the strength of those utilities, for those utilities, because one 

particularly is in very serious financial trouble because of, as I quote, “Hundreds of millions of dollars that you 

took from it and we don’t know what you did with it.” 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I take it you will not state what you’re aiming at for a 

debt/equity ratio. 

 

I will make a little wager here that at the time of the next election the debt/equity ratio for the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation will be worse than the day you were sworn in. And I will just issue a little challenge to see 

whether you can improve on that, and my bet is that when four years is gone by with all of the rhetoric — with 

all of the rhetoric — the debt/equity ratio will be worse than it was the day you were sworn in. 

 

You will say it’s because you’re building a power project as if Coronach were not built, as if other power 

projects were not built in the past. Of course they were; of course they were. And debt/equity ratio was 

thoroughly manageable. There’s nothing very bad about an 80:20 debt/equity ratio in a power corporation, 

nothing very bad about that. But my bet is you won’t get to 80:20. My bet is that it will be far worse than that. 

 

And one of the reasons, of course, will be because you will not be following the dictates of the 

recommendations of the Public Utilities Review Commission which says that you should improve the 

debt/equity ratio by putting equity in the power corporation . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Whoever took it out, 

it’s your Public Utilities Review Commission which says . . . 

 

The Public Utilities Review Commission says that you should pony up some money because you are asking the 

power corporation to do things which are not profitable, and you are refusing so to do — you are refusing so to 

do. And you obviously are . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . that’s right — refusing so to do. And we’re all going 

to have higher power rates and higher gas rates as a result of that. So that’s an interesting comment on just 

whether you’re concerned about debt/equity ratios — an interesting comment. 

 

So you, sir, are taking the position that you will not disclose this committee what debt/equity ratio you are 

aiming at for either power or telephones in your four-year term. Is that your position? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I made it very clear that our intention is to improve the financial state of 

the power corporation. We inherited a situation that was a public utility that had been robbed of over $104 

million in 10 years, plus the interest. Mr. Chairman, the hon. member says that we have the Sask Power doing 

things that are not profitable. I mean, I don’t know where this individual, the hon. member gets his . . . where he 

forgot his roots. 

 

What was the whole reason for Sask Power to start with? We bought . . . I mean, for heaven’s sakes, the former 

premier of Saskatchewan, Tommy Douglas brought power to all of rural Saskatchewan. Did he do it because it 

was profitable? Is that what he did? Did he go from town to town and say, well by gosh, we’re gonna make sure 

that this power corporation is profitable and that’s why we’re bringin’ power to Lake Valley, Saskatchewan. 

No, we didn’t do that. He said the people of Saskatchewan need power. And the people of Saskatchewan today 

need natural gas on their farms, and that’s what a public utility should do, is provide natural gas to people all 

across this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — And if there isn’t money in power today to provide Sask Power, and power to places all 

across Saskatchewan, including the North, for natural gas, it’s because the previous administration — and I 

don’t even think that the hon. Tommy Douglas would have done this — the previous administration robbed 

Sask Power of $104 million plus interest. And  



 

May 31, 1984 

3274 

 

now you talk about we can’t provide projects at a profit to the people. 

 

You’ve used Sask Power to tax them and tax them and tax them of at least 104 million plus interest, and you 

didn’t give them a thing. You didn’t give them natural gas. Why didn’t you want to give them a natural gas 

distribution program till the dying hours of the campaign? Why? Why? Because you knew you’d taken $104 

million plus interest which would have darn near paid for the whole program. We’re spending $350 million 

over 10 years. Here’s 200 . . . well doubled, it would be $208 million that you used and they didn’t know what 

for. 

 

And you ask me about the debt/equity ratio. Well you can go from town to town and house to house in the 

province of Saskatchewan from now until doomsday, talking about the debt/equity ratio of Sask Power. We will 

provide natural gas to the people of this province. We will provide electrical power to the people of this 

province. And if we inherited a problem, we will fix the problem. And they will not be fooled or confounded by 

a debt/equity ratio that they say, you’ll say, aha, there’s a project that isn’t profitable. People today want power 

and gas on their farms, and they don’t really care whether the former leader and premier of this province thinks 

that Sask Power is profitable or not. We’ll run it as well as it can be run. Mark my words, we will not rob it to 

spend on other things. And the money coming from utilities today will be used to put utilities in good shape. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, mark my words, you’ve already robbed Sask Power 

. . . Sask Tel, by your definition. You have done exactly what was done in the past by Sask Tel by taking the 

dividends out. And you have taken them out of Sask Tel, and you haven’t had any chance to rob Sask Power 

because they haven’t made a dime since you came to office — not a dime. 

 

And I’m interested in the comments from a member opposite because, you know, when we were pursuing this 

very issue in the power . . . in the Crown Corporations Committee, it was very clear that the position of the 

Progressive Conservative Party was totally inconsistent. 

 

The Premier says that that money should have been left in the power corporation. That’s what he says. If that 

had been done, the profits of the power corporation would have been larger each year than they were. I take it 

that that will be conceded; it’s self-evident. 

 

Each year the Progressive Conservative members of this legislature complained that the profits were already too 

large. The Premier is now saying you should have taken action which would have made them larger. He is 

saying what was totally wrong and totally inconsistent with what his colleagues said in the legislature when 

they were here. And this is such an example of the Conservatives wanting to have it both ways, of wanting to 

say in opposition, there should be no profits; when in government, there should be profits of the power 

corporation, and reinvested. 

 

Whether or not — whatever the Premier’s position of saying that the debt/equity ratio should be lowered by 

retained earnings (that’s his position) is totally inconsistent with the previous position of saying that the 

corporation should be run at a break-even figure, as his colleagues said, year in and year out. 

 

Whether, if we had followed, if anyone had followed the advice of his colleagues, there would have been no 

issue about dividends, there would have been no profits. That was the policy consistently urged and stated. If 

anyone doubts it, let them look at the record. 

 

So I think the Premier, as I say, has redefined the policy of the Progressive Conservative party. I’m interested in 

the redefinition that there’s nothing wrong with profits so long as they’re retained. That’s basically his new 

definition — and that he is going to run these corporations at a substantial profit in order to lower the 

debt/equity ratio. That’s what he told us. That’s what he’s  



 

May 31, 1984 

3275 

 

told us. 

 

Fair enough. We understand the policy. I am amazed to hear that, coming from a party which has consistently 

enunciated quite a different policy — a policy which said that they should be operated at a break-even figure. 

 

But just one question to the Premier. He talked about a deficit in the CIC which, for the sake of the committee, 

is a very different corporation than power and telephones. Let me make that clear. It is an umbrella corporation. 

 

And he said that there was a deficit, a deficit when he came to office. I want to ask him whether that deficit has 

increased or decreased in the two years in which he’s been in office. Will he not admit that the deficit 

complained of, and that he said was the author of his difficulties, is now much higher than it was before? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, with respect to profits and public utilities, my position hasn’t 

changed from last year, and the hon. member and I went through this before. There’s one distinct, clear 

difference between our position and your position, and that hasn’t changed among my colleagues. My 

colleagues, when they’re talking about power making profits and contributing to other things that are going on 

to the province, is not what a utility is set up for. 

 

Let me say very clear: a utility, in our view, should be profitable in that it shouldn’t be a loser, and if it can pay 

for its own projects, and if it can pay for the interest on those projects and maintain a healthy, credible 

reputation, that’s what the utility should do. 

 

Now the opposition says you should take dividends from that utility and do something else with the money, not 

tie it to that utility. We don’t believe that. So that’s where the distinction is, and that’s fair enough. 

 

With respect to the deficit in CIC, I think that, as I quoted, the Crown investments corporation found itself in a 

negative retained earnings position, and yet it provided dividends. In ’78, in ’79, in ’80, and ’81 was the first 

time that it was positive and it had $233,000; and in ’82 again, it was in a negative retained earnings position. 

 

Now the negative retained earnings position is partly because of the fact that CIC had been asked to contribute 

to the government, to general accounts, when it didn’t have the money in there, so we accumulated about $50 

million worth of negative earnings. Now if CIC is in trouble today, it’s the same way as Sask Power — because 

of that. 

 

And the second reason — or international commodity prices like potash that don’t provide the revenue. As the 

hon. member said, they got $168 million at the peak of one year. Well that’s fairly fortunate. You know, I 

would like to be in the same position. So, Mr. Chairman, I will just point out that there is a difference in 

philosophy with respect to utilities, and we’ll agree to disagree. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I asked the Premier whether or not he wouldn’t 

concede that the retained earnings position of CIC was a good deal worse now than it was when he took office, 

and he says there’s a difference of philosophy. That, I think, acknowledges that, in fact, he has run those 

corporations at a massive deficit since he has come to office, and that the deficit continues to rise, 

notwithstanding his rhetoric about how he is going to run them in a business-like way. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, I want to ask about the policy of the government with respect to liquor 

advertising, and whether you have had any cause to review the decision you made with respect to permitting 

liquor advertising? 



 

May 31, 1984 

3276 

 

I won’t go into all of the arguments against liquor advertising. They were done very capably by my colleague, 

the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, in discussing the budget with the member for Meadow Lake, the 

minister in charge of the liquor board, and the liquor licensing commission. My question to you is this: have 

you had any occasion to review your decision to permit electronic advertising of liquor, of beer and wine on 

radio and television in the light of the very large lobby of people who have expressed their opposition to it? 

 

The latest one is: “The United Church urges end to liquor advertising.” A month or so ago it was the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation urging an end to liquor advertising, they seeing the effect it was having on 

school children and young people; the United Church taking the view that it is having a deleterious affect on the 

community. Are you giving consideration to reviewing your decision, and rescinding the order in council which 

permitted the electronic advertising of beer, wine, and spirits - or—beer and wine? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we monitor our programs on an ongoing basis. And as the hon. 

member knows, and I won’t pursue it in any great detail that we have had some representation from people in 

the community asking us why we have changed the law with respect to Saskatchewan people advertising 

Saskatchewan products, like beer. 

 

And we explained to them why we’ve done that. And we very briefly say, Mr. Chairman, Saskatchewan 

produces a great deal of malting barley. Saskatchewan people do that, and it’s quite legal. Saskatchewan 

produces beer, and there are breweries in Saskatchewan, and that’s legal to do that, to produce beer. And it 

means a great many jobs. 

 

Saskatchewan also, all through the NDP administration, received beer ads from the United States into this 

province from Alberta and British Columbia, or pardon me, from Manitoba, because they could come in here 

from satellite. But our barley producers and our breweries, which were making and producing legal products — 

grain is legal, and beer made in the province of Saskatchewan — couldn’t advertise their products. So they’re 

saying Americans can advertise, drink Miller in Saskatchewan, and we are producing and competing but 

Saskatchewan people can’t. 

 

So we said: is it fair that Americans can advertise their agricultural and food products in our province, and we 

go ahead and produce them — and you allowed them to do it. 

 

I believe now that there’s over 70 communities licensed to receive those ads through international airways, 

which you didn’t stop — licensed to advertise all over Saskatchewan. And you say . . . and we said: well, we 

thought Saskatchewan producers and Saskatchewan businessmen and people in the business of producing malt 

and barley, people in the business of producing beer which is legal in the province of Saskatchewan, is sold all 

across Canada, should at least be able to compete with Yankees — at least. 

 

Now if we could stop all advertising so Americans couldn’t advertise their product, that’s a different story. But 

it’s extremely difficult, as the hon. member knows, to stop the satellites. I mean, it’s extremely difficult to do 

that. We’ve got more satellites up there, and people are advertising international things all the time. We live in 

an international world. 

 

So was it fair? And when we respond to people, they agree. Was it fair for Saskatchewan to put the blinkers on 

and say there aren’t beer advertising in Saskatchewan. No, because they’re here. They’re already here, and 

they’re all over the province, and it’s all American, and all Alberta, and all Manitoba, but not Saskatchewan 

products — only foreign products. So was it fair to us to say: well, we can’t advertise Saskatchewan stuff 

because it isn’t here. No, it was here. 

 

And, in fact, in more and more communities, it’s licensed. So as a result of that we said Saskatchewan people 

should have the opportunity to compete in the production of their grains,  



 

May 31, 1984 

3277 

 

in the production of their food products and beverage products, the same as Americans can. 

 

Secondly, the provincial government, the provincial government . . . I believe the former administration had put 

thousands and thousands of dollars into the industry — the Biggar malt plant; think the Biggar malt plant. In 

fact, the government had subsidized it, yet the Government of Saskatchewan wouldn’t allow Saskatchewan 

producers to compete in that market. 

 

Third, we thought it would be time that we had more responsible, aware advertising on television because there 

wasn’t any to speak of. So we said, using this excuse, we would allow Saskatchewan people to participate in 

that market if you make sure that you advertise an aware program, and we’ll tighten the laws — and the 

Minister of Transport and the Minister of Health have done that. Awareness is way up, accidents are down, 

charges are way down, and so forth. So it’s the combination, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It was time we woke up to what was happening internationally because we couldn’t deny the fact that it was 

here already, and, for the reasons I mentioned, we pursued it. We monitored closely. We look at the traffic 

accidents. We look at all the other things with respect to health, and you can have my word we will continue to 

monitor it very closely. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. I don’t think I could have put my case any better than you 

have put it. You have apparently relied upon the fact that some ads were coming in here for American brands on 

cable, cable that is received by a small minority of the people - — minority at least — of the people of 

Saskatchewan. And secondly, the brand is not, in fact, being sold here, unlikely to encourage a great deal of 

selling if you’re advertising Coors, or whatever, but I’ll leave that. 

 

You have stated your position, and I will also leave your last comments, and there are enough people around 

Saskatchewan to recall the old Aware program and the Feelin’ Good program and to compare it with what you 

are doing. And if you think that there wasn’t an Aware program before you came to office or a Feelin’ Good 

program before you came to office, and now there is one — fair enough. That is your position. 

 

But there are a lot of people around Saskatchewan who know better and will judge you for that sort of a 

comment, which is flatly false, and the Premier . . . Well, he may not know it’s false; I shall not say it’s false. 

His statement is flatly false, and it may arise out of error or otherwise. 

 

I want to turn now to the Expo ’86 beer hall, on hold pending liquor law review. Do we propose to . . . Is our 

project at Vancouver on hold because we’re unclear as to whether or not we can serve alcoholic beverages in 

the Saskatchewan pavilion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, I’ll have to take notice. I’m not familiar with the . . . (inaudible) . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — One final, small point. In our discussions yesterday, we — or perhaps an earlier day — 

we were talking about the staff. And I understood the Premier to say that he would let us have a list of his staff 

in approximately the same form as provided last year. And I don’t want it now. I just wanted to be clear that that 

was our understanding. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, you’ll have it. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — I have a few questions of the Premier, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier. In listening to the 

rhetoric of the last few days, I can understand how the public is Saskatchewan is somewhat confused about 

certainly the activities of the government and, no less, the activities of the former . . . opposition. Fortunately, 

we have another alternative in the wings, and that is the Saskatchewan Liberal Party. 

 

And I think that we’ll all agree that the polls do demonstrate, and the premier said earlier in this  



 

May 31, 1984 

3278 

 

debate, that the alternative in Saskatchewan has got to be the Conservative Party. I say the Conservative 

influence in this province has been felt, and I believe that in the next federal election we’re going to find the 

alternative in this province will be changed. It’ll be changed from the NDP and we’ll find a presence, a federal 

presence, a federal Liberal presence, in this province. 

 

Unfortunately, I didn’t have an opportunity to rebut the Premier’s statement, but he certainly did indicate that 

the polls do reflect on political movements, whether they be in Saskatchewan or whether they be in Canada, or 

wherever they may be, indicating that the plight of the NDP was not a pleasant plight. They are down 

drastically in the polls. But I would say to the Premier that the plight, even of the provincial Conservatives, is 

not an easy plight to deal with. We’ll get back to that later in the debate. 

 

I hope that my intervention will not delay the committee. I have a few questions of the staff of the premier, and 

I believe that I would like to start out by suggesting the Premier does have one of the largest staffs in Canada to, 

in fact, bring together the information required — at least perceived to be required — to deal with people like 

myself, of course, and the rest of the province. He has approximately 100 people on his staff. 

 

Last year at this time, I would just like to say, that Mr. Leddy, no longer with us, recently fired by the Premier, 

was sitting in the seat of Mr. Smith-Windsor who is now presently the acting deputy minister. I would ask the 

Premier: how long do you expect that Mr. Smith-Windsor will be your acting deputy minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — As long as I see fit. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — Well, I can understand that. When you, in fact, decide that you will appoint a deputy 

minister, will you in fact . . . Will you advertise the job? Will you call for . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I may or may not, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — Very interesting, Mr. Premier. As Mr. Smith-Windsor is the acting head of your staff I would 

ask you: does Mr. Dave Tkachuk report to Mr. Smith-Windsor? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — The assistant deputy minister of my office is in charge of virtually everything that goes 

on in the Executive Council, and people do report through him, which includes intergovernmental affairs, and 

I’m sure, Mr. Chairman, people are aware of the fact that in this administration, governmental affairs moved 

into Executive Council, and the previous administration it was in various other places. That is largely 

responsible for some increase in Executive Council. And in fact, the size of both of them has declined. So if we 

look at the size of the administration, obviously 3,000 people smaller than the previous administration, but even 

in terms of Executive Council, it’s smaller because we now include governmental affairs. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — Well, I don’t think the debate was the size of your staff or the size of the government staff. I 

think the people of Saskatchewan can see that the effect of government under the administration of the 

Progressive Conservatives hasn’t really dropped. The number of departments, I don’t believe, has been reduced, 

just the employment in those departments has been pared so that people within the departments, working for the 

departments, have to work a little harder. 

 

I would like to clarify the point just asked. You mentioned that Mr. Tkachuk reports to Mr. Smith-Windsor. I 

would ask you at this time: is there any part time activity on behalf of Mr. Tkachuk with respect to personnel? Is 

he paid a fee for attracting personnel into the Progressive Conservative fold? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — No. 



 

May 31, 1984 

3279 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — Well, you’ve certainly had other part time employees on your staff, Mr. Premier. As I 

mentioned earlier, recently fired Mr. Leddy. Moving along to another member of your staff sitting just to your 

left and over your shoulder, Mrs. Crosthwaite, who in fact is the present executive clerk to the Executive 

Council. I would just ask the Premier what basically Mrs. Crosthwaite has with respect to qualifications to hold 

that position. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, she is obviously a very talented woman. She has a B.A., an M.A. 

She has international experience. She’s got experience in research, and she’s very bright, and I might add, Mr. 

Chairman, she’s loyal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — I think the primary reason for her position is her loyalty, no doubt, Mr. Premier. You brought 

her in at great expense to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan from Argentina, along with her husband, who I believe 

as a couple, probably qualify as the highest paid married couple within your Executive Council and likely 

within the public service of Saskatchewan. Would that be fair to say, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, we in this administration are extremely proud of the women that we have 

working with us in this administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — And it is beyond me why any member, independent or otherwise, would pick on 

well-qualified, talented, young Canadian women working in the public service, when in fact it is our desire and 

most Canadians’ desire, to have more women working in the public service. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — And it is clearly a reflection of the misguided direction of the member that’s asking the 

question. I mean, the most popular thing that you can do in Canada today with respect to government 

employment service is to have professional women employed, and the member opposite is picking on t hem. 

And he knows that she is very well-qualified, both provincially, federally, internationally, and in education, and 

has a great deal of professional integrity. And that’s precisely what we want in the public service, and that’s 

precisely what we have here in the province of Saskatchewan from the cabinet minister down . . . or the cabinet 

down. 

 

So I am only too glad to see her come home to Saskatchewan to be employed in the provincial government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — I don’t think I intended, at any point in this debate, to in fact criticize the hiring of women 

within the public service. 

 

What was the cost to the public in Saskatchewan to bring Mrs. Crosthwaite from Argentina, or the cost to bring 

her husband or both of them back to Saskatchewan after two years of political experience within your 

government, prior to her returning after the provincial election to be appointed to your political staff? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, it didn’t cost the provincial government anything. It was virtually zero to 

bring them back. We didn’t pay any transportation bills. We didn’t pay any moving bills at all. 



 

May 31, 1984 

3280 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — Well, I can appreciate, I can appreciate your answer. What does virtually no expense mean, 
Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, that means the federal government paid for it. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Well, compliments to the federal government. How is it that the federal government paid for 
the return of Mrs. Crosthwaite and her husband to Saskatchewan to serve the employ of Mr. Premier and his 
Executive Council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, as I understand the federal policy, Regina was their 
permanent place of residence in their international movements, and they brought them back to their permanent 
place of residence, and they paid for it. So we were happy to acknowledge that, and it cost us, as a result, 
virtually nothing. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — So that both Mr. And Mrs. Crosthwaite came back to serve the Executive Council of this 
government at the cost of the federal treasury which, of course, is the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, as well as 
others. Did you request that they come back to serve you? And I can understand that the reason her loyalty was 
so assured is that she did serve as a political adviser to your caucus for two years prior to returning to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Is there any other couple within the service, within the public service that are paid as highly as this couple, Mr. 
Chairman? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t know why the hon. member wants to pick on couples, 
married folks, or women professionals. I mean it doesn’t . . . I don’t think the people of Saskatchewan have ever 
been anti-families, or anti-married folks, whether they worked at the Co-op or whether they worked in 
government or wherever they worked. I mean it’s just . . . I’m not quite sure where the hon. member is coming 
from in terms of picking on women — picking on women. 
 
There are people, there are married couples working in the Saskatchewan Government, in the Alberta 
Government, in the Manitoba . . . as far as I know, in all governments. And there are couples as high as the 
deputy minister level. I believe Mr. Ken Fyke, the deputy minister of health, and his wife both work for the 
Government of Saskatchewan, and they have been here for some time. I would venture to say at one time I 
worked for Mrs. Beryl Plumptre in Ottawa, and I’m not so sure her husband didn’t work for the federal 
government at the same time. I may be mistaken there, but certainly there have been couples that worked at the 
same time all across Canada. 
 
And what’s wrong with men and women working in government, and it happens to be a couple, if one is the 
deputy minister of that and one works for Executive Council? Why would the Liberal representative or the 
Liberal Party or Liberal anything, or anybody else for that matter, want to pick on women? I don’t understand 
that, Mr. Chairman. It just doesn’t make any sense. 
 
We are proud of women in cabinet. We are proud of women working in Executive Council. We are proud of 
wives working in the province of Saskatchewan. We are proud of couples working. We are proud of our 
children. We don’t like to pick on anybody. And a particular member of the legislature that would go to the 
trouble of picking on women — young, professional women — is beyond my comprehension, and I just frankly 
don’t understand it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Well, I can understand, Mr. Premier, you don’t know the direction that I am undertaking. I 
don’t think you know the direction that I am undertaking. I don’t think you know the direction of most of your 
government, and certainly it would do you well if you’d get to know a few of them and find out what the 
direction of your  



 

May 31, 1984 

3281 

 

government should be. I have never, ever qualified or, in fact, criticized your government or any other 

government for hiring women staff members. Never, ever, ever! I didn’t criticize it. I simply asked a question. 

Was she hired as a political assistant? And at what salary was she hired? And on what conditions was she 

moved into Saskatchewan? That is not criticizing; that is not, Mr. Premier, criticizing the hiring of women! 

 

In fact, if you go back in history, you’ll find that the Liberal government in Ottawa has members of cabinet long 

before you did. If you go further back, you’ll find that the Conservative government in this province go back to 

1930 and served one term. And with an attitude you have for individuals like myself and other individuals all 

the way across this province, you’ll find that the next term of this government will only be one term. 

 

But getting back to Mrs. Crosthwaite’s salary. How much does she earn, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, getting back to the issue of women working in government. Mr. 

Chairman, Mr. Chairman . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order! Order! The members from Regina North West asked a question. Allow 

the Premier to answer it . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Order! The Premier has the floor. Mr. Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, we re very proud of the tradition that we have in our political party with 

respect to women. The hon. member raises it. I believe the first woman in the history of Canada to be a member 

of . . . to be in the cabinet, nationally, was under John Diefenbaker. I believe that’s the case. And that’s a 

tremendously valuable historic fact, that women have, in our political party, always ranked with men equally 

when it comes to the political and democratic process. 

 

And it’s exactly the same in the province of Saskatchewan. The first women in the history of our province to be 

in cabinet came in April of 1982 — the first women ever to be elected and in cabinet in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Now that’s both a record federally and it’s a record provincially. Progressive Conservative 

nationally, Progressive Conservative provincially, and that’s exactly what we’re going to do in the future. And 

we’re very proud of it. 

 

Now, with respect to public employees, we’re very proud of women that are also public employees, and there 

will be more. And we certainly have more women in our caucus than you do in yours. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the salary of Mrs. Crosthwaite is $4,800 a month. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — I realize her husband doesn’t work in your department, sir, but would you have the 

information on his salary? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know the answer to that. But obviously it will be in Public 

Accounts, and we’ll get it. But let me just respond. My response is this. What is the hon. member trying to do 

with a female employee in the administration? Why is an individual of the legislature picking on a female 

employee in the Government of Saskatchewan? And the opposition is joining in. Why are they picking on a 

female member of the public service in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

You know what they do? They say, ah, but let’s find out the salary of her husband, as if that’s going to cast an 

aspersion on this individual . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Well, that’s exactly what you’ve asked for. The 

individual asked for the salary of the husband . . . He didn’t even give the position. He just said the husband of 

the female employee. Do you want to know the salaries of every one of the wives . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Well, that’s exactly the question. Right? Why do you want to pick on women? 



 

May 31, 1984 

3282 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, why does the opposition want to pick on . . . Why do they join together to pick on a female 

employee? Quit picking on employees. I believe, Mr. Chairman, it’s pretty darned low when a member of the 

legislature picks on a female employee to publicly embarrass her, when we are trying to provide more 

opportunities for women, and then to ask, to publicly ask what her husband’s salary is just to embarrass a 

female employee. I think that’s one of the lowest questions I’ve heard in this legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — Well, I’m not certainly criticizing a married couple or I’m not questioning the gender of the 

individuals involved. She works for Executive Council in a very highly paid position. All I was asking was her 

salary. I would also like to know whether she drives a luxury automobile on behalf of the government. I would 

also like to know the details of the expense account of this particular individual, and whether or not she has 

credit cards. And I’m not using her as any . . .with respect to gender, I could really care less. 

 

But I would like to say that recently a cabinet minister was definitely fingered by Southam News as having 

abused some of the privileges of the Executive Council and the cabinet. While he paid the moneys back, it was 

outlined that he had abused that privilege. 

 

I would like to establish, not only with respect to this individual but possibly with respect to all individuals in 

your Executive Council, exactly what their salaries are, whether they drive company cars, or whether they drive 

Executive Council cars, or whether they drive government cars, and just how lavish their expense accounts are. 

And how many credit cards do they have, to, in fact, entertain the whims of the members of Executive Council 

and cabinet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I will respond to the individual member with respect to the specific 

questions, but let me add: I think it is one of the lowest form of questions I have heard to pick on a female 

employee, to pick on a female employee. If the hon. member, Mr. Chairman, if the hon. member wants to stay 

here for the next two days or three days picking on women that will be his choice. 

 

But let me say, Mr. Chairman, we are extremely proud of the women that are working. We believe that women 

should have opportunities in the work-force, even if the hon. member as he’s always said, and he’s said for 

years and I know it well and everybody else does, that he thinks the women’s place is in the home and that’s it. 

Even if he believes that. And it will be reflected in the kinds of questions that he will ask here, and maybe he’ll 

ask for the next three days. 

 

But I want to say that we firmly believe that women should be in cabinet. We firmly believe women should be 

in Executive Council. We firmly believe that women should have full opportunities right across the entire 

work-force, whether he does or not. And we will stand fastly, protect that, and develop that and work at that. 

 

With respect to allowances, Mrs. Crosthwaite has the same expenses and expense account as all other civil 

servants get in her position whether they’re men or women. She is treated exactly the same. She doesn’t have a 

car. She has some car allowance. With respect to civil servants’ expense accounts, she has the same thing as 

other civil servants get whether they’re male or female. She doesn’t have credit cards, but in her position, if she 

has to entertain individuals that come in from Intergovernmental Affairs or the Chinese delegation or others, she 

is entitled to expenses the same as any other employee in the Government of Saskatchewan. She is treated no 

better, no worse, but she is a woman, and she’s given equal treatment and equal opportunity and we’re proud of 

it. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — Just for the record, I somewhat question the judgement of the Premier with respect to my line 

of questioning. I certainly am as proud as you are about any women working  



 

May 31, 1984 

3283 

 

in our work-force who have the ability and certainly the drive and enthusiasm to attain the position that Mrs. 
Crosthwaite has. That wasn’t the line of question that I endeavoured. I have no doubt that women all over this 
country have a deserving place in government and in industry and everywhere else, and I think you’ve 
somewhat misquoted me, Mr. Premier, by suggesting that I would say anywhere, anytime that women’s place is 
in the home and nowhere else. I think I should, in fact, on a point of order demand that you retract that 
statement because I certainly do not support it. I’ll let it go. I’ll get it go because it’s on the record. It’s on the 
record that I don’t support it. 
 
I just feel that the judgement of the premier on the integrity of my line of questioning is somewhat questionable, 
and it upsets me that he would direct and use a woman on his staff who is very capable, to come back at a 
member, to come back at a member of the Liberal Party and accuse him of attacking that individual. I requested, 
and all I requested, was information. I did not ask for a personal condemnation of what I think of women on 
your staff or women elsewhere in Canada working for government staff. I qualified that early. I said that I agree 
women have a rightful place in government and a rightful place in industry, and they are suddenly attaining that 
rightful place. Most other premiers in this country, in fact, employ women as part of a secretariat within their 
own staff to draw on ideas from other women. I’m not so certain that Mr. Devine shouldn’t have somebody in 
that position on his own staff. 
 
Basically, I think you’ve answered the questions that I asked relative to salary and relevant to other pertinent 
information. I know that the government thinks this is one big joke. I see Embury back there . . . I’m sorry to 
name him so explicitly, but I see him back there. It’s the first time I’ve noticed in this Assembly in the last few 
days that the man’s even been awake. So, you know, I’ve certainly improved the index of interest in the 
Assembly, if nothing else. I had absolutely, absolutely no intention to draw on the comparison that the Premier 
just voiced, and that is, my opinion of women. 
 
Going back to Mr. Smith-Windsor for a moment, I would just ask the Premier: what does Mr. Smith-Windsor 
run? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I will offer the independent member the same courtesy as the Leader of 
the Opposition. I will send him the whole list of people that are employed and their salaries, the same as I did 
last year. If he wants to go through them one to one, I’ll just say I’ll send them to him. In this case I’ll respond: 
6,024 per month. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Just moving along. Mr. Premier, you have two executive assistants. One is Mr. Craig Dutton; 
the other is Mr. John McKenzie. I would just ask you now what the salary that Mr. Craig Dutton earns and what 
the salary of Mr. John McKenzie is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I said to the hon. member I’ll send him the whole works, everything, the 
same as I send the Leader of the Opposition, which is the same as I did last year. It seems to me a little bit of a 
waste of time to go through every single, solitary member of either Executive Council or other departments. So 
we will send them over. You can have them all and you can have them at your disposal. You can publish them 
if you like. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I would prefer, Mr. Premier, that you give me these figures in the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I think they’re on three sheets here. We’ll Xerox it immediately and we’ll 
just give the whole works to the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — What are the responsibilities of your executive assistant, Mr. Craig Dutton? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Dutton primarily is an assistant to me with respect to two things: one, 
keeping track of social and economic conditions that are going on in the province and in particularly, the 
south-east part of the province, because that’s where my riding 



 

May 31, 1984 

3284 

 

 is. As you know, I have a few more responsibilities than the average MLA, so Mr. Dutton helps identify things 
that I should be aware of there on a daily basis and helps me deal with it. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — And what are the responsibilities of Mr. John McKenzie? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — My office receives a great deal of requests — a large number of requests — particularly 
by telephone. And so many of the issues — and I would say that sometimes there are literally hundreds a day, 
the telephone calls on specific things — Mr. McKenzie deals with those on an ongoing basis. And he will 
deflect them or direct them to departments. He will take those to me that he thinks that I need to handle. He will 
take them to the ministers that he thinks they need to handle. Mr. McKenzie also accompanies me when I go 
various places around the province. If I need this or I need that, he’s there. He will also assist me when we’re 
driving to Weyburn to a function and back again. 
 
So he’s generally on the communications side — incoming requests. He deals with them on the telephone. He’ll 
allocate them out and then he, again, is assisting me wherever I go. And if I need somebody to get me 
information, make some calls, and so forth, he’s my sidekick. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Do these two gentlemen earn the same salary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Evidently they don’t. I will send it to you in a matter of minutes. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — So, in fact, Mr. McKenzie, would he earn more than Mr. Dutton, or would Mr. Dutton earn 
more than Mr. McKenzie? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll send them over to the hon. member and I’ll send one to the Leader of 
the Opposition. It’s the same thing, and then he can look at them himself. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — What are the qualifications of these gentlemen: Mr. McKenzie, first and Mr. Dutton, second? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Dutton has a B.A. in political science and economics. He has three 
years administrative experience in business and management consulting. And he’s obviously involved in his 
own family operation in the energy business. 
 
Mr. McKenzie has 14 years experience in family and corporate business, and a considerable amount of skill in 
public relations, as he was involved in the entertainment business and so forth. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Where did Mr. McKenzie attain his degree? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. McKenzie didn’t get a degree. If you’re asking about where Mr. Dutton got his 
degree, the one I just mentioned, in economics and political science, I believe it was in . . . Well, maybe I’m 
mistaken, I think it was Brandon. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I see that Mr. McKenzie earns more than Mr. Dutton. Is there any reason for this inequity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. McKenzie has a few years experience on Mr. Dutton, and experience, 
as we know, for normal situations does provide for a certain degree of education and, as a result, it’s worth 
something. So, with 14 years of experience in business and public relations, and so forth, given the age 
difference and so forth, it’s a very natural difference. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Very natural progression. Where was Mr. McKenzie prior to his employ with the provincial 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Just prior to the election he was working for me as leader of the  



 

May 31, 1984 

3285 

 

opposition, or Leader of the Progressive Conservative party, and prior to that, he was in business. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — I see that he earns approximately 3,300 a month. Does that also include a car and an expense 

account? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, it does not include a car. It would include the normal expense account, 

expenses that he would receive working with me if we have to pay for expenses, and he is normally the one that 

pays for it for me. I will use my credit card; he will normally use it to pay hotels, and so forth, but he doesn’t 

have a credit card himself, or a government card. He helps me handle my travelling and expense account. So he 

would have the same normal expense accounts as any other public employee. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — Do either of these gentlemen have any previous experience in government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure, but I don’t believe that they do. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — Moving along to Mr. Greg Fyffe, assistant principal secretary to the Premier. I have his 

salary, Mr. Premier. Could you please outline his daily activities as far as a member in your employ? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Greg Fyffe, Mr. Chairman, because of his experience, and I would just point, has a 

B.A. and M.A. in politics and 11 years experience in legislative programming, is correspondingly responsible 

for . . . Well, he’s secretary of the legislative review committee. He monitors the Legislative Assembly on 

House procedures. He will attend things like constitutional conferences on House procedure. He supervises the 

correspondence unit in Executive Council, and he provides me with personal advice on the operations of the 

House, on regulations, on the design of legislation, and the review of legislative possibilities. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — I see his salary is $5,222 a month. I realize his responsibilities are heavy. Could you please 

tell me where he was employed prior to coming to Regina? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — In the House of Commons, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — But he relocated to Regina. Was there relocation expenses involved with Mr. Fyffe’s move, 

or was he moved here by the national government as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — He was relocated at the provincial government’s expense. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — What would the cost of a relocation like that be approximately, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Approximately $7,700. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — Does Mr. Fyffe have an assistant? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — He has a secretary, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — So he doesn’t have an executive assistant per se that works in his office or works for him? He 

only has a secretary? Is that right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — That’s right. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — Last year, when you were out of the country, Mr. Premier, Mr. Fyffe raised his salary, along 

with several others, of course, in Executive Council. Did he do that with your knowledge? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, let me make one thing very clear, nobody raises their own  



 

May 31, 1984 

3286 

 

salary. So I don’t think it’s fair for the member to be suggesting that to the public, or to the Assembly, that 
public employees just holus-bolus raise their own salary. In the case of Executive Council, the salary would be 
increased if we passed an order in council. If an order in council was passed with respect to salaries, I’d be 
aware of it and we are checking to find out what it might have been in terms of a level, if there was one, when I 
wasn’t here in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I’ll just move along to Ms. Marge Haddad. Is she a member of your staff, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — What are her responsibilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Itinerary co-ordinator, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I don’t see her listed on — I see that her salary is $27,085. What would her responsibilities 
include as itinerary co-ordinator? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Receiving and co-ordinating invitations that are delivered to me personally. Then it’s 
reviewed by committee. Recommendations are then suggested. Ms. Haddad brings them to me. I decide which 
ones I’m going to pick up on and do, given the recommendations of the tour committee, and she goes back and 
puts it all into place, and keeps my calendar from being overlapped or double booked, or whatever. 
Co-ordination of itinerary. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — And what are Ms. Haddad’s qualifications? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t have her educational experience before me, but prior to April of 
’82, she was working in the private sector. Prior to that she had been a secretary working in the Legislative 
Building, and prior to that I’m just not sure. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Would that be a secretary’s salary that she earns, or is that a special qualification? Is that a 
secretarial salary that she earns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — No, that isn’t a secretarial salary, it’s a ministerial assistant’s salary, because she does 
much more than the normal secretary. She has to actually manage, make some decisions with respect to the 
Premier’s time. So it’s a ministerial assistant’s salary, as opposed to a secretary’s salary. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I can certainly take that as an answer. I suppose that the allocation to a single, independent 
member is something like $28 a day. And she certainly looks after my itinerary. She certainly looks after my 
time. I don’t have any other staff. She also does all my research. I just compare that to $2,735 a month and say 
that, you know, I think that whether she’s qualified or whether she isn’t, I realize she has political connections 
with the Conservative Party. I would say that unless she has other pressing staff needs, that possibly she should 
be reallocated to the secretarial pool and possibly $2,700 a month is a little less than most secretaries would 
earn for the same kind of involvement. 
 
I would like to move to Miss Bonnie Holbird, who, as well, is a ministerial assistant, earning $3,435 a month. I 
would ask what her responsibilities are, and whether she has a government car, and also whether she has an 
expense account. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, let’s make one thing very clear, Mr. Chairman, so the hon. member can 
stand up and talk about it across the province. Earlier, I said he was picking on a female employee in the 
province of Saskatchewan, in the public service. And just now he says — he starts on another one — Mrs. 
Haddad. And he says, here’s a public employee that is doing the job of co-ordinating the Premier’s itinerary, 
and he said her salary should be reduced; she should 



 

May 31, 1984 

3287 

 

 be confined to a secretary’s salary. 

 

Women all across this province, and all across Canada, want equal opportunities and equal pay for equal work. 

What does this independent member from Lord knows where say: that the salary should be reduced and 

confined to that of a secretary? She is in a management position, and again he’s picking on women. And then he 

goes on to pick on Miss Bonnie Holbird, and he’ll probably say the same thing — the same thing. He’ll say, 

“Why can’t we pay women less?” Or, if a woman’s husband is employed in government, why should that be the 

case? 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, I will defend the women in government employees service all across this province — in 

my office, in other offices, in the private sector — no matter where they are. And I think that the hon. member 

might know that the Premier of the province might get more requests for public speaking than the member 

opposite, who says that his secretary might be able to handle his. He may not need one at all, given the requests 

that he has to speak — maybe not any. 

 

Let me just make it clear, Mr. Chairman. Let’s make it very, very clear what the hon. member is doing. He said 

in this House that a public employee of the Government of Saskatchewan, who is a woman, should have her 

salary reduced to that of a secretary, because she’s a woman. And that will go on record all across this province 

and, indeed, all across the country, and I’m sure the hon. member’s leader is very proud of it. 

 

With respect to Miss Holbird, she organizes and co-ordinates over 400 pieces of mail that come in . . . How 

often? Every month, and she co-ordinates the correspondence to that. And she has the same sort of expense 

allowance as other public employees, be they male or female, and no, she should not have her salary reduced to 

that of a secretary because she is a ministerial assistant and is in a management position. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: Well I can appreciate again the Premier’s insolence with respect to a reasonable question. I think, 

initially, I compared a secretarial staff that he’s allocated with an independent Liberal member, which doesn’t 

quite reach 500 a month, with somebody working in his own office for eight hours a day, who presently, 

whether she’s female or male — and I don’t really care which, Mr. Premier, whether you’re paying a salary, 

you’re paying for a service delivered, and you’re paying her $3,500 a month. 

 

And maybe your position dictates that yes, your personal secretary who looks after one small part of your daily 

business — your itinerary — maybe your personal secretary should earn $3,000 a month more than mine. I say 

that maybe she shouldn’t, and maybe that you should upgrade the services that you allocate an independent 

member in this House to at least allow them, to at least allow them to function — to function reasonably, to 

function reasonably, and I did not implicate at any time that I was attacking women again. 

 

I think your judgement is somewhat in error, and I think that on many matters, in fact, in estimates over the last 

three days, it’s been well demonstrated your judgement is in error, not only with respect to the bill that the 

public has to pay for 100 employees who work in your Executive Council, but also on many other matters . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . It’s a good thing I’ve driven Blakeney right out of the House. 

 

Miss Holbird is earning $3,435, and I’m not saying she’s not earning that. I’m not saying she’s not earning it 

and I’m not saying she doesn’t deserve it. All I asked you, Mr. Premier, is: what are her qualifications to serve 

in that position? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, Miss Holbird has nine years of non-government experience as an 

executive secretary and office manager. So with the kind of experience that she has, she’s more than well 

qualified for it. 



 

May 31, 1984 

3288 

 

Just to help put the hon. member’s questions in perspective. With respect to his attitude about people and about 

women, and a man that is evidently seeking the leadership of the Liberal Party says this, and this is the kind of 

attitude, this is the kind of attitude, and I’m quote The Globe and Mail, May 30th. This must be where you’re 

coming from. Mr. Whelan says: 

 

A man should always wear a hat. No easier way to catch a cold in winter than to go bareheaded. And in 

summer, the sun’ll roast your brains if you don’t wear a hat. (Yes, this is Mr. Whelan.) And that’s one 

reason they have low IQs in Africa. 

 

Mr. Chairman, that’s indicative of the kind of attitude the member has about not only women in the public 

service, not only women in the private sector, but any individual. He has no more respect for individual rights or 

individual integrity, human worth. And this is an individual in that party that'’ seeking the leadership of the 

nation. This is going to be the leader for all of Canada, and he says, “. . . that’s one reason they have low IQs in 

Africa. They don’t wear hats.” 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, if that’s a reflection of the attitude of the hon. Member’s questions about women that we 

have employed, about women that I have employed in Executive Council, or women employed all across this 

province, then it’s a sad day for the Liberal Party of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — There’s an old saying that any fool can criticize, condemn . . . And I think that most do, and I 

think, Mr. Premier, you’ve certainly qualified very, very effectively with the last statement. I don’t have any 

idea what the IQs are in Africa, and I don’t know where you’re quoting from. You mention The Globe and 

Mail, but I don’t know what it has to do with the qualifications of one Bonnie Holbird with respect to the salary 

she draws down as your employee. I’m not criticizing women. I’m just questioning the qualifications. 

 

I see Mr. Craig Dutton as well qualified as an executive assistant, and that’s what he is. Mrs. Bonnie Holbird is 

also a ministerial assistant. She earns $300 more than Mr. Craig Dutton, who has a well-qualified university 

degree and also other qualified experience. I just ask, for the record, what her qualifications are. I think that’s 

very simple. I know that she worked with the Conservative Party over many years, and I don’t doubt that she 

served the Conservative Party very well. I just asked: what is her background, and what are her qualifications? 

And I think education and service, not only to the Progressive Conservative Party, but outside the party, I think 

they’re important as well. And when you’re paying somebody $3,435 out of the public purse, I think an 

explanation is only just. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I again, have to say that I resent the hon. member saying that people 

without a university degree can’t be productive and can’t hold managerial positions. I resent that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — We have women employed in the public service in Saskatchewan, all across this province 

in the private sector, and in Executive Council that do not have a university degree. And that doesn’t mean, as 

the hon. member suggests, that they should be confined to being janitors or even secretaries or anything else. 

They can go to the very top, the very top of this government or our political party and, obviously, they do — 

they’re in cabinet. And they don’t necessarily have to have a degree in anything. And for the hon. member to 

say that individuals should not be working in the Executive Council with managerial capacity, because they 

don’t have a university degree, is a shame and a sham. 

 

And the reason that I read this from The Globe and Mail as an indication and reflection of how you and your 

colleagues feel about human dignity. You don’t know what it means. And you’ve asked me questions now for 

over an hour that have been nothing but to disgrace women from  



 

May 31, 1984 

3289 

 

one end of this province to the other, saying they don’t have enough education for a job; they’re paid too much 

in managerial positions, and all you want is more money for yourself. That’s all you want. 

 

You said well, why can’t you get more money? Well, first of all the Board of Internal Economy for this entire 

legislature decides what you and your secretary gets. It isn’t me, and you know that. But you just want more 

money for yourself, and you are willing to pick on any single, solitary, female and government employees all 

over the place. It’s a shame, you should be sent home and apologize. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — The Premier seeks to get down into the mud on this issue, and I’m trying to keep it on a 

plane. I don’t think that asking for qualifications relates anything to whether you’ve got a university degree or 

not. There are several employees, there are tens of employees working for your Executive Council where there 

is political appointees. And I’m not questioning whether or not they’re women or whether they’re men. I’m just 

saying, are they earning a fair salary. 

 

You just criticized janitors and people at the bottom of the scale, and that’s exactly where you are, Mr. Premier. 

You represent big business in this province. How can you, as a businessman, a Premier, who represents that part 

of the scale, even identify with them? You go out to a bowling banquet, and you’re in your best tuxedo. You 

don’t know where the people of this province are. You don’t talk to them. You don’t talk to the back-benchers 

in your caucus, and you criticize me. 

 

You say that I don’t have the integrity that I should have as a member of this House, and that I don’t respect 

women in a fashion that I should respect them. And that is absolutely balderdash, because that wasn’t the 

question. That didn’t relate to the question, and I want an answer to the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I gave the qualifications of Miss Bonnie Holbird. I said she had nine years 

of . . . five at professional, secretarial and executive experience as a secretary. And all I wanted to reflect is that 

everybody knows in this legislature that the most right-wing individual in the entire legislature is sitting there as 

an independent member — the most right-wing. And he is an individual that would endorse this kind of thing, 

that would say, women shouldn’t get paid the same amount. The place for the women is in the home, etc., etc., 

etc. 

 

And he is the kind of individual who said that women now that are being paid X amount of money to be 

managers should have their salaries cut. Well clearly, Mr. Chairman, the government members on this side of 

the House, and the government members on all sides of the House, are in mainstream Saskatchewan. We have 

support from the middle, we have support from the left, we have support from the right, we have support from 

women all across this province, because we understand real families, real people, and the integrity and the 

dignity of individuals, including all of the women that are employed and will be employed in the province of 

Saskatchewan, including Bonnie Holbird, who happens to work in a managerial position, and she doesn’t have a 

university degree, and we are proud as punch of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — I don’t know what qualifies you, Mr. Premier, to suggest that I’m the most right-wing 

individual in this House. In my term as a Conservative, you only spoke to me twice, and that certainly wasn’t on 

the basis of any philosophy. I can tell you that I had to . . . your personal secretary, not only was she very rude 

when I tried to make an appointment with you, but she turned me off on several occasions. And she’s been rude 

to the public. I have been told that this lady has been rude to other people who have tried to get through to your 

office . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Your office is not . . . the doors to your office aren’t open, Mr. Premier. 

 

And how would you know that I’m a right-winger, if I in fact am. I believe in small business. I  



 

May 31, 1984 

3290 

 

believe in Medicare. I believe in things that are small-L liberal, Mr. Premier. Now how can you quality that I 

am a right-wing individual of any philosophical nature? 

 

I would like an answer to that, or I’d like you to withdraw it from the record. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, again I rest my case. What does he say? Women are rude. Right? Women 

in the public service are rude to this poor little MLA. Mr. Chairman, we respect and we are so proud of the 

women that we have working for us, and he wants to reduce their salaries. He wants to embarrass them. He now 

says that they are rude. I mean, how many quotes do we have to have? We can publish this all across Canada. 

This is his attitude towards women in the public service, or women in private life, and women generally. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we know, we know that the most right-wing radical individual in the legislature is sitting as an 

independent. The whole province knows, and if anybody has been watching television, or reads Hansard, now 

they’ll know why that individual and where he’s coming from — why he sits so well with Mr. Whelan who is 

running, who criticizes the I.Q. of an entire continent. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I just say that I will defend women in the province of Saskatchewan and across the country, and 

in the public service, whether they have degrees or no degrees. I don’t condone saying that they are rude. I don’t 

condone saying that they are not qualified. I don’t condone lowering their salaries — in fact, the very opposite. 

 

They are great in terms of hospitality. They reflect and represent this government well. Some of the best 

representation we have in cabinet are women, in the public service are women. And I know the hon. member 

doesn’t believe that, and he doesn’t believe in equal rights for women, but I do and we will stick with it as long 

as we’re government, and we’ll be here a long time, given that. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Devine, your personal staff, your personal staff . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order. The member from Regina North West should refer to members of the 

legislature by their cabinet post, or by their constituency. The member for Regina North West. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Premier, your personal staff that are, in fact, lined up at the back of the legislature today, 

are on record, are on record as having criticized the ambitions of women in this province and all over Canada, 

indicting that . . . there are studies indicating that their only aspirations are to watch soap movies. I see one of 

them in the back of the hall today, Mr. Dave Tkachuk. You responded to that very poorly in question period one 

day, Mr. Premier. 

 

I have certainly not indicated today in any way, shape, or form, that I have anything but the most appreciative 

and absolutely the most respect for women of any member in this legislature, including yourself. 

 

I have just raised some questions with respect to your personal staff. I don’t think any staff of the Premier or of 

Executive Council should be covered because of their gender. I think the involvement of this staff should be 

open to the public. What we pay them and what they’re qualified to do should be open to the public. 

 

I suppose I can go back to Mr. Smith-Windsor, the gentleman to your right who is presently giving you 

information on, and you’re going to come back at me. He’s paid 80,000 a year. You’ve got other staff in here 

that are all over 60,000, I’m sure. There’s eight or 10 of them. 

 

One member rises and asks a couple of questions on the female staff of the Premier, also on the male staff of the 

Premier, and you come down on him only because he asks a question. And you  



 

May 31, 1984 

3291 

 

try to relate to it as being a very defamatory question relating to gender and not to specific responsibility. 

 

Well, I say, Mr. Premier, it relates to specific responsibility. And I’m not trying to outline the women are any 

better or any worse than men. Okay. They’re equal in my mind, and they’re equal in everybody’s mind, I’m 

sure, who is in a responsible position and has the opportunity to hire them. You hire them on the basis of their 

ability, not on the basis of their gender. 

 

I would also suggest that there are other people on your staff who, in fact, I don’t know their background and I 

certainly don’t know their qualifications. One sits immediately to your left. Last year Mr. Leddy sat in that same 

position. Could you please outline what Mr. Leddy’s background or what Mr. Leddy’s experience was, to the 

House, Mr. Devine? Mr. Premier, I’m sorry. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, as I point out to the legislature, Mr. Leddy no longer works here. When he 

did work here he had a personal service contract, and his experience was in the private sector for a number of 

years. 

 

Having answered that, I think it would be fair, Mr. Chairman, if I just elaborated a little bit for the hon. member, 

because he’s so concerned about it, about some of the things that this administration has done for women. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s not what I asked, Mr. Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, I answered it. And I’m just adding to it, and I can’t help it if you weren’t listening, 

but I’ve answered the question with respect to Mr. Leddy. Let me just take this opportunity because you are 

calling women rude. You were calling women over-paid, because you don’t . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — I haven’t called women rude. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — It’s in the Legislative Assembly. It’s on the record. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — On a point of order. I would request that the premier withdraw that remark. I have not called 

women, as he says, rude. Check the record. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Would the member from Regina North West state his point of order. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — My point of order is simply this, Mr. Chairman. I would ask the Premier to withdraw the 

statements he’s made with respect to my remarks about women in general. Okay? He reflects that I’m saying 

women in general are rude, and I say I have not said that in the record. I wish he would study the record. He has 

also made other defamatory remarks that I have made in this House that I have not made. I’d say that he is very, 

very far from the truth with respect to my remarks, and I demand that he remove those remarks from the record. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, speaking to the point of order, the member opposite obviously has 

not yet, has not yet learned the rules of the House. This is debate. When a member is losing in debate that’s no 

reason for a point of order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. It is a point of debate. It is not a point of order, and debate continues. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I just wanted to add, because the hon. member brought up the question of the salaries of 

women, of the attitude of women, and how women were being treated in this  



 

May 31, 1984 

3292 

 

administration, and I want to point out just very briefly what we’ve done for women in the last few months. 

 

One, established a Women’s Secretariat. A program description is attached, and I can just go through it. 

 

Activities to date include: a program with respect to violence against women, planning with other departments, 

retraining and employment programs for women, examine pension and provisions for inequitable treatment of 

women. 

 

Pornography: identification on problems and solutions addressed with respect to pornography and women, 

presented briefs with respect to it. 

 

A women’s services branch, Mr. Chairman, Department of Advanced Education and Manpower: develop 

educational and training programs to improve the opportunities for women. 

 

Saskatchewan skills development program: 50 per cent of the 2,400 training seats are expected to be filled by 

women, often in non-traditional areas where we even pay higher. Saskatchewan Employment Development 

Program — 1,500 jobs for single, unemployed, social assistant recipients, the majority of which are women. 

 

Affirmative action unit: that’s the third thing — improve the representation of women in senior and middle 

management and in technical trade areas within the Government of Saskatchewan, and it’s increased in 1982. 

 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan: an increase from zero to 16 per cent — that is women being employed. 

Saskatchewan agricultural research fund, increase from 14 per cent to 20 per cent; Sask Tel employees, increase 

from 8 per cent to 27 per cent; new boards and commissions — the Public Utilities Review Commission — 42 

per cent female employees; Saskatchewan economic development advisory committee — 20 per cent female 

employees. 

 

Social Services, number four: in addition to training programs co-sponsored by Advanced Education and 

Manpower; Saskatchewan Income Plan — we have assistance to seniors of which, of course, the hon. member 

knows 60 per cent of the women over 65 are living below the poverty line, and most of the seniors are women. 

 

Five grants to non-governmental agencies: sexual assault centres — obviously they’re addressed to women; 

traditional house and transition houses; Sask Housing Corporation — obviously we’re dealing with single 

women who are seniors. 

 

Mr. Chairman, with respect to all the questions the member asked regarding women, whether they’re underpaid 

or overpaid or . . . (inaudible) . . . As he mentioned, or whatever, I would just like to point out the record of this 

administration in employment of women, and the treatment of women, and the care of women, and the affection 

towards women is as high as it’s ever been in this province. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — Well, I compliment you, if that’s actually true, Mr. Premier. I compliment you on your 

approach to women’s issues. 

 

But that is not what’s on the record with respect to your own personal advisers. That is not on the record. On the 

record is that women don’t have any ambition, and women’s only ambition is to sit around in slippers and watch 

soap movies. That is on the record. 

 

And I appreciate that if you’ve heard that into the record, that at least you’re moving in the right direction with 

respect to women. And I’m not questioning that. My questions were not relating to the integrity of women on 

your staff. Basically they were specific to salary and qualifications.  



 

May 31, 1984 

3293 

 

And you can read into that whatever you wish. 

 

I don’t believe it’s the Premier’s role to decide whether or not my integrity relating to women, on the basis of 

the line of questioning that I’ve made, is, in fact, where it is. 

 

And I see, Mr. Premier, you’re back in the mud again, even from your chair — even from your chair. You don’t 

have the respect of your own caucus, let alone the women of this province. And I think that if you continue to 

destroy, or attempt to destroy, the integrity that I have, and the respect that I have for women, you’re losing, Mr. 

Premier. You’re losing badly. 

 

Minister of Finance was just on his feet. He suggested I was losing badly in debate. Well, on whose . . . How do 

you place that, Mr. Minister of Finance? 

 

The next person I would like to . . . Is Mr. Ron Larson on your staff, and what’s Mr. Ron Larson’s responsibility 

and qualifications, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Larson is currently seconded to Executive Council, working on the co-ordination of 

interdepartmental programs, and his experience has been in the private sector for a large number of years. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — He is seconded. Is Executive Council still paying his salary, sir, and what is his salary? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Larson is paid by the Public Service Commission and is not paid by Executive 

Council. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — Is Mr. Jim Martin on your staff, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I am advised that he is on the Provincial Secretary’s staff. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — What is Mr. Michael McCafferty’s responsibility on your staff, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. McCafferty spends most of his time on research with respect to policy 

issues, current events, and so forth. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — What are Mr. McCafferty’s qualifications? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. McCafferty has a B.A. and 10 years experience in government service 

and worked for one of the people that I most admired. He worked for the late John Diefenbaker, and was 

thought of very highly by Mr. Diefenbaker, and respected very much his loyalty. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — I was in his office only once, but he did have a large piece of real estate here in this building 

that was very lavishly furnished. I don’t know if that’s common to all the offices of your staff. He also had a 

21-inch television. I just wondered: does that real estate and the lavish furnishings Mr. McCafferty had in his 

office — does that go with all offices in this building? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I wouldn’t want the hon. member to leave the impression, or the wrong 

impression, with respect to the Legislative Assembly. The Legislative Assembly in these buildings are open to 

the public, and the public goes through them all the time. Clearly, the hon. member has been here for a few 

months, and he knows exactly what is the case with respect to furnishings. All government employees have the 

same. It’s nothing that is extremely elaborate. It is what’s necessary to perform the functions. 



 

May 31, 1984 

3294 

 

You can check in any of the public offices, whether you go into the Department of Agriculture, or whether you 

go into the Department of Government Services. As the minister advises me, there’s a formula that is used by 

the Public Service Commission that is in place — Supply and Services, pardon me — that is in place that 

dictates the kind of furniture, the kind of technical equipment, the number of telephones, the typewriters, and so 

forth, and that’s certainly public knowledge, and I imagine the minister can elaborate on it . . . (inaudible) . . . 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — Is Vic Sotropa — is he on your staff? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Sotropa is manager of the visual identity unit. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — And prior to getting into his qualifications, could you please outline what the visual identity 

unit is in your Executive Council? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — The visual identity unit co-ordinates the marketing designs of various kinds of logos that 

Crown corporations or various departments would use. And in the design of the logos, we would say maybe the 

wheat sheaf, or some other things, and to make sure that the Crowns and the departments are in concert and 

have them co-ordinated, we have a unit that works at that, and identifies it, and either stops duplication or 

prevents excess overlap. That position has been there for years. That kind of thing . . . I think the division may 

have been there for, well, let’s say 10 years, maybe 20 years. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — How many employees would, in fact, be involved in visual identity? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Three. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — I see that Mr. Sotropa is earning 4,700 a month, and I assume that the other staff is probably 

of lesser income . . . The combined staff of the department, would it be in the area of $100,000 a year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I didn’t catch the last part of the question. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — I just asked if the combined staff of the visual identity department would be in excess of 

$100,000 a year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — I see in his absence, that Mr. Jack Harrington isn’t on this list. Is he still in your employ? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, as everybody in the House knows, except the hon. member, I went 

through that and it’s on the record. We’ve already been over it in estimates. I hope I don’t have to duplicate 

everything that was already asked by the opposition, but yes, he still is. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — Well, I’m sorry, Mr. Premier. I may have been out of the House for a few minutes. I’d just 

like you to outline the income and the qualifications and exactly what the responsibilities of Mr. Harrington 

would be. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the income of the hon. member is the same as it was . . . or of the 

employee, is the same as it was last year and it’s one the record and you have it. His experience is strictly, let’s 

say, several decades of political experience, and he’s a political adviser to me and he is worth every nickel of it. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — How often would you consult with Mr. Harrington? 



 

May 31, 1984 

3295 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I consult with him as often as necessary. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — Once a month? Twice a year? How often would you consult with Mr. Harrington? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, sometimes I’ll visit with him daily. Sometimes I will visit with him on a 

weekly basis. Sometimes I’ll visit him on a monthly basis — as often as I think is necessary, or he thinks is 

necessary. And that’s . . . He doesn’t camp outside my office, he travels throughout Saskatchewan as I do, and 

we talk together on the telephone or personally when we think it is important. And frankly, you know, I say in 

all respect, that the hon. member should have talked to him years ago and he might have received some good 

advice. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — I have a great deal of respect for Mr. Harrington and I certainly have had opportunity to talk 

to him over the years, and I’ve received a lot of good advice from him. 

 

I think somewhat in the last year or year and a half, his responsibility, as your adviser has been somewhat 

downgraded although I believe his salary which is approximately $80,850 a year has certainly been upgraded, 

although you’re saying that he’s earning this year the same as he earned last year. Is he still earning $80,850, 

Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, what I said earlier, and the hon. member wasn’t in the House, and I hate to 

have to repeat it all, but he’s on a personal services contract. It’s the same contract that was last year. It’s been 

made public. It’s in Public Accounts. Last year’s record is available to the hon. member, and it hasn’t changed. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — And just for the record, on women — before we get off staff — I would like to say that the 

hon. Premier, on many occasions, has referred to the hon. member from Quill Lakes sister, in less than . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Certainly not. 

 

But I just would like to say, for the record, that the accusations that you made of me today, Mr. Premier, are 

totally inaccurate, totally inaccurate. And I specifically asked questions about individuals on your staff, and I 

don’t relate that to anybody else outside this House, or certainly anybody else on your staff. I just asked for 

qualifications and salary. And I think in doing that I didn’t do . . . I absolutely didn’t make any allegations about 

women in general. 

 

While you drew out comparisons out of the Globe and Mail and reiterations of ministers who are running for 

the Liberal leadership nationally — I don’t think that reflects on what I had to say today. But I believe that 

every time your government has referred to the family of the hon. member from Quill Lakes, who just happens 

to be in opposition, it is in certainly derogatory terms. 

 

And I suppose the last question, the last question I would have is: Mr. Jim Petrychyn is a member of your staff, 

and I understand his sister is also a member of your staff. And I would just ask what Loreli Petrychyn earns, and 

where she works. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I can’t find it, but Loreli Petrychyn is on staff as a clerk typist. Jim 

Petrychyn is not on staff, and just for the record let’s make it very clear, he’s not working for me. But let’s 

make the record very clear. Let’s make it very clear. 

 

In Hansard today you will read that the hon. member said that women were overpaid and rude. Let’s put it on 

the record. Let’s put it on the record. Let’s get it on the record. Let’s put it on the record, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. The Premier has the floor. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, let’s just make it very clear, Mr. Chairman. Let’s make it  



 

May 31, 1984 

3296 

 

very clear that on the record today . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order. The member from Regina North West is making too much noise so I 

can’t hear what the answers. I would like him to be quiet in the House when the Premier’s on his feet. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, let the record show that the hon. member, that the hon. member spent 

most of the last two hours individually attacking women in the public service in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Secondly, secondly, he said, he said that women, that women . . . Mr. Chairman, I believe I have the floor, Mr. 

Chairman. He can speak when he likes, Mr. Chairman, Let’s go through it and make the record very clear, very 

clear. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. The member from Regina North West continues to make loud noises while the 

Premier is on his feet. I would ask him, I would ask him to refrain from shouting when the Premier has the 

floor. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to review the record for the public, and they can read Hansard 

for themselves. The individual member opposite . . . The individual member opposite started selectively picking 

on women in the public service, in Executive Council, to attack women. He said that their salaries should be 

reduced. He said that women were rude, and they continually . . . Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, the hon. . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order! I will warn the member from Regina North West once more, and then 

I will have to call in the Speaker to make a ruling. The Premier has the floor. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to make it very clear . . . I want to make it very clear that you 

can review Hansard, and you can find that the hon. member said that women were overpaid. We know that he 

doesn’t like women, but he attacks women on staff. He says that women are rude, overpaid. If they don’t have a 

degree, then they shouldn’t be anything more than a secretary, and that’s on the record. And if that is a 

reflection of this so-called individual . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Call in the Speaker. 

 

Mr. Muller: — Mr. Speaker, during consideration of the estimates from Executive Council, I repeatedly called 

the member for Regina North West to order. He continued to disregard my orders. Under rule 25(2), I am 

obliged to report this to the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Under rule 25(2), it’s a very grave issue when a member refuses to obey the Chair in the 

House, and I would ask the member now if he would apologize to the Assembly for his behaviour. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Speaker, the House was so unruly, the members opposite, I could not hear the Chair 

when he addressed me with respect to my own activities. The opposition was carrying on . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. The member is not given the opportunity to make a speech but, rather, to apologize to 

the House for his behaviour. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — I will apologize with the caveat that the rest of the House apologize. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The member has no opportunity for caveats. An unequivocal apology is the only thing that 

will be accepted under the circumstances. 



 

May 31, 1984 

3297 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — I would like time for consideration. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The member, I’m asking again, if you wish to make an unequivocal apology, that you do it to 

the House now, otherwise, I will move on to rule 3. 

 

Mr. Sveinson: — Well I do it under duress, Mr. Speaker, certainly, but I do apologize unequivocally to the 

House, and certainly apologize to you for any inconvenience. But I do believe that there has been a 

misdemeanour, not only by myself, but by other members of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Does the House accept the member’s apology? 

 

Agreed 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Chairman, I would move that the House do now recess ‘till 7 p.m. with leave of the 

Assembly. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 



 

May 31, 1984 

3298 

 

CORRIGENDUM 

 

There was a problem with the typesetter in the Hansard numbered 61B for May 29, 1984. 

 

The third line on page 3143 should begin thus: 

 

HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

[NOTE: The online transcript for March 29, 1984 has been corrected.] 


