






















































Hansard: May 07, 1984


2249 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 7, 1984 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Currie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At this time, I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, to introduce a group to 
you, and to the members of the Legislative Assembly, a group of 53 grade 8 students who are presently sitting in 
the west gallery. 
 
This group of students are from Wilfred Hunt Elementary School, which is located in University Park in Regina. 
They are accompanied by Mr. Fred Short, who is one of their teachers and, as well, is the vice-principal of that 
school. They’re also accompanied by Mr. Lyn Dewhurst and, as a matter of interest to the members of this 
House, it was Lyn’s father, Mr. Dewhurst, who was a former speaker of this Legislative Assembly, as I recall, 
for several years. 
 
Another point of interest, Susan Schoenhals is also a member of this group, the daughter of a friend and 
colleague of mine, the Minister of Energy and Mines and the member for Saskatoon Cumberland . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sutherland, Sutherland. 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — I’m sorry, Saskatoon Sutherland. I would hope that the visit to the legislature would be 
both interesting and profitable on the part of you young people, and I look forward to meeting with you 
immediately after question period, first of all for pictures in the rotunda, following which we will meet for 
refreshments in the members’ dining room. I would ask the members from both sides of the House to join with 
me in extending a warm welcome to these people. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to introduce to the House 29 grade 7 and 8 
students from Athabasca School, seated in the Speaker’s gallery. They are here today with their teacher, Ken 
Watt, and the principal, Dr. Oshitwa. They will be meeting with me at 2:30 for pictures and a little later on for 
refreshments in the members’ dining room. I hope they enjoy their stay with us today, and I look forward to 
seeing them in about half an hour. And I would like the members of the House to welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Parker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you, and to the 
members of the Assembly, a group of 14 grade 12 students who are visiting us here today from Central Butte 
High School in Central Butte. They are accompanied on this journey by their teacher, Mr. Ron Richardson, and 
by the bus driver, Mr. David Newton. 
 
I understand the group will be conducting a tour of the legislature at 2:30, following question period. At 3 
o’clock, I would just like to advise the group that I will be meeting with them in the rotunda on the second floor, 
followed by refreshments in the members’ dining room. 
 
I would ask the group to please stand. They’re seated in the west gallery, and I ask all members to join with me 
in welcoming there here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2250 
 

Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to you, and through you to members of the 
Legislative Assembly, a group of visitors that we have with us from Lac La Ronge, northern Saskatchewan. And 
I’d like to introduce them as the Chief for the Lac La Ronge band, Tom McKenzie. I wonder, Tom, if you may 
stand. Joe Roberts, counsellor for the Lac La Ronge band, and Bill Heinz, who is under the employ of the band. 
 
These people are with us today meeting in Regina over economic and education development respective to their 
band. They have been recognized as a very hard working and very dedicated group of people in northern 
Saskatchewan. They take their own initiative in terms of economic development and education. I’d like to ask 
members of the House to help me in welcoming this fine group of visitors. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Chamber of Commerce Resolution Regarding Sale of Crown Corporations 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Deputy Premier in the absence of 
the Premier, who is attending the western premiers’ conference. 
 
My question deals with a resolution passed last week at the annual meeting of the Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce in Saskatoon. The resolution demanded that your government adopt, and I quote: 
 

A deliberate policy of divesting itself of all Crown corporations except those providing essential public 
services. 

 
Since then there have been a couple of statements by ministers which have been confusing. My specific question 
to you, sir, is this: does your government plan to adopt a deliberate policy of divesting itself of all Crown 
corporations, except those providing essential public services? And if so, which public companies does your 
government plan to put on the option block? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the short answer is no. And that makes the second part of his question 
non-applicable. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — The minister has answered no. The government, I take it, does not plan to adopt the 
policy of divesting itself of all Crown corporations, except those of providing essential public services. Then 
can you explain the difference between your policy and the one urged upon you by the chamber of commerce, 
because we’re having several versions of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the chamber of commerce no more writes our policy than the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour writes theirs. And as it relates to the difference, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 
apparent to anyone who has read the chamber resolution — which I have not — and anyone who has read the 
budget speech which was delivered by the Minister of Finance, which set out our policy as it relates to Crowns, 
it talked a little bit about the Sask Power bonds and Saskoil offering. And I think if the hon. member would take 
the time to make that comparison, he would very quickly see the difference. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We wondered about the policy announced in the Speech from 
the Throne, since neither of the pieces of legislation which might be involved have so far surfaced. 
 
What I ask you is this: has your government held discussions with people interested in purchasing all, or major 
parts of a number of the major Crown corporations in Saskatchewan? 



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2251 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well certainly not that I’m aware of, and I’m sure that I would be aware of it if that 
were the case. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — So that I may help you to focus your memory, are you advising that no discussions have 
been held with respect to the sale of all or a major part of the general business operations of the SGI — general, 
as opposed to the auto fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — No, I think that’s a fair statement. I’m sure that I would be aware of it if that were the 
case, and I’m not aware of it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — With respect to Saskoil — that corporation directed by your colleague, the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland — would you advise whether or not your government has been in discussion with respect 
to the sale of all or major parts of Saskoil? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Admittedly, that one’s very, very attractive. But no, so far as I’m aware there have been 
no discussions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — One last supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I ask the same question with respect to the 
Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — That one I am aware of, and the answer is no. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, I’d like to direct a further question to the minister, the Deputy Premier. Mr. Deputy 
Premier, I note that the chamber of commerce motion which your government apparently in one case rejected, 
and the Premier didn’t totally reject, was, in fact, proposed by one Mr. Herb Pinder Jr., who your government 
appointed as chairman of board of directors of Saskoil last November. At the meeting, before proposing this 
motion, Mr. Pinder is quoted as saying that your government should be more aggressive in privatizing Crown 
corporations. 
 
Since you have taken a new policy of appointing private individuals rather than ministers as head chairmen of 
the boards, I’m asking you whether or not you have collectively met with the various chairmen that you have 
appointed, including Mr. Pinder, Mr. Wright, and Mr. . . . the lawyer, the head of the Progressive Conservative 
Party from Estevan, Mr. Hill, and others — whether you have indeed discussed your government’s direction in 
so far as disposal of Crown corporations? Have you made it clear to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes, in fact, I think it’s no secret that the chairmen of the boards of the various Crowns 
also attend Crown Management Board meetings, and so they’re very aware of government policy as it relates to 
Crown corporations and their continuing existence, etc. 
 
The fact, of course, that they attend those meetings does not mean that we de-program them and put mush in 
their head. They still are free to think, still free to think as they will as individuals, and I think, Mr. Speaker, 
proof that we have, in fact, succeeded in de-politicizing the Crowns by putting competent, private sector 
business people on these boards. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Further supplemental, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask the Deputy Premier: are you prepared to take 
action, and concrete actions against the board chairmans who, in fact, express positions in respect to Crown 
corporations other than that as expressed by government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s board chairmen or board persons — not board chairmens, and no, no 
I’m not prepared to take action against Mr. Pinder, or anyone else for that matter. I’m not particularly happy that 
Mr. Pinder said what he said, but he said it. He does have the freedom to say those kinds of things if he wants 
to. Government policy hasn’t been altered because he said it, and that’s it in a nutshell. 



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2252 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Supplemental. Mr. Deputy Premier, you will recall sometime earlier that a Mr. Van Mulligen 
made a statement which was contrary, apparently, to your expressed government position. Now you have a Mr. 
Herb Pinder making a particular expression contrary to the expressed decision of the government. Why don’t 
you take the action of sending Mr. Pinder off to Prince Albert? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I suppose, Mr. Speaker, we can all wallow in hypocrisy from time to time because the 
same Mr. Van Mulligen that he talks about wanted action taken against the fire chief for endorsing one Wilma 
Staff to run for the Tories in Regina East. I think that the suggestion of the hon. member rings hollow, Mr. 
Speaker, and I won’t even . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 

Privatization of Court Reporting 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I want to direct a question to the Minister of Justice, and my question deals, Mr. 
Minister, with a resolution passed by the Regina bar association, which expresses its opposition to your plans to 
dispose of the Saskatchewan court reporters and to farm out the work to the private sector. As you know, the 
Regina Bar Association has added its voice to the opposition, following the opposition by the Yorkton bar 
association, by the benchers of the law society, and a number of other individual law firms. 
 
My question is: will you now come to your senses and, in fact, bring about some meaningful consultation, 
postpone your plan for privatization until such time as there has been a practical evaluation of the privatization 
plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, we’ve gone through the debate, Mr. Speaker, and the hon. member is fully aware of 
it. I suspect that once an opportunity demonstrate the new procedures is given to the members of the bar, that 
they will be quite satisfied. I have reason to be optimistic that with the new equipment and the new procedures 
that will be implemented, that we should have, in terms of transcript, approximately a two-day turn-around in 
the typing of transcripts. I think it’ll be a dramatic change. 
 
I know the reluctance to see change on the part of many but, in fact, I’m satisfied that the new procedures will 
give that type of service to the public and to the bar. And I think that once they see it operate . . . We are giving 
demonstrations to members of the local bars in those cities affected. That will be gong on, I believe, some of it 
this week, and I think that they will have a chance to evaluate it at that time. 
 
I caution all members to recall that when we announced our proposal that we would be proceeding with caution, 
and we are. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Supplemental, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask the minister: would you not agree that in light of the 
fact that here you have not, in fact, discussed the matter before moving, with the bar society of Saskatchewan; 
you did not discuss it with the Legal Aid society; you did not discuss it with the court reporters that are going to 
be disposed of their jobs. In fact, there has been no meaningful discussion other than two letters sent to them, 
which really gives them no future role. 
 
In view of that fact, will you not reconsider and enter into a system of meaningful discussion with the relevant 
groups? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Your information is not accurate. In fact, there have been several meetings with court 
reporters, with senior officials in my department. There has been meetings arranged, if they haven’t already been 
held, and I think some have, but they certainly have been arranged between senior officials in the department 
and members of the bar. And so the meetings are either arranged, or have been going on over the past couple of 
weeks, so I suggest to the hon. member that we indicated, before we brought in the policy, that we would be 
proceeding with  



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2253 
 

caution. I’m just a little surprised that the information that you have is not quite accurate, because there have 
been meetings going on. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. If there have been meetings going on, Mr. Minister, they 
have been most unsatisfactory. The benchers, the Regina Bar Association, and the Yorkton Bar Association 
have asked you to delay any plans to implement this program until after there has been a fair and independent 
study, and you’ve refused to do so. 
 
And I will read the resolution for you from the benchers: 
 

Be it resolved that no privatization of court reporters be undertaken until an independent study has been 
conducted. 

 
Mr. Minister, will you postpone the introduction of the privatization of court reporters until after there has been 
an independent study, so that we may know for sure what effect this is going to have on our justice system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I think I can assure the hon. member that within the next two weeks members of the bar will 
have some first-hand examples of the effect of the proposed changes. There will be a demonstration situation 
being made available to them. I believe it’s next week, not this week, and I think they will have a chance, then, 
to evaluate. And I think that when they see the speed of the turn-around of the transcripts they will be more than 
satisfied. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. This is another example of this arrogant government just 
assuming it knows best and running roughshod over those who have had years of practical experience with the 
system. 
 
Mr. Minister, I say that lawyers and members of the bar are . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The member is making a speech rather than asking a question. If you have a question, proceed 
with the question. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — My question, Mr. Speaker, is: in light of the concerns expressed by the members of the bar 
and the benchers, why will the minister not delay the implementation of the system until after he has received 
their comments? Surely there’s going to be no great harm done to the province if you delay it for three or four 
weeks, and that’s all they’re asking. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I have already indicated that there are, in fact, meetings going on between my senior 
officials and members of the bar. I suppose there may be an attitude of one of the very senior counsel that I met 
the other day. He said, “I realize that there has to be changes made, and that the system has to be upgraded, but 
why in my lifetime?” I think that that may be a fair assessment. 
 
We are addressing some of the concerns. One of the concerns raised: what about the impecunious client in terms 
of the hearing case? And that is being addressed. I believe that our response back to the bar will, in fact, have 
fully addressed that specific concern. Many of the bar have come to me and said, “We’re quite supportive of 
going private sector in terms of preliminary inquiry, examinations for discovery.” And so, in fact, well — again 
I have indicated at the outset that we would be proceeding with caution; that the members of the bar will have a 
demonstration as early as next week. When we are faced with a situation that there’s a backlog of transcripts of 
anywhere from eight to 10 months, that somehow we have to improve the system . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
I can’t believe that the hon. member from Quill Lakes has just figured out what the extent of the problem is, and 
we’ve been through it in debate during estimates, and how to deal with it. In fact I’m satisfied that the new 
procedures, the new mechanical equipment, and the new manner  



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2254 
 

of dealing with the transcripts, with the turn around, that my officials are quite confident can be there. As I say, 
in the cities, a two-day turn around in transcripts, that justice will be well served, or better served, with the new 
procedure. They will have the opportunity to review it before we do anything, and I’ve indicated that we are 
proceeding with caution. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, a new question. I was going to raise the problem of the impecunious 
litigant. At present many members of the bar will take such cases on contingency, and people need in most cases 
less than $100 to get their case before a judge. You’re going to radically alter that, and for many of those 
indigent people it would be impossible to get their case before a court. You say that you are considering it. Do 
you not believe, Mr. Minister, . . . This is my question: do you not feel it would be more appropriate to arrive at 
solutions to that sort of a problem before you implement it, and not try and work them out afterwards. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The fact is we already have a solution, and it’s being communicated and being discussed 
with the members of the bar. Secondly, in terms of as we discussed during estimates, the differential in 
transcript costs is probably not going to be the differential that would stop anyone from going to court and, as I 
indicated, that when the public sees a very quick turn-around of transcripts so that they can get their matters to 
court much more readily, that the savings to the public will be far greater than any incremental costs. 
 
So I make that suggestion to the hon. member, and I made it during estimates, that the only situation that senior 
members of the bar have raised to me is the question of the hearing, and whether there would be a requirement 
of a stand-by court reporter system. And that is a situation that we are dealing with, and I think that will be 
communicated to the bar. And we’ll continue discussions before we move, and I’ve made that commitment. I 
fail to see the concern of the hon. members when that commitment is there. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my supplementary to the minister is: I would 
suggest to you, and I would ask you to comment, Mr. Minister, on the suggestion that the backlog has anything 
to do with transcripts. 
 
Do you not agree, Mr. Minister, that the backlog has everything to do with your petty fight with the federal 
government over at which level the patronage should operate, and has nothing to do with transcripts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, it’s unfortunate the hon. member has not had the practical experience, but we’ve had 
a backlog of transcripts for many, many years. Unfortunately, the problem hadn’t been dealt with in the past, 
and that backlog of transcripts has never been addressed in this province and, I suggest, many other provinces. 
 
We are trying to eventually establish a system where it will not be the administration of justice that delays 
matters before the courts. It will be any human element. And I suggest to you that, when we do have a backlog 
of typing the transcripts of anywhere from eight to 10 months, it is a problem that has to be dealt with, and we 
are dealing with it. 
 

Tree-Planting Contracts in the North 
 

Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for the Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources. 
My question, Mr. Minister, deals with the fact that the Lac La Ronge Indian Band, and a number of independent 
contractors in the North, were upset to find that many of the tree-planting contracts issued this spring were, in 
fact, awarded to out-of-the-province contractors. For an example, contracts went to the British Columbia 
companies just recently. 
 
My question is: can the minister tell the House how many contracts were issued to B.C. firms this year; 
secondly, whether or not they were the low bidder in all cases; and finally, how your  



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2255 
 

government, how this decision squares with your government’s commitment to Saskatchewan first? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pickering: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member from Cumberland asks about tree contracts. We 
tendered them. They went through the tendering process the same as anything else that this government does. 
We chose the lowest tender. As a result, one tender went outside the province. And I think that is the only 
proper way to do it. If you’re going through a tendering process, the lowest tender should be accepted, and that’s 
exactly what we did. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister will know that the North is faced with high 
unemployment — 95 per cent unemployment. Welfare rates have increased by 50 per cent. The problem here is 
very serious, Mr. Minister. When is the North going to get their share of jobs and economic development? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pickering: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in the past, for many years, there has been contracts to go 
out-of-province people because of the low tender. 
 
And, as it relates to hiring the people in the North, out-of-province people that received tenders for tree 
transplanting hire 80 to 90 per cent Saskatchewan people. Only the supervisors come from out of province. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, is it your contention then that the Lac La Ronge Indian 
Band is not capable of handling that contract, or those contracts, or part of those contracts that were awarded to 
out-of-province firms, like the B.C. firm that was mentioned in the paper in the media? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pickering: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the fact is the Indian band has done a very, very good job of tree 
planting in the North in the past. They have a very good record. But we went through the tendering process, as I 
mentioned before, and we accepted the lowest tender, and I don’t think you can argue with that. If their tender 
had been lower we would have given them a contract. But such was not the case. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the minister. In view of the fact that the minister in 
charge of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation has given out contracts to in-province firms who are as much as 
17 per cent above an out-of-province firm, would your department consider giving a similar preference to 
groups like the Lac La Ronge Indian band, rather than bringing in firms from outside the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pickering: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve answered that question to the member from 
Cumberland. If SPC hired somebody outside of the province, we asked them to hire all in-province people, 
residents of Saskatchewan, to help with their project. That is exactly the same case as the people that tendered 
the lowest contract from B.C., and that’s the process we follow and will continue to follow. They will hire 80 to 
90 per cent local people, residents of this province, presumably all from the North. 
 
Mr. Yew: — New question now, Mr. Speaker. I noted here, Mr. Minister, that the minister for Sask Forest 
Products Corporation attended a Conservative meeting in La Ronge just the other day, and made a statement 
that he claimed to know nothing about the out-of-province contract awards, and that if it was true he’d find . . . 
If that’s true he stated he’d find out what was . . . This was very disturbing, and that he’d find out or look into 
the matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the minister for Sask Forest Products: what did you find out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll answer that question, and I also have an  



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2256 
 

answer to a question previously, too. 
 
First of all, I checked out with the minister in regards to Parks and Renewable Resources, and he’s given you his 
answer. He’s said that it was the lowest tender, and it was given out to the lowest tender. I would hope, sincerely 
hope, that the employees from up there, as I’ve talked to the minister about it, and he’s talked to the contractors, 
I understand, in regards to using northern people. I believe, as you do, the member from Cumberland, it should 
be northern people used, certainly as much as possible. 
 
But you asked a question of the Premier just previously. You asked a question to the Premier here last April 5, 
and you said — the member from Cumberland said: 
 

On July the 5th, 1982, your Minister of Environment told this legislature that you would create an 
environmental advisory committee with northern representatives to regularly monitor the impact of the 
Nipawin project on the people who live and work downstream from it. 

 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I fail to see the relationship between the minister’s answer and 
the question. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Services to the Physically Handicapped 
 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to make an important announcement on services to the physically 
handicapped. Today I am pleased to announce a major three-part breakthrough strategy designed to help meet 
the needs of Saskatchewan’s physically disabled. 
 
The highlight of the strategy is an employment demonstration project which will create up to 100 permanent 
jobs for unemployed physically handicapped persons who are presently receiving social assistance. $800,000 
has been allocated for this project. 
 
Salaries paid by employers who hire physically disabled persons will be supplemented to cover training costs. 
Subsidies will also be provided to employers to help make necessary modifications to the physical workplace. 
 
Community agencies which represent the handicapped will be given funds to hire four consultants, two each in 
Regina and Saskatoon, and these consultants will assist employers and employees in developing employment 
proposals or assisting in job search and placement. 
 
The second element of the strategy has been in response to requests from the physically handicapped themselves 
to expand the mandate of my department to more specifically include the physically handicapped. 
 
Within Social Services, the rehabilitation services division will co-ordinate provincial government services, 
promote awareness of the needs of the physically disabled, and develop employment initiatives. 
 
The third part of the strategy will see the establishment of an interdepartmental programming committee to 
focus on important issues related to the physically handicapped, such as the Canadian charter of rights, housing, 
transportation, employment in education, recreation, and independent living. 
 
My department has already met with numerous organizations for input into this new initiative, including The 
Voice of the Handicapped, the Saskatchewan Ability Council, Service for the Hearing Impaired, the Canadian 
Paraplegic Association, Canadian National Institute for the Blind,  



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2257 
 

Regina Employment Development Committee, and Disabled Persons Employment Services. Involvement of 
these community groups will be an ongoing feature of our government’s commitment to physically disabled 
people. 
 
This three-part co-ordinated breakthrough strategy on behalf of the physically disabled is the first of its kind in 
Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate you giving me the opportunity to comment on what has to be 
another statement of the Minister of Social Services that flies in the face of what is really happening in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Last week it was raised in the Assembly where welfare payments to a number of handicapped people — people 
who use walkers, people who are blind — were being taken advantage of by this government in having their 
welfare cheques cut. I find it interesting the minister would try to redeem himself today by using this legislature 
to bring forth a statement that is not believable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the minister is saying that an employment program to assist the handicapped, after what he did 
last week, is the first in Canada, is not to be believed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a number of incidents that have been raised in this House. We know about the speech 
therapist in Valley View last year and what happened with that individual who was dealing with . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member is ranging fairly wide on his reply, and I think you should stay 
with the subject of the ministerial statement. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, in referring to programs in other parts of Canada — I think the minister 
opened the avenue — and referring to things that occur in Moose Jaw, I think, may not have any relevance 
directly to the statement made, but I think it points out the meanness of this government in dealing with 
handicapped people and, therefore, I think is relevant to what the minister is trying to establish here, that he is 
somehow doing something good in an area where the opposite is true. 
 
I have a letter here from a parent, Mr. Speaker, who has a handicapped child, which points out what she refers to 
as a program that is not being properly funded by this government. And it refers to the program for the 
handicapped in the city of Regina in the public school sector. And she says the speech therapist in that area, Mr. 
Speaker, in dealing with handicapped people, is not being funded properly by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I’d ask the member to stay on the subject of the ministerial statement 
and not to be ranging into the school system. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s very difficult to talk about handicapped people and not refer to the 
school system where the training should occur — that people can get jobs. And I have a difficult time in not 
referring to education when we’re talking about training of children. I would like to quote from this letter which, 
very directly, relates to the training of handicapped people in terms of getting jobs at a later date. And I would 
like to quote from this letter which says that: 
 

One speech therapist is allocated on a one-half day per week to work with 62 enrolled in the development 
centre. 
 



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2258 
 

Mr. Speaker, the speech therapist tells me that this allows her to work with each child for 45 minutes once every 
two years. Mr. Speaker, I read this only to raise the point that while this government talks about what it is doing 
for the handicapped people, the credibility of this government, and this minister, I believe, is at stake. And this 
statement today, I say, is playing politics with a very serious issue, and the minister will be called before the 
handicapped people and the parents of this province to account for his actions over the last week. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 54 — An Act to amend The Statute Act (No. 2) 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The Statute Law (No. 2). 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I lay before the Assembly, under section 30 of The Ombudsman Act, the 
Report of the Provincial Ombudsman. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 52 — An Act to amend The Department of Parks and Renewable Resources Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Pickering: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s indeed a pleasure for me to rise today and 
give second reading to this bill that proposes amendments to The Department of Parks and Renewable 
Resources Act that will expand the scope of enhancement programs for Saskatchewan fisheries resource. 
 
Fish are important to the people of Saskatchewan. About one-fifth of Saskatchewan’s population are anglers. 
They, and visiting fishermen, take almost 9 million lb. of fish each year. Another 10 million lb. of fish are taken 
by 1,400 commercial fishermen. About 700 northern families are also dependent on fish as a basic food 
resource. The recreational value of sport fishing is highlighted by the fact that anglers spend in excess of 2 
million days fishing each year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fishery resource also provides a significant economic benefit. A study in 1980 indicated gross 
expenditures by all fishermen exceeded $104 million annually. Close to 3,400 jobs are involved in fishing 
industries. 
 
I should also indicate, Mr. Speaker, that some 200 outfitting establishments provide an array of services for 
56,000 anglers annually. It is estimated that visiting sportsmen contribute approximately $15 million to the 
provincial economy, much of which goes into the North. We are convinced that tourism based on fisheries can 
be expanded by enhancing the fishery. 
 
In recognition of the recreational, social, and economic value of the fishery resource, my department has worked 
hard to sustain the supply of fish. We have emphasized conservation of the resource for catch limits; habitat 
protection, and closed seasons are used. We have also used enhancement where steps are taken to increase the 
supply of fish to expand fishing opportunities. 
 
For many years, the government has been engaged in fish stockings as a means of maintaining an  



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2259 
 

increasing fish population. Some 1.8 million fish have been stocked in Saskatchewan. In 1983 alone, some 8.6 
million fish were restocked. By the end of the 1983-’84 fiscal year, this government will have spent over $2 
million in renovations to a fish culture station at Fort Qu’Appelle. These renovations will increase the quality 
and quantity of fish for stocking. Under natural conditions, survival of the young fish is near 1 per cent. 
Experimental work in my department has shown the survival of young fish grown to fingerling size in lake-side 
rearing ponds can be increased by up to 40 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rearing ponds will receive emphasis in the proposed new fish enhancement program. However, my 
department also proposed other techniques to enhance this population. Some of these are: construction and 
operation of spawning areas; acquisition and restoration of stream habitat; rehabilitation of small lakes; aeration 
of winterkill lakes; an expanded stocking program; and development of doorstep angling programs in your 
urban centres and in heavily utilized parks. 
 
In discussing the problem of funding for such programs, was sport fishermen and outfitters across the province. 
It was suggested to me that anglers would not object to paying higher fishing licence fees as long as they could 
be assured that the extra money would be used for fish enhancement work. I have acted upon this suggestion by 
including such a provision in this bill. 
 
My department has had a wildlife development fund since 1969, to the great benefit of our wildlife population. 
The proposed amendments to The Department of Parks and Renewable Resources Act will expand the existing 
wildlife development fund to include a fisheries component. The new program will be called the Fish and 
Wildlife Development Fund. It will enable my department to approach fish enhancement that is much bigger, as 
it now works on wildlife development. 
 
The new fisheries enhancement component will be funded by a 30 per cent share of annual licence fees. In 1984 
the Saskatchewan resident angling licence will be increased from 5 to $10. A one-day licence for Canadians will 
rise from 2 to $4, and the fee for a non-resident of Canada will rise from 15 to $20. The Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation has enthusiastically endorsed my announcement that angling fees would be increased to provide 
revenue for fish enhancement. Similar support has been expressed by the Northern Saskatchewan Outfitters 
Association and by the fish advisory committee. 
 
The fish enhancement component proposed in this bill may also receive revenue from gifts, bequests, and from 
the sale of promotional material. There is also provision for money to be received as compensation for lost fish 
habitat. It is also intended that moneys from the fund will be available from our department to work 
co-operatively with groups such as branches of the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation to develop local fish 
enhancement park projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the measures proposed in this bill are designed to increase the benefits to Saskatchewan people, 
that they will receive a further fish supply enhanced by this fund. I respectfully urge that this House support this 
bill as presented. It is a pleasure for me, Mr. Speaker, to move second reading of a bill, An Act to amend The 
Department of Parks and Renewable Resources Act. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I really didn’t get everything that the minister was saying in his 
remarks. There was quite a bit of noise in the House. However, I did get . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. However, I have went over the bill, and I most certainly do agree with what I hear that you are 
interested in improving the fish stocks in northern Saskatchewan, and that you are providing a fund to create 
new and . . . (inaudible) . . . ponds. 



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2260 
 

I think that when you talk about the commercial fishing industry providing 10 million pounds of fish in 
Saskatchewan, I think, Mr. Speaker, that yes, that’s right. But most certainly if it was handled properly the 
commercial fishing industry in this province could produce 20 million pounds of fish, and there would be no 
real strains on the lake, providing that action is taken in re-stocking, and that departmental officials would take a 
look at the proper limits on these lakes. 
 
I think that there is a number of items that I would like to comment on, after reading in Hansard what you have 
said, Mr. Minister. But I most certainly agree with the gist of the bill. But for them reasons, Mr. Speaker, I 
would beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 53 — An Act to amend The Wildlife Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Pickering: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker,. Mr. Speaker, this act proposes four amendments to The 
Wildlife Act, three of which are of a housekeeping nature. Section 12 is repealed because it is no longer 
required. Section 22 is repealed, and section 54 is amended to ensure The Wildlife Act conforms to the 
constitution. Section 63 is amended to make the game season setting process more efficient. 
 
Mr. Speaker, section 12 of The Wildlife Act was in place to establish the Saskatchewan fur marketing service. 
Since the Saskatchewan fur marketing service no longer exists, section 12 can be repealed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canadian constitution has clarified the rights of the Canadian citizen. The present wording of 
both sections 22 and 54 of the act, which are reverse onus sections, appear to be unconstitutional. Therefore, 
section 22 should be repealed, and section 54 amended to ensure the Canadian constitution is not violated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the present game hunting season setting process requires that all season setting regulations be 
approved by the Lieutenant Governor in Council, even though this is a rather routine matter requiring several 
separate regulations throughout the year. 
 
The proposed change to section 63 of The Wildlife Act will allow the seasons to be established by minister’s 
order. All other wildlife regulations will continue to be approved by the Lieutenant Governor in Council, as they 
presently are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments will assist us to manage Saskatchewan’s wildlife resource to the best interests 
of all Saskatchewan residents, and in the best interests of the resource itself. 
 
I urge this House to join with me in supporting these three amendments. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our research people have checked this bill over, and we really 
don’t see anything wrong with it. As you indicate, it’s more housekeeping. However, if there’s any other 
questions that we would like to ask on this, we will do it in committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2261 
 

ADVANCED EDUCATION AND MANPOWER 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — The last day, Mr. Minister, we were addressing the question of adequacy of the financing of the 
university, and I drew to your attention — while you weren’t the minister, I drew to your attention, however — 
that the amount budgeted last year was obviously insufficient because subsequently the government, your 
government, provided a special grant to the Regina university, also the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
And in providing this special grant I’d like to ask the minister: can you indicate what factors, indeed, 
necessitated the providing of a special grant to the universities last year? Obviously you will have reviewed that 
matter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member as I recall the discussions which took place last year 
between the universities and department officials, although as the member correctly indicated I was not minister 
responsible at that particular time, the overriding factor in consideration was because of the unexpectedly high 
fall enrolment which the universities realized over the summer months they would be experiencing as their 
applications came in. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In establishing the operating grants for this current year, I’d like to ask the minister then: were 
all the factors which would be faced by the universities taken into consideration, including the high enrolment 
aspect which they have to deal with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, all of the factors of which we were aware were, in fact, 
considered and had been discussed in pre-budget deliberations with the officials from the two universities in the 
province. 
 
We’re cognizant of the fact that there is a bubble effect going through the system right now because of the high 
enrolment earlier last year, and that that enrolment may well continue for another three years, or two years, 
while students are completing their programs. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — What I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, are you not able, in conjunction with your discussions 
with the university, at the time, or prior to the allocation of operating grants, to indeed sit down with them and 
to make a projection of the enrolment? Because, obviously, right after the budget it was interesting to note that 
the president of the University of Saskatchewan was asking again for additional grants. And I’m asking you: 
were you not able to take into consideration the expectations of the enrolment for this fall, that is, whether it’s 
going to be increased or decreased or hold fast? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well the increase in the grant, the base operational grant, did allow for a 5 per cent 
increase in any event over what was received last year by the universities. And, as a matter of fact, when we 
talked about enrolments there was some uncertainty that the freshman enrolment this year would equal last 
year’s, at either campus, as indicated to me by officials from both campuses. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well you are saying, Mr. Minister, when you set the quota, or rather the operation grants, at a 5 
per cent level, are you saying then that that was an arbitrary figure, inconsistent with the general policy of the 
government? And are you admitting now that, indeed, if there is other factors to be taken into consideration, that 
that amount is insufficient? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t feel the amount is insufficient. We don’t priorize for the 
university what programs they will offer or how they will be offered; who will teach them. The universities 
make those decisions themselves. We’ve had indications in the past  



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2262 
 

that the increase would, in fact, be in line with their increase in operating expenses. 
 
I would point out once again that the increase brings the total to $132.5 million operating for this current year. 
At the U of S, the president last fall had, in fact, gone through an exercise of reducing all his budgets by 4 per 
cent — finding a way he could do it if he had to. Obviously, he didn’t have to; we increased it 5. But he did find 
ways to trim by 4 per cent. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, the latest indication, Mr. Minister, is that you are prepared now to sit down again with the 
universities in respect to providing them with further grants, as you did last year. I want to ask you, have you 
indeed had meetings with the respective universities? And can you indicate whether any further information was 
given to you, indicating a higher enrolment or other factors which indeed will require the government to put 
forward further funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, correspondence has been entered into with officials from 
the University of Saskatchewan. They have requesting a meeting similar to the one the hon. member is talking 
about, and we have agreed to meet expeditiously. I did meet this morning with Dr. Barber, the president of the U 
of R, and the vice-president and some of his officials, with my officials, and we had some discussion in that 
regard this morning. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, the financing situation we have discussed previously, and certainly in Regina the 
president of the university has indicated the dire straits that the university is in. There was a very sizeable deficit 
last year. He’s indicating that, in accordance with the operating grants that your department is willing to put 
forward at this time, that there will indeed, be another huge deficit at the university. 
 
Now two things can be considered here. One is that the university, in trying to give a quality education to the 
young people of this province with insufficient funds, are indeed going into a deficit position. The other thing is 
that you can’t . . . I don’t think that you can sit back and say that, “Well, we gave them 5 per cent. They can do 
what they like with it.” 
 
Do you have no concern with maintaining the quality of education when you see our universities, in fact, having 
huge deficits and are trying to maintain the same quality of education? What is your position in seeing the 
universities? Is it your position: we’re going to give them X number of dollars and they can do with it what they 
want. Are you saying that to the young people, that we are not going to give sufficient funding, and if the quality 
is cut, that’s on the backs of the university; I take no responsibility. Is that the position that you are putting 
forward here in this legislature by, seemingly, justifying that by giving 5 per cent, that should be sufficient to 
maintain the quality? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Actually, Mr. Chairman, the discussions, particularly with University of Regina this 
morning, have been very fruitful, and the university officials have indicated to me that they are willing to 
demonstrate ways in which they can, in fact, balance their books over a period of time, given some time. We 
had an excellent, free, frank, candid discussion about the future. We talked about quality of education. We 
discussed the quality of education, and they have indicated to me that they feel they can maintain quality of 
education. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, since you want to disclose what the content of your discussions with them, I’d 
like to ask you whether they advised you that they can maintain the quality of education without further funding, 
over and above the 5 per cent which you have allocated. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Extra funding, which the universities are requesting, was really not connected per se to 
quality of education. It was connected to eliminating deficit positions. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In Saskatoon, Mr. Minister, there is no doubt that the president of the university also indicated 
not only concern with the financing arrangements of the university, but he indicated that he expected increased 
enrolment. Can you indicate whether or not, in your  



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2263 
 

discussions with the president of the University of Regina, whether or not there is likelihood of further increases 
in the enrolment this fall? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, I can give the hon. member the answer he’s looking for. The discussion we had 
today would indicate that the enrolments are, in fact, levelling off and, if anything, could be expected to drop. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — What is the situation, Mr. Minister, in respect to the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’d like to indicate to the hon. member: we haven’t had that discussion yet, but I believe 
it’s a similar situation. We haven’t formally sat down to exchange views on that, but from previous discussions, 
I think it’s a similar situation in Saskatoon. 
 
I could point out to the hon. member, however, that the trend would appear to be away from increasing full-time 
enrolments to a decrease in full-time enrolment, with probably some concomitant rise in the part-time 
enrolment. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I don’t want to differentiate between the part-time and the full-time, and I hope that we’re 
talking about the same thing. I’m talking about the overall . . . whether there’s an overall increase, including 
part-time and full-time students. 
 
Certainly, in Saskatoon, the release made by the president of the university has requested a million dollar 
increase from the government, similar to the extra grant that was received last year. And in his release he 
indicated that there is likely to be a 6.5 per cent increase in the enrolment at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now either the information that the president has put out is inaccurate, or the press has put out an inaccurate 
statement, or the minister has a different set of information. 
 
And what I am asking you specifically, because certainly I will be in discussion with the respective presidents, 
and I want to know whether, in your total analysis, is it your consideration then that as a result of . . . that there 
will not be indeed an increase in enrolment, and that no supplementary financing will be necessary in respect to 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I can’t definitively answer either part of that particular question, but let me go back over 
some ground. 
 
Enrolment projections are not terribly accurate. We can’t be 100 per cent sure. The best numbers that the U of R 
officials can give us is that they don’t anticipate an increase in enrolment. The U of S, we haven’t had an update 
in, well, within the last couple of weeks, of which I am aware. But yes, we have a meeting scheduled where that 
will be discussed. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Can the minister advise what is the actual deficit position of the University of Regina for the 
last year’s operation, and whether or not during your discussions there was any indication that if they carried on 
the same quality of education, the amount of the deficit for this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’m advised the deficit position the U of R is approximately $1 million. And I’m sorry, I 
didn’t quite catch the second part of that. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You indicated that in your discussions with the president of the University of Regina it was not 
to address an increase in the population or the enrolment of students, but rather extra funding to address the 
problem of deficit. What I’m asking you: did you, in fact, discuss any potential deficit that is being projected at 
the university campus this year, having regard to your 5 per cent operating expenses? 



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2264 
 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, the nature of the discussion was centring around the 
shortfall position in which the university has found themselves, and they have indicated measures which they 
intend to adopt over the next two or three years to change that situation around. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to ask you specifically: are you aware whether under your basic funding that you have 
provided — the 5 per cent — whether in your discussions the University of Regina is looking at another 
substantial deficit? That’s a fairly simple question. You have discussed it. You said that was the basis of your 
discussions, whether you’re going to give them more money. But what is the amount of the deficit that they’re 
looking at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — What we’re looking at is about a $1 million shortfall this year, going into this year, 
accumulated. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And what I ask you now, whether you have in your discussions with the University of 
Saskatchewan, in view of the fact that your provided a 5 per cent funding, and in view of the estimated cost of 
operating a standard quality university, whether in your discussions you discussed whether there would be a 
probable deficit during the course of this fiscal year? And would you indicate what that amount is likely to be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’m advised the U of S will have a balanced budget without supplements in the 
forthcoming fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Then two things are clear: (1) you have indicated that there’s not likely to be any enrolment 
increase; (2) you have indicated that, under the funding that you provided, the University of Regina will have a 
balanced budget. 
 
That’s what you’ve said . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I was talking about the University of Regina in 
respect to your discussion . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I did. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, you asked of U of S. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to go back to clarify it, Mr. Minister, because you indicated in respect to the Regina 
university that last year there was $1.25 million deficit. You indicated that this year you spoke, and recently, 
with the president of the Regina campus. All right. You indicated that there is not likely to be any enrolment 
increase. 
 
What I asked you is: in your discussion with them, is there likely to be a deficit with the University of Regina 
during the current year, having regard to the amount of funding that you provided in the budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, $1 million. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Then the situation with the Regina campus (let me just be clear) was over $1 million — $1.2 
million last year. And what you’re saying then, that the University of Regina, for the current year’s operation, 
will be in another million dollar deficit, in that vicinity. Am I correct in interpreting that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I think your figures, as you have added them up, sound 
accurate according to the discussions I had with the university officials. What they have told me, without 
disclosing all of the nature of the discussion, was that they are addressing ways, internally, administratively, to 
cope with their particular financial difficulties which have accumulated over the last few years. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I want to indicate, Mr. Minister, that certainly, in respect to the Regina  



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2265 
 

campus, that your funding certainly has indicated, your government’s funding has indicated clearly that the 
amount of funding is inadequate. Last year a $1.25 million deficit, and this year the university is looking at a 
further million dollar deficit. 
 
I want to ask the minister, since you have met with them: what is the likelihood of this government assuming 
some of the fiscal responsibility for education and coming forward with additional funds in order that the 
deficits of these universities can be eliminated, and that the quality of education, more importantly, the quality 
of education can be not only maintained, but improved on? 
 
Why will you not, in fact, address this immediately so that the universities can get down to business of 
providing quality education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, in the last year of the NDP administration, the operating grants to the 
universities was $100 million. This year it’s $132.5 million. That’s $32.5 million in three budgets, as brought 
down by my colleague, the Minister of Finance. Any way you cut it, $32.5 million is an awful lot of money 
increase in operating grants. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, just to conclude this, I would ask the minister then, if you could sort of summarize and 
indicate whether you think that the amount of operating grants that you’ve provided to the University of Regina 
and to the University of Saskatchewan is indeed sufficient, and indeed will provide a . . . maintain the quality of 
education which the young people of this province deserve. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I would like to tell everybody here that I have the utmost 
confidence in the administration of our universities. I have confidence in the faculties to deliver the best 
possible quality of education. I see no decline in that, because the individual members of faculties are very 
interested in doing the very, very best job they possibly can do, and I have the confidence in them that they can 
deliver. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And I want to just refer to a quote from a speech, Northern Telecom, and I think it’s relevant to 
the situation that is happening here in Saskatchewan. And in part, it says: 
 

Over the past decade, in good times and bad, we have identified more opportunities than vulnerabilities. 
However, one vulnerability persists and grows, not only for us but for all of North American industry. The 
vulnerability is the lack of constant flow of trained people in many disciplines of information age. This 
shortage of trained people could do more in the long term to undermine the future of North American 
economy than the activities of our international competitors, the size of the deficit in both countries, and the 
level of interest rates combined. 

 
And I want you to refer to this particular aspect of the quote: 
 

The emerging source of basic economic strength for any society is not capital investment or natural resources, 
as important as they are. It is brain power. Our industrial society is now brain-intensive. It centres on 
knowledge which creates sophisticated products and manufacturing processes while framing the techniques of 
management itself. 

 
I think that statement, Mr. Minister, puts the emphasis on education and the training of our young people in a 
proper perspective. 
 
And in closing this, I want to indicate that I feel that what is happening in so far as the support to the 
universities by your government, it has been insufficient. I think you haven’t addressed it on a proper basis — 
that the universities are, right after a budget, are consistently having to go to you and start negotiating and 
pleading and not knowing exactly what courses they can offer. It’s  



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2266 
 

more and more difficult for them. And I think that it is clearly evident that not only in the operating grants, but 
in the capital grants, that there is a considerable concern by the university faculties that much of the equipment 
is becoming outdated and, as a consequence, the quality of the education is deteriorating. 
 
We’ve covered off in respect to the deficit here in Regina. In respect to the University of Saskatchewan, I’d like 
to ask you, first of all, whether there was any deficit last year. I believe I know the answer, but I’ll ask you that 
to start the process. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I believe it came in approximately 1.5 million for ’83-84. The board of governors at the 
University of Saskatchewan have indicated, without supplement, it will be balanced budget in ’84-85. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In ’83-84 it came in in deficit, 1.5? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Right. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And my final question. In respect to the universities then: as a result of your meetings is there 
any likelihood of the government being in the position to give additional grants, as you did last year, to 
subsidize the operating grants which, I believe, are inadequate and, I believe, which the university, and certainly 
the president of the University of Regina has indicated, that he could not carry on the same quality of education 
at 5 per cent; that as a minimum he indicated he’d need 7.5 per cent? 
 
And so I’m asking you: — are you prepared to further provide additional funds to maintain the quality of 
education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — We’re certainly prepared to consider providing additional funds. I can’t say for sure 
right now, after the preliminary discussion, it’s yes or no, but we’re certainly going to consider it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I’m going on to another subject. I want to deal with another area, Mr. Minister, and that 
has to do with the established program funding. I believe it’s under Bill C-12 of the federal government. And I’d 
like you to indicate what the federal government is proposing in respect to the introduction of Bill C-12 relative 
to the established program funding, and what actions your government is taking in respect to their position. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I believe, Mr. Chairman, that that question is more properly addressed to the Minister of 
Finance, because EPF, established program funding, is a matter between the federal government and our 
Department of Finance. I will say that I did not appreciate the federal government’s stance on EPF and, in fact, I 
did write the following letter on the subject. It’s addressed to Jim Peterson, Chairperson, Standing Committee of 
Finance, Trade, Economic Affairs, House of Commons, Ottawa: 
 

Dear Mr. Peterson: My office has been advised that Mr. Al Shpyth, the External Vice-President, U of S 
Students’ Union, dispatched a letter to your office expressing concern for the imposition of the 6 and 5 
restraint guide-lines on EPF transfers. 

 
This letter goes on and recommends: 
 

. . . the immediate deletion of clause 7-3(b) and (c), which in effect does away with the 6 and 5 restraint 
guide-line on federal post-secondary transfers. My office is most concerned over the possibility of unilateral 
changes to the EPF arrangement. 

 
I would also like to take this opportunity to emphasize the need for consultation and discussion prior to any 
changes being made to our agreed-on funding arrangements. 



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2267 
 

Mr. Koskie: — You’re indicating, I guess, Mr. Minister, that your department doesn’t deal directly with it, but 
rather the Department of Finance, eh? Well, we can deal with that then. 
 
There are, I guess, in the area of financing just two areas of concern, which has been expressed by the students 
— the university students — and that is the increase in the tuition fees at the respective universities. I think this 
is the second successive increase. But also in the technical schools I note, Mr. Minister, that your government 
has seen fit also, by order in council, to increase the tuition fees to the institutes. I wonder whether you feel that 
in the particular economic times that are confronting young people, not only here in Saskatchewan but across 
the country, whether their governments certainly shouldn’t be providing sufficient funding in order to enable 
those institutions to, at least, not increase and impose on the students and parents additional financial burdens. 
 
I take it that, if one looks at the student bursary and the student loan area and the records of it, you’ll find that 
more and more students are availing themselves of this and, obviously, it’s putting a very considerable debt that 
each student is assuming in order to obtain this education, and it seems to me that this is as a result of 
meaningful employment during the summer. I’d like your comments in respect to the respective increases in 
tuition fees in both the institutes and the universities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’d like to take a look at what has been happening across western Canada then. In B.C., 
the fee increase is approximately 30 per cent, at a time when the universities received a negative five cut in their 
operating grant. 
 
In Alberta, a similar increase in student fees at universities, accompanied by a zero per cent increase in the 
operating grant to the universities. 
 
Manitoba, our socialist neighbour, increased student fees . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — A very, very good province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — A good province that increased student fees 10 per cent and gave the universities a 2 per 
cent increase in operating grants, necessitating, at one of the universities, some 200 jobs to be cut. 
 
In Saskatchewan, with a 5 per cent increase — the only western province to go that far to do that well in 
operating grants to the universities — our increase in student fees mean $88 a year on a full course in Regina, 
$75 a year approximately in Saskatoon. It translates into almost $1.5 million additional that will be paid out in 
student aid as a result of the increase in tuition fees which, of course, if the prerogative of boards of governors 
who did so unilaterally, which is entirely their decision, and one which I uphold that they should make. 
 
The increase at the technical institutes, the technical institute increase came in at, I believe, 4.8 per cent . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Just a minute, 5.9 per cent was our increase in tuition fees at the technical institutes. 
 
Our student fees remain among the lowest in Canada. Comparatively, if we take a look either across Canada or 
at our neighbours in western Canada, ours have consistently been lower — will continue to be lower in the next 
year. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, on May 2 I entered into the questioning on estimates. At 
the time you assured me that information would be forwarded relating to a specific program policy with 
Advanced Education and Manpower as it relates to the various native sectors in terms of programming. Do you 
have that information now? 



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2268 
 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — One of my officials has just handed me some of the information. I believe it’s the 
information which you requested — expenditures, various programs, student aid, financial assistance. And I can 
arrange to have this delivered to you. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I’ll thank you, Mr. Minister, for that piece of information. As well, I had raised issues with regard 
to your consultation process when the report was undertaken by the treasury board. I stated at the time that the 
Gabriel Dumont Institute and SUNTEP (Saskatchewan Urban Native Teacher Education Program) had indicated 
to me that clearly there is little or no consultation. And also we had raised issues with regards to your program 
policy on Saskatchewan student bursaries, the special incentive bursary program — just recalling those very 
quickly here, Mr. Minister. 
 
The other area that I needed information on was with respect to the question of the emergency loan and grant 
funding request that was put before you by, I understand, Dumont and SUNTEP. As well, I had a question with 
respect to your department’s policy on the future development of the technical institutes in the province in terms 
of enrolment of non-status Indian and Metis students. 
 
However, I assume that in time I will get specific answers to all those questions raised on May 2, Mr. Minister. 
Am I not correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Certainly, Mr. Chairman. You spoke of an emergency loan fund. There is already one in 
existence to which those students can apply. They can tap into the emergency loan funds if they wish. Branch 
staff from my department will, and have already done so in some instances, go out to each SUNTEP centre and 
Gabriel Dumont . . . (inaudible) . . . and they will help the students process applications. The department 
officials are fully prepared to help in any way they can. Our student services branch personnel are available and, 
in fact, the contact they have had with the Gabriel Dumont students now numbers 141 out of a total of 191 
students. I believe that was the information the hon. member asked for. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Just to conclude, Mr. Minister, I want to indicate to you that it’s pretty hard to compare, you 
know, with respect to estimates, to be able to question intelligently and accurately and factually if you haven’t 
got that information. 
 
I waited . . . I was of the understanding that I would get this information a couple of days after the estimates 
questioning here of May 2, but I still haven’t received the copies of the information requested, and I just want to 
conclude by saying I hope that you can make the process much speedier the next time around because the issue 
of training and education of the native community is very important, and there’s a crisis out there when we 
haven’t got the type of enrolment stats that we ought to have when we look at the high unemployment and the 
high drop-out rates and high reliance on welfare and incarceration of our native people in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’d like to make a couple of remarks, Mr. Chairman, in response to the comments of the 
hon. member. I share his concerns. I think it’s been demonstrated by the programs the department is introducing 
and the increase in funding to certain of our programs in native affairs. 
 
Secondly, he mentions a delay in providing information. A couple of points. This is the first time we’ve been to 
estimates since that particular day, and there was a weekend intervening — as one thing. I think we’ve been 
pretty quick at finding that information and giving it to you factually. Secondly, we also wanted to check 
Hansard and make sure we knew exactly what we were being asked for and what was being committed to, so 
that you did not receive the wrong information, and that we would, in fact, deliver what precisely we said we 
would deliver. 
 
And again I want to reiterate to the hon. member. He said he may be having trouble speaking  



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2269 
 

intelligently on some of the subjects without the information. Frankly, I think what you presented last week was 
excellent, and I want to reiterate my offer: my door is open. The officials are here to serve. If there are problems, 
we want to know about them. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, I want, first, to go a little bit on the student aid, Mr. Minister, and could the minister 
indicate what is the maximum amount that a student can get of a combined loan and bursary at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I knew that. I’m sorry I took so long to get up. I knew that figure. It’s $162.50 per week 
of study. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And can you indicate what is the interest rate being charged on the loan portion at the present 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — It’s 12.25 per cent. The payments don’t start until six months after the courses are 
finished, or graduation. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And for this current year, are you saying that it’s 12.25 for the past year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’m advised that it’s for anything negotiated prior to August 1 of ’84. It will be that rate. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I wonder if the minister could provide the statistics for 1982 and for 1983; that is, the amount 
that was loaned to students in 1982, the amount of the bursary portion for 1982, and similarly for ’83. Could you 
provide the amount of student loans and the amount of bursaries? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I can certainly undertake to provide all of that information to the hon. member. The ’82 
figures we have to go back and dig for. We have some of the more up-to-date ones more readily available. 
Would you prefer if all those figures are compiled and sent to you? Would that be acceptable? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That’s fine. The other area that I’d like you to provide — you may not have that in your 
possession at the present time — and that is the grants to the community colleges. I’d like the amount for 
1983-84, and what I would like you to do is to give the names of each of the community college board, and the 
amount of the grants for 1983-84, and the amount for ’84-85. In other words, go through all of the community 
colleges on an individual basis and provide that information. If you don’t have it at the present time, providing it 
in the future would be okay. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I’m happy to say I do have the information. I’ll have it sent over to you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And similarly, Mr. Minister, grants to the educational agencies. I would like a list of all of the 
educational agencies that you provide grants to, and the amount that you provided in 1983-84, and the amount 
that you will be providing in ’84-85. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I assume the hon. member is referring to federated colleges, affiliated 
colleges, and so on. Including Gabriel Dumont, I have a cumulative total. We can undertake . . . I’ll send you 
this one and we can also undertake to give you the breakdown by college. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That will be fine. 
 
In respect to the P.A. technical institute, do you have a schedule as to when you expect that to be completed and 
operative, when students will be able to be enrolled? 



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2270 
 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, our schedule calls for classes to be offered in the fall of 1985. It may not 
be finished. In fact, I’m sure we won’t be finished in ’85; it’ll be finished sometime in ’86 and be fully 
operational and up to snuff by then. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — There has been an announcement by the government in respect to the development of the 
Wascana technical school, and it was indicated by the Minister of Government Services that it was being 
developed privately by H.R. Roberts. I asked him at that time whether there had been taken into consideration 
any concern in respect to design, and he seemed to indicate that that information would be provided by the 
Minister of Advanced Education. 
 
What I’m asking you now: with the proposed Wascana technical school, how many spaces are there proposed to 
be, and did your department have full consultation in the preparation of the design of the Wascana technical 
school? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I looked up my numbers for the institutes. The number of new training 
places for Wascana Institute would be 880. It isn’t broken down as to how many would be in the new building, 
the new facility, and how many would be added to the current location, because there are 22 new programming 
initiatives going on in Wascana Institute. And, yes, there was full consultation with department officials 
between Advanced Ed and Manpower and Supply and Services. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, what I’m asking you specifically . . . You’ve made the announcement of building a new 
Wascana technical school. It’s being built by a private developer. The people of Saskatchewan will be paying 
handsome rent for it. And what I’m asking you specifically: surely to heavens you know how many additional 
spaces are going to be put into this announced new Wascana centre. And that’s the information I want. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The figure is approximately 600 in the new building, but I’d like to point out it’s also 
done on an extended day where there would be a 12-hour day. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, on the usual basis, that is, a 12-hour apparently is not the usual because you made 
mention to it. I’m asking you, under the ordinary hours that the institute normally operates under, how many 
additional spaces are being allocated? Because you can gum up a whole number of spaces if you start going 
around the clock. And that’s obviously what you’re doing here — is a little fiddling with it, going 12 hours. And 
what I really want to know is: in a given sitting, how many spaces have you got? How many students can you 
accommodate? Pretty simple. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I thought it was — 800 new places; 600 would be run through that particular building. 
But you have to understand the philosophy of the delivery is competency-based learning based on an extended 
day. It’s a new concept in teaching in delivery of programs and one which we think will fit the individual needs 
of students, and one which many groups, especially adult groups, have already embraced as being something 
they think is a very, very worthwhile initiative in technical training. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, Mr. Minister, you can certainly expand the number of spaces in the province by extending 
the number of hours that it operates, and that’s the game that is being played by this government, and it slipped 
out from the minister. They are not really creating a large number of new spaces. What they are doing is 
extending the day and, accordingly, when you ask, in respect to the Wascana technical, you don’t get straight 
answers indicating that if you build a school you know how many, approximately, how many students that it’s 
built to accommodate. And, similarly, if you build a new Wascana Institute, you know how many that it’s built 
to accommodate. Now what you have done is thrown in the extra hours, a day and a half or two day sittings in 
one, and you have got it up to 600. 



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2271 
 

But what I want then is for you to give me the names. I want you to provide, for each institute that we have in 
the province, I want you to provide me with the number of spaces that we had, say, at the Wascana in 1982-83, 
’83-84. And I’d like you to provide the number of spaces that you had in each of the institutes in 1982-83, 
’83-84, and projected in ’84-85 — the number of institute spaces. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — While we’re compiling that and digging it out, which we’ll be happy to send over to 
you, I’d like to tell you precisely the number for Wascana Institute as you asked — you said I was hedging, or 
whatever — was 652. And the reason I gave you the rest of the rhetoric was I thought you might have been 
interested in the method by which we will be presenting courses to the institutes in the years ahead. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’d like the . . . as I indicated, the . . . that information. And what I’d like also is the names of all 
of the institutes — not the names, I know the names of the institutes — but I want them identified by the 
individual names, and I’d like you to indicate the amount of expenditure, capital expenditure, that was spent in 
year 1982-83, ’83-84, and ’84-85, for each of the institutes in the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, the first piece of information requested I’ve just asked to be 
photocopied. I’ll provide you with a copy of it. The ’84-85 numbers are not on there. We will provide that 
separately just as soon as we can dig them out. The last question, I believe, should be directed to Supply and 
Service. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I would have thought that within the framework of you who are providing and also 
monitoring the spaces, that your department should indeed have that information, because it seems to me that it 
would have to or should, at least, originate from your department. 
 
And, fine and dandy, if you want to hedge and evade the question, but I can’t understand how the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Manpower wouldn’t have that information available, because it would have to be 
submitted. Surely, the method is that you would initiate the idea, and it would be handed over to the 
Government Services for implementation of the construction. 
 
Are you saying, indeed, that you don’t have that information and can’t provide it? . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well, I just asked you a question, and you told me you couldn’t provide it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The process, Mr. Chairman, is simple. The officials within my department, in 
consultation with officials from the institutes, take a look at the requirements. We project the need according to 
student interest and according to labour market planning and information branch. Then we put it together. We 
consult with our colleague, the Minister of Supply and Services, and say, “These are our requirements.” Supply 
and Services then take over the project. They tender it, according to our needs and our wishes. They are the 
people who would answer the specific questions on the amount of money spent on the buildings. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In respect to the capital grants to the university, I wonder if the minister could provide an 
identification of the particular projects, the amount that is going to be spent during the fiscal year on each of the 
projects. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Pardon me, the hon. member was saying the capital to the universities that time? We 
can give you a copy of the breakdown of that and send that over to you, if that’s acceptable. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2272 
 

Items 2 to 24 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 25 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’d like to ask the minister: why has there been a fairly substantial decrease in that subvote? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, rather than give some misleading general statement, I’m waiting for a 
specific to be looked up in the book. 
 
Primarily these are federal training spaces which are bought and brokered through our programs. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I don’t quite understand that, Mr. Minister. Could you elaborate on that particular explanation 
of why there is a very substantial decrease in the amount under the subvote: “Advanced Education and 
Manpower Training”? 
 
. . . (inaudible) . . . provide me with the answer. That will be . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — No, Mr. Chairman, I wanted to give a specific answer. Interprovincial training 
agreements — we are buying a fewer number of places. I guess it was the federal programs that were sponsored. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I think another good five minutes of research would have helped in the answer. I’ll leave 
that at the present time, and we can go on, Mr. Chairman, with the next item. 
 
Item 25 agreed to. 
 
Items 26 and 27 agreed to. 
 
Vote 5 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

ADVANCED EDUCATION AND MANPOWER 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 
 

Items 1 to 4 agreed to. 
 
Vote 5 agreed to. 
 

SPECIAL PROJECTS FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

ADVANCED EDUCATION AND MANPOWER 
 

Capital Expenditure — Vote 5 
 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 5 agreed to. 
 

SASKATCHEWAN HERITAGE FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

ADVANCED EDUCATION AND MANPOWER 



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2273 
 

Provincial Development Expenditure — Vote 5 
 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 5 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister and his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to thank my officials for the assistance they provided in the 
course of the estimates. I’d like to thank the members of the opposition for the spirited discussion and the spirit 
in which they asked their questions. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — What can I say, Mr. Chairman? I want to join with the minister to thank his officials, and to 
thank him for answering the questions as straightforward as is possible under the circumstances. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

TOURISM AND SMALL BUSINESS 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 45 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, when we left off the other day, we were into some of the questions that relate to 
your program on venture capital, and some of the things you were planning on doing. 
 
I’m wondering, before we get back into that, Estevan Mercury reported a $600,000 loss of a plant down there, 
that there was some government involvement. I believe your government did a joint announcement on this, or 
your government announced this plan where you had a $220,000 term loan and $145,000 bridge financing. 
 
Was that loan secured by the insurance or is the department out some money on that one? Where are we sitting 
as far as Char Industries at Estevan are concerned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I was hoping that we would get started on the right foot this afternoon and 
stick to our department. The question that you have raised relates to Sedco. I would be willing to deal with that 
in Crown corporations, but it has nothing to do with the department. To answer your question directly, no. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Are you the minister responsible for Sedco? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’m pleased to advise the Assembly that I am minister responsible for 
Sedco. 
 
Mr. Engel: — We were discussing about your government’s involvement in financing and starting up business. 
What I was mainly concerned is, the Estevan Mercury related . . . You likely are familiar with this item that was 
in the paper — the $600,000 loss in Char plant fire. The story goes on to say it’s not so much the money, but the 
sad thing is the jobs that were lost. 
 
Now, are you saying that you’re not prepared to discuss your government’s involvement in helping finance and 
start up plants like this? And can we get another plant going in the Estevan area? Are you not prepared to 
discuss whether that loan and that money your government, under your administration and in your department, 
put up to start up an industry like that? And  



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2274 
 

you’re going to try and find an excuse so we don’t have to talk about this. Is that what you’re telling me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, no I’m not ashamed to discuss any venture that’s going to be opening in this 
province under our department. That’s what our department is there for. 
 
Your question relates directly to a responsibility of Sedco. We don’t use weeklies or dailies for research. We use 
our very competent staff and all the other facilities that are available to us, including the legislative records. We 
don’t use the weeklies. 
 
There was a fire in Estevan. If a new corporation, or the same corporation would be willing to start up again, 
certainly our department, or the Deputy Premier’s department (depending on who was looking after those 
affairs) would be more than willing to co-operate to re-establish, wherever possible, businesses within this 
province. That’s what we’re here for. 
 
But the question that you asked originally related to Sedco. The only government involvement with Char 
industries is through Sedco, and that is a Crown corporation situation. Now if we’re here to discuss Crown 
corporations, I suppose we could do that. The other day we discussed Economic Development and Trade. I 
would like to get on with the business at hand of doing Tourism and Small Business. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Estimates usually aren’t designed and set up for what the minister wants to talk about, but some 
issues that we are concerned with. 
 
Now your government made some bridge finances. Was the $145,000 bridge financing loan a Sedco loan as 
well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, our department was involved in no financing at all of the Char industries 
corporation. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Your government was involved in talking to these people and putting a $145,000 bridge 
financing loan in place, and an additional $220,000 term loan. The announcement said, “the government 
announced.” It’s done by your . . . And you are the minister responsible. Now all I’m asking you is: did you 
make sure that there was sufficient insurance in place that these loans could be taken care of, and that we could 
get . . . Under this government’s open for business, surely you’re open for a business that exists within the 
province, and not just for some of your friends that are from down East. 
 
And all I’m saying is: are you in a position with this company to say that because of the insurance that was in 
place or whatever, or did you make loans that weren’t secured by insurance? That’s the question I’m asking. 
 
Is there a chance to put this plan back in operation? Like everybody in Estevan said, it’s not so much the money, 
but the sad thing is that jobs were lost. And here is another instance where you’re not prepared to do anything, 
or you don’t want to talk about it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know how I can get through to the members opposite. They’ll find 
any excuse to wander from what we are here for. We are here to discuss Tourism and Small Business. And I’m 
prepared to do that. Now when you start wandering off the topic again and start talking about Sedco stuff, I can 
assure you that as far as Sedco is concerned — and I will respond just very briefly to it — things are well in 
hand as it relates to Char industries. But I am not prepared to go into a large discussion on Char industries and 
Sedco. It has nothing to do with the business of our estimates. 
 
But I can assure you that our officials, and the company officials relating to the matter of the fire, are in 
discussion. I haven’t read the article that you’re referring to, therefore I can’t properly  



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2275 
 

comment on the article. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I’m using the article as a term of reference, Mr. Minister. I’m not commenting on the article one 
way or the other. All we both agree now is that there was an industry that had created some good jobs in 
Estevan. They were financed by your government. Now you say that that insurance is in good standing. 
 
So my next question is: are you prepared to listen to these people, and are you prepared to negotiate with these 
people to get a new site, or clean up that site and start rebuilding that plant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’d be delighted to advise the opposition that our department is open and 
available for discussion with any business people. It always has been, and it will be. We are presently 
negotiating with literally hundreds of businesses, either starting up or expanding. 
 
Now if the officials that you’re referring to would like a little bit of help from our department, our department 
would be more than willing to send in our consultants to discuss their situation with them, to discuss their 
problem with them, to assist, whatever they might have in mind for Estevan. But it has nothing to do with the 
fire or with Sedco because I am not here to discuss that particular problem — but certainly the rest of it. 
 
By all means, our consultants would be just delighted to talk with them, as we are with hundreds of others. 
Because there are a lot of businesses opening up; there are a lot of expansions going on. The rural community is 
looking to us because we have said it before, and we say it again: rural Saskatchewan will not die under our 
administration. And certainly any business people that want to talk to us, we’re more than willing to help them. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, we went through the amount of jobs that have been created under your 
administration and how many more there are looking for work today than there were when you came into office. 
I think we settled that thoroughly on Friday morning. 
 
What we’re saying today is: here is an industry that was operating, was providing some good jobs, was making a 
product that was saleable. And you’re saying that your officials haven’t even been back, and aren’t discussing 
how this plant can be opened up and re-established, and how we can put programs in place quickly to create 
these jobs. Are you saying you’re just . . . (inaudible) . . . we’re talking to . . . (inaudible) . . . the specific 
business I was asking about. 
 
I think the minister should indicate to this House if he’s prepared to put the money on the line again, like they 
did last time, where they did provide 148 or $150,000 worth of bridge financing . . . (inaudible) . . . $145,000 
plus . . . If that money is insured, are you in a position to help this company get re-established into . . . to create 
these jobs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I just can’t convince them. Perhaps you can. This is Sedco questioning. 
Certainly our Sedco officials are in discussion with the principal of Char industries. And certainly if they’re 
going to decide to re-open and the financing is required and Sedco can put it in place, this will be done. There’s 
no question about that. And I don’t argue that. And it is all under control, as far as they’re concerned. It’s up to 
the officials now to do something. 
 
What I am saying is that our department, too, is available to assist them. And if the principals of Char would 
like to avail themselves of further expertise, our Department of Tourism and Small Business would be delighted 
to come in and assist them. 
 
And, getting back to the numbers of the people or the job creation and all the rest of it, I beg to submit, Mr. 
Chairman, that what we did establish is that Saskatchewan had the largest work-force in its history right now, 
and it has never been at that huge, great number, which indicates to me that we are doing our job properly in 
creating jobs and keeping the people of our  



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2276 
 

province employed. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, it’s not quite that easy. It’s not quite that easy. The plant manager says that he’s 
concerned about the 18 jobs that are lost, and he argues that the insurance money won’t come close to 
compensating the year and a half of time he’s put into building this plant and getting it off the ground. 
 
Where . . . Are you just saying, these 18 jobs — here’s a product that the Deputy Premier’s department has 
researched that’s got some market potential; the market’s there; the 18 jobs are there; the fire started because of 
spontaneous reaction with the briquettes or the coal or something that was stored on site. I’m not sure. I didn’t 
investigate it myself. 
 
But the problem is, the insurance money is maybe sufficient — maybe it’s sufficient to satisfy the financial 
claims that Sedco has on it — but where is the man supposed to get some capital to start back up again? If your 
department and you, as Minister of Small Business, aren’t prepared to stick your neck out and act as a big 
brother to people like this and say, “We believe that plant can go . . .” I think that’s the role of government. 
That’s your role. And if you’re not prepared to do that, say so, and he’ll have to either find out or go out and 
find another partner, or scrounge up some money some place else. 
 
I understand that the insurance money was sufficient to cover off the loans, but in no way near getting the down 
payment to start a new project. And if that’s the case, Mr. Minister, I think it’s your responsibility as Minister of 
Small Business to see that plants like this can reopen and can get started when they have a natural disaster like 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I . . . he’s now asking about the adequacy of the insurance policy. Well our 
department doesn’t go out into the area of all government and ask everybody if their insurance is in order, so I 
can’t possibly begin to answer that question. Neither can my department. 
 
I can again tell you that the insurance money is a Sedco problem to work out with Char industries. Now if Char 
industries have any other problems concerning our Department of Tourism and Small Business, and they would 
like to restart it again, certainly our consultants and our officials would be more than delighted to go out there 
and assist them. That’s what the department is there for. 
 
But please, please don’t mix up the fire, the insurance policy, Sedco financing, and all the rest of it with an 
individual operation that has really nothing to do with our department, except that you want to know how we are 
going to assist them, and they could very well feel free to talk to our department. 
 
We have the new industrial development program going in place; that would help them. perhaps they could use 
the assistance of the venture capital program that’s going in place, and certainly the fixed-rate financing 
program that’s going to be in place. 
 
So that we have lots of tools for their use. And if they want to avail themselves of those tools, we would be 
delighted for our officials to go down and show them how to use those tools. 
 
But the fact remains that the fire and the financing are two different things, and they’re divorced totally from our 
department. So I don’t know why you keep avoiding the good things that we’re doing in tourism, the good 
things that we’re doing in the Department of Small Business, and keep going back to situations. 
 
Friday was all economic development, and now today you’re talking Sedco. I mean, let’s get our legislative 
calendars together, so that when my officials come here we can handle the questions that properly deserve to be 
handled. That’s why the forum is here. Ask us some questions about  



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2277 
 

our department so that they can contribute, to supply you will all the necessary answers. I mean this is what 
we’d like to do for you. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, we spent all day Friday trying to determine if you had a program in place that 
covered off certain situations. The answers were a total disaster. 
 
Today I tried to use an example of another kind of situation where we had a business that was creating and 
manufacturing a product that was marketable, that had good markets, the product would sell . . . the product 
sold. There were 18 jobs in Estevan. That firm ran into a problem with a fire, and you’re saying it’s Sedco, and 
an insurance people’s problem. It’s not my problem. Go talk about it in Crown corporations. Do anything, but 
don’t ask me, as a minister, to step in and do something. This is a typical example of what you’re doing in your 
department, of a small business. 
 
We talked about the promise you made before you were elected that you were going to provide the businessmen 
of Saskatchewan with a fixed-rate insurance program. You said, “Oh, things have changed. Now that we’re in 
government things have changed.” Well, Mr. Minister, things are still the same. Things are sad out in the 
country. Things are blue for the businessmen of Saskatchewan because if they happen to have any problem, it’s 
the minister’s word saying it’s tough luck — it’s tough luck. 
 
My colleague, the member from Athabasca, has some more questions. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, we ended Friday afternoon’s session with 
some questions related to northern economic development programming. 
 
I questioned you, as the Minister of Tourism and Small Business, specific areas pertaining to northern 
Saskatchewan. More specifically, Mr. Minister, I was wanting information on the procedure, the policy of your 
economic development program for northern Saskatchewan as it relates to the benefits that your department 
sees, that your government sees, going into more specifically, the trappers, the commercial fishing industry, the 
wild rice growers, the small businesses in northern Saskatchewan, and also to local groups and organizations. 
 
I have a copy of Hansard here. You, in general, came back to me and quoted to me that — stated to me, pardon 
me — that the local loans committees had been phased out, and further, that more of this administration 
function was now centralized with the district loans committee. I understand, then, that there is a shift in policy 
with respect to economic development in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Furthermore, you stated Friday afternoon that you were finding, your government was looking at, ways at 
bringing about and co-ordinating with the Special ARDA (Agriculture and Rural Development Act) program 
and the northlands agreement. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, at this time, if you could be more specific with respect to the benefits that will accrue in 
terms of economic development initiatives to the trappers, the fishermen, the wild rice growers, and the small 
businessmen and the community groups in northern Saskatchewan, and also if you could be more specific with 
respect to your Special ARDA program and the DREE (Department of Regional Economic Expansion) 
northlands agreement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, as I mentioned the other day, all of our programs are designed for long-term 
programming benefits. We don’t believe that short-term, band-aid type of situations for grantings will work. 
This has been tried by prior administrations, for the last dozen years. It’s been a continual situation that all 
administrations have looked at, that have tried to do their best with, and in our opinion hasn’t worked — so that 
we believe that specific, long-term programming will be the solution to the problems in the North, and we are 
approaching it in that type of a pure business fashion. 



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2278 
 

So that along with all the programs that are available through our department . . . And certainly our consultants 
will go out into the field and explain the various programs that are available, not only as it relates to Small 
Business, but certainly all of our Tourism programs, along with the new programs that were announced in our 
budget. Those will be available to the North, and along with all their special, various programs, such as the 
special ARDA; or the northland agreement, that I mentioned that we’re trying to conclude with the federal 
government; the revolving fund, certainly venture capital; management assistance programs; and our other 
programs — all this will be available to them. 
 
We will play a co-ordinating role in attempting, with the people from the North, to arrive at something 
meaningful, and to put this type of programming in place. I know that since up to the end of April, loans that 
we’ve approved . . . . Since the re-opening of the loan fund, there have been 15 fishing loans; there have been 
four trapping loans; and 10 commercial loans, to a value of almost $600,000, that have all gone into the North. 
So that I think in the short period of time that the Department of Small Business has been dealing with that 
particular program, we are making headway. And, hopefully, with co-operation of various business interest 
groups, and the communities themselves that want to actively become involved in these programs, our 
consultants will truly be able to help them get along into more meaningful business opportunities that will, in 
turn, create employment for the North. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Chairman, I’m pleased to hear the minister talk about long-term economic solutions to the 
crisis that faces and confronts us in northern Saskatchewan with respect to the fact that we have no economic 
development strategy announced by the minister that had the portfolio, DNS, prior to this dismantling process, 
because that minister advised this House and the people in northern Saskatchewan of an economic, 
self-sufficiency program. And to this point in time, we have yet to see that package; we have yet to see that 
economic development program. 
 
You talk about ways of tying in the Special ARDA Program, the DREE western northlands agreement, Mr. 
Minister. And you talk about the fact that you have now unfroze the revolving fund that you have. I asked you 
for some rather specific information, and I asked for your policy on that program. And further, I asked for your 
policy on the program, as it relates to the northlands agreement and the Special ARDA program. 
 
I wonder if, at this point in time, I may ask for those policy papers, and if that is available, then certainly the 
communication gap — barrier — will be diminished a little in terms of information flowing into the 
communities. Because, as I stated as you confirmed, the local loans committees that were in the northern 
administration district are defunct; they’re obsolete; they’re no more with the economic development program. 
 
And so I say that the information is going out very sparsely through the district loans committees, and it’s not 
reaching the communities at all. And the various people that are interested in economic development, and also 
in communities that are wanting to take advantage of those opportunities, are just not getting them. And I’ll 
leave it at that for now, Mr. Minister. You may want to respond. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Okay, Mr. Chairman, I really appreciate this line of questioning because it is directly 
related to our department, and we can talk about things and plans and what we would like to do, and this is very 
meaningful to us. 
 
First of all, with regard to the policy to the northland agreement and Special ARDA agreement both, we’re not 
in a position yet to announce that policy, because we’re in the final process of negotiating with the federal 
government because they are involved in the overall processes, I’m sure you’re aware of. And hopefully, both of 
those programs will come to a conclusion very soon, and as soon as they do, there is no question that the 
committees in the North will be apprised of those policies, because it affects them more than it does anybody 
else. 



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2279 
 

As it relates to the loan fund itself: yes, there have been four major changes made to it. And from the . . . There 
are four basic operational differences from the previous fund. There is now a floating equity requirement of 
between 10 and 25 per cent — the greater the risk, the greater the contribution by the borrower. That stands to 
reason. Previous loan fund operations had a 10 per cent equity requirement, and then that was loose. So in other 
words, we’ve changed it, depending on what type of application comes in. We think that they understand that 
and that they agree with that change. 
 
Applicants must now have some experience in the area of their proposed business venture, or be willing to take 
related training. Now that wasn’t there before, so that if somebody comes in and wants to start trapping, before 
we give them a loan we want to make sure that they understand what trapping is all about, so that they just don’t 
take the loan and go out and do everything wrong, and they don’t get anything meaningful out of it, and the loan 
fund loses money. 
 
The third change is the loan application review process by the committee has been changed to provide a more 
professional approach. If we just want to deal with each one a little bit better, the new committees will have 
significantly more lending expertise than the previous loan committee, so that we will be able to help the 
applicant, because the people that are on the committee will understand what they’re talking about and be able 
to convey that information to them. 
 
And finally, a new, tighter collection policy, similar to that used by commercial lenders, has been implemented, 
because we have to make the applicants understand that it is a part of the normal process, that when they do 
borrow these funds, that they have to repay them, and that they are taking some risk. It’s not just a grant 
situation, and I believe that they accept that. 
 
Now as far as it relates to the local loans committees, it’s a two-way street, you know. We’re willing to work 
with all the people in the North that we can, and with the committees. Now we sent 34 letters out to 
communities in November, requesting information about their committees and their structures, and only five of 
those communities responded; five out of 34, and the others just fell by the wayside. So that indicated to us that 
that community committee conception was not working, because there were 29 communities didn’t even bother 
responding. 
 
But to those people that are interested — and I will point to the gallery, our friends from La Ronge that you 
introduced earlier — I was one of the ministers that met with this group this morning, and they have a very, very 
good proposal in Tourism that we’re extremely interested in and that we will assist them in and give them all the 
help possible from our government, and they understand that. And they’re going to be back with this proposal. 
 
But they’re taking the initiative upon themselves to come in with this type of a program, this type of an idea, and 
saying, “This is what we would like to do. Can you help us?” Well as soon as we see that proposal — and they 
know that — we’re going to just dig in right there and see if we can help them and get something like that off 
the ground. 
 
And again, it’s designed, in this case, for Stanley Mission, that would get some tourist attraction up there, that 
they could bring people in, not only to see the historical value and enjoy what the North offers to our 
vacationing people from Saskatchewan, because it truly is a significant thing for the people from our area here 
in Regina and the South to go up to La Ronge or certainly Stanley Mission. 
 
And as a result, if we can get those kind of programs or attractions going, certainly it would help to create 
employment and alleviate a lot of situations in that regard. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, can I get a copy of your revised policy on those programs that you  



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2280 
 

just described? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes, we’ll deliver. Would you like it right now? 
 
Mr. Yew: — Whenever. Following up . . . Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Following up, Mr. Minister, and getting 
into specifics, I wonder if you may provide me with the response that came to me the other day. I was listening 
to you talking about the local loans committees. And certainly you have probably sent a directive to them with 
respect to your program. And you had a poor response, I understand. 
 
And the several calls that I received informed me that after your government took over, the committees were left 
in limbo for quite a long spell. And further, I just want to add that they felt that they didn’t have the authority, 
the influence, that they required to recommend on major economic development programming in northern 
Saskatchewan. So therefore, Mr. Minister, you know they lost interest in the program because of the lack of 
follow-up by your department. 
 
The question I want to get on with, Mr. Minister, is the policy with respect to the wild rice industry. What is 
your policy with respect to the wild rice industry and how much funding have you allotted for that particular 
industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I can’t really say why . . . I’ll answer the first part of the question first. I 
can’t really say why the communities lost interest in that revolving loan thing, but I’m glad that you do agree 
that it wasn’t working and that changes were necessary, and we’re implementing those changes. 
 
With regard to the past minister and how it was shifted to our department, that was a compliment to the past 
minister, because he recognized the importance of that particular program. And that’s why they shifted the 
revolving loan and the northern economic development into our Department of Tourism and Small Business, 
where we can properly deal with it. 
 
But getting on to the wild rice situation, probably the major thing that has been accomplished by us that was 
long awaited for was the wild rice processing plant. And certainly as soon as that plant was put in, what it did 
was just raise up the standards and credibility of the wild rice product itself. So now that helps us go on and do 
the marketing. It certainly helps us with the pricing that makes it a more viable industry for the people in the 
North that are in wild rice. And of course, along with all that, we are in a better position, stronger position, to do 
more research, because now we have the actual processing plant right there, so that we can grow it, harvest it, 
process it, all in the same area, which jut makes total economic sense. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Yes, Mr. Minister, I had raised the specific question of what type of funding you were providing to 
that industry, in terms of the management, the research and development function, the marketing function, etc. I 
wonder if you may have those figures available with you. 
 
I just want to add, while we’re on the subject of the wild rice industry, there was some concern expressed just 
over the weekend that a portion of this program was to be administered through the community college board. 
You may want to comment on that as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’m delighted to say that our government recognizes the importance of the 
wild rice industry in the North. And assisting with research . . . For instance, our Department of Agriculture is 
becoming involved in that. And I understand that there may be some positions . . . I can’t speak for that 
department, but there may be some positions available for that. I can’t particularly discuss or answer about the 
community colleges. I’m sorry; I don’t know. That’s not my area, and I won’t respond to that. 
 
But the revolving fund is available for the purchase of equipment by the operators. Our  



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2281 
 

government helped fund the plant itself, because we recognize the importance of the processing plant. Our 
department works directly on marketing and a system in developing new markets for disposal, and I believe that, 
to date, we have been able to dispose of all of the wild rice that has been harvested to date without any problem. 
And, along with that, we have effectively used all the various agreements that are available to us with our 
federal counterparts, to assist in implementing these projects and getting as many people involved in them as we 
can, and we will continue to do so. So, in other words, it’s just a total big umbrella, and we recognize the 
importance of that industry. And we’re putting in a lot of effort, not only through my department, but through all 
levels of our government. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Well, Mr. Minister, I look at your blue book here, and it talks about an economic development 
budget for northern Saskatchewan, and that particular budget is down from 1.4 to $200,000, which is hardly a 
drop in the bucket, so to speak. 
 
And then again we had a minister on that side of the House announce that the North would be provided with an 
economic self-sufficiency strategy on July 16, 1982. At this point in time, we haven’t seen or heard of any 
definite plan by your government with respect to an economic development strategy for northern Saskatchewan. 
 
We realize that at the moment we have unemployment as high up as 95 per cent. On the average it’s 66 per cent. 
Welfare rates have increased by 50 per cent. Incarceration of our native people are up by 63 per cent. Only 2.5 
per cent of the total enrolment in our universities and technical training institutes are of native ancestry — 2 per 
cent, 2.5 per cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, we, in northern Saskatchewan, get our share of welfare, unemployment, rip-offs, and jails. I ask 
you, Mr. Minister: when are we going to get our share of jobs, of economic development programs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yew: — When are we going to get our share of economic development opportunities? The PC government, 
your government, provides for your corporate friends, your corporate friends and your big business friends. We 
have all kinds of give-aways and hand-outs, Mr. Minister, in the form of tax and royalty holidays, which costs 
and creates a loss for Saskatchewan by well over $100 million — losses to Saskatchewan — tax and royalty 
holidays that costs us well over $100 million. 
 
Your government also has a deficit, produced a deficit of $829 million. This is also . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . The member for Moosomin wants to know who draws up my speeches. I want the member from Moosomin 
to know that I do my own homework, and I do my own speech writing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yew: — I haven’t gut the lustre that you members have on that side of the House with a full bureaucracy to 
back you up . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Minister, getting back to the issue at hand, your government has a deficit — created a deficit of $829 
million, and it’s costing the people of Saskatchewan well over $11,000 an hour to pay the interest payment on 
that deficit. It’s costing us well over $100 million . . . Pardon me — not over 100 million, but $92.6 million in 
high interest payments. And this is money going to rich people — to the banks, the bond dealers from the East. 
The banking institutions, the bond dealers don’t need that kind of money. That kind of money should be going 
to people in this province to create jobs, to create employment. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you: we have $700 million worth of renewable and non-renewable resources  



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2282 
 

being extracted from northern Saskatchewan — mineral resources, mining, forestry, tourism, you name it — we 
are losing a lot of resources in northern Saskatchewan. We are contributing significantly to the provincial 
treasury, somewheres in the tune of $700 million. I ask you, Mr. Minister, when are we going to see our fair 
share of return for northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, I wish you would have referred to all the numbers in this book instead of just the one 
that you did. Northern economic development — almost $1.7 million. The Special ARDA — almost $1.4 
million. And you referred to one specific grant of 200,000. So I think that if you’re going to talk figures, you 
should talk all of them. 
 
Now along with those, which amounts to over $3 million, we’ve got the loan fund in place which, hopefully, 
will reach another million. Plus, for the first time, we’ve got a Department of Tourism and Small Business, and 
the North will be able to qualify for all of our programs. And this is a new department, as you very well know. 
And you can see what we intend on doing so that they can qualify for all of these programs as can the other 
business people of the entire province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I agree with you about the resources and the tourism. And I agree with you about that mine — $700 
million. You people built it. Then at your last convention you said close it. We didn’t say close it; you did — 
$700 million. 
 
You wave a little bit of a figure for me about interest and the deficit, and you want to destroy a $700 million 
thing that you installed. And if you want to talk about deficits, we can talk about the deficits of Sask Power. We 
didn’t put those deficits there. 
 
But in the meantime, you did touch on one word — “tourism”. Tourism is something that the past 
administration had never ever dealt with effectively. There have been countless thousands of opportunities lost; 
millions and millions and millions of dollars of lost investment, for the North in particular, because there is a lot 
of things that can go into the North. And I don’t know how much employment that that would have created in 
the last few years, or in the last decade in particular, that was never effectively dealt with. 
 
Well I’d like to inform the member from Cumberland that this government, the PC government, is effectively 
dealing with tourism. We have put tourism in a department that it rightfully belongs, that of small business, and 
we are going to develop tourism and it will catch on, not only in all of the province, but certainly up in the 
North. And it will provide investment and employment opportunities for the people there. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, I hope it’s not going to confuse you to interrupt my colleague from Cumberland’s 
line of questioning, but it looks like we won’t finish before 5 o’clock and I have some areas of concern that I 
wanted to raise. I’m not sure I’ll be able to be here tonight. I’m going to try, but I have some areas of concern I 
was going to raise about some of the direction your government’s taking and especially in light of promotion of 
tourism. Have you a budget allocation, or an amount that you spend, on preparing film or tape or library material 
to use in tourist promotion? About how much money did your department spend in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg would rephrase his 
question because we’re not sure if he asked how much we spent last year, or how much we intend on spending 
this year. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I was just wondering, since you’ve taken office here you’re saying that we lost millions of 
millions of dollars on tourist promotion. I was just wondering what you are doing and how much you have 
spent. How much did you have in place last year? You were talking about . . . There was talk about letting a 
major contract and having some library tape shot, and I was wondering if that was done. And if it was, and you 
have some library material, that you put some package together and are using . . . What kind of a budget are we 
looking at? How much money  



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2283 
 

was committed for that, and how much was spent, and how much are you planning on spending this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, there was several millions of dollars of investment lost because of no 
promotion in the last decade. And it was an economic crime that that was done because there were millions of 
dollars of lost investment. Lost investment certainly means lost employment. The prior administration just 
didn’t believe in tourism, I guess, but we do. 
 
Last year we spent $600,000, roughly, promoting tourism. And we have been doing studies and a strategy 
because we knew that we were going to get after the tourist industry in a bigger way. And this year we are 
adding another $1.8 million to that budget. 
 
Mr. Engel: — That’s not what I asked the minister. I asked the minister: how much money did you spend on 
producing and actual filming and making film and library tape to be used in promotional material? You know 
what the question was. Don’t try and evade the issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, we discovered that our library was non-existent. It was bare. There was no 
library. So we had to do something about that, and we did. And we spent approximately $80,000 on production 
that will be used in all of our marketing this year. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Who did that contract for you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, there were a number of contracts involved of various amounts and types of 
work. They were all given out to local people, and another portion for another area was assigned to an 
advertising agency. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Boy, that minister sure believes in giving detailed answers to the question, you know. Could you 
be any more vague than that to give us that answer? It took you a little while. I waited for that one five minutes. 
Would you take another run at that, and maybe tell me why the Saskatchewan film makers accused you of 
misallocation of funds? Why were the Saskatchewan film makers so upset? They claim you let out $100,000 
contract that went to and was used between two departments for Saskatchewan commercials and for 
Saskatchewan Tourism and Small Business. Saskatchewan Government Insurance took part and you the other 
part. 
 
If these people were all so happy and all went to local work . . . I believe this $80,000 was part of a $100,000 
contract you let, that you let, that upset these film producers. Talked a little bit about it last year, but we weren’t 
getting any more success from our answers last year, from the former minister, than we are from you, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
But, is it true, is it true that . . . Is it true that you let this contract to a Toronto-based film maker that also 
produced the PC Party campaign ads for the 1982 election campaign? One, in the name of Nancy McLean, to 
make a number of films for eight departments and Crown corporations, was one answer, but are these the people 
that you say were building this wide library of stuff? I’m suggesting . . . I’m suggesting she did reasonably good 
work, but she got this job to build some film bank, and you said the stuff is still in the bank. Well, are you 
holding if for the next election, or what are your plans for using this material? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, there again, I wish the members opposite would use the proper research. I 
don’t know where he gets all that startling information to accuse us. 
 
First of all, our department didn’t have a contract, plain and simple, with a Toronto firm. There was no such 
contract awarded in the dollar amount that you’re talking. The film makers never did accuse us of 
misappropriation of funds. You’re reading something from . . Maybe one of your shills wrote something to 
some paper, and you’re using that again; I don’t know what you’re referring to. 



 
May 7, 1984 

 

2284 
 

The important thing that you have to understand, and please understand this: that not all producers belong to the 
Saskatchewan film makers, even if their association may choose to be critical with our government. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


