






















































Hansard: April 19, 1984


1909 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 19, 1984 

 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Raymond Contractors Ltd. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the Minister of Tourism and Small Business, 
the minister responsible for Sedco. My question has to do, Mr. Minister, regarding the awarding of a contract 
by Sedco to Raymond Contractors Ltd., to renovate Innovation mall in Saskatoon. 
 
The minister will be no doubt aware that Raymond Contractors Ltd. is a transplanted B.C. company and only 
recently became registered to operate in Saskatchewan. The construction contract in total was $460,000. 
Some progress payments have been made, in the amount of $32,000 in February, and $167,000 in March. I 
want to advise the minister that there are 16 Saskatchewan subcontractors owed over $300,000 on that 
contract, and not one of them have received a cent. I want to ask the minister: are you aware of the desperate 
position that your inadequate administration of the funds in the operation of Sedco have placed these 
contractors, and that, indeed, many of them are on the verge of bankruptcy by the lack of progress payments? 
 
HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Speaker, no, I’m not aware of the desperate situation. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — A supplemental, Mr. Speaker. The desperateness of the situation is so bad, Mr. Minister, 
that this morning a press conference was held by the subtrades in Saskatoon at 8:30 this morning. They are 
on the verge of bankruptcy, and they are desperately wanting Sedco, and the minister of Sedco, to take 
immediate action to get some money in their hands. Are you prepared to take immediate action and start to 
administer Sedco in a business-like way? 
 
HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been trying to administer Sedco in a business-like way for a long 
time now, but in view of its none the less the situation to which the members refer to has been brought to my 
attention, and we are dealing with the matter at this time. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Minister, are you aware of the desperate situation that the subcontractors are in 
relationship to the contract that has been extended to Raymond construction, formerly of British Columbia? 
 
Are you aware of the problems that the subcontractors are having in respect to payments? 
 
HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Speaker, before I . . . I would like to inform you that I was not aware of a 
desperate situation to which you refer. All right, so let’s clear that up. I am aware of the problems that are 
occurring. That has been brought to my attention, and we are addressing that. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Minister, supplemental. Would the minister be prepared to indicate what problems 
have been brought to his attention? 
 
HON. MR. KLEIN: — I understand that the contractor that was awarded the contract is in financial 
difficulty, and we are presently dealing with it. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — New question. Mr. Minister, when you awarded the contract to this transplanted B.C. 
company, did you do any research into the financial affairs of the company to  



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1910 
 

determine whether it was a reliable company? Because obviously there are many Saskatchewan companies 
that were willing and ready to provide the services to Saskatchewan. Did you check into it? 
 
HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Quill Lakes seems to think that there is a little bit of 
a political overtone in this contract. Yes, he called it a B.C. company. Don’t frown at me . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . All right, let’s clear something up. The contract was awarded by the management that was in 
place at the time of your administration, and it did not appear on my desk at all. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I’d like to ask a further supplemental to the minister. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Proceed. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would appreciate some attention here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the minister: are you aware of whether or not Sedco, when they left the contract to 
this B.C. . . . British Columbia, subplanted company into Saskatchewan, the contract . . . Did Sedco insist on 
the labour and material bonds at the time to protect, at least, the subcontractors in the event of financial 
disaster of this company, which you didn’t check? 
 
HON. MR. KLEIN: — Let’s clarify something. Of course there is a bond in place. There is a guarantee in 
place for the . . . a performance bond in place. This has been the normal practice that Sedco has used for a 
long, long time. The management awarded the contract in the same way that contracts have been awarded in 
the past. We have not changed any systems, and it’s all in place exactly the same as it was when we inherited 
it. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — A new question to the minister. Mr. Minister, you indicated that you had some 
knowledge in respect to the financial problems of this subplanted B.C. company which took over this 
contract. I ask you: have you been contacted by any of the subtrades, the subcontractors, the Saskatchewan 
subcontractors that are in financial problems? Have you been contacted by them, and could you indicate have 
you done anything? 
 
HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t be happier with that question because, if it’s such a 
desperate situation, no, nobody has contacted me. The first that I heard of it yesterday was through my 
officials at Sedco, and I can hardly see the desperate situation that you’re referring to if the contractors have 
made no representation to me. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I suppose that indicates the confidence that the people, 
the subcontractors have in the minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you aware that these people, the subcontractors, eight or nine of them, had a press 
conference this morning in Saskatoon to release the facts of their desperate situation of not having received a 
single cent in progress payments, and they have owing to them over $300,000? 
 
HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Speaker, no, I’m not aware of any press conference that they called, and I’m 
rather disappointed that they choose to go that route rather than contact me first, because I was not aware of 
any problem. 
 

Sale of SPC Generating Plants 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Minister of Labour, the minister in 
charge of Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Two weeks ago, in Crown Corporations Committee, the 
minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation told me that the power corporation was not 
considering the sale of any generating plants 



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1911 
 

 
I will quote the Hansard, on page 772 and 773. The minister says, “We are looking into any measures that 
can improve the efficiencies and lower the debt.” (I’m paraphrasing slightly.) And I say, “Including the 
selling of generating capacity?” The minister says, “No, not including the selling of generating plants.” Then 
I say, “that is, you’re not planning the sale of a generating plant?” The minister: “No.” 
 
Mr. Minister, are you prepared to tell this House today that you are not planning the sale of any generating 
plant owned by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, or that you have not been planning the sale of any 
generating plant of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation during the last, say, six months? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, in the time frame that the hon. member was asking the questions, 
we were talking the year under review. As of today, there is no negotiations or talks going on about selling 
any generation plants of Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Minister, have there, during the last six months, been any negotiations 
going on for the sale of a generating plant for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, yes, there were some negotiations the last couple or six or seven 
months, but those have all failed, and we have no intention, at this time, to continue with any sale of 
generation plants. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Minister, in the Manitoba legislature on Monday of this week, Mr. Gary 
Filmon, the Leader of the Progressive Conservative party, a good man and a very frank man, is quoted as 
saying as follows: 
 

The Saskatchewan government is giving consideration to selling back the Island Falls power plant to 
Flin Flon. 
 

That’s a direct quote from what he said. Is it accurate, Mr. Minister, that during the past several months you 
have been negotiating to sell the Island Falls plant to Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting Company Limited, 
or a subsidiary thereof? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker. Let’s go back a little bit. At the time we took over office, the 
Island Falls plant situation was in the courts, or heading into the court situation under your administration. 
We were fortunate enough to arrive at a settlement as far as the Island Falls project was concerned, out of 
court, and saved the Saskatchewan Power Corporation a substantial sum of money like – maybe, $20 million. 
 
In that agreement, we left the door open for a few months for the Hudson Bay mining that if they so choose 
to take the plant back again, which was theirs initially until you people wouldn’t renew the water rights. We 
negotiated. They came to us in that time period and said the possibility existed that they may like to 
negotiate, which we did. We, as of today, and I’m telling the member opposite that negotiations broke down. 
There are no more talks, the deal is finished, and Saskatchewan Power owns Island Falls. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — You are then, Mr. Minister, telling us that Mr. Gary Filmon is inaccurate and 
out of date in his comments, that you are not considering the selling of the Island Falls Dam to Hudson Bay 
Mining & Smelting. Is that what you’re saying, Mr. Minister? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I just finished telling the member opposite that talks are 
finished. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, we’re well aware of the minister’s very careful phrasing here. In 
the Crown Corporations Committee he didn’t mention these talks. He’s now telling me  



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1912 
 

 
they are finished. Have you any intention of restarting the talks which would involve the sale of the Island 
Falls Dam to Hudson Bay Mining & Smelting? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the member opposite that we were . . . when I 
was making those kinds of statements, it was under the year in review that we were doing with Sask Power at 
that time. As of today, there are no more talks going on as far as Island Falls. I don’t know what can happen 
in the future. If there are savings for Saskatchewan Power and the people of Saskatchewan, we’ll look at 
anything down the road. But as of today . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I want to establish this point, Mr. Speaker. If, in the opinion of the minister, 
and if, in the opinion of the chairman of the board, one George Hill, there are savings for the people of 
Saskatchewan, you then will sell the Island Falls power dam. That’s what you’re saying? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not saying that at all. There are circumstances that come about 
down the road, and we can’t foresee what may come. We could change our minds, but right now the deal 
with Island Falls is off. There are no more negotiations going on, and it’s finished. As of today, there are no 
more talks. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Further supplementary, Mr. Minister. Did you receive, as minister in charge, a 
recommendation from the president of the corporation, or anyone pointing to him, a recommendation in 
writing that the sale of the Island Falls Dam would be in the best interests of Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, there are no more talks going on, and I’m not going to try and look 
into the future as to what might happen. Anything can happen. But, as of today and any future plans at the 
moment, we are not looking at selling Island Falls. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. Does the minister deny that there have been 
negotiations in the past, that these were carried on over the objection of the technical staff of Sask Power, 
and that they were carried on at the political level by Mr. George Hill and members of cabinet, and not by 
any technical people in Sask Power? Do you deny that? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, yes, I deny that. We get recommendations, and negotiations went 
on because of the court case started by you people across the way. And we had that in our negotiations and 
agreement with Hudson Bay. They chose to act on that point in the agreement. We did talk with the company 
for some five, six, seven months. And it all ended that there was no agreement. We could not reach an 
agreement, and talks have failed. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — One final point, Mr. Speaker. Will you indicate whether or not there is any 
date in the future at which you expect talks to resume? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, there is no date to my mind, nor to my knowledge, set for any 
future meetings. 
 

Increases for Public Services Superannuates 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Tuesday the Leader of the Opposition asked me a question that I took notice of, and I would 
like to provide him with the answer today. The question was: will there be a supplemental cost-of-living 
increases for retired persons on provincial government pensions? My answer to the question, Mr. Speaker, is 
that an ad hoc adjustment has been granted in each year  



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1913 
 

for the past 18 years, except for 1967-68 and 1970-71, and this year there will be no exception, and 
legislation is being drafted to provide for an adjustment on the customary date of May 1, 1984. Further to 
that, Mr. Speaker. The Superannuation Act will be amended twice this session on the advice of the legislative 
counsel, who felt that the amendment for the early retirement program should be introduced at an earlier 
date. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Brief supplementary, Mr. Speaker. While I can understand why the earlier 
retirement material might be introduced at an earlier date, and was introduced a couple of weeks ago, what 
has stopped you from introducing the supplement for superannuates a couple of weeks ago? Surely you knew 
that six months ago you were going to do that. Why didn’t you put it in the same deal? Why are you 
cluttering up the order paper with a couple of bills? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, Mr. Speaker, simply put, it was because we followed tradition and 
decided to introduce it at the same time as we normally do every year. 
 

Closing of Regional Culture and Recreation Offices 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I have a question for the Minister of Culture and Recreation. Mr. 
Minister, your department’s decision recently to centralize its operation in the process, and close a number of 
offices in smaller communities, recreation offices in smaller communities – can you tell me how many 
offices you’ve closed, or are bout to close, or are attempting to close, regional offices throughout 
Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. MR. FOLK: — Mr. Speaker, the number of offices across the province that will be closed amount to 
zero. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. New question. Indian Head-Wolseley News clipping says, 
 

The News has learned that the Department of Culture and Recreation is moving their regional office 
from Wolseley, effective the end of this month. Notice has been served. 
 

And do you deny that notice has been served to move the culture and recreation director from Assiniboia to 
Moose Jaw? He is moving to Moose Jaw. Or have you withdrawn that notice? 
 
HON. MR. FOLK: — I will not confirm that there is any movement taking place. It was contemplated at 
one time, but it is no longer contemplated. And the regional offices will remain as before April 1. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Will the minister assure me that Johnston’s job will be secure, and that they are staying in 
Assiniboia, or are they being transferred to Moose Jaw? 
 
HON. MR. FOLK: — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t catch the question there. Will I assure you of which? 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I’ll repeat the question. Will you assure me that the Johnstons, the Johnston family, Mr. 
and Mrs. Johnston – he is the recreation director in Assiniboia. He has been asked to move, and had a letter, 
and was transferred to Moose Jaw. The family prefers to live in Assiniboia. Are you telling me that you are 
not closing that office and moving to Moose Jaw – that they can now stay in Assiniboia? Are you giving me 
that assurance? 
 
HON. MR. FOLK: — Mr. Speaker, I thought I made it quite clear that the offices are going to remain as the 
19 regional offices around the provinces. Therefore, Mr. Johnston will be remaining in Assiniboia serving 
that area. 



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1914 
 

 
Now I might want to add at this point, Mr. Speaker, that the number one priority of the Department of 
Culture and Recreation is to provide the best service possible around the province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. FOLK: — And I am very surprised that it has taken the opposition this long to ask these 
questions. Mr. Johnston will be staying to serve that area, and he will be serving it as good as he has in the 
past, probably even better. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Just one final question. Are you waiting for the opposition to make the decisions? We 
have a copy of a letter that was written from the South West Recreation and Parks Association. We let those 
people make the decisions and decide. And he writes, and for the record, and as a baseline information for 
this new question, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read just two short paragraphs into the record: 
 

On behalf of the South West Recreation and Parks Association, I would like to express our deepest 
concern over the Department of Culture and Recreation’s proposed centralization of regional culture 
and recreational consultants. 
 
The decision by your department seems to have been made without any consultation with the people 
being served by the Department of Culture and Recreation. 
 

Are you now going to admit that when the pressure came on, you changed your mind and you decided to 
leave them there, like what was originally put in place and have been there for a long time and serving the 
people well without – without, I say – any political influence? We didn’t get involved because we wanted 
these people to decide. Are you saying you changed your mind, you’re going to stay with the former plan? 
 
HON. MR. FOLK: — Mr. Speaker, once again I will confirm that those offices are going to remain. And 
once again I will state that, as always, the Department of Culture and Recreation’s policy is to provide the 
best service possible. And as far as not being consulted, our department keeps in touch with every recreation 
association, and there is input going on . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I see your lips are moving, but your 
legs are not working very well, I guess, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If I can go on there, service is a number one priority, and we have been in touch with people all across the 
province. And as far as the closings are concerned, they are not going to occur. Indeed, it was contemplated 
at one time, but because of strong representation by various groups around the province, and strong 
representation by some of their elected members – and I might reiterate at this point that this government is 
willing to listen to representation, keep our doors open, and quite a change from that government there. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to direct a question to the Minister of culture and 
Recreation. I have here, Mr. Minister, your letter that was sent out to the recreation regional boards, and the 
policy that you state here is: “another component that facilitates this new thrust will be a consolidation of our 
regional offices into eight zones.” I ask you: when you sent these letters out, was that the policy, and are you 
saying that now it is no longer the policy? 
 
HON. MR. FOLK: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how many times I have to cover this. At one time that was 
proposed, very correctly, and right now the regional offices are remaining open as before. 



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1915 
 

 
MR. KOSKIE: — In respect to the . . . As recently as April 5th . . . I guess my supplementary question to 
you, Mr. Minister, because I’ve been getting representations from the various . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. It’s very difficult to hear in the Chamber. I’d ask for order. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — What I’m asking you: when did you advise the regional offices that the policy which you 
put into effect is no longer policy? Because we are getting letters and concern as recently as April 5th in 
regard to the consolidation of the Humboldt culture and recreation offices. When did you renege your policy 
and state a new policy? 
 
HON. MR. FOLK: — Mr. Speaker, every community involved and every recreation board involved should 
be aware of that by now and probably quite some time ago. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Tabling of SGI Annual Report 
 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to table this morning 
the 1983 annual report for SGI. The record of operations will show a very good year indeed on both the 
compulsory and general side of the corporation’s business. 
 
I am pleased to announce to this Assembly that the Saskatchewan auto fund, which used to be called the 
AAIA, recorded a surplus of $27.5 million for 1983. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, this totally eliminated the accumulated deficit of $12.6 million 
and, in fact, established a reserve of $14.9 million. That reserve is the first since 1978. The auto fund, which 
operates on a break-even-over-time basis, has finally recovered from the very severe losses of 1979 and 
1980. 
 
I am especially pleased at this performance in light of the fact that under this government Saskatchewan 
motorists experienced the smallest increase to licence plate insurance in many, many years – 3 per cent in 
1983, Mr. Speaker. And what’s more, as I indicated last month, we will not apply to the Public Utilities 
Review Commission for an across-the-board increase for 1984. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — But I would be remiss, Mr. Speaker, if I didn’t mention that Saskatchewan 
drivers had much to do with this good performance. The number of claims in 1983 decreased by 9 per cent. 
The weather was mild and there were fewer accidents. This proves to me that Saskatchewan drivers are 
generally safe and responsible drivers. 
 
Good management of the fund also contributed to the positive showing, Mr. Speaker. Decreased 
administrative expenses in 1983 played no small role in the auto fund’s bottom line. And on the competitive 
side of the business, there was also good news. SGI’s general business has recorded a profit of $9.8 million 
after record losses in 1982. That profit, Mr. Speaker, came about after SGI settled an important part of a 
large international reinsurance contract, the details of which are all too well-known to members of this 
Assembly. The settlement which, by the way, was very skilfully negotiated by SGI management, allowed 
SGI to reduce its claims liabilities by more than $20 million. This, in turn, was responsible for the positive 
net result—the $9.8 million profit. I think it’s clear to all members that the new management of SGI has 
started to turn that corporation around. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1916 
 

 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — That management and those employees have worked very hard to get SGI 
back on a solid and profitable footing. And I think these results speak for themselves. I want to personally 
congratulate all SGI employees for a very successful year. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I reply very briefly to the remarks of the minister. Not having 
had an opportunity to study the report, we will obviously have more detailed comments at a later time. 
 
We are naturally very pleased that the automobile accident insurance fund, the automobile fund as it’s now 
called, has had a good year. That was virtually inevitable with the increase in the deductible to $500. The 
number of claims must be down very, very substantially. The administration costs are not remarkably down. 
 
Because of the fact that the number of claims are down, you have eliminated many, many small claims from 
the fund. They are now dealt with by Sask Government Insurance in another way, if the person’s had a 
package policy, or by other insurers. The expenses are still there, but they’re simply not being paid by the 
fund because the fund has withdrawn the substantial amount of coverage. 
 
With respect to the general business, we are seeing exactly what was predicted a year ago. The loss of a year 
go was purely fictitious. As I recall it, that particular report I said ought to be a strong contender for the 
Governor General’s Award for fiction. 
 
The minister has now confirmed that, and tells us that of all of these losses, which never had been incurred 
but he said were going to be incurred last year, have not, in fact, been incurred. In fact, 20 million of the 
losses have evaporated, were never there, but are now gone, and he is able to declare a profit. 
 
It is, indeed, a result which everyone fully expected, since nobody believed his last year’s report. Nobody 
really believes his this year’s report, in the sense that the $20 million recovery was not a recovery because 
there was no real loss. Once those two years of pure fiction are eliminated, we will see how the minister gets 
along when he is not moving fictitious sums from one year to the other, as he has done in this report. 
 
I am glad to have him acknowledge that his last year’s figure was pure fiction. And I am glad that the report 
will now reflect some measure of reality, and we can find out what’s going in this report, and we will not 
have it clouded by allegations, purely spurious allegations, that massive sums have been lost in some 
reinsurance contract, which he now freely and fully acknowledges were false allegations. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Hepworth that Bill 
No. 49 – An Act to provide Counselling Assistance and Loan Guarantees to Farmers be now read a 
second time. 



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1917 
 

 
MR. ENGEL: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a matter of serious importance to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan that we’re dealing with today. I received a copy, requested a copy from the agricultural 
minister’s office this morning, and I have here an application form that’s entitled: 
 

Application Form, Counselling and Assistance Service, and Assistance for Farmers. 
 
Instruction: This form must be completed in ink. Read, sign, and date. The declaration and 
application will not be processed without the signature. Counselling and Assistance for Farmers, 
Room 106, Walter Scott Building, Albert Street, Regina. 
 

And there’s a toll-free number. 
 
This application, Mr. Speaker, has 2, 4, 6, 7 pages of questions that ask everything that can be asked about a 
farmer and his family and their affairs that exists. They omit a few aspects of his very, very private life, and 
that’s about all. 
 
Like Mr. Trudeau once said, he has no business in the bedrooms of the nation. That’s about the only area 
that’s left out of this application form. It is got to be . . . If you’ve looked at this application form, and I’ve 
made copies of it . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I have. It’s a good application form. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — The member for Kelvington-Wadena says it’s a good application, and so I well can 
imagine, because this application form is going to be, according to the legislation, is going to be sent to . . . 
Well, let me read from Clause 6(1), application for assistance: 
 

6(1) Any farmer may apply to the program chairman, in the form required by him, for counselling 
assistance. 
 
A farmer whose financial situation has deteriorated to the point where he is unable to obtain 
sufficient operating funds and who: (a) is a resident of Saskatchewan and (b) his net worth is not less 
than 500,000 and (ii) 50 per cent of the value of his assets; may apply to the program chairman, in 
the form required by him, for counselling assistance or a guaranteed operating loan and counselling 
assistance. 
 
7(1) If the program chairman is satisfied that an applicant is eligible for counselling assistance, or a 
guaranteed operating loan and counselling assistance, he shall, taking into account the applicant’s 
specific situation, geographic location, designate (here’s the point that we’re worried about) 
designate any three or more members of the committee to sit as a panel to review the application, one 
of whom he shall designate a chairman of the panel. 
 
The program chairman shall advise the applicant in writing of the name, address and phone number 
of the chairman of the panel established to review his application. 
 
(3) the applicant shall . . . 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. We’re in second reading on this bill, and in second reading we deal with 
the overall intent of the bill. We don’t deal with specifics such as you’re getting into at this point. I think 
those specifics would be better dealt with in committee of the whole where amendments could be proposed. I 
would ask the member to deal with second reading items. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This piece of legislation, the general principle of a farmer 
making an application and saying that he is in distress, he needs some assistance, is very imminent. If we 
watched the news last night, and if you reviewed the situation that Art Jones  



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1918 
 

reviewed up in the area of north-eastern Saskatchewan, where in one R.M., Mr. Speaker, on last night’s 
news, 50 per cent of the land is up for sale – 50 per cent; 40,000 acres of cultivated land in one R.M. is up for 
sale. I am saying to this House that this piece of legislation, and there’s only one specific item I wanted to get 
into, Mr. Speaker – I don’t want to deal with all the aspects of this bill, I’m not going to go into it – but 
there’s one little area that I have to read from the bill, and I wish you would give me permission to read from 
clause 7, to say when the farmer fills out this application form he fills out everything – everything. There is 
not a question left unanswered about his personal affairs; and his investments, his income, his entire 
background is on this form. 
 
This form is then made public to a local committee. This form is given to a local committee, Mr. Chairman, 
and the local committee that’s appointed by the government opposite reviews this application, and I wanted 
to read into the record to make sure I wasn’t misreading it. I started by saying this is a very important piece 
of legislation. Mr. House Leader, Mr. deputy deputy house leader, the Minister of Health, is likely going to 
be piloting this bill today. This bill isn’t important enough for the agriculture minister to sit here. They want 
to rush this bill through, and where is the Minister of Agriculture this morning? We’re accused of dragging 
our feet on this bill, and the Agriculture minister hasn’t got time . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The member has been in this House for a long time, and I’m certain that he is aware 
that to draw attention to members that are not here is not within his right when he is speaking on any piece of 
legislation or any item in the bill, or any bill. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, as far as the rules of this House are concerned, I don’t want to question your 
authority and your rulings. You have the right to run this House as you please. 
 
I felt that this is such an important bill. I was being accused by heckles across the floor yesterday for asking 
for leave to study this bill overnight last night. I was accused of dragging my feet and not hurrying through 
this bill. And today when we’re supposed to be discussing it, I get sat down because I’m concerned because 
the minister isn’t here to discuss it with me and to listen to my concerns. If he doesn’t answer my concerns 
immediately, I am directly my direction to the Minister of Health who likely will be piloting the bill through 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Okay, he says he will, so I have the right source. So I will be dealing with you, and you will be held 
accountable by the farmers for the kind of bill you’re passing. 
 
Now the thing that concerns us the most and is the specific line that I want to talk about (and I’m just going 
to refer to one more line – if you rule me out of order I’ll sit down again and listen to your ruling) . . . but the 
establishment of the panel is the key, is the key in this operation. 
 
Manitoba had this same kind of legislation in place for eight months. This legislation is in place in Manitoba. 
It isn’t costing the government one cent. It’s not costing them $4 million like it’s costing you here. The $4 
million here is going to go to hire some political people in each constituency, and in each town, and in each 
area. And I can go to Gravelbourg and I’d say to my farming friends, “Who are you going to have to go to?” 
And they’ll all tell me the same name. And I would make a little wager whose name will be on that 
committee panel that will be reviewing the applications in Gravelbourg. And there are farmers around today. 
 
I want to make one more point to the sharp young lawyer from Saskatoon. I want to make one more young 
point to you. And I want to tell you why some of your neighbours in Vanguard . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Are you listening, or are you wagging your lips? I want to tell the member, Mr. Speaker – now that it’s 
quiet that he can hear me – I want to tell the member that there are farmers in the Vanguard area that will not 
deal with the credit union because they don’t want the three members on the credit union board to know their 
business. So they go to the bank. So they go to a bank. That’s why those farmers don’t deal with the credit 
union. 



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1919 
 

 
I know Vanguard as well as he does, because I dug a house connection into every house in Vanguard. I know 
how many banks are in Vanguard and I know there’s no credit union there. And that’s why I told him that. 
And people all across this province are not making credit union loans, which are good, and I’m not putting 
any aspirations or any . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — State your point of order. 
 
MR. YOUNG: — My point is, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member is misleading the House when he advises 
the House that there’s a credit union in the town of Vanguard. There is not one. I think that that’s a proper 
point, Mr. speaker. There’s not one within 20 miles, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — We cannot deal with a dispute of fact in the Chamber. A member has the right to speak, 
and if he is wrong, you have a right to correct him when you speak. But for me to deal with points of fact, 
whether or not a member is dealing with fact, is very difficult and is not part of my duty as chairman here. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Mr. Speaker, if the member will read the record, he will find out 
exactly that. I said the people in Vanguard aren’t dealing with a credit union. I never once said there was a 
credit union. In fact, I told him before he got up that I’d dug a house connection to every house in Vanguard, 
and I said there wasn’t – there was not. He doesn’t even listen, he’s wagging his mouth instead of haying his 
ears open. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is an issue at stake here in this piece of legislation, and as far as the second reading of this 
legislation is concerned. There is an issue at stake that we’re concerned with. We think you can introduce a 
farm loan guarantee program without putting $4 million into oiling the political machine. You don’t need to 
oil your political machine to introduce a farm loan program because as I said earlier, in Hudson Bay there are 
30,000 acres of land for sale today. 
 
It was on the news last night. And those farmers are in trouble; they couldn’t wait for this loan program. You 
didn’t move ahead with a piece of legislation that was in place to affect those farmers, so they are putting the 
farms up for sale. And do you know what they told Art Jones last night? How many of you listen to the 
news? Did the member for Maple Creek listen? Because her constituency is next. Your constituency is dry – 
your constituency is next. 
 
But do you know what they told Art Jones? The rich are going to buy it. We’ll still farm it; we’ll still farm it 
but we wont’ be our own masters; we’ll be serfs. That’s what they told Mr. Jones last night on the television 
news. 
 
And this piece of legislation . . . These applications, Mr. Speaker, are out in the country. I got my copy this 
morning because I suggested to the agriculture ministers’ office, “they’re available all over; I’d like one for 
this speech this morning.” So they were good enough to give me a copy. These pieces of application are all 
across the country already. The Minister of Agriculture is like Rip van Winkle. He’s been sleeping for 40 
days since this program has been announced, and now all of a sudden he wants to railroad it through and say 
the opposition are holding it up. They won’t give us the weekend to consult with the farmers and see if they 
like it because they went out with these applications – out into the country – and said the NDP are holding it 
up. That’s the kind of way . . . That’s the respect you have for this legislature. 
 
And then when we go to deal with it in the House, where’s the Minister of Agriculture? Is he here to answer 
the questions? Is he here to talk about this bill? No, he’s not; he’s going to put somebody else up. I think it’s 
a serious matter. My colleagues have much to contribute to some of the points that are in here and that we 
could be raising. 
 
I think this legislation is geared to help the right people. It’s there. It can do so much good. 



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1920 
 

 
There’s so much good it could do if they wouldn’t have to go through those committees, if the farmer would 
go and make this application. He’d take it to his credit union or to his bank; the banker would review it and 
say okay, if you can get a government guarantee on this, I think you can make a go. They’d sign and he’d 
have his loan – he’d have his guaranteed loan. 
 
The other thing this legislation doesn’t do, and that doesn’t spell out an interest rate. If you’re so anxious to 
help the farmers, and you’re so anxious, and you believe that the interest rate’s a big thing, Mr. Minister of 
Health, why don’t you put into this legislation an 8 per cent ceiling on the interest? Why don’t you put your 
money where your mouth is, and spend that $4 million for some good, rather than spend it on oiling your 
political machine? Make some changes to the bill that will make it useful, that will prove to the farmers of 
Hudson Bay, and to the farmers of Moosomin, and to the farmers of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, that you mean 
business, and we’ll support it 100 per cent. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MULLER: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a very short few points that I want to make on Bill 49. I 
think this is a very important piece of legislation, and I know that the farmers out in the eastern part of my 
area, and certainly in the Hudson Bay area, are certainly waiting for this. 
 
This legislation will allow $4 million to be utilized as the base fund to support the loans for Saskatchewan 
farmers who are having difficulty financially. There are some very good farmers in this province and find 
themselves in a bind this year, and I think especially of some of the farmers in my constituency who have to 
battle frost, wheat midge, or glume blotch. Through no fault of their own, these farmers haven’t been able to 
raise sufficient crops to meet their expenses and, because of the opposition’s friends in Ottawa, these same 
farmers are now facing high freight rates, lower grain prices, which will prohibit a fast financial turn-around 
even if they could get a bumper crop. 
 
This program will be operated by a group of farmers, not a group of bureaucrats, or bankers, or politicians, 
but a group of farmers. This ensures that every farmer who is a good operator will remain in business. Mr. 
Speaker, some of these opposite have been suggesting that, rather than providing an excellent legislation, 
maybe we should propose some form of debt control. Of course this is typical of the NDP approach: control, 
control, control. 
 
But I remember back during the early 1970s when the operation LIFT (Lower Inventory for Tomorrow) was 
in force. I’m a mixed farmer. I’m not a mixed-up farmer like some of them across the way. The banks and 
credit institutions had a lot of farm loans arrears during that period. The federal government refused to allow 
banks to foreclose on farmers who had borrowed under the farm improvement loan plan. What happened? 
The banks and credit unions simply quit lending money to farmers. I remember going to my banker in those 
days and being refused simply because I was a farmer. If we had chosen that route I suggest the same 
situation would occur today, and soon we would have no farmers purchasing seed, fertilizer, equipment. 
While they couldn’t be foreclosed upon, no one would extend them credit. Mr. Speaker, I think that’s very, 
very serious. 
 
This legislation is more realistic. It exhibits, once again, that this government is truly in touch with the needs 
of Saskatchewan farmers. It proves this government is responsive to the requirements of Saskatchewan’s 
most valued industry – agriculture. 
 
And I’d like to just mention one more little point that was brought up by the member opposite. I see he’s left, 
the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, one of the mixed-up farmers. He’s claiming that this farmer board 
of real good Saskatchewan farmers that have been appointed to look into the financial problems of 
Saskatchewan farmers, that these people aren’t going to be sincere in their job. Does he realize – and I think 
he does – that every credit union in Saskatchewan has elected members that look into financial problems and 
look at farmers’ finances every time they come to a credit union for a loan? And now he’s trying to turn it 
around and say that nobody  



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1921 
 

should be able to look at farmers’ financial positions before they’re handed out money on a guarantee. 
 
I don’t think me, as a farmer, I wouldn’t expect that, and I don’t think the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg would expect the taxpayers’ money to be spent by giving it out. I think the Minister 
of Health made a good motion here one day in the House when he said, “by the pailful.” I think we have to 
look into the financial situations of farmers before we guarantee their loans with taxpayers’ dollars, and I 
want to compliment the Minister of Agriculture for the job he’s doing, and he’s out doing it today. He’s not 
sitting in here. He’s out talking to farmers. We’re doing it. We’re in the country, and I’ll support this bill all 
the way. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TUSA: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to rise this morning in the legislature, to add a few words 
regarding this bill which we are presently debating, and on a day which I believe is a very, very historic and 
important day for the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re well aware that the conditions today place many farmers in this province in a position 
where some of them are having some problems carrying on their operations. Mr. Speaker, we’re aware of 
that, and this unfortunately is not unlike some times we have experienced in the past here in Saskatchewan. 
And we all know, farming in Saskatchewan very often goes in cycles, and that being the case, Mr. Speaker, it 
is the responsibility of a caring and compassionate government to take steps at times to help alleviate the 
condition the farmers find themselves in. This bill, Mr. Speaker, is a reflection of the compassion that the 
Progressive Conservative government is showing the farmers of Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . We know, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. If the members would like to get into the debate, I’ll give you plenty of 
opportunity. But I would ask for order while the member is speaking. 
 
MR. TUSA: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we realize that the farmers in Saskatchewan, in some 
case, are facing difficult circumstances. And let’s look at some of the factors which have caused this to 
happen. Those of us in this House who are farmers – and I must say that on the government benches there are 
many, many of us who are farmers, and are not only farmer, but, in fact, active farmers, Mr. Speaker, such as 
myself – realize some of the reasons why some farmers are having difficulties. And, of course, some of these 
reasons are: the high cost of equipment, which has happened over the period of the last 10 years due to 
inflation. The high cost of repairs, Mr. Speaker, is another factor for this; the increased cost of fertilizers, 
chemicals and, indeed, of fuel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that this has been going on while, at the same time, the price that farmers have been 
receiving for their product has, in fact, been either remaining stable or declining, as it has this year. 
 
For example, we were informed just a few days ago by the minister responsible for the Canadian Wheat 
Board that most products, Mr. Speaker, that the farmer grows, will in fact decline in the coming crop year. 
These are the reasons. May I quote some of the figures that the farmers can expect to receive and what has 
happened . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . A great deal, a great deal. Just listen. 
 
The price of wheat, Mr. Speaker, will decline by 28 cents a bushel in the coming crop year. The price of 
durum will decline by 55 cents. The price of barley will be down 11 cents, and so on and so forth. 



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1922 
 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, the cost of production has been going up; the price received for the product has been 
declining. And, therefore, you will recognize that there are some farmers in this province facing financial 
difficulty. 
 
This bill, Mr. Speaker, is in response to the very real difficulty some of these farmers are facing, a bill 
brought on by concern, compassion, and brought in, Mr. Speaker, with consultation with the farming 
community. 
 
I would like to contrast this, Mr. Speaker, with the measures taken by the former government when they 
faced similar circumstances after they became government in 1971. And we all know in 1971, Mr. Speaker – 
and I remember very clearly myself, having begun farming in those years – that in 1971 there was a 4-bushel 
quota. The price of no. 1 grain was approximately $1.25 a bushel and the outlook looked extremely bleak – 
much more bleak than now. 
 
And what was the response of the hon. members’ government when they were elected in 1972? The people 
who stand here today, Mr. Speaker, and criticize us for this bill which is going to help a great many farmers, 
what was their response? How were they going to help the farmers of Saskatchewan? 
 
They were going to help the farmers of Saskatchewan in 1972 by bringing in that infamous land bank policy. 
That’s how they . . . That was their response, Mr. Speaker. And they told the farmers of Saskatchewan, 
“We’re going to help you by buying your land, and we’re going to buy their land by bidding against your 
brother farmers, your neighbours. That’s how we’re going to help you.” Mr. Speaker, that was their 
compassionate response – to bid against my neighbour so he can’t buy it, and the all-powerful state, 
all-powerful big brother, who has unlimited access to funds can say, “Well, we’re going to buy your land. 
Then you can lease it back forever, and meanwhile, we’ll outbid your neighbours.” 
 
That was their response, Mr. Speaker. What was another response they had? The fuel rebate program, which 
they seemed to bring in conveniently before the election and conveniently remove after the election. At the 
same time they stand and criticize us for not doing the same thing. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have done our share in that regard. We have removed the fuel tax in Saskatchewan – 
the largest single tax cut in the history of this province. And even though the hon. members do not wish to 
recognize it, many, many farmers have been helped by this. And the federal Conservatives in Ottawa, Mr. 
Speaker, under the leadership of Brian Mulroney, are fighting to have the federal sales tax removed on fuels, 
which will help all farmers again in the whole country. 
 
So those are some of their responses, Mr. Speaker. Manipulation of the farmer. In short, manipulation and 
contempt for the farmers in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have introduced this bill in the legislature to take into account the fact that farmers 
need help, that there are some farmers in desperate straits through no fault of their own. They are farmers 
who are hard-working, down-to-earth farmers, who are not overly extravagant, who are doing their absolute 
best to survive. And even with their very, very best efforts, they find themselves facing difficulty. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, having recognized our responsibility to those farmers in this province, we have 
introduced this bill. And we have also done other things, Mr. Speaker, to assist farmers generally in 
Saskatchewan to get through this period of difficult times which, unfortunately, has begun in the last few 
years and is kind of reaching a culmination. 
 
We have introduced the farm purchase program, Mr. Speaker, to help farmers get low-interest loans to 
purchase land. We have a livestock investment plan to help farmers save some money,  



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1923 
 

 
so that they can carry on. We have introduced in this budget the removal of the education tax on the home 
quarter which, once again, will help all these farmers, including the farmers who are facing these difficult 
circumstances. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on and mention many other things we’ve done. But today we’re talking 
about the farm assistance act, and this act is directed towards helping farmers who face the most severe 
difficulties. Mr. Speaker, the hon. member who preceded me talked about Manitoba’s plan. He said in 
Manitoba they don’t have any of these farmer committees. He says it’s not going to cost them a nickel. The 
government’s going to run it in Manitoba. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as the hon. .member from Quill Lake well knows, this government also ran The Land 
Bank Act, and we all know who got the land under this government’s administration of The Land Bank Act. 
 
I suppose, Mr. Speaker, that’s what happening in Manitoba. Same thing, Mr. Speaker, their attitude towards 
farmers is reflected by that member’s comment from Shaunavon or Assiniboia-Gravelbourg who claims that 
it’s good that Manitoba hasn’t consulted the farmers. That’s what he’s saying. He’s saying it’s a great thing 
that the Manitoba government doesn’t consult the farmers. That’s their attitude towards the farming 
community, and I would like the farmers of Saskatchewan to take note of that. 
 
Our government, Mr. Speaker, has set up committees made up of farmers – farmers who understand the 
actual day-to-day problems on the farm – so the farmer who’s having problems will go before fellow 
farmers, Mr. Speaker, not bureaucrats. 
 
The hon. members opposite would like to see the farmers of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Don’t include me in that statement. Don’t include me. 
 
MR. TUSA: — I will not include the member from Regina North West who wishes to be disassociated from 
the hon. members opposite. I don’t blame him. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, he didn’t think about that 
quickly enough. Unfortunately, he never thought about that quickly enough because, about a week ago, he 
stood up and he said, “I’m against you and I’m with the NDP,” and he walked over there. He says, “I oppose 
you, like the NDP do.” And today, he sits in this House beside the hon. members. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s the attitude of the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg who said that it’s a good 
thing in Manitoba that farmers who are having problems have to go before bureaucrats instead of farmers. 
Well, we disagree with that, Mr. Speaker. Here in Saskatchewan the farm assistance act, our farmers who 
have problems are going to go before farmers, not bureaucrats. You see, there’s the fundamental difference. 
 
Well, the hon. members opposite always make a big show of caring about the farmers. In actual fact, they 
never do it. For example, about a few days ago, they stood up in this House and they voted against the diary 
producers, and we hope you all remember that. They’re the same people who got up next day and made a big 
show about caring about farmers. They’re the same people who stand in the House today and criticize the 
Progressive Conservative government for trying to do something to help farmers in distress. That’s the kind 
of double-talk we see here in this legislature. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think I have amply pointed out that our government is extremely concerned that those 
farmers who need it most receive help. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, I think it should be clear to the people 
of Saskatchewan that, while the members opposite, the official opposition, pretend to care about farmers, 
when the chips are down they actually have no faith in Saskatchewan farmers at all. None at all. They stand 
here in the legislature and vote against the farmers. They stand right here in the legislature and vote against 
the farmers, and today we saw  



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1924 
 

 
the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg stand in this House and say that the Manitoba method of farmers 
going before . . . (inaudible) . . . bureaucrats, the farmers going before bureaucrats for assistance, is superior 
to farmers going before farmers, which we have in this bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for that and many, many other reasons, because we recognize the importance of farmers, and 
the ability of farmers to make decisions for other farmers . . . for that and other reasons, Mr. Speaker, I will 
be most happy to support this bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I want to begin by saying that in our caucus and by the efforts of the agricultural critic, 
the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, certainly it illustrates that our caucus is indeed concerned with the 
plight of the farmers in this province. I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the minister, the critic for 
agriculture came in with a five-point platform which would in meaningful way address the problems 
confronting farmers. 
 
We on this side, as I said, indeed indicate our support for measures which will assist the farmers in the 
difficult times, the importance of some action which would assist, indeed, one of the most important 
economic sectors in this province. But I want to ask this House and the people and the Saskatchewan 
farmers: what are the Tory government trying to do here? 
 
I want to say it’s fluff, it’s rhetoric, and it’s not fully meaningful. I want to say that when they dealt with the 
oil industry to get it going, $350 million of write-off royalties and taxation, that’s what they have done. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. Order, order. The member from Quill Lakes seems to be getting quite a 
ways off the bill. The bill deals with the counselling assistance loan guarantees to farmers, and I would ask 
the member to stay on the bill. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I respect your ruling, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’m going to stick to the bill. And I’m 
going to say that what they’re putting up here as fudge, fluff, to address the problems of the farmers of this 
province, is $4 million they say. And that’s what they say. That’s the magnitude of what they’re prepared to 
put up to protect the farmers of this province — $4 million! 
 
And what did they do the oil companies? This is a contrast that I have to be able, be allowed to put in here — 
$350 million to the foreign oil companies. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I’ve already ruled on this. Is the member from Quill Lakes challenging the 
ruling of the Chair? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The bill before the House is Bill No. 49. I would ask the 
member to stay on the bill. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I’m not challenging, but here in this bill I’m talking about the principle of this bill. And 
within this bill and within the budget there is a financial package which is put forward to the people of this 
province. 
 
Agriculture, I think we can agree, is one of the most important economic segments in s. You know what this 
program is initiated, is supposedly to cost? Four million dollars. And all I am saying is that in other priorities 
they have had substantial amounts, and the oil companies is the example. 
 
I want to go on further, that this government attempts to indicate how important that they bring in this 
legislation right away. Do you know what? We’ve had the budget. We’ve had the problem developing over 
the course of the year. Farmer after farmer that I’ve talked to has indicated the problems that he’s having. 
And this government stood and did nothing. And today, two days, introduced on Tuesday, and today they are 
saying they want it passed. 



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1925 
 

 
I would have thought that what we would have heard in this debate is the members get up and not talk about 
he past, but talk about he magnitude of the problem. I thought they would come forward with a total analysis 
of the problems out there. I thought that they would have gone to the Farm Credit Corporation, and that the 
minister would have been able to indicate how many have financial problems. I thought that they would have 
provided to this House, the statistics of how many are having problems with other financial institutions. 
 
But we get no analysis of the problem; we get no opportunity to discuss the nature and the direction of this 
bill with farm groups, as an opposition. I say further, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to know exactly how 
much of this money the estimate will be spent, and I ask: how many farmers are they really going to help? I 
think that there should have been before this House that analysis, and they have failed to do it. This is just a 
baloney sandwich as I said in my . . . wrapped up to sell to the farmers and try to satisfy them, but it’s not 
going to satisfy the needs, I’ll tell you. 
 
The problems are real. The farm problems are very real. The cash flow, lack of delivery of quotas. There are 
increased rising costs in all the input, and a decrease in the return on the sale of the commodities produced by 
the farmer. And one other aspect is the farmer’s facing increased cost of transportation. 
 
Those are the essential problems that are out there. And I am amazed at the position that this government 
takes. Here we have a very serious problem, as the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood has indicated. 
He said it was serious, and I agree, but although they haven’t brought any analysis, but we have done our 
own analysis. And he says, “You know, we have been helping farmers and we’re continuing.” He said, ”We 
put in the farm purchase program, and we subsidized the interest rate for farmers to purchase land.” And we 
agreed with that when that bill was passed. 
 
But just look. Here we have a major problem of already established and active farmers, many of who are 
going under, and you know what the best they can do in this bill? They said, “We’ll come forward and we’ll 
only guarantee the interest that you can get at a financial institution.” Won’t subsidize to save farmers, but 
apparently will continue to subsidize to expand farmers. Doesn’t make sense, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’ll tell you that there’s an area over in Hudson Bay where there’s a desperate situation taking place. 
Hundreds of quarters are going to be sold. Farmers are going to be driven off their land, not by their lack of 
effort, but by the whims of nature and the difficulties that they’ve had in respect to . . . (inaudible) . . . 
conditions and disease to their grains. That problem has been going on. The farmers have organized. They 
have met with the opposition. They have pleaded with the government opposite to address that problem, and 
they haven’t address it. And here they come forward and they say, in the words again of that would-be 
member from Last Mountain-Touchwood, that this is a historic bill. 
 
Well it doesn’t take much to become historic when the Tory puts forward such . . . This bill, we are going to 
go along with it. It doesn’t, in fact, meet the basic problem that is there and which has been outlined by my 
colleague, the critic for agriculture. 
 
But I want to put forward these application forms, Mr. Minister of Energy — the one that gives the money 
away to the oil companies. He’s chatting. These forms have been out, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Some of the 
farmers have already been trying to see whether they can get assistance. Do you know what happened? I had 
a phone call this morning. I was in my office this morning at 7 o’clock. At a quarter to 8, a concerned farmer 
from Riceton phoned me, and he said, “I have gone to see whether I can get assistance under this program.” 
 
He said, “I have a half section of land.” He said, “I only wanted $5,000 to $7,000.” He said, “They told me to 
get out of the office.” He said, “First, they said, you haven’t got an economic unit; half section you can’t live 
on.” (Despite the fact that he does, and supports his family. He’s an  



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1926 
 

 
intensive farmer.) 
 
They told him that he might as well get out of the office; this program wasn’t for him. He asked for 5 to 
$7,000, and they told him literally it wasn’t for him . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Right. Turned him away. 
 
Do you know what they said? Do you know what they further said in respect to this program to him? “Why, 
you’ll get only $5,000. By the time the legal fees are paid for by you, there won’t be anything left. This 
program you can’t go under $25,000,” they said, because the legal fees to draw up the documents to put it 
into effect, they said, would eat up the revenue. 
 
I want to say that there’s also another farmer in that same area, three-quarters of a section of land—
three-quarters of a section of land – and I’ll tell you he received the same treatment. 
 
This program . . . I’d like the Minister of Agriculture to be here. I want to know who he consulted with. Who 
drew up this plan for him? I have talked to a number of farm organizations, and I’ll tell you they are saying 
they haven’t been consulted. And by forcing this bill through today, that’s what you want to do. 
 
On one day, two days it’s been before us, I’ll tell you we’re going to let it go through. We’re going to let it 
go through, but the deficiencies lie on your back. Your deficiencies lies on your back. Can you feature, can 
you feature, one member stands up and says, a historic bill, a historic bill. And when we look around this 
House, Mr. Deputy Speaker – no Deputy Premier, no Premier, no Minister of Agriculture, no Minister of 
Parks. Can’t find, can’t find, can’t find an agricultural spokesman. 
 
Do you know who we’re going to deal with, with this historic bill? I’m going to deal with the Minister of 
Health. Just imagine. And they’re trying to tell us that this is historic and important bill. 
 
Well I’m telling you, out in Saskatchewan today, awareness – a new awareness – is suddenly developing. A 
new awareness, and this here fudge and puffery that is being put forward here is not going to do the job that 
needs to be done. 
 
I urge the members opposite to consider, consider seriously what I’ve said. I ask you not to laugh at the 
miserable pittance that you’re putting out towards pretending to help farmers. I ask you not to laugh. I ask 
you take this problem serious – very, very serious. And I ask you to look at the programs of financial 
assistance to farmers in agriculture in Alberta and in Manitoba. I ask you to look at the five-point platform 
that was put forward by my colleague, the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, on behalf of our caucus. 
 
I want to conclude, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by saying that I am disappointed, disappointed in the slowness with 
which the minister addressed the problem. I am disappointed in the way and the magnitude with which he is 
attempting to resolve the problem. What he has in this bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will not resolve the 
problem. 
 
Secondly, the whole process is very long. It’s very complicated, and I don’t think there’ll be many farmers 
availing themselves of it. 
 
I conclude by saying that what we need is action, substance, and immediately. This bill fails to provide 
substance in the way of help to farmers and it’s much later than it should have been. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. YOUNG: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ve been listening to the debate this morning on the 
second reading, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and certainly with some amazement. Particularly  



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1927 
 

the members opposite who have spoken have really got my interest up on just how they would imagine any 
program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to run. 
 
The member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg would presumably, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the former owner of 
Allen Engel Construction Ltd., would have farmers come in, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and cross their hearts as to 
being in need of assistance. He’d have them come in and saying, “I promise I need some help.” He certainly 
wouldn’t have them disclose, Mr. Deputy Speaker, their particular financial plight in the circumstances of 
their operation. No, he wouldn’t have them do that. He’d have them come in and make a Cub’s honour that 
they needed the money. That’s how he would have it. 
 
His friends in Manitoba, he says, don’t provide any money and it’s going to cost us 4 million. And he lauds 
his friends the Pawley NDP government in Manitoba for not spending any money. Certainly that’s the NDP 
track record and I could see how he would like to see that come to pass here. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to spend money, we’re going to spend 4 million to help out viable farmers in 
need of assistance. I think that’s quite a key word that hasn’t been addressed to any great length today. And 
by that, Mr. Speaker, if we refer to the Minister of Agriculture’s speech on this second reading bill yesterday, 
he points out that there’s a third of the farmers who are in virtually no debt. 
 
There are apparently two-thirds of them that have some degree of debt. Certainly, all the farmers in debt are 
not viable. All the farmers in debt are . . . Some are viable, some are non-viable, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
what we’re trying to address in this legislation is viable farm operations who, because of things beyond their 
control, weather, wheat midge, flooding, whatever, have found themselves in the situation where they’re in 
an immediate squeeze where they cannot get their operations in. The banker reviews his security file, and he 
says, “Sorry, Mr. Farmer, my bank policy is I can’t extend you any further credit.” 
 
We come in with a government guarantee which is going to satisfy bankers. They’re quite convinced that 
with a guarantee that the loan will be paid, they’ll help out these viable farmers. Certainly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the member from Quill Lakes stands up and he says that if there’s $5,000 in loan that would come 
from this program, it would all be eaten up in legal fees. And I just don’t understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
how any legal fees at all would be involved in this situation. With a government guarantee, Mr. Speaker, I 
would put it to you that — and I’d put it to the member from Regina North West – that the banker will not 
require anything more than the government guarantee to help out the viable farmer in need of assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the salient points here that I think are worth noting is that the program is going to be 
farmer –run, and the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, the Allen Engel Construction Ltd. man, he gets 
up and he says that, he says that this is real bad because it’s going to be all Tories giving loans to Tories. And 
I think if we note here, his record in the legislature is such that he continually makes reference to possible 
pork-barrelling. 
 
Now that is obviously foremost in his mind. When he was a member of the Liberal party for years, his 
construction company went from town to town – went to Vanguard, put in the sewer and water under the 
Liberal administration. I think he is well versed in pork-barrelling and, accordingly, that is first and foremost 
in his mind. He brings that point up time after time after time. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s going to be a farmer-run program, run by farmers, and run fairly, and I think we can 
all count on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s worth noting I think, as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the program does allow 5 per cent of the loan to 
go to capital projects, and certainly one can see how some small capital item could  



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1928 
 

be of great assistance to the farmers. We have a situation if your grain auger motor went on you, and you 
couldn’t put your crop in, that would be a capital purchase you’d have to make, and it would shut you right 
down if you couldn’t make a small capital purchase. 
 
Some of the people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who are not deemed to be viable, and there’s certainly going to be 
lots of those people who have not run their farms in a fiscally responsible manner, have bought up too much 
farmland so that their revenues, at any sort of a yield – at 50 bushels per acre – would not pay for their land. 
 
Those people could only be considered to be land speculators, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and accordingly, not 
being viable, will not qualify for this program. I think, Mr. Speaker, what we’re targeting here is what should 
be targeted, being the viable operations. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would also like to state that this program, in my view, will be very well received in 
the Hudson Bay, north and east end of the country, where they’ve had considerable problems with all sorts of 
wheat midges and floods and gosh knows what. 
 
Some of the other areas of the province haven’t been hit as hard, but it’s certainly a provincial program, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and all farmers who are turned down by the customary money lenders, and who are viable, 
will be able to make application to this program, have their situation reviewed by their peers and, if viable 
and if in need, certainly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will qualify for the program. 
 
I think for any farmers watching the program . . . Certainly me, coming from a city seat, I look at my voters’ 
lists and there’s probably one out of 15 or one out of 20 voters in my constituency of Saskatoon Eastview, 
which is an urban constituency, have on the voters list, farmers. And any of those watching, the forms can be 
picked up at the ag rep offices. 
 
I would certainly urge any farmers who feel they have a viable operation, and who are in need of immediate 
assistance, to get the crop in, in what looks to be an early spring this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, should get 
themselves down to their local ag rep offices and get on with our program. 
 
I would also, as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, like to commend the officials, as was done by the Minister of 
Agriculture in the Department of Agriculture, for putting this program together so swiftly, and in such a fine 
form, and so well thought out. 
 
There’s nothing in the legislation that I can see, Mr. Speaker, that requires any sort of reconsideration or 
amendment on third reading. It all looks good to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I will certainly be keeping my 
speech short. I don’t want to be condemned, as the NDP are, for filibustering any farm legislation, as they 
stalled the much needed dairy legislation. 
 
With these short remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will sit down and let any other members of the House who 
want to, speak on this matter today. I certainly hope we get it through. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, today I would like to express the Liberal position on an initiative 
that was addressed into this legislature, called The Counselling Assistance and Loan Guarantees Act. Our 
position is that it lacks the initiative the farmers require who are having trouble out in rural Saskatchewan. It 
lacks the initiatives to address the problem of capital which they require in many parts of this province just to 
buy the seed and get it in the ground, so they can, in fact, look at a return on their investment in 1984. 
 
Counselling services – most farmers are very independent individuals. They are on the land because they 
want to be a small businessman with responsibility to nobody but themselves, and  



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1929 
 

their abilities have proven that they are right in that respect. And over the last 50 to 100 years in this province 
they have been the most successful, the most successful economic community in Saskatchewan. They have 
proven their ability to manage their business. And this government is saying they don’t have that ability. 
They’re going to counsel these farmers. And what’s it going to cost to counsel these farmers? They’ve got $4 
million that they’re addressing to this problem, and of that $4 million, most of it, I would assume, will be 
counselling. 
 
The cost of loan guarantees to the government was absolutely nil until we have bankruptcies within the farm 
community, and the loans are called. They pay nothing until these loans are called. And I think their lack of 
initiative with respect to the capital into the project is indicative of their lack of knowledge of what’s 
happening in the farming community in some sectors in this province. 
 
We will, out of hand, be forced to support this legislation simply because it’s better than absolutely nothing. 
But it does bring to mind the old picture you see (and I saw it recently in a Royal Bank), where a farmer was 
leaning on a post with his wizened-up horse. His belt was pulled right to the last loop, and he said, “You 
know,” he says, “we’re a day late and a dollar short.” And that’s exactly what this government is with respect 
to this bill. They’re longer than a day late and they’re more than a dollar short. And while we’re going to 
have to support the bill, with respect to the farmers, I hope the government has a little broader initiative to 
address the problems out there. 
 
Bankruptcies in the farming communities – and the member from Shaunavon indicates that everything is 
well in her constituency – bankruptcies in the farming community are at an all-time high in Saskatchewan. 
It’s time that we addressed those problems as a government, as a government. Talk to some of your 
back-benchers. Realize that there are problems out there. The front benches have exhausted that avenue of 
input within that government. 
 
So I will sit, and I will say I will support this legislation, but the caveat of support is that this government 
promise that they address the problems of the farmers out there and not just address the political cream puff 
that they feel is important to get into a budget that’s basically bankrupt of new ideas for farmers in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. PETERSEN: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The opposition has once again show their total lack 
of understanding of a government program. They’ve been grandstanding, playing political games, trying to 
get little points across. 
 
I’m quite upset with the attack that the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg had yesterday on the Minister of 
Agriculture. Once again the opposition has just shown their total negative attitude, another display of 
negativism – total and complete. They showed it when we brought in the farm purchase program that has 
helped so many farmers. Over 2,500 farmers out there have been helped by that program. They showed it 
when we brought in the agricultural credit corporation bill. They voted against a lot of good programs. They 
stood up and they filibustered time and again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Time and again they held up this House 
when needed legislation was on the floor. 
 
They did the same thing again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, yesterday – another filibuster. They’re doing it today 
again. To et back to the milk strike situation we had a week ago, they did then as well. Negativism – time 
and time and time and time again. And do you know why, Mr. Speaker? Do you know why they are 
opposing this bill? Do you know why they are holding it up? They must be opposing it. I haven’t heard any 
of them stand up and say that they agreed with it. Do you now why they are holding this bill up? They want 
farmers to go broke. They want farmers to fail. They don’t want program s to be successful. And do you 
know why? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1930 
 

 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — Order. The member from Quill Lakes. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — We’re not talking about the principles of the bill. I would like to ask whether that . . . 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — Order, order. I’m trying to hear a point of order by the member from Quill 
Lakes, and the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is interrupting. The member from Quill Lakes. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was called to order twice for veering off of the principles of the 
bill, the content, what it does, and its proposals. You allowed the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood 
to go into land bank and all over. Now you are allowing this member to go into every deceivable thing that 
he wants to. Nothing on the bill. And I think if it’s fair that we follow those rules, I think it’s fair that he 
follows them. 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — The point of order is well taken. I would ask the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena to stay on Bill No. 49, An Act to provide Counselling Assistance and Loan Guarantees 
to Farmers. 
 
MR. PETERSEN: — I accept your ruling, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. And I would like to 
continue my remarks, making some comments on the opposition’s comments on the bill. In order to do that, I 
have to go back to some of their comments about the bill. 
 
Yesterday, the hon. member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg said that the Manitoba program was a better 
program than the one we’ve initiated. I ask him who endorses that program? Who endorses that program? In 
his own words, and I’d like to quote from Hansard, April 18, 1984, page 1879. In his own words: 
 

All a farmer in Manitoba has to do is, he has to fill out his application form. He goes to his bank or 
his credit union. The bank or credit union decides whether he qualifies under the terms of it. They 
send it in and they get an endorsement from the government, whether they are going to back that loan 
or not. 
 

An endorsement from that government, Mr. Speaker, our bill puts a framework in place of farmers assessing 
that application. And who should know farmers’ problems better than other farmers? Obviously the member 
wants us to come along and say, okay, fine, we won’t put that in place, we’ll let bureaucrats decide it. We’ll 
put another department in place to decide it. He wants us to spend more money, hire more people, but not 
doing one thing for the farmers. Farmers know farmers’ problems the very best. 
 
If the member opposite had taken time to read the bill, the bill that’s before us today, he would have seen that 
the thrust of this bill is not only towards providing a hand-out. He has suggested that the farmer who is 
experiencing the cost-price squeeze should come in and, as one of my colleagues said, give Cub’s honour or 
Scout’s honour that he really needs it, or I need it, I need it bad. 
 
He doesn’t want them to have to lay out their financial situation. I don’t know why. When I go to a bank or a 
credit union, I have to lay out my entire financial situation. I have to lay out the assets I have, the debts I 
have, the amount of money that people owe me – those are relevant things. And that application form that the 
hon. member held up earlier today, and was so derisive about, has those things in there in a very simple 
form; not complicated and hard to understand. It’s very clear, concise, and direct. 
 
If you take a look at our program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it not only provides hand-outs, it provides 
counselling. The act is an act to provide counselling assistance and loan guarantees to farmers. That’s the 
very title of the act. We are not simply giving out hand-outs, Mr. Speaker. We are  



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1931 
 

giving out much more that that. We are providing education, consultation, rather than the confrontation that 
the opposition would have us set up. 
 
Let’s work together. Let’s get the farmer and the financial institution talking to one another. That’s what this 
government wants. That’s not what he opposition wants, Mr. Speaker. They have attempted time, and time, 
and time again to set up a confrontation atmosphere between the financial institutions and farmers. Why, Mr. 
Speaker? They want unrest, they want instability, they want strikes – that’s the very essence of their being — 
socialism at any cost, at any cost. It doesn’t matter that a number of innocent farmers are going to be 
damaged. It doesn’t matter about the lives of ordinary people – socialism at any and all costs, time and time 
again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on and on. Other people in this Assembly today on our side of the House 
have outlined the program, have explained the program in some detail, and have tried to point out where the 
opposition is mistaken in some of their misconceptions. I ask, once again, that the hon. members opposite 
quite playing their little political games and get on with the job at hand. Quit holding up the House. Quit 
filibustering. Let’s get on with it. The farmers out there are waiting for something. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I listened with interest to many of the members on 
the government side today talking about this very important bill. And I agree it is an important bill, but not 
necessarily in the form that they introduced it in. They criticize us for holding it up for the last two days. 
They had since last fall to introduce a bill. They knew the situation that farmers were in. They knew the 
situation in the Hudson Bay area and all across the North. 
 
But what did they do? They waited until the end or the middle of April to introduce a bill that might give 
some support to these farmers. Where were they since last fall? Where were they all winter and all this 
spring? Why wasn’t this bill introduced at the beginning of this session when they knew what the problems 
were? And now they bring this bill in, and they say, “We have to get it through in a hurry, without having an 
opportunity to look at it, because the farmers need this assistance now.” The farmers needed that assistance a 
long time ago; they needed it months ago. And that’s when this government should have acted. But did this 
government act? No, they didn’t. 
 
This bill is so important that we don’t see any ministers in this House that are concerned with agriculture 
today. We have to deal with the Minister of Health or may be some other minister in this House today. And I 
think it’s unfortunate when a government feels that it’s of so little importance to provide some necessary 
assistance to the farmers of Saskatchewan that the Minister of Agriculture refused to be here to debate this 
bill today and to make some changes if necessary? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member for Kelvington-Wadena talked about the lack of understanding of this party on this 
side, the opposition of the House. Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s no lack of understanding as to the problems of 
agriculture on this side of the House. Because if they didn’t lack that kind of understanding on the 
government side of the House. Because if they didn’t lack that kind of understanding, this bill wouldn’t be 
before us today. It would have been here 30 days ago. That’s when it would have been here. But it’s not here. 
It didn’t come in here at that time. It comes in here now. It comes in at a time where it’s going to be very 
difficult for some of these farmers to be able to get the loans in order to keep farming this year. They’ve 
come to that point where they have either given up or they will not be able to get that loan processed in time. 
 
What did this government do? They went and they sent out applications forms. I don’t know when. There’s 
no dates on them. But they sent out the application forms to the ag reps in the  



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1932 
 

 
country and to farmers, and there was no bill in the House – no bill in the House for the opposition to discuss 
or for the opposition to be able to take to the farmers of Saskatchewan to have a look at. But they had the 
application forms all out. They had those out there. 
 
This is a government that says they’re in touch with people. Well, if they were in touch with people, Mr. 
Speaker, they would have introduced a bill and then put out an application form that would have been maybe 
a better application form, one that would be a little simpler and one that would allow the farmers to get that 
loan long before seeding is over. Because that’s what they’re going to be faced with now. 
 
This government doesn’t do what they say. Most of the time they try to make people do as they say, and 
that’s what they are doing, that’s what they are doing with this bill. They are now trying to criticize the 
opposition for holding it up, which the opposition isn’t. We get into this debate and we will be passing a bill 
that we feel is inadequate, but we will pass it because it’s better then nothing. And that’s about all this 
government has ever introduced for agriculture is a bill that’s maybe just a little better then nothing, but far 
from being adequate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they say that the farmers are waiting for this legislation. Well, they are waiting for it; they are 
waiting to get some money. Btu what do they have to do first? They have to send in an application form 
which has about half a dozen pages to it. And in the bill it says that in order for this farmer to get a loan, he is 
going to have to send his application to the program chairman and the program chairman will advise the 
applicant in writing as to the names of the panel and the committee members on that panel. He’s going to 
have to advise that applicant then of these panel members and then they will decide as to whether his 
application is valid or not. It will be reviewed and then will be forwarded back to the chairman. And it’s 
going to have to take about two or three or four different transactions before that applicant is going to know 
if he will qualify for a loan. Well, Mr. Speaker, the way bureaucracy works, that applicant is going to be 
finished seeding – if he’s going to be able to – long before he gets his loan. So he wont’ know whether he’s 
going to get a loan, and if he doesn’t know if he’s going to get a loan, the bank isn’t going to give him any 
money to get his crop in. 
 
And all that is saying that this government is not introducing a bill that is going to help the majority of the 
farmers. It is introducing a bill that is going to allow this government to appoint some political hacks out in 
the country to that panel to decide which farmers are going to continue in agriculture. That is what this bill is 
going to do. Some political hacks are going to decide who is going to remain in agriculture. They’re going to 
do it at a time when those that won’t get the loan in time are going to have to drop off and give up farming. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — It’s a membership drive. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Speaker, as the member for Regina North West suggested a minute ago, all this is is 
a membership drive. Well, Mr. Speaker, that might be true. However, I wouldn’t suggest that he was right in 
what he is saying. But it is definitely going to be a problem for farmers to get this loan through in time to do 
their seeding. 
 
In introducing that, I’m not sure that they are interested in looking at the situation that’s out there and 
interested in doing it in a very serious fashion, because if they were, they wouldn’t be trying to eliminate a 
good number of the farmers, and this bill is definitely going to do that. It’s going to eliminate a lot of 
farmers. 
 
As my colleague from Quill Lakes said, this bill is nothing more than a baloney sandwich. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I think as some of the colleagues were saying here, it’s going to be awful difficult for some of these 
farmers to even find that baloney in that sandwich. Because all it is, is just a lot of talk – a lot of talk as we 
have heard from this government in the past that tries to make it look good, that somehow the farmer is going 
to see some benefits and some advantages. But when he gets down to trying to receive some of this money 
and to receive it in time, those farmers are  



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1933 
 

 
going to be very disappointed – disappointed because many of them will not qualify. The government, the 
panel, and the people that they appoint to it are the ones that are going to decide who qualifies, who is a 
viable farmer, and who is going to get the loan. 
 
We see a good number of farmers in the Hudson Bay area that do not have the resources to continue farming 
right now, have put their land up for sale, without this loan will not be able to continue, and I would suppose 
that a panel in that are would then say that those farmers are not viable because of their financial situation 
now, and that they will not qualify for this loan. So what kind of assistance is it going to give those farmers? 
 
This bill could have made it very clear as to who will qualify and who won’t. They could have made it very 
clear, that the farmers know just what to expect and whether they could go ahead with some preparations for 
this spring’s work and maybe try to make some financial arrangements, knowing that they will get some 
assistance. But there’s nothing in the bill that makes it clear as to who will or won’t get it. It’s all at the 
discretion of the panel and of the minister, the minister who won’t even be here for the debate today. That’s 
whose discretion it’s at. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s unfortunate that this government would have so little interest in agriculture and 
put so little effort into trying to come up with a bill and then to do some legislation that will try to keep as 
many as the farmers as possible on the farms and continue to farm and continue in agriculture. Some of them 
have been there for years and, because of situations beyond their control and circumstances beyond their 
control, they are finding some difficulties in farming. And all they need is one or two good years to be able 
to continue, and they will continue for a good number of years then. And it is the responsibility of a 
government to see an industry as large as agriculture, to see that this industry can continue. It is the 
responsibility of any government, because a strong agricultural sector, a strong agricultural industry means 
that there is going to be some strength in our economy, some strength for small business people, and those 
are also going to suffer as the farms diminish. 
 
And this government doesn’t seem to care. It doesn’t seem to care the effect that a lack of introducing a bill 
in time or in introducing a bill that would be adequate for the purposes of agriculture, they don’t seem to care 
as to what’s going to happen to rural Saskatchewan. And that becomes more and more obvious, as you see 
who is in this House today debating this bill and the ministers that are here trying to push this bill through. 
The Minister of Agriculture doesn’t seem to care. I don’t see any other rural members that care. The Premier 
isn’t even here – that concerned about it. And yet agriculture is the most important industry in this province. 
 
And I can only say, while we are going to support this bill, we are going to support this bill but not because 
we think it’s adequate. As I said, it is not adequate, but it is better than nothing. But this government wants to 
know everything about the farmer, and they’re going to want to know everything that he does, and that might 
be fair, but when you talk about a panel of people that they hand-pick out in the country, good friends of 
theirs, to tell his neighbour whether he is going to exist in farming or not, I think, is the wrong direction to be 
going in. 
 
They put the money in – $4 million to introduce a bill and to assist farmers. Four million dollars is only 
going to be for the purposes of counselling, Mr. Speaker, for the purposes of counselling because that's what 
he bill was first designed to do. The farmer doesn’t have to be told what his problem is. He doesn’t have to 
be told that the wheat midge created some difficulties for him or that the rains last year drowned his crop out, 
and he doesn’t have the finances to continue at this point or find some difficulties in it. He doesn’t ‘have to 
be told that by some lawyer or some teacher or some bureaucrat. He knows the problems. He knows his 
problem. He knows that equipment is going up. He knows that the chemicals are going up. And he knows 
that he is going to have to pay higher freight rates to move his grain. And he doesn’t need assistance — $4 
million assistance of the taxpayers’ dollars – to have someone tell him that those are his problems and to tell 
him, because he has these problems, that he is not viable; he’s too small a  



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1934 
 

farmer. As my colleague has mentioned, one farmer tried to get a loan, but he is too small and you shouldn’t 
be farming. We, as a government, will give you the freedom to go out there and look for a job because we 
don’t consider you to be a farmer. 
 
That’s what they are telling the small farmers of Saskatchewan. And yet the small farmers of Saskatchewan 
were the ones that built this province to what it is. It was the small farmers of Saskatchewan. And yet they’re 
saying – like they’ve told a lot of other people in this province – we are now going to give you the freedom 
to go and look for a job because we don’t consider you to be a viable farmer. And because of circumstances 
beyond your control, you’ve got yourself in some financial difficulties, we’re going to tell you that you’re 
going to have to leave and somebody else is going to have to take over your farm. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that is not the kind of assistance the farmers are looking for. The farmers are looking for 
some assistance that will give them an opportunity to continue farming, to get their farm back on track, and 
to make – not a large profit; they don’t look for a large profit –just a half decent living, usually below the 
poverty line. They look for a half decent living as long as they can continue to be productive and to put a lot 
of hard work into that farm. That’s all they ask for. 
 
But none of that is addressed in here. All that this government wants to do is set up even a larger bureaucracy 
to control that farmer and to get more information about that individual. And not only the government. We 
could understand if they dealt directly – the banks, the farmer, and the government department. That would 
be understandable. And that would be a lot simpler than what they’ve introduced in this bill. 
 
Why not make it very simple, where you can have the farmer, the bank, and the government department 
decide as to how large a loan this farmer could get? The banker knows the situation quite well. He’s probably 
been borrowing money to that farmer for years. But all the banker needs is a little bit of assurance that if the 
wheat midge hits another year, that this government will stand behind agriculture, that they will protect that 
industry, and that they will guarantee that loan, if necessary. But in most cases I would suggest, Mr. speaker, 
that not too many farmers will default on those loans that they get. 
 
If at all possible, barring any unforeseen circumstances, those farmers will come back and they will continue 
farming, they will continue producing, and they will pay those loans off. So it could fully likely cost the 
government nothing. 
 
And yet this government does not see that, does not provide legislation to this House that will see this 
process go through quickly and allow that farmer to get this year’s crop and hope that everything goes good 
for him. And then he could start paying back some of these loans. 
 
No, they wouldn’t do that. They want to put together an application that wants to know everything about the 
farmer, and not only the government knowing it. They want their panel members, their good Tory people that 
they’re going to appoint out there, to know everything about every farmer that applies for a loan. That’s the 
kind of information they’re looking for. 
 
I’m looking at this application form, Mr. Speaker. It says – and they want the farmer to sign this form, to 
give them that permission that the farmer consents to personal investigation . . . (inaudible) . . . and the 
program panel . . . (inaudible) . . . or his designate. He could designate anyone to go out there and investigate 
every farmer and find out all the information he wants about him. Why would a group of political appointees 
out there, why should they be allowed to have this kind of information? 
 
Why doesn’t the minister do like he’s done in some other departments and say that that kind of information 
only comes to his department and he is responsible for it and it will be kept confidential in his department? 
He did it in other areas, but he won’t do it for the farmers. He  



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1935 
 

 
wants a panel to know everything that’s going on, a panel of appointed farmers, so he says, out in the 
country. 
 
I saw the other night a former candidate – a PC member who ran for candidacy in my constituency and was 
defeated – in this House the other day when this bill was introduced. Now maybe he is looking for one of 
these jobs. And if that’s what we’re saying, Mr. Speaker, I say that this is wrong. I say that the farmers are 
not going to accept that. 
 
But with the time that the government has given us to look at this bill, they are forcing us to introduce and to 
pass this kind of legislation – legislation that will not be adequate to assist the farmers for this crop year. 
 
If they do appoint a group of farmers out there, as they indicate in the bill, to sit on that panel, and if they’re 
good, active farmers, I wonder, at a time like this, when we’re into April 18 or 19, when we’re getting to the 
end of April and some farmers are out in the field seeding now, how many of those farmers are going to have 
time to spend for the next month or two reviewing all the applications that come in? How much time will 
those farmers have to spend on those applications? Or are they just going to sit on those applications because 
they’re too busy doing their own work in order to survive, and the poor farmer that makes that application is 
going to have no opportunity to get I processed in a hurry? 
 
That is only one of the problems. The other is what’s stated in the bill – the number of times that it has to go 
back and forth and get approval from different people. So, Mr. Speaker, this bill is very, very inadequate for 
what was being proposed. 
 
We have given, from this side of the House, a suggestion to this government that could have provided 
assistance for these farmers without all the rigmarole that’s being proposed now – would have got them some 
money in a short period of time. But this government, because of their foolish pride, wouldn’t take any of the 
suggestions we made. They come forward with a bill that’s so complicated that nobody will benefit from it. 
And there’s no real help in that bill for the farmers. They’re going to counsel the farmers as to what their 
problems are. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in closing, I can only say that I’m very disappointed in this government for not taking 
some positive action in helping the farmers. I’m very disappointed that they wouldn’t take some suggestions 
of the opposition and put it into their own bill, and one that would help agriculture, and they would get our 
total support for it. And we wouldn’t ‘have to saddle the farmers of this province with a bill like what’s being 
introduced now. That takes away all their dignity, takes away all their pride, and is going to leave them with 
nothing. But some bureaucrat is going to tell him that you’re not viable and you can get off the farm, and it’s 
certainly not going to help the farmers that need that help at this point. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with great disappointment, I am going to support this bill, but I only wish we had a government 
that could have been a little more positive in drafting this kind of bill. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — How’s the logging going down there? 
 
MR. SAUDER: — Excellent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it gives me pleasure to rise in this Assembly to join in 
the debate which is dealing with one of the most important pieces of legislation before the House at this time 
a bill to . . . I realize our member from Quill Lakes doesn’t feel that dealing with farmers’ problems is 
important. He would sooner be dealing with other party partisan issues. Doesn’t feel that solving and aiding 
the farmers with their problems is important. 
 
This government clearly recognizes that there is a problem out there and has introduced this legislation 
which is going to help many of those farmers. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I spent a lot of time over the last number 
of months talking with the farmers in my area, in my constituency, and listening to their problems. And the 
bottom line always was that: we don’t want a hand-out; we  



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1936 
 

just want the opportunity to be able to continue farming and to put another crop in the ground. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SAUDER: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that speaks for the attitude and the initiative of those 
farmers. They want to be able to produce something on their own, and yet when they get into a situation 
which is beyond their control, they’ve asked us for some form of assistance. And our Minister of Agriculture 
has paid attention to their requests and has brought forward this bill, and now we have the opportunity to deal 
with it in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it gives me . . . causes me a great deal of distress to see the members of the opposition once 
again displaying their lack of real interest, real genuine interest in the farmers and in the agriculture 
community of this province. They sooner want to deal with the petty issues, looking for some cheap political 
gains. Last week they demonstrated – as we dealt with the difficulties in the dairy industry in this province – 
they demonstrated that they weren’t interested in helping the farmers. In three and one-half hours they never 
mentioned it. 
 
Once again today, the agriculture critic, the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, gets up, does not deal 
with the substance of the bill, but only deals with the fact that the farmers, to get assistance, is going to have 
to disclose information regarding his financial situation. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — To his neighbours – say it all. 
 
MR. SAUDER: — He says: only to his neighbours. I do not see anywheres in the legislation where the 
farmer is going to have to disclose it to his neighbours. It says, “to a committee of farmers.” It doesn’t say 
that it’s going to be his neighbours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if he can show me one financial institution in this province or in this country where I can get 
operating money for my farm without disclosing my financial situation, I would love to deal with them, 
because I could certainly have a heyday dealing with those type of people. 
 
The farmers tell me that it’s their neighbours. It is farmers who understand their problems, and they would 
gladly deal with them and present their case to them to have them consider their financial situation and 
recommend assistance for them. 
 
I think we must recognize that he said they should go to the banks like they do in Manitoba. These people are 
farmers who the banks and the financial institutions and credit unions have already refused credit to. He says 
they should go to them. Well, once they’ve already went that route this is a panel who can look at their 
situation and deal with it and recommend that the government will guarantee operating loans. By 
guaranteeing operating loans, they are going to be able to multiply the benefit of that $4 million many times 
over. And I think it’s indicative of the responsibility which this government has taken to provide assistance 
to these farmers. 
 
For another, he tries to slur this government by using innuendoes as to what we’ve done. Another example, 
regarding the news last night, he suggests that there’s 30,000 acres in one municipality for sale. I believe if 
he’d have paid attention to what was on the newscast, he’d have seen that there’s 30,000 acres in the 
north-east region of the province for sale, not in one municipality. Another thing they brought up as a small 
concern was the fact that the forms were sent out . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Order. Many of the members have had an opportunity to speak, and I 
think that the House gave you that opportunity. At this point there’s another member has the opportunity, and 
I would ask that you give him his chance. 
 
MR. SAUDER: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another criticism they had was the fact that the application 
forms had been sent out as soon as possible. They felt that we should have waited. I  



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1937 
 

think if they’d recognize and look at the record, they would see that the forms were sent out some time after 
the bill was on the floor of this legislature. I think they would find that they were only sent out yesterday, 
after this bill was in second reading debate . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It’s maybe time that Canada Post 
did something right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another thing they suggest is that the land bank system helped the farmers. As I go through the 
records of most of the farmers who come to me with their problems, I find that it is the ones who are in a 
land bank situation who are in financial trouble. The biggest majority are former land bank tenants, people 
who have no equity in their operation, and therefore have nothing to offer for security to the banks or the 
credit unions, to secure their loans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve addressed the problems of agriculture in many responsive ways previously, and we’re 
going to continue on addressing them in the future. This is one more responsible piece of legislation which is 
going to do that. 
 
It gives me a great deal of pleasure to be able to commend our Minister of Agriculture for bringing this 
forward. And it also gives me great pleasure to be able to go out and explain to the farmers how this bill and 
how this legislation is going to help them. And it’s good when they thank us for what we have done so far. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I certainly will be supporting it, and I appreciate that all (begrudgingly) the members opposite 
recognize that it is going to address the situation. It is going to provide assistance to those farmers, and they 
also feel they should acknowledge that and should also support it. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GERICH: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to support the bill. 
 
Many farmers in the Redberry constituency are in need of such a program. And the agriculture economy is in 
a very stressful situation in the rural Saskatchewan area. This is a direct result of poor grain prices and quotas 
for red spring wheat, and the farmers have quite a bit on hand. Trying to pay the bills with a 5.8 bushel quota 
from August ’83 through now until April – and in the last week have raised it to 8.7 bushels quota in some 
areas – is fairly hard to do. This hardly covers the interest on operating loans since last spring. And these 
small quotas hardly pay the fuel bills, let alone pay, or even start paying, on the fertilizer bills. The dropping 
of the grain prices last week by the Canadian Wheat Board is just an added stress to the farmers. 
 
The removal of the Crow’s Nest Rate by the federal Liberal government, with the help of the five NDP MPs 
from the province of Saskatchewan, again added extra stress in the higher transportation costs. 
 
The fuel costs are also hurting the farmers. With the removal of the federal fuel tax, it would put millions of 
dollars back into the pockets of the Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
We, as the Government of Saskatchewan, have been trying to help the agricultural economy wherever we 
can. We removed the provincial gas tax on the fuel, saving the farmers and the people of Saskatchewan $135 
million or so per year –unlike the NDP who had a 20 per cent sliding tax instituted on their fuel. This 
government has approached the federal Department of Agriculture on numerous occasions, with no avail, to 
have the federal tax removed. We also have removed the sales tax on electricity to help out on the rural 
sector. We’re unlike the NDP who put a 5 per cent sales tax on the power bills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past few years the input costs in farming have overshot the return on the profits. Also 
the interest rates, high interest rates, have added an extra burden to the farmer. The  



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1938 
 

financial problems and circumstances are hurting many of the farmers in my area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in regard to Bill 49, it will provide help to farmers in the Redberry constituency. It is a move, a 
move to help in some way solve part of the problem, the financial problem of the Saskatchewan farmer. We 
are trying to address the problem out there with no help form the federal government or even the NDP 
opposition. 
 
The very NDP across the way, who are holding up Bill 49, just over a week ago voted with the unions to 
have the dairy farmers pour their milk on the ground and suffer financially, for an extra four hours. Now this 
totally, and I say totally, shows the two-faced attitude of the NDP opposition and the unprincipled attitude of 
the MLA from Regina North West in showing their unconcern, showing their unconcern for the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. They are steadily arguing political rhetoric in their concern for the farmer by not supporting 
this bill. Being the member from Redberry, I will support Bill 49. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and, by leave of the Assembly, referred to a committee of the 
whole later this day. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

BILL NO. 49 – An Act to provide Counselling Assistance and Loan Guarantees to Farmers 
 
Clause 1 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Is the minister ready to introduce his officials? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to take this time to introduce the officials. Seated to 
my right is the deputy minister of agriculture, Jack Drew; beside me is Doug Maley, the director of economic 
division of the Department of Agriculture; and behind me is Henry Zilm, the assistant deputy. Henry isn’t in 
yet, but he’ll be here in a moment. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I think we’ll proceed a little better today than we 
did in estimates yesterday because yesterday the minister just didn’t bother consulting with his officials. 
Today, I think we’ve got a situation where we’ll have some consultative process and maybe we’ll get some 
answers. 
 
If you look at the record yesterday, we tried in the estimates for two and a half hours and we didn’t get one 
answer. You look at Hansard yesterday. And we just didn’t get any answers at all. 
 
Today we want to go into this bill. I’m going to be asking some specific questions and, if you can come up 
with some answers, we won’t have to stop the clock a long time. But if you’re going to play politics and 
you’re going to talk on and on and on, like the minister did yesterday, then this is going to be a . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! The question before the committee is Bill 49, item 1, short title, and 
not Agriculture estimates. Could the member please get on with the debate on item 1? 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Chairman, I’m just trying to take 30 seconds to establish a few ground rules. And I’m 
saying that I wasted, yesterday, two and a half hours of my time. Today . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! The chairman has just ruled that we’re not going to talk about yesterday. The 
topic is today. Does the member have any debate on today’s topic? 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Chairman, I’m going to ignore what your colleagues are sitting there that  



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1939 
 

 
wag their mouths and never have their ears open. I’m going to go straight into this bill. 
 
Mr. Minister, how long has this material been available, and how long has it been printed? When was it off 
the press? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — In reply to the member – and I want to say I would like to see this move along 
because certainly the intent of this bill is to help people out there, people that many of the members of this 
House have been talking about for some time . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If you could keep your 
colleague in his seat quiet, I will answer your questions briefly: 3 o’clock Tuesday. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Are you saying this application was printed and available since 3 o’clock Tuesday? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Off the press at 3 o’clock Tuesday. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Was information similar to this, or the information contained in this form, or similar 
information like this, circulated to the ag reps in the ag rep districts prior to this past Tuesday? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — No. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Are you sure that the ag reps had no understanding or no awareness of what this 
legislation was going to contain? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — No, they haven’t been sent out to them at this point in time. They’re going to be 
sent out to them today. So what information they may have had, the official tell me, they’re very similar to 
the ag corporation forms. It may have been that they speculated that’s the type of form . . . 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Maybe I was being a little too specific as to the exact nature of it. But were you in the 
process of discussing and informing your ag reps? Have you had them into a meeting, or have you run a 
circular letter? Is there any way you’ve notified or talked about what the content might be so they would 
have a general knowledge of the kind of legislation we’re getting into? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — No, there hasn’t been a consultation with them as regards the form. The only 
discussion was when we were selecting people for the panels that you were quite concerned about earlier and 
making allegations, and making allegations of political appointments and indicating that the people that 
select them were politically . . . I remember the member from Pelly indicating this. The names for the panels, 
for your information, have come from the ag reps. Now if you think they’re all political appointments, you 
go out there and you tell them that. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — How would the ag reps know to talk about setting up panels? If information regarding this 
bill and the literature hasn’t gone out to them till Tuesday, what are you trying to tell this House, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Certainly, if you remember back to the budget, there was an announcement that 
there was going to be a package of this type. The ag reps were asked to nominate people who had good farm 
management capabilities in their areas, and that’s what has taken place. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I haven’t asked any questions at this point, Mr. Chairman, about the political people 
involved or the people involved or the chairman or anything. I’m asking about information that relates to Bill 
49. When was that information first related to the ag reps, and when was that discussion process started that 
the ag reps were being familiarized with the  



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1940 
 

content of the bill and with the material that we’re going to be discussing here? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Officials indicate to me that there have been no direct discussions with the ag 
reps as to the content of the bill other than asking for the nomination of suitable people for panel members. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — You’re being as evasive as the Minister of Agriculture was yesterday. What kind of panel 
members . . . (inaudible) . . . but I am asking . . . In the March budget you indicated that there was going to 
be $4 million for a counselling and loan guarantee program. Now this information on the content and the 
kind of program that you were foreseeing and the portrayal of that has taken place and started sometime 
along the way, because we know that counsellors have been selected, and people have been involved, and 
chairmen are in the process of the selection that has taken place some time ago. 
 
But I was wondering . . . I’m trying to determine if you’ve had a consultation process, and I wondered when 
this started. You know, surely you must have started at some time. Did you start this prior to the budget? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Well, I think the member knows that probably the most important thing to get this 
all into motion is to get the bill passed. That’s what we’re doing here today. I understand that there have been 
candidates suggested – shall I say that? – by the ag reps, people with good farm management backgrounds 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I think that’s part and parcel of our discussion. And that these people 
have been in and had a discussion, but there has been no selection yet of who those panel members are. But 
everything is in place pending the passage of the bill. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — That leads me to the key point. You come along, the day before Easter, and you have 
second reading of a bill – the day before the Easter break. You come along and you come to this House with 
second reading of the bill and say, “We can’t go with this bill until that blankety-blank opposition lets it go.” 
A member stands up in this House and says that he’s supporting the bill, but when we speak on it, we’re 
filibustering and we’re holding it up. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, when we look at the time today, this bill has been filibustered longer by members on the 
government side than it has on this side, if you’re talking about filibuster. 
 
We’re trying to get some answers. What we’re saying Is the Minister of Agriculture has been a Rip Van 
Winkle. He could have brought this bill down the day after the budget, and we could have discussed it, and 
we would have had months – a month and a half – to go through it. But, no, you try and put us on a time 
frame, when the material was out, when the material was available for your ag reps for more than two weeks, 
and you know that everybody had this material except this legislature. 
 
And really what you’re doing is thumbing your noses at this legislative process. Then you use it as a weapon 
and say the opposition’s filibustering the bill. When you filibustered it, you created some deadline so you 
could get through the political flack, so you’d have a time limit so we wouldn’t have time to consult. 
 
I think it’s very unfair that we didn’t have this material three and four weeks ago, so we could have consulted 
with the farmers and said: is this the kind of program you like? Is this how it should be implemented? Do 
you want it? They need a program; they’ve been asking for programs. They’ve been asking for loan 
guarantee programs. 
 
But I’m not sure they want a program that you’re so anxious to get talking about, you’re so anxious to get 
involved in. Let’s talk about the counsellors that have been appointed and how we’re selecting them. And 
you want to try and assure me . . . Before I even asked about it you’re standing up and trying to assure me 
that the ag reps appointed him. What have you got in the  



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1941 
 

 
back of your mind? Why did you raise that issue before I did? I never even asked about him yet. I’ve never 
questioned that yet here, and yet you stand up and start raising that issue before . . . And Mr. Minister, you’re 
just as political as the Agriculture minister was yesterday, and I think that’s the seriousness of this 
government. 
 
I am trying to determine: when was this material available? How long have you had it? How come you 
waited for us? I waited for a piece of material as far as a report was concerned. We got it from the mail 
before we did on the order paper. And I think the minister is very, very cute in answering the questions that 
I’ve asked, in being evasive as to how long they’ve known what the content of the bill was, and when they 
decided to bring it forward in this House. And yesterday was the first opportunity we had to debate it. 
 
Yesterday was the first time it was called to the floor. Yesterday was a short day. Yesterday was a day we 
had the chance to debate and talk about it. Overnight is all the time we’ve had to consult with our farmers. 
Last night is the first night we’ve had a chance, since the minister has made his statement, to consult with 
and see if the farmers . . . And already we’ve had farmers phone in and say, “We were laughed out of their 
offices. If we were asking for a $7,000 loan, we were laughed out of the offices.” 
 
Another farmer told me that he went in, and he went in and he asked for a loan, and he asked for a guarantee 
of a loan, and he said it’s a joke. He isn’t a good financial risk. That’s what the member told me, the farmer 
told me. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, this information has been out there. The ag reps have been counselling and been telling the 
farmers what they can do and what they can’t do. They know what’s going to be in this bill and yet this 
legislation didn’t know. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as you can see, the member opposite is talking about a 
filibuster. I think it’s very evident to this House that I’ve been attempting to give crisp, short answers and to 
get this bill through. Because the purpose of this bill is to help people who are in financial need. And the 
member opposite continues to try and mislead, or maybe he is misinformed. I would be kinder and say, 
probably, he is misinformed. 
 
Because there are no panels in place. There are no panels in place, so I don’t know who was talking to you, 
your person who said you don’t qualify, because it hasn’t come into place yet because, as you well know, it 
cannot come into place until the legislation is passed. That’s what I’m trying to do this afternoon, and that’s 
what my members were speaking for: to express this concerns of the people of Saskatchewan, the farmers 
who need the help. So let’s get on with the act. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’m sure that nobody in this House has 
wanted the government to get on with the act more fervently than the members on this side of the House . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . If I may, Mr. Chairman, I’ll wait till they settle down. They seem to be somewhat 
uproarious this morning. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. There is serious business before this Assembly, and I would ask the 
co-operation of the members in getting on with this business. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, the circumstances that give rise to this bill 
are not new. They have been arising for some months. If the minister is not aware of them . . . I’m sure he 
knows that. 
 
I have been around the province, and particularly in north-east Saskatchewan, hearing many, many stories of 
farmers who were in deep trouble. We all are aware of the difficulties of farmers  



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1942 
 

in the Hudson Bay area, who have been beseeching this government to do something on their behalf because 
they have had a series of crop failures due to frosts and floods and, some of them on the west edge of that 
area, midge and the rest. 
 
No fewer than five reeves joined together on behalf of their councils to try to meet with the Minister of 
Agriculture and then to meet with the Premier. And eventually, at the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities) convention they met with the Premier, and I’m glad that sometimes someone was 
recognizing the problems. Mr. Minister, if you asked those officials and asked them how lease payments are 
coming in on Crown land in north-eastern Saskatchewan, they will say that arrears are very substantial and 
higher than they have been for a goodly number of years. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I am asking the minister why, in the face of facts which were known to the government, 
certainly, and in the face of an announcement more than four weeks ago in the Speech from the Throne, why 
you have waited for four weeks to bring in this bill. You knew the problem. This particular approach of 
guaranteeing operating loans is not new in Canada. There are certainly other systems operated by 
governments in Canada for guaranteeing operating loans for farmers who are in difficulty, and members will 
know that. The minister will know that. 
 
Why do you wait for four weeks and then suggest that it’s absolutely urgent that it be passed in 48 hours or 
so? We agree that it’s urgent that it be passed, but we would have thought it was urgent last week when you 
were still being Rip Van Winkle, when you people were still sitting around twiddling your thumbs, making 
up your speeches about how concerned you are for farmers. Why did you not bring in the bill sooner, so we 
could have had more opportunity to consult with farm groups, more opportunity to know whether the 
particular provisions of this bill we’re now debating are what farmers believe they need, in order to get them 
over the current difficulty? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — The officials tell me that they have had a number of consultations regarding what 
type of format that the assistance should take, groups that they’ve met with and, as you know, this takes time 
to organize some of these meetings. The Wheat Pool have had input into this. SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities), as you indicated earlier, the federation of Saskatchewan agriculture, 
that they were looking at this because . . . I think you must realize, and I’m sure you do, that if one is going 
to come forth with some assistance for people, or some help, that you want to at least find something that 
will best suit their needs. And one can come rushing in with hastily prepared legislation. In fact, I think if I 
just had a minute or two to think, I could remember some of those bills from years past. 
 
But be that as it may, I think that they went through a commendable amount of consultation with some of the 
farm groups, which I believe is the right way to go, and today this bill is here and, as I say, the forms are 
there, the panel members, credible people, are ready to go into place, and all we’re needing is Royal Assent 
to get this out there to help. 
 
As you correctly indicate, the people in the Hudson Bay area and in some other areas of Saskatchewan – 
wheat midge, things of this nature, due to no man’s control, can put you in a very tough financial position. 
This has happened to some very credible farmers. I don’t think there is one better way than to have peers 
looking at the operation of their peers, to decide if they can continue, and if they can indicate to the financial 
institutions that these people deserve a loan to get started. 
 
It was very interesting to hear the member from Pelly, a few minutes ago, saying it should be the bureaucrats 
and the bankers that make the decision. In his last discussions, as I remember, he was dead against the 
bankers. We’re saying it should be the farmers. I think you must agree, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, that 
that is probably the best avenue, and the best way to go. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, acting, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I note  



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1943 
 

that you have consulted with the farm organizations, and you consider that proper, and I consider that proper. 
Do you equally consider it proper that the opposition should have an opportunity to consult with farm 
organizations? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I would say, if you’re doing your job, you’d be consulting with farm 
organizations all the time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — And do you feel it would be appropriate for the opposition to have an 
opportunity to consult with farm organizations concerning the terms of the bill which you have laid before 
the Legislature? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I think that if the opposition, if they would follow the steps that we did when we 
were in opposition – those are rather successful ones as I remember back – that you would consult on a 
number of topics. Certainly I can remember nights in this Legislature when we spent virtually hour after hour 
on the phone talking to people. I can remember, very distinctly, a bill not too many years ago, in fact . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. Order! Order. The topic is Bill 49, item 1. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I was referring to Bill 49, not to a previous election or 
whatever this was . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, it depends on which election. I’ve had lots of them, 
some of which I remember rather fondly. 
 
My question is rather simple, Mr. Minister. Do you feel the opposition ought to have an opportunity to 
consult with farm organizations with respect to the terms of Bill 409 which were made available to the 
legislature earlier this week? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Yes, I certainly do agree that you should have an opportunity to consult, and I 
would think, and had I been the Leader of the Opposition, the day that I saw the budget come down with a $4 
million package to help farmers I would have been out there consulting. I would have been visiting this 
province. I would have been talking to every farm organization, and I would have been coming forth for 
some solid suggestions as to the way that we could best help them. 
 
Now I don’t ‘know if you took all those avenues, or did all those things. You’re asking me if I thought that 
consultation should take place. That’s the way I would have looked at it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I take it then you feel that all of the 
information which would have been needed to carry on consultations was the statement in the budget, and 
that it is not necessary, or even desirable, for an opposition to be able to discuss the terms of the bill with the 
public prior to the bill being called for a vote. Is that your position? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Well, certainly you have every opportunity. The bill was tabled in this House. 
You saw the terms of the bill. You could contact . . . You must . . . I don’t know if you have any contacts in 
the farm community any more, and maybe that is part of your problem. 
 
And also, if there’s some part of the bill that’s objectionable . . . I’ve heard your members get up time after 
time and, judging from their discussion of the bill, they are adamantly opposed to the bill. And then they say, 
“Well, I guess I’ll have to vote for it, anyways.” 
 
Now if there’s something in there that really bothers you, you know the legislative process; you know it very 
well. Bring forth an amendment. That’s part and parcel of it. And you’ve had opportunity to discuss with 
groups and, as I say, if you’ve been doing your homework, and if you do have any connections in the farm 
community, which I kind of doubt, then perhaps you would  



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1944 
 

have had ample input to bring your points forward. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I think we now have it clear that, in 
the judgment of the minister, the time frame in which they’re operating is fully adequate to allow an 
opposition to consult with the members of widely dispersed farm groups. And I don’t share your view, but 
I’m interested in knowing, just for the record, what the government feels the appropriate time frame for 
consulting with farm groups is. 
 
We know when the bill came down; that’s on the record. We know that there’s a great deal of pressure to get 
it moved along. We know that you’re having to bend the rules of the House in order to get it passed. We 
know that you’re having to ask for leave when normally the rules call for a 24-hour lapse. We know that you 
have sat around for four weeks. We know that you have done nothing. 
 
We’re not going to hold up the farmers, but we suggest to you, we suggest to you that a better course of 
action would have been to make available in a more public way what you had in mind, so that there could 
have been much more extensive consultation, not only by the government, but also by farm organizations 
with whom you may not have consulted, or other farm groups who may well be interested in the terms of this 
bill. 
 
We have 65 or 70,000 farmers in this province. They have many differing circumstances. Neither you nor I 
now whether or not the terms of this bill are appropriate for all of the different financial strictures that 
farmers are finding themselves in. I don’t know why you put yourself in the position when the public cannot 
know the terms of your bill before it is passed, and that’s, in effect, what you’ve done. There is no way that 
you can table a bill on Tuesday and have it passed on Thursday and expect that its terms will be understood 
in Loon Lake or in Climax. And it will not be, it cannot be. You know that. We know that. 
 
In my judgement, a better course of action would have been for you to move after you announced it in the 
budget, not wait for four weeks as you did, not do the Rip Van Winkle bit, but indicate what you had in 
mind, and let the public who are vitally affected by this bill have some more opportunity to have comments 
on whether or not the strictures levelled by my colleague, the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, are sound 
or unsound. 
 
It may be that farmers don’t worry about whether they give their social insurance number when they are 
applying for a farm loan. When that social insurance number was introduced, we were assured by all and 
sundry at Ottawa that it was not going to be a general identification number, and that it was not going to be 
used for identification purposes; and I believe a check of the act will show that you’re not supposed to ask 
people for their social insurance number. I note your application form requires that. The people may not be 
concerned about that; then, again, they may. And what conceivable use the social insurance number could be 
for the Department of Agriculture when they already had the SHSP (Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan) 
number. I know you will explain. I know you’ll explain why you want both numbers. I can think of no other 
application form where you have to give both numbers. That application form errs on the side of asking for 
yet more and more information. And I know that you will have an adequate answer to that, but I don’t know 
what it is, and I would be interested in knowing what it is. I wonder if the minister would open up, shall we 
say, by telling us why he felt it necessary to have both the SHSP numbers and the federal social insurance 
number. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Well, I’d like to just go back and comment on a few of the member’s 
observations. First and foremost, as to degree of consultation or people having a chance to know and have 
input, I just reiterate that it was announced right in this House the night of the budget. I go back through the 
steps and indicate that here was consultation with the farm groups, and you commend that. 
 
The bill was tabled in the House. There is ample opportunity for people to look at the bill, discuss  



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1945 
 

it, talk to people in the field about this. And I think the thing that we should be looking at – and you have 
every right to question these things, and that’s fine and dandy – but I think the emergency is out there, that 
people need help, and that before people can get help, the legislation must be put into place. And I think 
that’s the paramount objective. 
 
Now I think the second part of your line of questioning, if I recall correctly, was some concern – concern, I 
would say – for the requirement of the SHSP number and the social insurance number. The officials indicate 
to me that this is rather standard on many forms for loans, bank loans, things of this nature, but I would 
assure you, and the members of this legislature, and the people of Saskatchewan, if someone does not want 
to put their social insurance number on there, if that’s really going to concern them, that’s not going to 
prevent them from being considered by this good legislation. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, this is the second time since you’re in 
government that you have come down with some earth-shaking legislation. 
 
I can remember the praises that were used by the former minister of agriculture when he was talking about 
the original program that guaranteed 8 per cent. There’s a little difference that time, compared to now. That 
time the opposition had a weekend to talk about it before the bill was jammed through. You had a little 
weekend. 
 
And if you remember, the first time in Saskatchewan’s history, when you were coming out with a program 
that was going to have earth-shattering results, what happened out in front of the building? Do you 
remember? Do you remember? Eleven hundred people were parading out here. The galleries were full, and 
that’s why you’re using this legislation through this time – because you don’t want to give the farmers a 
chance to hear. 
 
That’s why you’re in a hurry, and that’s why you won’t give us a weekend. Because, if you would heave, 
you could have had this legislation and this bill, which isn’t even printed in a proper order, you could have 
had this bill down just tow days earlier, given us a weekend – last weekend. 
 
But no, you said, we’ll wait till the following Tuesday. I insisted that the Minister of Agriculture give us the 
information. We kept pressuring him in the question period. We kept saying, if you’re not going to do your 
own bill, please do the farm security bill, Mr. Chairman. And I think you better comment on that because 
when the opposition talks to farmers, the farmers come back and respond, and that’s what you were afraid of. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Well, the hon. member opposite is quite correct. If there’s a government that’s 
brought some earth-shattering changes in to this province, it’s certainly this one – such things as a mortgage 
program, a gas tax, and various other good programs that have benefited the people of Saskatchewan. And let 
me tell you, they’re very pleased that they were brought in. So if you want to talk about that as 
earth-shattering., I’ll agree with you, and I’ll talk all day about those good, earth-shattering situations. 
 
You’re asking about more time for consultation. I rose in this House minutes ago and asked for leave to 
continue on with the debate of this bill. You agreed with that. Now you had the option, as you know in any 
democratic institution, to refuse that leave. You chose not to do that. So the debate is on about this bill. So 
let’s not forget that when we get talking about wanting to be consulting. 
 
Let me indicate something else to you. Let me indicate that since this bill was dropped, there have been 82 
individual farmers have phoned the department already asking for these forms, and let’s get on and see if I 
qualify for help. And that isn’t counting, and that isn’t counting the number of banks – the friends of the 
member of Pelly – the number of banks that have phoned in asking for forms and information as to how this 
can apply. 



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1946 
 

 
Let me tell you gentlemen, out there in Saskatchewan today there are a lot of farmers that realize that there is 
some constructive help coming for them from this bill, and they want us, as their elected people, to get that 
bill through. And that’s what we’re here for today. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Minister, yesterday the Minister of Agriculture stood up in this House and said that 
things were 1,000 per cent better than they were when he took over – 1,000 per cent better. I think what 
you’re starting to tell us is how good things really are. When he said that the budget was fine – I said it was 
so fine that even the Japanese technologists couldn’t drill a hole through it. You know, I use that illustration. 
And that applies to the people that are in trouble today. 
 
We’ve been urging your people, we’ve been urging you – do something; come up with a package. Come up 
with a loan guarantee program. And besides that, put in some legislation to prevent foreclosures, to save 
money in the courts We’ve been urging you in saying there’s trouble out there. Yesterday your officials 
knew how many people are in trouble, but the minister wouldn’t tell us how many people are in trouble. 
 
I’m surprised that there’s only 82, because the lines were busy. If the guys could have gotten through, and if 
the lines wouldn’t have been busy, there would have been 822. I can assure you that there are a lot of people 
out there, 30,000 acres in north-east area alone are posted for sale, and they’re saying there’s nobody there to 
buy it. They’ve given up waiting. 
 
But those people that are waiting want a form that is fast and simple and easy and handy to have them. They 
don’t want to give away six and seven pages of detailed information. They can tell you, “Look, Mr., it’s 
tough.” The member phoned here, and said, “I need $7,000,” and he was laughed out of the ag rep’s office. 
He phoned in and said, “I need $7,000.” He was laughed out of the office and said you’re not a viable 
farmer, because with $7,000 you’re not going to hand in there. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What member phoned? You said a member phoned in. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I said, a member of this constituency phoned in – and if you can’t hear – my farmers are 
members of my riding. They are important to me. They are people that are in trouble. 
 
You, maybe, laughed at it, and maybe the Minister of Agriculture can stand up and say: things are so good, 
they’ve never been better, but, Mr. Minister . . . Mr. Minister, there are some areas in here that are pretty 
serious, and the only reason you didn’t give us a weekend is you were afraid that they’d come bombarding 
into this place and saying, “Look, we don’t want to go through a long, big process. We don’t want to get 
involved with all kinds of your political committees. We don’t want to get involved with your political 
committees to see whether we can get some operating loan. We want to take an application into our banks.” 
 
When you mentioned the banks are phoning, I think that’s where the program’s at. That’s where the 
program’s at. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Well, again, we see the member dabbling in wild speculations – 82,820. No one 
knows that. You don’t know that, so why are we wasting time with these whirling and wild words. You 
quoted my colleague as saying that it’s a thousand times better. I want you to be exact, because misquotes 
are not the best sources. 
 
What he said, if you will check, “that it’s a thousand times better in this province than had you stayed in 
power.” I believe that and so do a lot of other people believe that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1947 
 

 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Now, as trying to fill out these forms, again you are trying to make a big bugaboo 
out there, a big bogey man that’s going to take a whole lot of time. If you’re a farmer, you know very well 
that if you’re in farming and have difficulty, don’t tell me that these fellows don’t have all their forms ready, 
all their material is ready, they are just waiting to come in and bring the information to see if they can 
qualify. They are ready. 
 
And the farm specialists in the department will help them fill out the form. Look at . . . we’re not going to put 
a whole bunch of problems and stumbling blocks in the way of these people, as I said when I rose to speak in 
here. We brought this legislation forward today. We want that legislation passed today so that these people 
can get their help immediately. So again I say: get your points, do our debate, let’s get on with the show. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to ask the minister: in view of the fact that you 
indicate that there is a considerable problem out there, and in view of the fact that the budget was brought 
down on March 21st outlining the general principles, and I want to ask you: you indicate that you think it’s 
sufficient that we have a bill introduced – and today is the first time we got the official bill – introduced on 
Tuesday, and we are to pass it through on Thursday. I want to ask you: what were you doing from when the 
budget was brought down, setting out the broad principle, March 21, ’84, until now, this Tuesday, and when 
you brought down the legislation? Could you indicate what took that length of time? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I believe you missed the reply to the Leader of the Opposition who asked the 
same question . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and, well, maybe you were, and maybe you didn’t hear it. I 
don’t know. But I will repeat it: that there was a series of consultations with farm groups, and the ones that 
come to mind are the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. I’ve heard that question asked three times and answered two times, and 
I don’t ‘think that the third answer is really in order because it sounds to me to be a repeat of the other two 
answers. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Minister, you indicated that the reason that you didn’t bring it in before April 17, I 
believe, that you needed consultation. Now you are saying to this House that it took you from March 21 to 
April 17 to do your system of consultation . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — With the staff you’ve got. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — With the staff, and also knowing, going into the process of budgeting, that the problem 
was there, and you had adequate time that you could consult before the budget. You say you need from 
March 21 to April 17 to . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. I caution the member to be seated when order is called. The debate 
must be relevant to some extent . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I caution the member to be quiet when order 
has been called . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I caution all members to be quiet when order is called. The 
question . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . (inaudible) . . . ask questions on this bill, you can throw me out. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! If any members are asking to be thrown out, I suggest it is not necessary. 
There are two doors to this Chamber they could walk out if they wish. Now I’m calling order, and I’m 
cautioning the member. 
 
The point here is that three members of the opposition have now asked virtually the same question, and it has 
been answered two and a half times now, and we have to have some relevance to the debate. The question 
really is . . . 



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1948 
 

 
AN HON. MEMBER: — On the general principle, we can debate. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Well, the question here is a question of relevancy, and the Chair allows some 
wavering from that rule when there is a filibuster in progress, but I don’t understand that to be the case today. 
 
So I caution the members to be relevant, and not ask the same questions over and over again, and to not 
debate the same points that have already been raised. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your ruling. And I want to be very succinct and very brief. 
March 21st the budget was introduced, Mr. Minister, with the general principle of this bill, which you said 
we were supposed to be able to consult on. 
 
Now you come to the House, and you say: well it took us from the budget time up until April 17th to come in 
with a bill, to carry on the consultation. That’s what you said. How can you stand up, Mr. Minister, and say it 
took you from March 21, ’84 to April 17 to consult, and say it’s adequate for the opposition to have it on the 
17th and to pass it today? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — You know, Mr. Chairman, as I hear the members opposite, I think they are really 
concerned that what has come about is a very good bill, and they’re trying to prevent that bill from being 
passed and help the people out there. 
 
I want to indicate to you that there was notice of motion came forward on April 13th that the bill was coming 
forward. I want to indicate to you, also, that in the negotiations – and I think the Leader of the Opposition 
would realize this – that one of the important aspects of this bill, or any other type of bill that is going to give 
assistance or provide assistance for people who are in tough economic straits, is that the lending institutions 
must be willing to co-operate and go along with this type of a program. That type of negotiation takes time. 
 
And I want to indicate that there were four meetings between the departmental officials and the banks and 
the credit unions, so that they would go along with the program as it was going to be designed. And I want to 
indicate that these meetings have brought together the support of these lending institutions, that they will go 
along, as best they can, where feasible, in helping these individuals who are facing tough times. Those are 
the kind of negotiations. 
 
Sure you can rush in, bring it in quickly, not have your homework done, and create something that is a 
nightmare. The consultation has taken place, and the bill is here today for debate and passage. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I take rare exception to the minister saying we’re not prepared 
because he can’t come with a shred of evidence that we aren’t. 
 
I want to ask him then: can you indicate to us the analysis of the problem relating to this bill, what analysis 
you have done? Can you indicate a breakdown of the number of farmers that you feel are in the difficult 
straits which you indicate that this bill is going to address? Can you give us a breakdown of the analysis that 
you have done in respect to this bill? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Well first of all, I wonder just what the importance of statistics are at this point in 
time. But in consulting with the officials, they indicate that this is confidential information with the banks, 
that they can’t release this. Unless a farmer signs a formal release, it can’t be given to the Department of 
Agriculture. I think we all know there are some people that need some assistance, and certainly that’s the 
basis that we’re going on. The exact numbers, as I say, is confidential information. There’s no way of 
knowing at this time. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Minister, are you indicating to us that you’re introducing a bill with $4  



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1949 
 

 
million as the amount that you’re putting up, or supposedly may put up? Are you saying you have put before 
this House a bill which you don’t even have an idea as to how many farmers there are out there that, in fact, 
need the assistance as provided in this bill? Is that what you’re saying? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Well certainly we brought forth a bill that we feel are going to help a number of 
people out there who need help, and want help. We know that Ontario has a bill similar to this, and the 
numbers that were helped there was about 800, my officials tell me. Now Ontario is a little more intensive 
agriculture – you just can’t compare that entirely to Saskatchewan. There can be difference in situations 
there. But to the exact number, no. but certainly, it was announced in the budget, and there’s a considerable 
amount of dollars there, and it is a program to help people to see if they can get some more assistance from 
the lending institutions to let them get on with their spring operations; and I think that is what they’re 
wanting, and I think that’s what we should be moving toward, and not quibbling over mere statistics. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Chairman, it’s not a matter of squibbling, or quibbling, over mere statistics. Today 
we are before this legislature with what they are claiming to be an important bill. An important assistance to 
the farmers. And here we have – not the Minister of Agriculture; he’s not around – the Minister of Health, 
who is indicating that the Department of Agriculture has not even done an analysis to determine the 
magnitude of the problem. 
 
How can you set up a program adequately to address the problems if you haven’t analyzed the degree of it? 
How do you know it’s properly funded? How do you know the guide-lines are proper? . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . You just absolutely haven’t. I ask you: have you gone to the Farm Credit Corporation to 
determine the problems that farmers are having? Have you asked farmers in order to do an analysis? Have 
you sent out any survey of the farmers of Saskatchewan? Have you done an individual survey across the 
province? I ask you! 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Well I want to indicate to you, very plainly, because I’m soon going to be leaving 
the debate because my colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, will be coming through the door – or is in here 
right now. I want to show you that this government is concerned with the farmers of Saskatchewan, and the 
Minister of Agriculture was out consulting with them today, and that’s why I took on bringing this bill 
through here, so that the people would have help today, before the Easter holiday, to get out there and do 
their work. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — My colleague will now answer your questions and, I want to tell you, that’s 
reacting to the needs of people. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I’d like to ask the Minister of Agriculture . . . We’re very pleased that he saw fit to return 
to the House to add some knowledge to it, because it’s rather difficult dealing with what they claim an 
important bill with the Minister of Health, who doesn’t know anything about it. 
 
What I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, is: can you indicate how many farmers are likely to get assistance 
under this program, and what would be the average amount that the average farmer will receive? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, hon. colleague, first of all, I apologize for not being able to be 
here sooner. But I do want to thank my colleague, the Minister of Health, who also understands farming and 
farmers in this province. And I appreciate him filling in for me so ably while I was away. 
 
Your question, as it relates to exact numbers that will be helped, the numbers that will be helped  



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1950 
 

 
will be based on the numbers of applications that come in, I suspect. And I don’t know if we can be more 
specific than that, quite frankly. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Minister, the Minister of Health has indicated that you really didn’t do a survey or a 
study of how many farmers will be affected. You’re not aware of that. Have you consulted with the farm 
organizations? There’s different farm organizations in this province that have close contact with the farmers. 
Have you been in contact with them to find out how many farmers are going to be affected by the problem 
that’s out there, and how many farmers will be helped by your program. 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — I suppose, Mr. Speaker, we could have studied this issue of the cost-price 
squeeze, and how severely it’s affecting farmers – and to what degree it’s affecting different areas, and 
different ages, and different categories of farmers. And as I said yesterday in the House, I could have, in fact, 
probably stood before this House and said: all is well in Saskatchewan. I could have pointed to bank reports, 
reports of economists that say, “Yes, in Saskatchewan, relatively speaking, things are not all that bad.” 
 
I could have pointed to the agricultural outlook conference report just last December, a meeting held in 
Ottawa, that suggested: in Saskatchewan, net realizable farm income for this year is going to rise 
substantially, whereas in Manitoba it’s going to fall. I could have pointed to those kinds of statistics and 
those kinds of numbers and said, “all is well. All is well.” 
 
But instead, we’ve chosen to act. And we’re acting responsively and responsibly based on, number one, first 
of all, what we hear farmers telling us. You can look at all the statistics you want in the world, but if you’re 
out there in the country talking to the farmers – which all of these members have been, and it’s unfortunate 
you haven’t been. Because I was up last night, probably in an area of this province that’s as hard hit as any 
area of the province – Chelan – and had a very good meeting with them. 
 
It has been at meetings like that that I’ve been at over the last several months, and that my colleagues have 
been at, and out knocking on the farm doors hearing what’s on their minds, that we’ve determined, in fact, 
that there is some need for a safety net out there. 
 
As well, we’ve talked with the lending institutions on a regular basis, not only myself, but members of the 
agricultural caucus. And between those contacts that the MLAs make, and the talks with the farmers, and the 
talks with the lending institutions, we determined that there should be an additional safety net put in place for 
Saskatchewan farmers. In fact, rather than point to statistics and say, “All is well,” rather to say to the people 
of Saskatchewan, the farmers of Saskatchewan, “It’s a global economy and we’ve got nothing that we can do 
about it,” instead, we chose to act, and act we will do. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Well, Mr. Minister, yesterday you said that things were a thousand times better for the 
farmers in this province, than they were before. Today, you are saying there are some problems. You’re 
finally admitting there are problems out there. 
 
In all these consultations you say you’re having with farmers, you must have run some kind of a survey to 
find out just how many farmers are affected. I think when you were talking about the thousands of times 
better yesterday, what you meant was that there are thousands of farmers out there that have this problem. 
Now how many do you think that this program is going to help? You’ve presented a bill to this House. How 
many of those farmers that are in trouble – there’s thousands of farmers that are in trouble – is this bill going 
to really provide some assistance for? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — First of all, I disagree with on two points. Number one is what I said 
yesterday, is that Saskatchewan farmers are 1,000 times better off because there’s a Tory administration in 
power than they would have been if you’d have been in power, buying up their  



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1951 
 

land. The big land grab of the history of this province, took place when you were in power. And the millions 
and millions and millions of dollars you spent buying their farmland would be to put it back into something 
productive, maybe we wouldn’t be in this situation today. 
 
And in so far as how many are in trouble and need this additional safety net, I would suggest to you the 
numbers are very small. But the important point is: we are going to have that safety net there, and if it’s one 
farmer that we help, I’ll be very pleased. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Minister, I think there are number, and a large number, of farmers who are having 
very, very serious problems, and that’s what the farmers tell me. And that’s the truth of the matter. And what 
I want to ask you is, if you’re concerned with helping farmers, helping farmers in dire straits, because as has 
been indicated with the various reasons for it, why would you not introduce legislation which could give 
them a subsidized interest rate? You did that for the farm purchase program. You thought it was important to 
give a subsidized interest rate. 
 
And so what I’m asking you now is: why would you not . . . Those who have spent a lifetime building a 
farm, who — no, not because of anything they have done – now find themselves in very serious financial 
problems. Why do you just simply turn them over to the banks, to high interest rates that have been foisted 
upon them, and not subsidize the interest rates in respect to the assistance in . . . Obviously there’s a crisis, 
because that’s what we are talking about addressing. Why won’t you help them by giving them a subsidized 
interest rate? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I would suggest to you that prime plus one is a 
preferred rate. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I’d like to ask the minister: is prime plus one equivalent to what the farm purchase 
program – the benefits under farm purchase program? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — First of all, as you well know, the farm purchase program does provide 
assistance in a longer term nature as low as 8 per cent for the first five years, and a 12 pert cent interest rate 
for the next five years. And based on what prime may or may not be today, I suppose we might be coming 
awful close to 12 per cent. So in some fashion we may be coming close to at least part of the preferred terms 
of farm purchase program. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Minister, I would presume that you find equally important to help farmers through 
difficult times to maintain their operation. And again I ask you: why can’t you . . . Is it not as important to 
maintain family farms as it is to maintain a program during tough economic times which subsidizes 
substantially for purchasing? It just doesn’t make logical sense that you will give substantial subsidy for 
purchasing in tough economic times, but you will not give subsidized interest rates, substantial subsidized or 
equal subsidized interest rates, to help farmers maintain an operation which they’ve spent their life at. But 
what is the rationale? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, the reason, in fact, that this program is here 
before us today is because we do, in fact, believe in the family farm concept and feel that there are some 
family farms in there that are in jeopardy, and that’s why we provided the safety net. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You suggested that possibly the amount that will be held will 
be very small. What are your . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, how did you decide that that’s going to be 
very small? What kind of an information gathering system have you in place that would determine how 
many people in that safety net are viable? How did you measure that to determine that you’d need $4 
million? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I did not say that the numbers helped would not 
be great. What I said out there is I don’t think the numbers facing a case of terminal  



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1952 
 

cost-price squeeze are great. I do not believe they are great. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Minister, in determining that, what process of consultation, or who have you been 
talking to, that you believe that that isn’t a great number out there? Last night on the news, when we watched 
CBC, in RMs around Hudson Bay when they tell us there’s 30,000 acres for sale, they are beyond your 
program. They’ve pulled ups takes, and the land’s sitting there. Is this what you’re saying that farmers should 
do, and so, consequently, they’re not a problem? They’re not farmers that require your safety net. Is this what 
you’re saying that farmers should do, and so, consequently, they are not a problem? They’re not farmers that 
require your safety net. Is this what you’re saying? They are not a viable unit. So what are you really trying 
to tell this House? What kind of determination have you made? I think this is a key to if this program is 
going to work or not. 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Well the determination that we’ve made has been based on, as I said earlier, 
consultations with several sectors of rural Saskatchewan, and, as well, the lending institutions themselves. 
And over and above that, I think the key point in this whole program is that it’ll be farmers helping farmers. 
And who better than one other farmer who is experienced, has demonstrated management abilities, has been 
through the ups and the downs, to determine where the safety net should be, and who the safety net should be 
for? 
 
And I was up in that area last night, quite frankly, and the reading I got was a very positive one. I have never 
yet run into farmers – and you must know, surely; you’re from a farming community – I have never yet, and 
I don’t think any of these members on this side of the House have ever yet run into farmers that say, “Hey, 
we want government hand-outs.” They have never ever suggested that. What they have suggested is that 
there should be a sensible, responsible, and responsive strategy – a net, a safety net. They have told us, and 
quite frankly some of the reeves that came in from that area have told us, throwing 10 or $15,000 at the 
problem this year as a grant, or a subsidy, is not going to save somebody who is up on that high wire, 
stumbling, and in danger of crashing to the ground. He needs a safety net. He needs a long-term strategy for 
a solution. 
 
I’m suggesting to you that we have covered the bases on interest rates. This augments that program for those 
who need that additional safety net. The judgements will be made by farmers – other farmers out there. It 
seems to me very common sense. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I can now see where your philosophy is coming from. I can now see why you had $4 
million in your budget, and the safety net that the oil companies required was quite a little bit of heftier 
material. Instead of using a net, a netting like people used to use when they made hair nets, the net for the oil 
companies was very well constructed, because there’s quite a bit of difference between $300 million and $4 
million; and I think the people of Saskatchewan will remember those statements. You say to the people of 
Saskatchewan that the farmers don’t want a government hand-out. The oil companies will ask for it, so they 
get it. But the farmers aren’t asking for it, so they’re not getting it. 
 
Mr. Minister, a senior vice-president, general manager for Saskatchewan for the Royal Bank of Canada, has 
written me a letter. It’s my name on the letter-head, and the very first paragraph in the letter says, “In a recent 
meeting with the Minister of Agriculture,” . . . So you’ve been consulting, you’ve been consulting with these 
people as early . . . He’s written to me March the 19th, so your consultation was . . . Process started with the 
banks prior to that, and he seems to think and suggest and by listening – and you must have a list or a copy of 
this, because I think this is general mailing to all the MOAs, and I’m not seeing anything new – but he seems 
to think they have the province covered up pretty fair with people that are agrologists that are able to advise 
farmers. 
 
I believe that the Royal Bank is going to pick up a lot of interest amongst farmers by being able to go to an 
agrologist, a qualified person, to get some consultative purpose, consultative  



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1953 
 

 
information regarding loaning, and they’re saying that we have identified 79 farmers who financial 
circumstances have deteriorated over the past years to a state where, in our opinion, the best option will be to 
sell. And another line, they said that they may optimize their return from any sale of capital assets, as well as 
provide them an opportunity for the family farm to reassess their personal goals and objectives. 
 
Now did you buy that hook, line, and sinker? And then you are setting up a . . . According to what some of 
your colleagues have been saying this morning, and I don’t want to paraphrase because you can read into the 
record, but the member for . . . (inaudible) . . . and particularly the member for Kelvington-Wadena were 
stressing this counselling – counselling that farmers seem to need. 
 
You seem to have the idea that the successful farmers, those farmers that know how to make it, those farmers 
that have accumulated some land at low prices, those people that are really in there pitching, they’re going to 
provide a little counselling service, and they’re going to sit down with the . . . (inaudible) . . . and say, “Look, 
Mister, I bought my land, and the most I ever paid was $15,000 a quarter. You paid $100,000 a quarter too 
much. Get out while the getting’s ahead. Get out while the getting’s ahead.” And consequently, he won’t be a 
problem. He won’t be a problem. He won’t have to declare his assets to his neighbours. He isn’t going to 
have to fill out this form and detail all his information about himself. He isn’t going to have to do that 
because he’s going to know that you are going to decide that he is not a viable farmer. 
 
Now, to fill you in, and I’m sorry you weren’t here this morning, but we presented some very good 
arguments in second reading, and I’m going to almost have to stretch third reading rules a little bit to fill you 
in on the feeling we’ve got on this issue . . . And my colleagues have joined together as a team and are 
making this one approach. We’re concerned with the tactics your bill is taking. You have taken from prior to 
the budget consultations, right through till this week, Tuesday, to determine what the legislation should be. 
You give us 48 hours and say, boy, today that bills got to go, or those farmers that are going to go under over 
the weekend are going to hang on your head; you’re going to be responsible. We haven’t had a chance to 
consult, and the point I made to the Minister of Agriculture when you weren’t in here, the last time you 
presented a world-shattering piece of legislation that had to do with loaning for farmers, that wasn’t accepted 
too well. 
 
Those 1,100 people that paraded around this legislature – there were 1,100 people parading out in front of 
these buildings. The galleries were full of people that were saying to the minister of agriculture, the world 
globe-trotter, they were telling this minister, “Look, buddy, we don’t like what you’re doing.” So 
consequently, this time around you thought, well, we’ll consult with the agricultural community. We’ll do 
our consultations, but we’ll keep the opposition in the dark. Well I’m afraid, Mister, you’ve overstepped your 
bounds a little bit on this one, and by pushing it a little too far you are trying to force down the throat, on the 
farmers of Saskatchewan, a plan that was similar, a plan that was similar . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
The only other time we had Conservative government in this province, when they had programs in place, 
they called on chairmen as well. There was a chairman in every constituency, Mr. Minister, and there was a 
person there that he decided how much seed oats you could get. He decided what you could get, and this 
counsellor and this chairman and this bill is going to be the same, have the same role. He’s going to be that 
same political person. He’s not only going to tell you whether you need feedlots or not. He’s going to be able 
to look at this application and say, “Oh, is that right now? Isn’t that interesting? This guys’ 4020 John Deere 
isn’t even paid for yet.” 
 
And he’s going to be able to go down the line and look at every line, and every stock and bond, every 
account receivable, all his personal loans; every term, everything that’s ever been written and recorded about 
a farmer is going to be down on this little paper. And it’s going to be reviewed first – not last, not as a resort, 
not as an appeal process because the lending institution turned him down. But he’s going to look at it first 
and decided whether he could even carry it to a  



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1954 
 

 
lending institution. 
 
I believe that Mr. Roberts would gladly tell you what you should do for these 79 farmers. And he would 
process them, and he’d say, “Hey, I have applications from these 79 guys. Maybe we can salvage them too. 
Maybe we can salvage them.” He said that this is the people that are in trouble, and they need some 
salvaging. 
 
I think their agrologists that they have in place in Regina, and Swift Current, and Saskatoon, and Yorkton, 
and commercial lenders for the North and the South, are there; and all the lending institutions have these 
advisors around. I don’t think you ought to duplicate it. The $4 million you’re spending are going to be spent 
to oil your political machine, and that’s what I’m worried about, Mr. Minister. 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, you covered a number of points there, and I’ll 
try and deal with them as concisely and precisely as I can. 
 
First of all, as it relates to consulting with the banks, we consult with the banks, quite frankly, on a regular 
basis. And I do that, and my colleagues do that in the agriculture caucus along with me, because we like to 
have a feel for what their reading is as to the pulse of rural Saskatchewan related to credit matters, and just 
get a feel for what their view is on what the economic situation is out there. Not that we accept it as above 
anybody else’s opinion, but certainly I think it’s a source that we should stay in touch with. 
 
Secondly, I’m very disappointed that you are, in fact, suggesting that these farmers that will sitting on those 
panels . . . I’m very disappointed that you would suggest that some of the finest farmers in Saskatchewan 
cannot be trusted. I think that is a black mark for you sitting in this legislature, as a farmer, telling the 
farmers of Saskatchewan that they are not to be trusted, that they can’t keep confidential records confidential. 
Are you trying to tell the members of this legislature, and all the farmers of Saskatchewan, that you don’t 
trust farmers; is that what you’re trying to . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Where does it say confidential? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — The Hon. Leader of the Opposition says, “Where does it say confidential?” 
When you get in to clause-by-clause, I think you’ll find out where it says confidential. Secondly, if either one 
of you had been listening yesterday when I gave my second reading speech, I said the records would be kept 
confidential. I asked that that word be underlined. And you’re on the verge of misleading the House when 
you say that they wont’ be kept confidential. 
 
I’m telling you quite honestly, I’m disappointed in your attitude towards farmers in this House. You sit on 
your hands when they need you most. And then when you should be standing up behind them in terms of 
appreciating their judgement, you condemn them. 
 
Furthermore, our consultations have not stopped with just the banks. As I mentioned earlier, our 
consultations (and it’s unfortunate that yours aren’t the same way), are constant with the entire farm 
community out there. I myself have probably talked with — not to, but talked with – probably something 
close to 4,000 people in the last three weeks; farms, rural people. And then you wonder where and how we 
get a feel for what the issues are in rural Saskatchewan. That’s how you get that, and I could point to 
virtually every MLA in this legislature on this side of the legislature, and they would say the same story, 
because that’s what they’ve been doing as well. 
 
And finally, you are on the verge of misleading the House when you say 1,100 marching in the legislature – 
1,100 people marching on the legislature, relative to the land bank repeal. You know, and I know, there was 
not 1,100 people out there, so I would suggest to you that you are on the verge of misleading this House, and 
I would think, as a responsible member, you  



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1955 
 

should correct that. 
 
And finally, Mr. Chairman, I would ask you if you, in fact, believe that the land bank is the way to solve the 
ills, number one, of the cost-price squeeze out there facing some – few as they may be – some Saskatchewan 
farmers today. Stand up in this House and say so. If you believe that the land bank is the way to solve the 
intergenerational transfer of the family farm out there, stand up in this House, because you have never done it 
yet. You have picked your words very carefully. Yesterday afternoon you spent an hour reading from letters, 
but never once did you put your own views on the record, on the record in this House. Now stand up here 
today, stand up here today, stand up here today and tell the farmers of Saskatchewan that you believe land 
bank is the solution to those problems. Stand up here today. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I can appreciate the Minister of Agriculture getting in and wanting to discuss land bank. I 
can see that, because he has a little bill here. He has a little bill here that he says, there, the amount of farmers 
that are going to be helped by it are very small. Very small. He’s applying a little safety net under there, and 
I might catch the odd guy that’s going to fall. That’s what he said. Those are the words you used. And if you 
want to get in and talk about yesterday and how you didn’t answer one question, I can talk about that if you 
want, but I don’t want to talk about that. 
 
I spent an hour and a half yesterday trying to get an answer out of you, and today, when we started this, I was 
glad the Minister of Health was here. I thought we’d get some answers, but he didn’t answer any questions 
either. He didn’t answer any questions either. 
 
So my question is: how many people – the member for Quill Lakes asked it, the member for Pelly asked it, 
the former premier asked it, and I’ll ask it again for the third time – and we have to repeat it as we’re not 
getting any answers, Mr. Chairman. How many people do you feel are in trouble in Saskatchewan? What 
percentage of the farmers? We asked that question yesterday under a different context, but today we’re 
talking about a bill that is going to provide counselling assistance and loan guarantees. How many people are 
you prepared to provide loan guarantees to? What’s the ceiling in this bill? How many people can get 
involved in a loan guarantee? Is it a first come, firs served basis? Are the people supposed to start lining up 
tonight already, and stay lined up over the Easter holidays, and on Easter Sunday and on Easter Monday, so 
that when the office is open Tuesday morning, they’ll be the first twelve in? Or how many people are you 
going to help? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, as I’ve said earlier, I can’t give you a hard 
number as to, number one, how many should be served through the provision of this safety net. In fact, it’s a 
voluntary thing; they can come forward if they desire. So you could have lots of farmers in a financial crisis 
out there, but they may not wish to access this safety net. That would be their decision. It’s voluntary. It’s not 
the style of this government to say: look, you must use it. It’s totally voluntary. 
 
But if we look at the experience of some other jurisdictions – for example, Ontario . . . And because I have 
faith in Saskatchewan farmers, it’s my belief that those who need to be caught by this safety net will, in fact, 
not end up defaulting on their loan guarantees. And because of that, I believe that the $4 million will not be 
the constraint, because I believe that $4 million will translate into several more millions, based on the fact 
that it, in fact, has been a relatively small percentage that has defaulted. And we only have to look at . . . 
 
And if we can use those other jurisdictions as a model: for example, my understanding is, in Ontario, it’s 
been something less than 25 per cent that default. And I think, in fact, the number was down as low as 18. So 
you could . . . that $4 million could translate into several millions of dollars more. So I don’t believe that that 
will be a constraint, if you like, for this safety net. And if that’s the point you’re getting at, I would suggest to 
you that it’s not a valid point. 



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1956 
 

 
MR. ENGEL: — I’d suggest it’s up to me to decide whether the points I’m making are valid or not, Mr. 
Minister. Your arrogance is showing, and blowing, but it’s not up to you to decide whether a point I’m 
making is valid or not, Mr. Minister. 
 
What percentage of the $4 million will be spent on counselling, and how much are you reserving for a 
guarantee fund? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, our best estimate is that something probably 
less than 10 per cent would be spent on the administrative portion relative to the counselling side. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Will the people that are being put in place as counsellors, are they going to be paid on a 
per diem base? Are they going to be contracted with, or what kind of an operation are you planning putting 
in place there? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, per diem basis. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Are you dividing the province into districts similar to the ag rep districts where you’re 
putting these counsellors in place, or have you smaller districts than that? How far away from the farm are 
you getting? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, it will be on an ad hoc basis with no fixed 
boundaries at this point in time. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — How many people do you envision being involved in this counselling process? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, there will be three per panel, and I should 
probably make clear that neighbours will not sit in judgement of each other. For example, we would not have 
a fellow that lives a mile down the road looking at the application of his neighbour just down the road from 
him. We try and take people from this part of the province and put them in the review process some distance 
removed from his neighbours. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Have you a projection as to how many people are going to be involved? You haven’t 
given me any kind of a number that’s relevant any way at all. Are you looking at 20 people, 30 people, 70 
people? What kind of projections are you looking at now? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — We have a pool, if you like, of farm panellists that are prepared to serve if 
asked, that probably is in the neighbourhood of 40, 50, 60 farmers. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — You’re suggesting that it’s between 40 and 60 people. How soon will you be able to make 
this list available to us to indicate who these people are? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — There’s no list of specific panellists, because what the view would be is that 
they put together based on the problem case, if you like, that they’re dealing with. And an example I’ve used 
. . . for example, if it was a hog operation that was . . . a farmer running a hog operation that was part of that 
target group and had applied, you would draw from that pool somebody who has some expertise in that area. 
And so each panel would be different and would be put together as required, and so there is no list of formal 
three-member panels at this point in time. We just have a pool of people that we’re prepared to draw from 
and who have agreed to serve should the need arise, quite frankly. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — What you’re basically saying is there’s only going to be one provincial chairman. That is 
at provincial office. Is that person in place? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member, yes, one program chairman, and he is in 
place. 



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1957 
 

 
MR. ENGEL: — Could you give us his name and his qualifications? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — I’m disappointed, quite frankly, that the hon. member wasn’t listening to my 
second reading speech when I made mention of his name, and that’s Barry Andrew. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I asked . . . (inaudible) . . . but there was more then one part of that question. How did you 
come about selecting him? What are his qualifications and background and so on? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, and before I answer the question, I would like 
to acknowledge a comment made by the hon. member from Quill Lakes from his seat. Why I couldn’t give 
you that direct answer on to how he was hired is because I don’t do the hiring in my department. It’s done by 
a deputy minister. 
 
The farmer that was selected to be program chairman, Barry Andrew, has been president of Canadian 
Western Agribition, president of the Saskatchewan Livestock Association, very involved in the shorthorn 
breed over the years, a grain farmer – amply experienced and qualified, I would suggest. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Is his office going to be located here in Regina? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman and hon. Member, yes, he’ll be working out of the Walter 
Scott Building. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Can you give us what his per diem will be? You said these people are all on a per diem. 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — The best information I have on that at this point in time, and I believe it to be 
correct – I would not want to mislead the House—I believe it’s $225 per day for the program chairman. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — We can accept that. I appreciate the minister giving us that information. The panellists that 
will help and sit on there, how much are you intending to pay them? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, my best information there, as well, is that the 
chairman of the three-member panel would receive $150 as a per diem, and the panellists would receive 110. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, do I understand the system to be that you’re 
going to have this large committee, which may have 40 or 50 or 60 people, and that the provincial farmers 
counselling and assistance program committee, any number, and perhaps 40, 50, 60, and that that committee 
will really not do anything as a committee? They’re not going to make decisions, but rather, the chairman is 
going to be an administrator, and out of that group will come panels who will, in groups of three, make 
decisions, probably in geographic locations, on applications which have been sent to the committee – in the 
form of the act to the chairman of the committee. Is that the administration, how it’s going to work? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I don’t know if your 
terminology in terms of committees, is an appropriate one. What I would suggest to you is we have a pool of 
expertise, if you like, that we can draw on to form these three-member panels, and I wouldn’t . . . And I’m 
sure you didn’t want to leave the impression that that pool is going to be drawing the per diem as they sit 
waiting for a phone call to sit on a case, because that is not the case. It’s only those panellists who would be 
activated to look at a particular situation that would be receiving that per diem. And there would be a 
chairman of the three-member panel, and they would talk to and meet with the farmer applicant. And all 
those panellists would be  



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1958 
 

 
farmers. And we’d have one overall chairman of chairmans, if you like, a program chairman. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I think I’ve got it right, then. We established, by the act, the provincial farmers 
counselling and assistance program committee, consisting of any number, and that number is probably from 
40 to 60 of active or recently retired farmers, etc. That committee will probably never meet, or, if it meets, 
probably once, and make no decisions. 
 
It is essentially, as you say, a list or a panel. The chairman of the committee will be active and will be on a 
per diem basis, but he will be near full-time for a while anyway. And thereafter, there will be panels of three 
drawn from this larger committee who will actually deal with the applications. 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, Hon. Leader of the Opposition, yes. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — The application as such, if we just want to run through a model, a farmer at Fir Mountain 
needs some help. He wants to put some feeders in his pasture, and he goes into the ag rep’s office, picks up a 
sheet like this, all right? He fills out the entire form . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Follow these steps, Mr. 
Minister, even if, in spite of some of your cronies there trying to interrupt me . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Well, maybe it’d be a lot simpler if you‘d run through that process and continue it so the position as to when 
the guy can take it back to his credit union and get a loan. Follow it through from the farmer that is . . . And 
we’ll use an example. Let’s use a fictitious example of a farmer at Fir Mountain. I could even give you his 
initials. But let’s use a fictitious example of a farmer at Fir Mountain that comes in, picks up an application, 
and just wants to buy 30 head of cattle to put into his six quarters of pasture land he’s got. And where does 
he go from there? He’s got the application; he filled it out. What does he do next? Run it through us till he 
gets the money. 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, the farmer would fill out this application which 
would be available, for the member of Quill lakes’ information, where he would get it from – could get it 
from credit unions, banks, ag reps. He would take that, fill that application, get it into the program chairman 
who would verify it as complete and correct, program chairman would then can select a panel and the panel 
chairman, who would then meet with the farmer. That’s the . . . You kind of wanted the step-by-step process 
– and that would be it. 
 
With the panel chairman in place, then, would proceed to meet with and/or talk to the farmer. And the 
farmer, as well, would have the right to veto any panellist if he . . . Even if a guy come from 500 miles away, 
they might have had some dealings in the past, and it would not be in their best interest to review each 
others’ records, and that would be his option as well. 
 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . They will go over his strategy for a solution, if you like. Maybe they could 
then draw on additional expertise – accountants, if they wanted, if there was some additional expertise they 
thought they needed in the advice situation. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — We’ve still got this application hanging in the meeting. There’s still no working capital out 
there. Please finish the process. 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — They’d meet with the farmer. They might draw in other expertise if they want 
it, meet with the lending institution and/or they might meet with them both together at some stage along the 
way. The bottom line here is we’ve got farmers, their peers, taking a look at the situation, seeing if there is a 
strategy for a solution here, and trying to come up with a judgement as to whether that is a strategy for a 
solution. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Just one more quick run through the . . . the farmer said to J.R. or whoever it was, picks up 
this application form on Tuesday – how long do you think it will be from that date until he can get it staffed, 
get it approved, and get the credit union or the bank or whoever actually  



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1959 
 

making the cheque? How many hoops, and how long, and what’s the time lag that you consider would be an 
average of what this might take? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, it’s a hypothetical question at best. But by 
gosh, I do have an answer, Mr. Hon. member from the Quill Lakes. We would suggest that possibly 
something in the range of three to seven days. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I think the only other thing that I would like . . . Can the minister assure us that we . . . The 
only name we have so far is a former director from Agribition, Barry Anderson. Can you provide us a list . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Andrew. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Yes, I’m sorry. I can’t even read my own writing. 
 
Can the minister provide us with a list of the people that he’ll be calling on to act as his regional chairmens? 
There’s a framework of about 60 people that you have on that thing. I think it’s only fair to squelch any hint 
– any hint – of the former allegations I’ve been making. If you want to squelch any hint that these people are 
not your key organizers and workers in the various constituencies, and that this isn’t going to be an oiling 
process for your party, can you provide us with that entire list of people that will be on call, and will be 
involved and acting on these panels? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — First of all, Mr. Chairman, hon. member, the only paid person that sort of can 
be definitely identified at this point in time is, in fact, the program chairman. And that’s because of the 
process I just described to you, because you will make a judgment on who would seem to make sensible 
panellists for a given case. And after that, we have a pool of farmers out there to draw on. 
 
But I do want to definitely squelch any suggestion that you would make, or that your hon. colleague would 
make, that this is a political panel, because the method of the collection of these names has been through the 
vast ag rep network that you know exists out there, and that I know exists out there. They have submitted to 
us probably several hundred names. Not all could come in. Not all wanted to sit as panellists. And there may 
still be some who, because of other commitments, may not be able to sit on a given day. 
 
But I do want to assure you, and all members of this House, I want to squelch, unequivocally, any suggestion 
that that’s a political panel, because they were drawn based on our ag rep network out there. Please send us 
in names of farmers that fit this bill – experienced, actively or recently retired farmers, a proven track record. 
And I want that to be on the record for everyone in this House to be aware of. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Minister, I suggested how you can do that, and that is by providing us with a list of 
people that you’re going to be drawing form. You tell us there’s a number of names been submitted to your 
office. You’ve weeded this down to about 40 or 60 from 100-and-some. We want that 40 or 60, and we want 
a list of all the names that are going to be used to draw on from time to time. And if you need to update it, 
it’s no problem. Just send us an update list. But I think that’s the smallest, that’s the least guarantee you need 
to give us, is to at least provide us with that list of names, from time to time, that will be on call. 
 
We don’t want to know which three people travelled to Moosomin or to Maple Creek or to Vanguard or to 
Gravelbourg or wherever, but I think we should have the broad privilege of saying these are the people we’re 
going to be drawing from. And I think that, then, is fair, and leaves it above reproach, and leaves it 
completely justifiable that here is truly a farm panel of retired and expert people that can rule on decisions. I 
like the idea that a farmer can veto any name that’s on the list that’s going to review his case. I think that’s 
great. And if you can provide us with that list, we’ll say then you are acting in the best interests of the 
farmers. If you’re not  



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1960 
 

 
going to provide us with the list, then we know there is a little bit of a hanky-panky and a little oiling going 
on. 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I want to squelch it, I have given you my word 
but, more than that, we will give you the lists of who are the panellists as they are engaged, because we don’t 
know who they are. To be quite honest with you, I haven’t seen the lists. I didn’t do the hiring. I have a 
deputy here who does the hiring. But as they are engaged, we will give you whoever. Because right now I 
couldn’t even tell you who’s going to sit, quite frankly, but, as they do sit, you can have a list of every panel 
of three that goes out there. Okay? 
 
MR. ENGEL: — That is not quite what we were talking about. We were suggesting that you’ve got a list 
that you’re going to be drawing from. If you send us a list after the fact, you actually may be telling us who 
you interviewed, and who you didn’t. We don’t want to know that. We don’t want to know which farmers 
were interviewed, and which ones weren’t. I think that is not what we’re talking about. 
 
We’re talking about the people that are going to be the ones that are going to be pronouncing the death 
sentence on a farmer, or are going to be giving him a stay of execution in granting him a little working 
capital to carry on. And that is a tremendous amount of power. There’s a tremendous amount of power in 
that committee there, Mr. Minister. And I think it’s only fair that the list of 40 or 60 names that Barry has 
now that he can work with, plus what additional ones, I think it’s wise to have those, that name of list made 
available to the opposition in such a way that it will tell the people of Saskatchewan, “Look, we’re above 
reproach.” 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, we are above reproach, and I have no doubt, no 
doubt whatsoever, and I don’t know why you don’t trust the farmers or don’t trust the ag reps out there, but I 
have no doubt that all these farmers are above reproach out there, and they’ve been selected on the basis of 
expertise, not anything else. 
 
And I have told you, and I will provide to you everything but the name of the farmer. I have told you that I 
will supply you with all the names of the panel members as they are struck and activated. It’s a dynamic 
process out there. There’s a pool out there. I suspect there’s some coming and going all the time on it, based 
on commitments, desire, expertise in a given area. But I will show you every name of every panellist who, in 
fact, actively sits as a panellist. 
 
Now I don’t think you can get much more open that that, given that we can’t supply anything more concrete 
than that. I don’t have anything more concrete than that. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I think the minister is avoiding the issue. When you explain the process, and when I look 
at this bill, when there’s a number of requests coming from Assiniboia, for example, on a given week, 
they’re going to go down, and you’ll say that to save time and save money they’re not going to run for every 
applicant. 
 
So they have 10. And they’ll have a little hearing down in Assiniboia. So one will come from Moosomin, 
one will come from North Battleford, and somebody else will come from Regina, and they’ll come down. I 
don’t want to know those three that are coming down there. I want to know the master list. There’s a master 
list around, and there’ll be of names that you . . . (inaudible) . . . And just send us that master list of: these are 
the people that are going to be out there on panels. 
 
If, after a year down the road, we get a list saying that these people served 20 times, and this one only served 
once, and this one never showed up at all, that’s fair pool. Bimonthly or biannual or whatever, twice a year, 
that’s fair. But I think there should be a master list that indicates these are the people you’re drawing from. If 
you update that master list from time to time . . . You update it, and I think that’s the simplest for 
bookkeeping; it’s the easiest for us to keep track of. I think there’s no problem, then, to say that this group of 
farmers is above-board and above reproach,  



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1961 
 

and it includes a cross-section of the community and not a select few. 
 
Because you have a track record, Mr. Minister. Your party has a track record and they lost, and they were in 
the boondocks for 50 years because of that very issue. If you talk about Tories, the first topic that comes up 
are those Tory people that were involved before. You have a track record to cover up, and you have to go 
specially far and make specially certain that that doesn’t happen again. And this is the one area that we want 
to see you do. 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — You, Mr. Chairman, hon. member, you want to know who is, in fact, going to 
be sitting there and controlling the destiny, if you like, of some farmers. I’ve told you, as those panellists are 
put in place, as a given person out of that pool confirms that he will sit on a given case on a given day, given 
that the program chairman suggests that we need your kind of expertise, I will give you that. I don’t know 
how I can give you something before it exists, quite frankly. 
 
And secondly, that pool is a dynamic one. We obviously got the foundation for it – the large part of the pool 
– based on recommendations that came in from agricultural representatives. Some, when they came in and 
listened to what the concept of the program was, decided not to allow their names to stand as panellists. 
Others may have to be brought in because of a particular type of expertise they may represent that we don’t 
have there. 
 
It probably is going to be somewhat dynamic. It doesn’t exist. And until they’re activated, I couldn’t even 
tell you who would sit. I haven’t seen the list. Quite frankly, I don’t want to see it. But I know there is lots of 
farmers that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I will give it to you as they sit. I can do no more than that. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Minister, you’ve made a couple of statements here this afternoon that makes it a 
little difficult to believe everything you say. One, you say you’ve got a pool there that you’re going to draw 
these people from, the panellists from. And then you say you don’t know who is in that pool, you don’t know 
how many people you are going to draw, or where they are going to come from. What kind of pool do you 
have that you are going to be drawing from? Surely if you’ve got a pool of people that are capable of doing 
this job, that have the expertise that you talk about, then you must have some names, and there must be a 
good number of those people on that pool. And that was all we were asking for, was the names of the people 
on that pool. And why don’t you give us that list? 
 
The other thing, Mr. Minister . . . or maybe I should get you to tell me . . . answer that question first: why 
wont’ you give us the list of the people on that pool? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Number one is: I don’t have it. Number two is: it’s dynamic and it’s 
changing minute by minute. Thirdly, what you are interested in is who is sitting determining the destiny of 
farmers. And I will give you that list as they sit. 
 
We don’t operate like you, hon. member, when you were government. We don’t operate on the basis of 
putting these fiercely independent people, like Terry Hanson, on boards; Harvey Abbells, son-in-law to 
you-know-who. We don’t operate that way on this side of this House, and I think you are impugning the 
name of every farmer in Saskatchewan when you suggest that we are. 
 
Those people have been called in, recommended by their ag reps as possible people that would sit because of 
their expertise and the respect that others in the community hold for them. I’m frankly very disappointed that 
you would even suggest that farmers don’t have that kind of expertise out there. We don’t believe in this 
political jiggery-pokery that you played for years and years and years. And the hon. member for Quill Lakes, 
I would like to see him stand up and say he doesn’t believe that you didn’t do that. Stand up and tell us. 



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1962 
 

 
MR. LUSNEY: — Well, Mr. Minister, you talk about what the former government did. Your record isn’t 
much better, Mr. Speaker. In fact, your record is a lot worse. When you look at Staff Barootes, you look at 
George Hill, and you look at all the people you put on the different committees, that, Mr. Minister, is what 
we’re concerned about. 
 
You’ve got a pool of people. You say they’re changing every minute. What sort of pool do you have that’s 
changing every minute? Surely there must be only so many people in the province that would be willing to 
sit on this committee, or on the panels. And surely those people have to have the time to sit on there every 
day if necessary, for the next month. 
 
So there must be a pool of people that you have some names of that, one, do have the expertise and the 
qualifications to sit on it; number two, will have the time to sit on that panel for the next while to process 
many of these claims or applications that’ll be in there. And if you’ve got a pool of those people, why are 
you not giving us that list? Are you trying to hide names, or what? Why don’t you just provide the names of 
the people that you will be drawing from that pool? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, you will see the name of every panellist that 
sits, absolutely every name. I’ve given you that in this House before this legislature. That is my commitment. 
That is what I will do – nothing more, nothing less. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Well, Mr. Minister, I would hope that when you do that, that it will be coming in the near 
future, and not a year or two later. 
 
One of the other things that you mentioned awhile ago, Mr. Minister, was that the farmer will have the right 
to veto any panel member. Now I’ve looked through this bill, and I don’t see where it states in this bill that 
the farmer does have the right to veto a panel member that is appointed to review his application. Is there 
anywhere in that bill that this is possible? Is this just something else that you are saying to the farmers, that 
they have this right, but when they get down to it, they won’t have that right? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — That will be part of the policy guide-lines for the program chairman to 
follow. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Well, Mr. Minister, if you’ve got some policy guide-lines, could we see some of those 
policy guide-lines that they have to follow as to where the veto will be? Who is going to be providing this 
kind of policy? Surely you’re not asking us that the program chairman is the one that’s going to be making 
some of these decisions. If you have some guide-lines, what are they? Are they going to be in regulations, or 
is it just going to be a little note that you’re going to hand the chairman, or what? Where are these guide-lines 
and what form are those guide-lines going to be there? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, you’ve been in this House long enough to 
know that for every piece of legislation, there’s usually what they call “delegated legislation,” or 
“regulations.” And as well, after the regulations are set out there’s usually a policy put in place after that. 
And surely to goodness you would know that that is the procedure, has been, and probably always will be the 
procedure, and I’ve just finished telling you what part of that policy will be. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Minister, when will we be able to get a copy of the regulations regarding this bill? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, that’s a good question. And given how long 
you’ve stalled this bill, that some farmers out there might want because they might want to access this safety 
net, I can’t give you a concrete answer. But with your assistance, it will be sooner than later. 



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1963 
 

 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Minister, if anybody’s stalling this bill it was the minister himself, and not the 
opposition. You weren’t in this House this morning when we started. You come in this House half-way 
through, and now you’re saying we’re stalling it. We want to get this bill passed – in as bad a form as it’s set 
out in – but we want to know a little about what you’re going to be doing to the farmers of this province. And 
we’re not stalling the bill. We are just asking you for some very reasonable information, and asking you 
some reasonable questions. Do you have the regulations put together that you can send to us, and to send to 
your ag reps, or whoever is going to be responsible for the program? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, the regulations will be put together and 
approved through order in council, and made public in the normal route, as soon as possible, and in due 
course. And in so far as your view about me not being in the House and this bill not being able to proceed, 
obviously you’re in error again, because my hon. colleague, the Minister of Health, in fact had the bill up and 
rolling when I arrived back here today, and I think that just indicates the kind of depth we’ve got on this side 
of the House, in that any one of these ministers can carry legislation related to the farm, because we have so 
many people here in touch with the farm. 
 
And I think it’s a real tribute, not only to my colleague here, but to this whole government side of this 
legislature. It’s unfortunate you don’t have that kind of depth. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Minister, with the kind of legislation that you brought into this House today, when 
you talk about being in touch with the farms, I can tell you about the only thing you’re in touch with is a lot 
of fresh air, and not in touch with the farmers of this province nor do seem to be too many of your other 
members. 
 
Asking the Minister of Health to pilot this bill through the House this morning while you were away doesn’t 
mean that he knows everything about the bill. It’s easy to do just about anything when you have a good 
group of support staff with you. We are asking for information without having your support staff here, and 
we are hoping that your support staff will provide us with some of this information. 
 
You are saying that you’re passing this bill, and the farmers are going to be filling out the applications; and 
you’re saying, if we get this thing through fast, they’ll be able to start filing out those applications And you 
haven’t met as cabinet, from what you just said a few minutes ago, to put together any regulations yet 
regarding this bill. So you’re going to get the applications, then in the future your cabinet is going to put 
together regulations regarding this bill. 
 
Surely, Mr. Speaker, you have, or Mr. Minister, you have some regulations put together that are going to 
affect this bill, where you will be able to instruct your staff out in the field, that will know just what the 
regulations are, what they can or can’t do. 
 
You mentioned the veto, you mentioned the veto that’s going to be in regulations. And yet you say you’ve 
got no such regulations anywhere. Yet there’s going to be a veto available to the applicant. Surely you’ve got 
some idea of what’s going to be in those regulations. 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, one other unique feature about this legislation 
which you probably haven’t noticed, maybe because you haven’t particularly looked at the bill, is that very 
much of the detail is, in fact, right in the legislation itself. 
 
And I know when your party, the NDP party, was the government in this legislature, that you tried to hide 
everything in regulation so that you could do it in the dark of night with the cabinet – change the rules and 
jiggery-pokery and all that kind of stuff. 



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1964 
 

 
We believe in being up front. This bill clearly states who, what, when, where, why. There will not be need 
for any great deal of regulation, because it’s in there. It’s spelled out in detail. The numbers are there. 
Virtually everything is there. I know that’s, for Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan farmers, a refreshing 
change. 
 
But regulations, I mentioned, will come as soon as possible through the normal channels. We want to get this 
program up and running. Don’t jeopardize all farmers in Saskatchewan who might want to use this safety net 
like you jeopardized the dairy farmers of Saskatchewan. We beseech you not to do that. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Members from across the way are heckling and pushing and 
calling us filibuster. 
 
When is the cabinet meeting going to be held? Are you having a cabinet meeting today to pass the 
regulations that will make this thing law? Are you meeting today to finalize this bill and get the regulations 
in place so that the farmers can qualify under this? Are those regulations and are those orders in council . . . 
Are those orders ready? Have you got your preparation done that that cabinet meeting can be held the minute 
this House finishes this bill? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — The provision for the guarantees, Mr. Chairman and hon. member, is in the 
act. We get that through, the provision will be there. As soon as it receives Royal Assent would be my 
understanding. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Are you saying that the last line of this bill: 
 

For the purpose of carrying out this Act according to its intent, the Lieutenant Governor in council 
may make regulations prescribing any matter or thing that is required or authorized by this Act to be 
prescribed in the regulations. 
 

Are you trying to tell me that that application and that Barry can call together his committee without a 
cabinet meeting? Is this what you’re saying? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — I’m saying, Mr. Chairman, hon. member, that the provision providing loan 
guarantees is right in the act itself, and let’s get on with it. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Minister, you’re avoiding the question. You insisted that we pass this part in our little 
part here before Easter so there won’t be a delay. And I’m suggesting that your cabinet isn’t meeting before 
Easter, and that this was just a big charade to make it look as though we’re stalling. And the farmers aren’t 
going to be in any way, shape, or form, accommodated any sooner than if we’d have come back next 
Tuesday. And we would have had the long weekend to find out if there had been some farmer reaction to this 
bill. 
 
You rushed this through. You’ve had since prior to budget processing. It took you a whole month to get it 
ready, and yet we’re supposed to agree, and if we take more than 245 hours, you’re saying we’re 
filibustering. Now come clean on this one. Are you telling me that this bill will give some money to farmers 
without a cabinet meeting and without an order in council approving it? Is this what you’re telling me? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — The provision for guarantees will be there the minute this bill receives Royal 
Assent. The panellists can go, be up and running, etc., etc. . . . Now whose side are you on? Are you on the 
side of the farmer, or you’re not? Come clean. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — You know I’m on the side of the farmer. Now you’re telling me that if a farmer picks up 
his application this afternoon, the credit unions are open on Saturday – the credit unions are open on 
Saturday. Are you saying there’s going to be some farmers ready to have an application by Saturday? If 
they’re not, we could have come back and finished it on Tuesday.  



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1965 
 

And you railroaded something through that isn’t going to do the farmer one iota of good, because you’re not 
going to deal with this until next Wednesday’s cabinet meeting. That’s what’s happening. 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I’m suggesting to you that we can start having 
farmers put the mechanism in place to have their interviews, their applications received, the provision for 
loan guarantees, by the passage of this act. That is my best understanding. 
 
As well, you know full well (at least I would presume you would know) that you can’t pass regulations 
before. And I’m suggesting to you as well, that to get things up and running in terms of providing loan 
guarantees, because the act is relatively detailed and specific (which is refreshing to the people of 
Saskatchewan, I might add) that by the mere passage of this we will, in fact, be well on our way to putting 
that safety net in place. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I think we have our answer from a non-answer like we’ve had yesterday, that you are 
saying that none of this is going to be in place before Wednesday’s cabinet meeting. 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — No, I’m not saying that, Mr. Chairman, and hon. member. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — In other words, you’re saying that some farmer, if I take his application along home 
tonight – this afternoon – could fill it out. On Saturday he can go to this credit union and get a loan 
guarantee. Is this what you’re telling me? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — I’m saying that if we get this bill through the House, he’ll be able to get his 
application in to the program chairman and have his panel selected and get on the road, that three-to-seven 
road I suggested in so far as meeting with the panellists and having a decision made, so that, in fact, if they 
do recommend that he should have a guarantee, he can, in fact, get that guarantee. 
 
I went through that process step by step for you. The hon. member from Quill Lakes asked the time frame. I 
gave it to you. And your delaying it is going to make it later than sooner, quite frankly. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I don’t know why the minister is so sensitive about asking questions. We agreed to 
continue and get some details on this through the bill, and I’m prepared to move into clause-by-clause. I have 
two amendments I’m going to offer. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Chairman, in section 6, I would like to move an amendment that would add a point 
(3): 
 
That clause 6 be amended by adding the following words: 
 

(3) Notwithstanding subsection 3, a farmer may apply to a lending institution for a guaranteed 
operating loan, and if the lending institution reports to the program chairman that is satisfied with the 
farm plan, the program chairman shall authorize the making of a guaranteed operating loan pursuant 
to clause 11(1)(a). 
 

I so move, seconded by my colleague from Pelly. 



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1966 
 

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — It is the ruling of the Chair that the amendment is out of order for the following 
reason, as quoted from Beauschesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, page 233: 
 

An amendment is out of order if it imposes a charge upon the Public Treasury, if it extends the 
objects and purposes, or relaxes the conditions and qualifications as expressed in the Royal 
Recommendation. 
 

For that reason, because this amendment could lead to the expenditure of sums of money out of the public 
purse in excess of what’s contemplated in the bill, I rule that it’s out of order. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Chairman, I think if you read the ruling, all this does is eliminate a lot of red tape. It 
eliminates a lot of red tape for the farmers, should the credit union . . . The same loan guarantee is in place. If 
the lending institution feels it’s great, that motion just says that it saves money. It saves the public purse 
money from bringing that committee together, having a special hearing when it’s not even necessary. 
 
If it’s a straightforward, above-the-board case that the lending institution sends in, they send it to the 
program chairman. The program chairman looks at it, and he says, okay, this is one I don’t have to call my 
committee together on, and we can rule on it. 
 
So it doesn’t draw on the public purse. It doesn’t change the intent. It save you some money and some red 
tape. And I think that’s what the farmers want. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. The amendment has been ruled out of order. The next item of business 
is section 6, Application for assistance. 
 
Clause 6 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 7 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 11 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Chairman, on this section here, I think it’s very important that the government . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Section 11. And I think it’s very important that the government follows through 
with what they’ve been saying and what they’re recommending, and it’s similar to what other programs are 
in place. 
 
I think it’s very unfortunate when the Chairman doesn’t give the minister a chance to respond and rules it out 
of order just to . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
And in this one here, I am sure you will consider very favourable, because section 11(3) was amended by 
adding clause (f) and that clause 11(3)(f), and if I could have a page . . . And that we want to add in a section 
to make this as fair as the Farm Purchase Plan was, and that it established a rate that the farmers can count 
on. 
 
And so we amend it by striking out the words “the prescribed maximum rate” and substituting the word: 
 

8 per cent. 
 

I so move. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. If the members of the opposition wish to have the amendment read, we 
will have to have some order. 



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1967 
 

 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, hon. members, what I’ve been hearing and what other 
members of the legislature have been hearing, and what farmers have been telling us is, in fact, that there are 
some out there who, in fact, are not able to get an additional operating loan. They’re not able to get 
additional money, period. 
 
So the first thing we’re doing here is making a provision so that they can get that additional operating funds. 
That’s what they’ve asked for. And over and above that, we have said that we are prepared, in fact, to make 
it available or have as a condition of the loan guarantee that it be made available at a preferred rate. So they 
are already, in fact, receiving a preferred rate. 
 
I would suggest to you that compared to some programs in other jurisdictions, that rate today is not much 
different than what operates in some of those other jurisdictions. So I would be voting against the 
amendment. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS 
 

Blakeney Koskie Lusney 
Engel   

— 4 
NAYS 

 
Birkbeck Embury Rybchuk 
Taylor Dirks Caswell 
Rousseau Maxwell Hampton 
Katzman Young Gerich 
McLaren Domotor Tusa 
Baker Folk Meagher 
Hepworth Muirhead Glauser 
Schoenhals Petersen Sauder 
Duncan Sutor Zazelenchuk 
Sandberg Parker Martens 
Klein Smith (Moose Jaw South) Weiman 
Dutchak Myers Sveinson 

— 36 
 
Clause 11 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 12 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 18 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Section 18, Mr. Minister. When are you going to have this meeting, and have this 
regulation, this order in council meeting. When is that cabinet meeting going to be? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Well, Mr. Chairman, hon. member, in due course. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Big rush now, but in due course, after the bill is passed. Thank you. 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — You’re welcome, Mr. Chairman, hon. member, it would be very highly, and 
very highly irregular to pass regulations before a bill is put in place, I would suggest. 



 
April 19, 1984 
 

1968 
 

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Section 19, coming into force . . . 
 
MR. ENGEL: — We’re still on 18, Mr. Chairman. It wasn’t carried. We still hadn’t voted on 18. Are you 
going to call a special cabinet meeting tonight to pass this? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, number one is I don’t call the cabinet meetings. 
Number two is, as I’ve already indicated, the specifics in this bill, because it is very specific, allow for this 
thing to get up and rolling, and for the provision of guarantees that process to start taking place. It is the 
regulations . . . It is my understanding the regulations that we would, in fact, need, would be to do with the 
payment of default claims. So everything we need to get the safety net put in place will occur with the 
passage of this bill. That’s my best understanding. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Just one more question. While the Premier’s away skiing, who did he put in the position 
that could call a special cabinet meeting to pass this bill, so it’s expedited immediately, like today? 
 
Clause 18 agreed to. 
 
Clause 19 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 

 
THIRD READING 

 
Bill No. 49 – An Act to provide Counselling Assistance and Loan Guarantees to Farmers 

 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Chairman, I move that the bill be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS 
 

Birkbeck Maxwell Schmidt 
Taylor Young Tusa 
Rousseau Domotor Meagher 
Katzman Folk Glauser 
McLaren Muirhead Sauder 
Baker Petersen Zazelenchuk 
Hepworth Sutor Martens 
Schoenhals Parker Weiman 
Duncan Smith (Moose Jaw South) Blakeney 
Sandberg Myers Engel 
Klein Rybchuk Koskie 
Dutchak Caswell Lusney 
Embury Hampton Sveinson 
Dirks Gerich  

— 41 
 

NAYS – Nil 
 

Bill read a third time. 



 
April 19, 1984 

 

1969 
 

 
ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 

 
At 2:57 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and 
gave Royal Assent to the following bill: 
 
Bill No. 49 – An Act to provide Counselling Assistance and Loan Guarantees to Farmers 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:58 p.m. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, before adjourning the House today, we’ve had a long session today. 
I’d like to take this opportunity to wish all members of the House – both sides – yourself, Mr. Speaker, and 
your staff, a Happy New Year. I think we should strike that from the record. And have a Happy Easter. I t 
has been a long day. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, it’s been a longer day than I think any of us have been quite 
aware of, and I join with the House Leader in expressing the hope that we have a short respite over the Easter 
holiday, that we refresh ourselves, and come back invigorated to do the public weal. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 3:00 p.m. 


