






















































Hansard: May 16, 1984


2641 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 16, 1984 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Clerk: — I’d like to advise the Assembly that Mr. Speaker will not be present today to open this sitting. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Birkbeck: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to introduce to you, and of 
course through you to the other members of the Assembly, a group of grade 5 students from Whitewood in 
my constituency, seated in the Speaker’s gallery. They are accompanied, of course, by their teacher, Mrs. 
Santo; their bus driver, Mr. White; and, of course, one of the parents, Mrs. Potts. 
 
I would like all members to join me in welcoming them to the Assembly here this afternoon. I hope that you 
will find it informative, as you have in other years, having brought the grade 5 students in. Of course I will 
be meeting with you later for drinks and for pictures in the rotunda area. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Zazelenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like to introduce to you, and through you to 
the Assembly, approximately 43 grades 7 and 8 students from St. Dominic School in Saskatoon. They are 
seated in the east gallery and accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Steve Buttinger, and chaperons, Mr. Novak 
and Mr. Barnett. I’ll be meeting with them at 2 o’clock in the rotunda area for pictures. I know all members 
hope they have a pleasant stay in Regina and a safe trip home. I’d like all members to join with me in 
welcoming them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce a former member of the Assembly 
and former leader of the PC Party, Dick Collver, who is seated in the Speaker’s gallery. I’m sure that all 
members will want to warmly welcome the former leader to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I could just join with the members opposite — I’m not 
entirely sure how sincere their welcome was because I think they regret, in large part, that that particular 
individual ever came to Saskatchewan, because, in large part, he’s responsible for them sitting over there. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Central Canada Potash Lay-offs 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to direct a question to the Minister of Finance, in 
his capacity as chairman of the Saskatchewan . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Minister in charge. 



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2642 
 

Mr. Koskie: — . . . yes, minister in charge, rather, of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. And my 
question deals with yesterday’s announcement by the Central Canada Potash, that it will lay off 364 workers 
at its mine near Viscount, effective July 14th, for an indefinite period. 
 
The mine manager says: 
 

The lay-offs are due to low potash demand in the U.S., (and he says) that due to uncertainty in the 
market-place, there will be little improvement in the potash demand in the last half of the calendar year. 

 
My question to you, Mr. Minister: does the government and the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan share 
the pessimistic outlook as expressed by the general manager of the Central Canada Potash? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — In response to the hon. member’s question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan does not share that pessimism. Obviously there is concern with the weather 
and climactic conditions in the United States corn belt. The sales have not reached the budgeted levels. 
However, our sales internationally through Canpotex are in excess of 100 per cent ahead of last year. We 
would not anticipating any closings of any of the potash corporation mines during this fiscal year. In fact, the 
officials of potash corporation are still optimistic that they will be able to hit a record target of production in 
1984. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, as a supplemental question I’d like to ask the minister whether the minister can 
explain the large discrepancy between what is being said by the general manager of one of the private sector 
producing potash corporations and what you are saying and leading the people of Saskatchewan to believe, 
that there is no problem with the markets during the currency of the coming year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I think a couple of things have happened. The Canpotex sales have, in fact, as I 
said, been significantly higher than budgeted. The volume is very good. The price would be preferable if the 
price internationally were higher. The potash corporation has, in fact, done a very good job over the second 
half of 1983 and into 1984 by the minister — now the Minister of Labour, then minister responsible for the 
potash corporation. And the board at that time put many of the salesmen, or all the salesmen in the U.S. 
market, the U.S. domestic market, on to commission. 
 
What we have found by that change of marketing strategy is, in fact, the percentage share of the domestic 
market being captured by the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan has increased very significantly. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — One further supplemental. Can the minister then give an explanation as to the actions taken 
by one of the members of Canpotex, the Central Canada Potash Corporation? They are, in fact, taking 
actions which are totally contradictory to what your predictions are. Are they not sharing a part of the same 
market, an international market, in Canpotex? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, I wouldn’t profess to speak for Central Canada Potash. Certainly the actions 
that they’re going to take . . . I assume the announcement yesterday was a vehicle by which they would 
control their inventories. I assume that’s what they’re doing. We believe that the strategy that we have 
undertaken of going back to three shifts in all mines, except the Rocanville mine which is, of course, the 
most economically viable mine in the sense of its closeness to the market, the way that mine is, in fact, being 
run. We can run four shifts at that particular mine. 
 
The strategy of inventory control through the potash corporation, the sales that we have in place, certainly 
from the point of view of the potash corporation, we would not anticipate, we  



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2643 
 

do not expect to have any closing down of the mine for, I think, it is a three-month period that Central 
Canada Potash . . . 
 
I’m not convinced that some of the other mines will do the same. I suppose each company will approach the 
question of managing their mines in their own particular way. What Central Canada Potash mines does, 
certainly, is of an interest to us as government, and something that we would look at as the potash 
corporation, but certainly we do not anticipate doing that, and we will run the corporation as we have, in 
fact, been running it of late. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to ask one further supplement, and would the minister . . . I essentially asked it 
previously, but you evaded answering it. And what I ask you: is Central Canada Potash indeed a part of 
Canpotex, and are they not, in fact, sharing in this expanded international market which, in fact, you are 
saying that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan will have no difficulty? Here is a member which is 
sharing in the same markets which . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order, order! The member, in a supplementary, is not allowed to make a 
statement without asking a question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — A short explanation to the member opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In answer to his 
question, yes, Central Canada Potash is part of Canpotex. Yes, they have their allocation of sale that can go 
into the international market. The problem, I take it, that they’re experiencing is that they are dropping off in 
the volume of sales into the domestic market, which each company markets its own product into that 
domestic market. 
 
I suppose what we are doing, and I find it somewhat strange that we have the Leader of the Opposition for 
the last six months, Mr. Deputy Speaker, standing up saying the management of the potash corporation is 
being run off and that is why we’re having losses. That is why we’re having losses. Now we turn it around 
and showing a $10 million profit in the first quarter, $10 million profit in the first quarter. Now the member 
sitting directly behind him starts to say, well, if Central Canada Potash Mine is going to shut down, why 
aren’t you going to shut down? The easy answer, Mr. Speaker, the easy answer, Mr. Speaker, is because the 
way the potash corporation is being run, the marketing into the U.S. domestic market is higher than last year. 
The marketing, through Canpotex, into the international market is almost 100 per cent higher than it was last 
year. The result of that, Mr. Speaker, is more jobs for the people of Saskatchewan; the result of that, Mr. 
Speaker, is more dollars for the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Handling of Asbestos at Queen Elizabeth Power Station 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I direct a question to the minister in charge of the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. On Monday I asked you a number of questions about concerns which had 
been raised by SPC employees with respect to health hazards in some power plants, particularly Queen 
Elizabeth plant at Saskatoon, and you promised to investigate and report back. And since then some facts 
have come to light which bring into question your willingness to have all of the facts revealed. 
 
The CTV network, W5, recently sent a crew to the Queen Elizabeth power plant to prepare an item on 
asbestos in the workplace for airing this Sunday night. During this time when they were at the plant, it is 
reported to me that their crew was followed around by a second TV crew which had been hired by SPC to 
monitor their activities. And the CTV producer was told that the SPC crew was there to gather evidence in 
the case of a lawsuit. I ask: does the minister, or did the chairman, Mr. George Hill, or any political 
appointee of either yours or Mr. Hill authorize this crude effort to intimidate the press? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2644 
 

Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, that’s the first that I have ever heard that kind of activity was 
supposedly going on. And I’m certainly not going to comment on that kind of statement as far as us setting 
up a separate crew to follow the CTV. It’s the first time I’ve heard about it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, are you advising that you are unaware of the fact that a second TV 
crew was trailing around to see that the CTV didn’t say anything of which you disapproved? Are you saying 
you were unaware of that? And if so, will you investigate and report to this House whether or not that sort of 
a tactic was indulged in by the corporation for which you are responsible, to see if you could put a muzzle on 
the press? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, the answer to the member’s question is yes, I was unaware of any 
such action. And I’m waiting for a complete report of the whole activity from my officials, both in the 
occupational health and Saskatchewan Power. And my understanding is that the folks are back to work, the 
plant is safe to work in, and we’ll look at the allegations that the members from the occupational health 
committee have provided to me. I’ve got the letter. 
 
I don’t have affidavits, by the way, but I have a letter signed by three or four people from within the plant. 
And once we have that information all in place, I’ll certainly be looking at it because we’re not going to step 
aside and not be aware and be concerned of the health of the employees in that plant. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, I assume that . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, I assume that the material you 
are studying will include the affidavit sworn by the mechanical maintenance foreman at the Queen Elizabeth 
plant, in which he swears that he was instructed to keep a certain individual working on a project involving 
asbestos, week after week, and month after month; not because he was required to do that. He was, in fact, 
one to be rotated. But he was not rotated because of the fact that he’d employed . . . Do you have, Mr. 
Minister, the affidavit of the mechanical maintenance foreman, one Reuben Penner, to that effect, and are 
you able to respond to the allegation in that affidavit now? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a letter signed by several employees of the plant. We re 
going to look at all their allegations and respond to it, but I need that information first before I can. And I 
will do that, as I said earlier. 
 
We’re concerned about health of people, too. And our occupational health director and staff are on the site, 
monitoring it from the day that the clean-up started. And once we have all the information, certainly we’ll 
look at all the allegations and respond to those employees. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — A new question, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The minister and members of his caucus found 
the comments by the CTV group funny. I don’t think the CTV thought they were ridiculous, and I don’t 
think the workers did. Mr. Minister, the problem throughout has been that the management has attempted to 
intimidate the workers, rather than dealing with the problem. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, has to do with the type of investigation which you’re going to launch into this. I 
ask you, Mr. Minister: is your investigation going to go beyond simply asking management about the matter? 
Because the management have been the problem. They have attempted to intimidate the workers rather than 
to deal with the problem. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister: will you give this House your assurance that your inquiry will go beyond simply 
asking the management about the matter? Because they are part of the problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I won’t make any judgement of any kind until I’ve heard both 
sides of the story. And that’s what we intend to do. This isn’t something that has just  



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2645 
 

started. This has been on the go since 1975. The Saskatchewan Power Corporation superintendent shut the 
plant down in 1975 because the employees wouldn’t wear safety equipment. 
 
So there are two sides to this story. That’s what I want to investigate. I’m getting closer to having all the 
information and, as I said, I’ll be answering the allegations of the employees. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Minister, when there were complaints directed 
to the former government and the management under the former government, they were listened to. But the 
complaints, Mr. Minister, in this case have been that, rather than deal with the complaints, you’ve attempted 
to intimidate them. 
 
My question, again, Mr. Minister, is: will you give this House your assurance that you will not just 
investigate the matter by listening to one side of the story, i.e., that of the management. Will you give us 
your assurance that your investigations will include listening to both sides of this dispute, including that of 
the workers whose lives are being endangered by your incompetence and neglect? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve just finished telling the member opposite that I listen to both 
sides of the story before I make any judgements, and that’s what I intend to do. And we have been in touch 
with them. We have had some of the employees in our office that we have talked to, one of them in 
particular, and we will be doing all of that. My director of occupational health is out of the province at the 
moment. I expect him back this weekend. He’s been on the site, our staff has been on the site, and we’ll put 
it all together. 
 
And right now the monitoring has proven that the plant is safe. We had the Saskatchewan Research Council 
do a second test for a second opinion, and the plant is safe to work in. Charges, others allegations, we’ll look 
into. 
 

Monthly Reports on Economic and Social Indicators 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a question to the Premier, and I want to ask the 
Premier about a memo which you sent to all your cabinet ministers, dated May 4. The memo says that you 
have decided to establish a system of monthly reports on economic and social indicators. 
 
And I ask the Premier: what economic and social indicators does he plan to monitor on a monthly basis 
which he doesn’t now have available to him? He will know that the Department of Social Services puts out a 
monthly statistical bulletin; that the Department of Energy and Mines puts out a monthly oil and gas 
production report; that the Department of Health puts out a SHSP in-migration and out-migration; that the 
Department of Labour puts out a labour report; that his own rural statistics puts out a consumer price index, 
a labour force statistics, and a monthly statistical bulletin. 
 
Now are you, Mr. Premier, not aware of these publications, or are you upset that they do not confirm the 
story you tell about prosperity in this province, and are you proposing to put out another set of figures which 
fit in rather more closely with your rhetoric? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have initiated several programs in terms of tax incentives, or 
social programs, or health programs. We want to make sure that we can track the results of our programs, 
whether it’s in drilling, or whether it’s in hospitals, or whether it is in health care, whether it is in economic 
activity of various dimensions. For example, the livestock tax credit is going to have an impact on the 
number of cattle going into feedlots. I want to make sure that we can track that accurately, that we know 
what we’re . . . that we can see the response. We want to see the response in terms of feed grains. I want to 
see the response in terms of construction activity as a result of nursing homes. I just want to market and 
target the  



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2646 
 

activities that we are doing so that we know, in fact, how we are doing compared to other jurisdictions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, supplementary. The Premier indicates that he wants to track 
growth and livestock numbers, and he obviously doesn’t have confidence in the existing statistics in the 
Department of Agriculture. What I am asking you, sir: is this to be in addition to the reports which are now 
made available to the public? Or are you proposing contemporaneously, with setting up this new system of 
statistics, to shut off some of the material which is now available to the public, to shut off publication of 
information, which the Minister of Social Services has already done in certain areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, this has nothing to do with stopping any publications. This is the 
consolidation of information on a monthly basis from various departments so that we can track the activities 
that are taking place in the province of Saskatchewan. It’s a consolidation so that we can look at it very 
clearly, look at it by statement. We are providing for the first time, the first time in Saskatchewan’s history, 
targeted tax incentives by sector. We want to make sure that we can track those economic activities by 
sector, and that’s why we’re pulling it together once a month. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, supplementary to the Premier. In the interests of open 
government and the public’s right to know, often professed by the government opposite, will you give us the 
assurance that existing publications available to the public will not be shut off, and we will have available to 
us the information we now have together with such additional information as you say will come from your 
new series of statistics? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it has nothing to do at all with changing the publications that are 
in existence. It’s a co-ordination and consolidation of information that comes together, involving cabinet 
ministers that are in these segments that we’re targeting for economic growth or social services or nursing 
homes, so that we can track how Saskatchewan is doing with respect to other provinces or jurisdictions. 
 

Ministerial Letter to Former President of SGI 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, a question to the minister in charge of SGI. My question deals 
with a letter that the minister has sent to the former president of SGI, one Murray Wallace. The letter, dated 
April 2nd of this year, reads, in part, as follows, and I want members to listen to this: 
 

Since our meeting of August 9, 1982, the Saskatchewan Government Insurance has reviewed further the 
operation of the corporation during your presidency. It is unfortunate that when the decision to terminate 
your employment was taken a full review had not been completed. I am now prepared to confirm that your 
performance with the corporation was acceptable, and your termination was without cause. 

 
Can the minister explain the purpose of this letter sent to a man fired almost two years ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Well, one good reason, Mr. Speaker, that I will indicate to the hon. member is it 
saved us a lot of money, to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . How much we 
paid, Mr. Speaker . . . The member asks how much we paid. We, on this side of the Assembly, do not breach 
agreements that we make. We made an agreement with Mr. Wallace that we would not reveal the terms of 
that agreement. That’s more than what can be said from the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. But it was, in 
fact, one of the main reasons for having signed the letter, was to, in fact, save a considerable amount of 
money to taxpayers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister appears to be telling us that under  



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2647 
 

threat of legal action he finally admitted that he had no cause of action. I ask the minister: if you had no 
cause to fire this man, no just cause, as is indicated by the letter, why didn’t you investigate that fact before 
you fired him, and thereby save the public a great deal more money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I indicated at the time, and two years ago, that we, in fact, had a 
cause at the time. The members opposite seem bent on giving information out that is confidential, that we 
agreed not to reveal and not to make public, and that includes the amount that was paid. Frankly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I would just love, I would love to be able to reveal how little we paid Mr. Wallace. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will ask the minister, who would love to reveal that, whether, 
if we obtain a written consent from Mr. Wallace for the revelation of that, he will, in fact, reveal it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m surprised at the leader of the Opposition asking such a 
question. The fact is there has been an agreement made. We will honour that agreement on our side. If the 
Leader of the Opposition feels that he should breach that agreement, that we should breach it from either 
side, I’ll leave that to his conscience. Certainly we don’t intend to do it on our side. There was an agreement 
made. The terms, the reasons, all of this is within the agreement and we’re going to leave it that way. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, a supplementary. Is it the custom or your government to 
dismiss senior employees, claiming that you have just cause, and then, when the damage is done, 18 months 
later write an abject apology saying that you had no cause? Is that to be the custom of your government, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, certainly not. We had reasons at the time. He’s bent on 
bringing this information out. He’s doing more harm to the reputation of the individual at this point in time 
by his questions. 
 
We agreed to put it to rest. We agreed to settle the dispute. We agreed to settle for an undisclosed amount. 
And I don’t know why the Leader of the Opposition is bent on asking these questions that would only reveal 
what the information is confidential, reveal to people why we took the action that we did, both then and now. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 54 — An Act to amend the Statute Law (No. 2) 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Indian Head-Wolseley, by 
leave of the Assembly, that second reading of Bill No. 54, An Act to amend the Statute Law (No. 2), be 
discharged and the bill referred to the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Bill No. 48 — An Act to amend The Marriage Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to explain the purpose of the proposed amendments to The 
Marriage Act. I should point out that on July 16, 1982, a bill to amend The Marriage Act was given first 
reading. 



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2648 
 

This bill was given second reading on December 3, 1982. It appears that, because of attention given to other 
matters, the bill was not referred to the committee of the whole at that time. The Legislative Assembly 
prorogued on March 9, 1983, without the bill having proceeded beyond second reading. 
 
The contents of the bill that has now been given first reading are identical to the contents of the bill that was 
introduced and given first and second reading in 1982. My explanation for these amendments will, therefore, 
be similar to the explanation that I gave to the amendments in 1982. 
 
The purpose of the amendments is to transfer responsibility for The Marriage Act from the Department of 
Health to the Department of Justice. The administration of The Marriage Act involves issues which are 
primarily legal in nature, such as the determination of eligibility to marry, or the validity of certain 
marriages. For this reason, administration of the act properly belongs with the Attorney General. 
 
In addition, transfer of responsibility to the Attorney General will facilitate handling of the steadily 
increasing number of civil marriages in the province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the change will also strengthen the administrative support system for marriage 
commissioners, whose number has been increased by the appointment of selected justices of the peace and 
court officials. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, administration by the Department of Justice will also ensure that The Marriage Act is 
co-ordinated more closely with other legislation dealing with marriage and family law, which is 
administered by the Attorney General. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I should mention that while administration of The Marriage Act is being transferred to 
the Department of Justice, the registration of marriages will continue to be handled by the Department of 
Health, under The Vital Statistics Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that the amendments to The Marriage Act be given second reading. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND TRADE 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 19 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister please introduce his . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The officials were introduced last day, Mr. Chairman. If you wanted me to do it 
again, I don’t mind. He knows them all. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The other night when we left off, Mr. Minister, we were in a 
very important discussion, and I want to indicate that I will endeavour here to clearly make it known to the 
people of Saskatchewan, the true philosophy of the current minister. 
 
We have the record of the previous minister, the member from Regina South, who occupied the department. 
And we are all aware that at taxpayers’ expense, he, soon after getting elected,  



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2649 
 

made a trip — a very extensive trip through Europe, England, Germany, Italy at a cost of some $30,000. 
 
Now none of the results have ever been put forward as to the benefits of the very expensive trip that was 
made by the previous minister. And accordingly, you also have made a number of international journeys — a 
very considerable number since you assumed the office last July. And we were discussing some of these, and 
I think what we can get to is the information that I requested in respect to these, and we can get on and 
through the department relatively fast. 
 
What I want to really be able to establish here is that this minister here has a particular philosophy — I think 
is being shared by more of his members of the government side — a philosophy which really represents their 
attitude, and that is that they are not there for a long time, but they’re there for a good time. And what we 
want to do is to get through these international journeys and then to get on to some of the substance of the 
department. 
 
The last day we were speaking in respect to your, I believe, November 27th trip — and that was the one to 
Vienna — you indicated that you had taken two people along with you. What I had asked you, Mr. Minister, 
if you could provide us with the breakdown of the cost to the taxpayers of that trip to Australia. You have 
had . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Just a moment — Vienna. Vienna. I’m sorry. I’ll come to Australia later 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh yes, well I’ll just come one at a time. 
 
So you’ve had some considerable time — two days — to collect this information. And I know that the 
minister, being an honourable minister, will of course come forward now and provide to the taxpayers . . . 
and I would think that shareholders in any company would, in fact, want to know the details of the expenses 
of an executive officer of a corporation. This is good business practice. You are saying that you are running 
this government on a good business practice. So I want to know the details of the Vienna tour — the trip to 
Vienna. You indicated yourself and two other people, and I wonder if you can now provide us with that 
information as to the cost. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — As I said the previous day that we were here dealing with these estimates, Mr. 
Chairman, the hon. member may, in fact, some day well receive the information that he’s asking for. But that 
information will come either through orders for return by use of the order paper, or through Public Accounts, 
when Public Accounts are tabled. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Are you indicating here that we come into estimates and that you absolutely refuse to 
provide the cost of the extensive travels that you are doing all out throughout the globe — that you’re 
denying in estimates that information, and you have it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well what’ I’m telling the hon. member is that if he wants the information, he 
should go through the proper procedure, and that is to use the order paper, or to wait for the tabling of Public 
Accounts. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’d like to ask the hon. member why he takes the position that this is not the proper 
procedure. There is no doubt before, when the Leader of the Opposition sat as premier of this province, he 
took a trip to China, I believe, and also what he did when they came back from the trip, members of the 
opposition, I recall, asking him for the expenses — no problem. No problem. It was presented. It was 
presented exactly the way you asked for it; exactly the way any information you wanted when we were 
government — you got it. There was no doubt about it. 
 
And so I want to go on further. And I want, first of all, to ask you why you think it is not proper that during 
estimates that you should have the right to deny that information and to make us wait until it is either in 
Public Accounts, or to get it through a motion for return which your government has been denying our — the 
opposition the right to even move the motions for return. And moreover, you are amending the motions for 
return to essentially not provide us  



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2650 
 

with the details which we want. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m sure the hon. member has been around long enough to know that when you are 
dealing with information, or seeking information that has to come from more than one source, you do that 
through the order for return. And ministerial travel, of course, can be covered in many ways — either 
through the department, through Executive Council, or through a Crown. 
 
And I’m not prepared in any way, shape, or form to give partial information. It’ll be all or nothing. And, of 
course, the only way you can get it all is to go through order for return. And, of course, I have no control 
over what form those orders might take. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, I want to make a further comment on this. What is, in fact, happening here, 
Mr. Chairman, is the government’s cover-up of the extravagance of the expenditures that have been taking 
place. 
 
And the reason I tell you that is that in the past, even the minister that previously occupied that portfolio, the 
member from Regina South, Mr. Rousseau — now he didn’t last long because he wasn’t very good. And I 
can understand that. But I’ll tell you, when we asked him how much his jaunt across the world cost the 
taxpayers . . . And you know what? He was able to stand up in this House and give us the cost of $30,000. 
 
Now that was an embarrassment — an embarrassment to this government. And now what they’re doing — 
and let it be known to those who are watching proceedings here today — that very extensive amount of 
travel is taking place by this government, costing hundreds of thousands of dollars. 
 
And they are, in fact, denying to provide that information so that the people of Saskatchewan can evaluate 
whether, indeed, this government is just having a good time, or whether they’re really administering the 
affairs of this province. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, Vienna — what we’ll do is we’ll do a cost-out on it, and we’re going to publish our 
approximation of it. We’re going to advise the people that you have made very major trips around the world, 
and that you are not prepared to provide any information, because the only reason that you won’t provide the 
information is that it’s a cover-up. It’s a cover-up. You won’t disclose the facts to the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers. That can be the only legitimate reason. 
 
And I want to tell you — just because you guys are . . . you boys are getting out of touch a little fast — that 
one of the major concerns that the people of Saskatchewan have with this government, with your 
government, is its extravagance — 25 cabinet ministers, the third largest in all of Canada; 12 legislative 
secretaries. Here is a minister that sits with a $9 million budget, and he has two legislative secretaries — two 
legislative secretaries. And the fact is maybe he needs someone to run the department because he’s off on 
trips across the continent to other continents. 
 
In respect to the Vienna one, can the minister then detail the length of time that you spent on that trip to 
Vienna, the number of days. And I’d like the details as to other places that you may have visited during that 
particular jaunt or, some would say, holiday. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Some may call it a holiday, and I’m sure hon. members opposite would try and 
work a little bit of that time in when they were travelling around the world. Unfortunately that wasn’t to be 
this time, and the Vienna stay was three days. And I know you’d have a whole lot less difficulty hearing 
what I’m trying to say if you could get your seat-mate to put a button on it. Thank you. 
 
And following Vienna was the London, England visit, the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce led visit, 
and that was one week. 



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2651 
 

An Hon. Member: — One week to London. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — One week. Seven days. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, let’s take one of these little jaunts at a time because there are a series of questions I 
want to find out. The number of people that you took to Vienna in yourself — and the taxpayers paid for — I 
take it, was two. And you indicate that the length of time that you spent in Vienna or that trip — I’m not sure 
which you’re saying — three days you spent in Vienna, I take it. Right? And I ask you then did you make 
any other stops? Did you go to any other capitals? Did you enlarge that trip, or was it straight to Vienna and 
straight back to Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We have . . . We don’t have a direct flight from Regina to Vienna, and so I went, I 
believe (I’m going from memory) . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I sat in seat 3B and it was a DC-10. I 
believe it was Air Canada — I’m not sure. We went from Calgary . . . from Regina to Calgary, Calgary to 
London, London to Vienna, Vienna to London, and London to Toronto, and Toronto to home — London to 
Mirabel, I should say. And then I got to Regina . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much was the cab? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I don’t recall because I’ve never had the patience to fool around with those petty 
little claims, so I just pick them up myself. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Now could the minister outline the essential purpose of your little trip, little holiday to 
Vienna. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — You know, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member doesn’t seem to put the same 
importance on trade relations as members on this side of the House. The major purpose for the trip was to 
open our Agdevco office in Vienna which is very . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Open what? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Agdevco office in Vienna. The Agdevco office in Vienna is headed up by one 
Derek Bedson, and Derek Bedson has done an excellent job over the last year in developing the relationships 
that are necessary to develop trade in eastern bloc, and had your members not been ragging the puck in 
SMDC in Crown corporations this morning, you could have had got on to the Agdevco annual report and 
sought some information as it relates to the activities of Agdevco in Vienna and the eastern bloc countries. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to move then . . . It seems to me that August 21 to August 30, 1983, that you took 
another journey and that was to Austria, or indeed, did you go to Australia as well? I guess I want to ask you 
if you went to Austria, Australia, I mean . . . That’s what I wanted to ask you, because Vienna is in . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, Australia . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I was in Australia as well. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Right. And will you give me then the similar details, the length of time that you spent in 
Australia, the number of people that accompanied you, and the total cost of the trip to Australia? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I was in Australia from the time I left Regina until the time I returned to Regina, 
August 21st to August 30, 1983. The people that accompanied me, Ron Dedman from my office . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Ron Dedman from my office and, Wayne Lorch from the  



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2652 
 

department, did not accompany me but he met me there and was, in fact, doing some advance work for some 
Canadian, or Saskatchewan manufacturing and processing — agriculturally related people at a . . . I think 
there were four trade fairs on in Australia during that period. 
 
So those were the two that were there with me. It looks like nine days, total time, from wheels off to wheels 
on, as they say. And as it relates to the total cost, you will take the same route as set forth previously, either 
the order for return, or the Public Accounts. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I was wondering, in respect to the Australia trip, did any other private individuals other than 
employees of government accompany the minister? I use as an example, the members of the Chamber of 
Commerce, or members of organizations, boards of trade, or industrialists within the manufacturing sector, 
and whether or not there was any contribution made by the Government of Saskatchewan, your department, 
or any other department which helped to assist other businessmen to attend? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The answer to your first question is no. The answer to the last part of your question 
is: with some of the people from Saskatchewan who had a product on display at these trade fairs, there may 
have been some aid to trade help under the Aid to Trade program. 
 
Okay, there were four companies that received some aid to trade help. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Are you able to disclose the names of the companies and the amount of aid for trade that 
was provided? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We have that information. It’s not in the proper format, but we will endeavour to 
provide you with it if you want to go on to something else. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You’re starting to shape up. A little information is starting to 
come. 
 
So the basic reason then for the trip to Australia was to help promote some product sales, I take it. Can you 
indicate the nature of the promotion that was undertaken by this world travelling minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes, there were four agricultural equipment trade shows in various parts of 
Australia, one just out of Sydney about 80 miles (and I forget the name of the town); another one over in 
Perth — and anyway there were four of them. And the type of product that was being promoted as . . . At an 
agricultural trade show you would expect it to be agricultural machinery, wouldn’t you? And Saskatchewan 
has some considerable expertise in the development and application of . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . in dry 
land farming technologies. I mean, I think that’s true; I think that’s true. We’ve been at it for a very long 
time. 
 
And in addition to these trade shows we met with industry people in Australia, discussing such things as 
distributorships, licensing, with joint venturing and those kind of things. And beyond that we met with both 
state and government people in Australia. 
 
The federal government in Australia is, in fact, promoting Saskatchewan dry land technologies in Australia 
now as a result of our visit. And I think the benefits of that will, if not already, soon become very apparent. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I guess in a way what you have done is indicate the basic purpose of it. I’m wondering 
whether you are able to report, as a result of your trip to Vienna and the establishment of the Agdevco office 
there, with Mr. Derek Bedson, costing the taxpayers some — oh, around, over, in excess of $100,000, I 
would say — and your subsequent trip to Australia — whether you can outline any of the specific concrete 
achievements that you could document as a result of your endeavours. 



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2653 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, you’ve got it backwards. I went to Australia first, and then Austria, so the 
subsequent trip was Austria, not Australia. It’s difficult to document those kinds of things, because . . . I can 
cite a few. In Austria, in Vienna, we have . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Derek Bedson there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes, and another order for — I suppose equivalent to — a million and a half or so, 
head of Hereford cattle to go to Bulgaria. We have discussions going on in Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, 
Albania. And my friends opposite don’t seem to understand that you don’t sell in the world these days by 
answering a telephone. You go out and knock on doors and push your product. 
 
You know, I . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — The economy of the province doesn’t reflect that you’re doing all that well; that’s the 
only problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I heard the member opposite; I don’t agree with him . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well, I’ll sit down and allow you the opportunity to get into that, then. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I imagine now, having heard that illuminating position put forward by the minister as 
to the concrete results to the Saskatchewan economy, that it perhaps would be appropriate, and almost a 
challenge, to continue to move on to the other world trips that you have taken. 
 
The one note I do note, that your first endeavour, at least, to get our economy going was contact with two 
socialist countries, Austria and Australia. And I suspect that you found that the Austrian economy was rather 
a model economy, because I’ve heard the Minister of Finance indicate that the socialists are doing very well 
over in Austria. 
 
I note recently a business magazine comparing the approach of the right-wing, neo-conservative Bennett, 
which we are only one step behind here in Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . One step behind, 
that’s where we are, one step behind. 
 
They outlined the neo-conservative Bill Bennett’s approach to cutting back and introducing his restraint 
program, and it was rather interesting that they said that what he had used is really just a matter of 
confrontation, and a dividing up of the various groups in society. They went on to indicate that the other 
approach . . . I’m talking a little bit about socialism here. The other approach they indicated was in Australia, 
under the new Labour Prime Minister, where he discussed with groups and developed a consensus towards 
expectations. 
 
And so I certainly agree that the minister is on the right track . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — . . . going to some of the socialist countries to see how to run a society. And I would invite 
you, as I have had the opportunity of going over to some of the Scandinavian countries like Sweden, and I 
commend the minister . . . I recommend to the minister that, in fact, as he covers off continent after 
continent, that I would recommend that he continue his approach of looking at the successful socialist 
societies in the world. 
 
I want to move on, Mr. Minister, and I want to move on, Mr. Minister,, on to a very . . . a continuation of 
this, and that is, I believe, in December, if I’m not mistaken, you had a trip to London. And again I would 
like the details that you have been providing: the length of time that you spent in London; the number of 
people that accompanied you on your trip to London — I understand  



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2654 
 

members of the chamber of commerce. Indeed, I . . . Well, I’ll get that information. I have a little more to tell 
you on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I really appreciate that. And I really appreciate the member’s endorsement of my 
efforts for . . . (inaudible) . . . And I just want to make one thing clear. When I am travelling, my discussions 
are trade-related, and I’m not there, whether it be in Bulgaria or Yugoslavia or Australia or United States, 
I’m not there on a philosophical refresher course. And I appreciate your endorsement of our travels around 
the world in promoting Saskatchewan’s trade effort. 
 
You misunderstood earlier when I said when you were asking me about the trip to Vienna, and where I had 
stopped, and why, etc. The trip to Vienna, and now the question you raised about the trip to London, were 
one and the same. 
 
I came from Vienna back to London, at which time we had the seminar with the London Chamber of 
Commerce. I was met in London by my deputy, Don Moroz, and Dorothy Sollosy of my office was with me. 
And I don’t know off the top now how many chamber of commerce people were there, but it was a 
chamber-led mission. So, in fact, I guess I accompanied them, rather than the opposite. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And the particular purpose and, sort of, the results, as you have been able to analyse in 
respect to the trip to London, if you could, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — This came out of an invitation from the London chamber, when they were here, to 
the Saskatchewan chamber, and sponsored by the London chamber in London. There were about 120 
business people from London, and some of the neighbouring countries as well, at this particular seminar. 
 
As it relates to what came out of the seminar, I would suggest that that question is properly directed to the 
chamber of commerce, since they were the leaders in this particular mission, and not us. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You did, of course, attend for a purpose. And I agree that what the chamber got out of it, I 
suppose I would have to ask the chamber. I’m really asking: did you just go to be there, to attend, or was 
there a specific purpose and a specific achievement or development by your attendance, your deputy, and 
other members of your staff? That’s really what I’m asking. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Sure, my purpose there, quite frankly, was to support the efforts of the 
Saskatchewan chamber. If the gauge, if you will take the Canadian High Commission’s yardstick as to 
success or failure of the effort, I think it is fair to say that it was very successful in their view. And I think 
they’re more capable of making that assessment than I am . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Yes, I was there primarily to support the chamber’s efforts and I think that’s part of my job. It’s part of the 
selling job, part of running up Saskatchewan’s flag around the world and explaining the opportunity that 
exists in Saskatchewan for people around the world and vice versa. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Was there any contribution made by your department in assisting the Chamber or any of the 
business community to attend that particular conference? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes (pardon me) there was a grant made to the Saskatchewan chamber, ball park 
$40,000, a little less than $40,000. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And do you know how many members of the chamber were able to attend the . . . Since you 
provided the grant, I think it’s in our interest to know the number that were able to attend. 



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2655 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We’ll get that information for you in a couple of minutes. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — There is one other trip that I just want to deal with — maybe a few more — but you 
indicated from March 30 to April 20, 1984, that you were in Saudi Arabia, that indeed that you had stopped 
off at Holland and Germany, I believe, on that trip. Could you give me the details in respect to that — who 
accompanied you, the cost of that trip, the purpose of that trip? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay. Again, that trip was a split exercise. The Holland/Germany section of the trip 
I had my deputy, Don Moroz, and we were met in Europe by Bob Larter from London. And for the Saudi 
part of the trip, I was met at a connecting flight in Switzerland by Gordon Wells of Agdevco, and K. Nasser, 
professor of engineering from the University of Saskatchewan, who has a healthy linguistic ability in that he 
speaks Arabic, and French, and English, and maybe one or two others, and also a professional engineer 
whose talents came in handy while we were in Saudi Arabia. 
 
The purpose of the trip in Saudi was . . . It’s, I guess, the first time we’ve had any exposure in Saudi. There 
was an agricultural fair equipment show in Riyadh that we participated in, and supported some of our 
Saskatchewan manufacturers at that agricultural fair, equipment fair; and in addition, talked to governmental 
people and business people as it relates to trade opportunities and investment opportunities flowing the other 
way. 
 
I think it’s fair to say that there was more than just passing interest by the people of Saudi Arabia. We are 
expecting — although it isn’t absolutely firmed up yet — we are expecting a visit from Saudi to take a look 
at some of the things we’ve talked a bout. I hope that we can have it firmed up and have some of them here 
in time for the spring farm progress show. I’m not sure that we’re going to be able to do that. 
 
On the Holland and Germany side of the trip, what we were doing there was — in both Holland and 
Germany — we were talking to business community, bank and financial community, exploring trade 
opportunities and investment opportunities. In addition, we were in attendance at the Hanover Fair, 
supporting Canadian and Saskatchewan products. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to leave that aspect of it. All I want is a commitment from the minister if he would 
provide just a complete list of all of his out-of-province . . . Could you provide a complete list of all of your 
out-of-province trips? I don’t want to go into those that you went to the United States or down to Toronto, 
and so on, but I want to get a general picture. Could you provide just sort of a general list, and the dates and 
the destination of any other trips that you may have taken? These are the essential international trips as I see 
it. But I want to get a general picture as to your involvement within Canada itself, and your involvement as 
Economic Development and Trade Minister with United States, as well. Can you provide that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I think I did the other day, but I’ll give them to you again, and I’m talking about . . . 
Did you say you wanted the internal trips as well, like to Ottawa and Toronto, etc.? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well, sure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay, there was a trip to Ottawa on April 25 of ’83. And that was the previous 
minister, so you can scratch that one. So, okay, my first one was to Australia — Australia, London, Vienna, 
and that was one and the same trip; and Ottawa, to a federal-provincial trade ministers’ conference, October 
30, ’83. 
 
And in answer to your previous question, the number of chamber members on the London trip was seven, 
and I have here a Business Review publication, spring of 1984, and you’ll find on page 29 an article dealing 
with that trip. I’ll send it over to you. 



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2656 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Yes, I asked you for the additional . . . I asked you for your additional trips, and I see that 
apparently during the year that you have been minister — or nearly a year, I guess — that you have only 
made apparently one flight out of the province, and that is to Ottawa, to a federal-provincial. 
 
I note that you have not, in fact, made any trips to the United States, the closest trading partner, and I would 
have thought the larger investor in Saskatchewan. 
 
What I’m asking you right now is: is that the complete list, or have you had contacts similarly with 
industrialists and financial community in the United States; eastern Canada; indeed, western Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — This list that I’ve just provided you with is all-inclusive until December 7, and in 
addition to travel that would appear on this list, I can recall one trip into California, that was sponsored by 
SMDC, visiting with Nuexco and Southern Cal Edison, and tied in with that was a visit to some of the 
business community and financial people. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I think it fairly clearly indicates the point that I was making, that certainly the overall 
emphasis that the minister so far has demonstrated is considerable travelling across the world: the Austria 
trip, the Saudi Arabia. And when you ask whether or not he has been to eastern Canada, to discuss the 
economic development policy that he is putting into place, he indicates a blank. 
 
And so one can only come to the conclusion, Mr. Minister, that what we have really been saying is that you 
have been doing an awful lot of sightseeing without a lot of concrete results, because you seem to have 
abandoned, or not attended to, what I would have thought would have been the immediate — that is, some 
close contact with other parts of Canada and United States. 
 
But let’s leave that part of it at the present time. And I want to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, if you 
want to expand on that, you can, but the evidence is clear. You have given me all the evidence that I need. 
 
You haven’t moved out of Regina to go other than to Ottawa, in all of Canada, so you’ve had no discussions. 
When I asked you whether you went to United States with your economic development policy, and you 
indicate, no, you just went to California once with SMDC. 
 
And so I think what I have said before is that you’ve had a good time touring the world, and I imagine that 
will broaden your horizons. I’m not convinced, however, that it has really expanded to any significant 
amount the economic development of Saskatchewan for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to move on to another area, and that is the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I think I’m satisfied 
where I have summarized. I think it’s clear, and I think unequivocal, that there’s been a tremendous 
expenditure by this minister with very little, very little results. 
 
And certainly we will certainly want more substance to verify the expenditure, because to date you haven’t 
been able to put forward any. You may want to comment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I didn’t want to point out to the member that he doesn’t understand that the 
Canadian and United States markets are a whole lot easier to access, and they don’t require the minister to 
knock on every door in Canada and the United States. That’s in large part done by the private business 
people and the department officials. 
 
However, in those areas where . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, it’s an absolute fact. And one of the 
reasons, of course, that you’re sitting over there is you didn’t understand that while you were over here. 



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2657 
 

And in answer to one of your earlier questions, Mr. Chairman, you were asking about the companies that 
attended the Australian trade show that had received aid to trade assistance, and they are as follows: Beline 
— $1,500; Schulte — 1,429 — one of your constituents, but one of my supporters; Michel’s Industries — 
$1,800; Rite Way Manufacturing — $2,500; Doty industries — $600. I don’t think that Friggstad was there 
on this particular occasion. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to turn, Mr. Minister, to what you have established, and there was a news release on 
February 23,’84, indicating that you had established a series of international marketing consultants. You 
have appointed an Alexander Duffy, London, England; and Norman Andrews of Minot, North Dakota; then, 
Kwok-Shing Low, or something of that nature, of Hong Kong. 
 
Can you give me, first of all, where Mr. Duffy is, in fact, located; and the particular whether he has offices 
set up; whether there is a staff complement with him; whether the taxpayers are, in fact, paying for that 
position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — He is attached to the Agent General’s office in London. And the fee is, ballpark, 
$2,200 a month. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Are there any other additional staff that is used, or is paid for, for Mr. Duffy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — No, he uses the existing staff at Saskatchewan House in London. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And Mr. Andrews: can you indicate where he is, in fact, located; his duties; and whether or 
not there is any particular staff that he has hired; and the amount that is being paid to Mr. Andrews? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — He’s located in Minot, North Dakota — which is another reason that I don’t have to 
do a whole lot of travelling down there — and he has office expense of 2,900 a month; a consulting fee of 
4,800 a month. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A consulting fee of 4,800 a month — not bad. I was wondering, in respect to the Mr. Duffy 
at 2,200 — a “ballpark”, I thought you indicated. I am wondering whether you could indicate whether he is 
full time, or do they come cheaper in England? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — They are both full time, and I suppose you get what the market will bear. It would 
appear that, perhaps, they do come cheaper in London, England. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And you have an additional international-marketing consultant, Mr. Low. Can you indicate 
where he’s located, and also what he’s being paid? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — His name is K.S. Low. He is located in Hong Kong, and looks after the Pacific Rim. 
He is limited to a maximum of 15,000 per quarter. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — When you say limited to 15,000 per quarter, what I’m asking, that is all inclusive of any 
additional staff or other expenses that he has? What I am specifically asking is: over and above the 15,000 
per quarter to Mr. Low, who is stationed in Hong Kong doing the Pacific Rim marketing consultants work 
for you? I’m asking: are there any other expenses paid on behalf of the international-marketing consultants? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay. He’s not on full time. He bills for services rendered, and he’s limited to this 
15 per quarter. And although I haven’t got that information yet, I believe that travel is in addition to this. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And you’ll provide that information? 



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2658 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — You bet. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — All right. Now in respect to trade offices, can you indicate whether your department has set 
up any other trade offices? It seems to me that the former minister had indicated that they had established a 
trade office, if I’m not mistaken, in Milan, Italy. And can you indicate whether there are any others under 
your jurisdiction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The one in Milan was an individual providing service on a fee-for-service basis, and 
that’s been phased out. The whole trade office area is currently under review. I would expect that there will 
be one, and possibly two more trade offices of some sort opened up in the next year, locations not yet 
decided. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Have you any particular options that you’re looking at, without having, in fact, made the 
decision — but you’re contemplating setting up more trade offices? I note the one in Milan that was set up 
by your predecessor, you indicated had been phased out. I imagine why it was phased out is that it shouldn’t 
have been put there in the first place. What I would like to ask you in respect to the Milan, Italy, trade office, 
whether you could provide us the amount that it cost to support the Milan trade office from its inception up 
until the time that it was phased out. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — It wasn’t a trade office. It was a man that was operating out of his house on a 
fee-for-service basis. He was a retired from the Canadian Trade Commission foreign service and there was, I 
understand, an illness problem, and that’s the reason that it was phased out. And it relates to the cost, we 
don’t have that here, but we’ll find it and get it to you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’ll expect that within the next three or four days? I want to move to the Saskatchewan 
Development Advisory Committee, and I know that it’s particularly under the jurisdiction of the Premier and 
I may, in fact, ask him, but I want . . . You are vice-chairman, Mr. Minister, and I think, obviously, this 
committee would be working in conjunction with your department fairly closely, I would assume. 
 
But in any event, are you able to provide me with the number of members on that committee and the 
individuals? Can you give me the names of the people that make up the Saskatchewan Development 
Advisory Committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — My suggestion to you there is to raise that one in the premier’s estimates because it 
does come under him. And you’re right, I am the deputy on that particular committee, but the appointment 
was made just before my trip to Saudi Arabia, and I’ve missed the only meeting that’s been had since my 
appointment. So if I was you, I would raise it with the Premier. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Can you outline to the House, if the terminology is correct, I’m not sure, but in the number 
of trade missions that you have had during the past year to help develop a market for Saskatchewan 
products? I’ll give you the one that I am particularly aware of. It’s the one to Chile. And I know some 
businessmen that were, indeed, invited to attend that one, and they had some doubts, some . . . I guess some 
fears. The political stability in Chile is not particularly strong. 
 
The other thing that they indicated to me in respect to sending a mission over to Chile is that the country is 
essentially bankrupt, and the potential of them being able to buy any particular amount of goods from 
Saskatchewan manufacturers is less than — the expectation is less than great. Are there any other trade 
missions besides the one to Chile? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — In response to your concern about Chile, I should tell you what Chile is. Chile is . . . 
The fair at Chile is similar to the fair at Hanover, and it serves all of Latin America, not just Chile. and it’s 
very, very large and everyone goes — the Japanese, the Germans, the Canadians, the U.S., all of them. And 
it would be very similar in scope to the Hanover show that was  



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2659 
 

in Germany about a month ago. And I will provide you with a list of all the other trade missions that we 
participated in. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I take it that there were, indeed, others. In respect to the . . . If you could give me, read out 
the list of the trade missions that, in fact, you had during the course of the year; it would be useful. And I 
would like also for you to indicate what contribution, if any, that the province or your department 
contributed to the individuals from Saskatchewan to take some of their manufactured goods for display at 
the trade missions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The Canada Farm Show in Toronto in January of ’84; Montana Agri-Trade 
Exposition, February 16th; Ago-Expo, Lethbridge, Alberta, March 1st; SIMA (This is the 50th SIMA ’84; 
it’s the 55th international exhibition of farm machinery in Paris); Northland Farm and Ranch Show in 
Edmonton, March 27; Western Canada Farm Progress Show, June of ’83; Ag Quip in Australia, that was I 
believe August of ’83; Big Iron Show, Fargo, North Dakota, September 14th; Sunbelt Ag Expo, October 11; 
the Chile show that you just raised, in October of ’83; Northern Farm Show in Minneapolis — January of 
’84. 
 
In addition to the list already read into the record, there was February 20 to March 2- Australia High Tech 
Show in Sydney; March 10 of ’84 — the Cairo Trade Fair in Egypt; April 4, ’84 — the Hanover Fair, in 
Hanover, West Germany; April 5 — Minot Agri Future, Minot, North Dakota; May 17, ’84 — Can Expo 
’84, Hong Kong; May 29 — Moscow Agricultural Show, Moscow. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — The particular list that you read out: are you indicating that through your department that 
you made arrangements to have Saskatchewan manufacturers or processors display some of the 
manufactured goods? Is that the purpose of these trade missions? Can you outline . . . I guess what I want to 
know, Mr. Minister, can you outline what is the procedure that you have set up in your department for the 
various — the Schultes, the Degelmans, or whoever — what is the mechanism for them being able to get in 
on the trade missions? Do you have a grant that you provide? 
 
So would you outline the basic procedure that you use in assisting the business community with the trade 
missions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — There are many, many of these shows going on around the world, and our 
department will make an assessment as to what we believe are the most important for us . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Sorry. The most important sows that Saskatchewan people should be participating in. And 
the initiative can be taken either from the private sector or from the department as to participation. We might 
phone up a few people and say, “This show is on. Are you interested in participating?” They might also say, 
“Look it, we would like to go down to this particular show. Can you help us put it together?” 
 
The main source of assistance for the business people to participate in these various trade shows is PEMD 
(Program for Export Market Development), a federal trade assistance program; and Aid to Trade, a 
provincial program. And that’s handled through the department — the Aid to Trade program. And I have a 
pamphlet here of what the Aid to Trade program is all about that I’m sure the member has seen. If you 
haven’t, I’ll send it over to you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Does your department, in respect to the trade fairs . . . Do you have any brochure or any 
co-ordination whereby the business community can avail themselves of knowing a brief description of 
maybe the ones that maybe the should be attending to? Have you got any information of advising the 
business community in respect to the potentials as to where they, in fact, should be displaying their particular 
manufactured goods? 
 
In other words, I see it as kind of a loose program. It’s federal and provincial. And I’m just really trying to 
zero in on the concrete steps that you take in your department, Mr. Minister, to assist the business 
community in displaying the particular commodities. 



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2660 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay, a couple of things. There is co-ordination between our department and the 
federal government so there’s not a duplication of effort. And, number two, we are putting together a 
Saskatchewan export newsletter, and the first issue is due out next month, and that will go a long way toward 
tightening up any semblance of looseness that the hon. member alleges exists over here. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — The one major concern that has been raised with me, Mr. Minister, and that is with the 
business community in Saskatchewan, is that previously, when we had the department of industry and 
commerce, they were obviously able to go to one particular department and receive the information that they 
required. The problem that many of the business community have indicated to me is that you have divided it 
up into Small Business and Tourism and then you have Economic Development and Trade department, and 
they have a great deal of difficulty in really being able to get any concrete information. 
 
I’m going to give you a couple of examples. Four small businessmen in my constituency, all wanting to 
promote and develop as we had developed before, some manufacturing, expansion of business; and the 
problem that they have is when you go to determine what information is available for them in respect to any 
assistance that might be made available, you can check with the Department of Small Business and Tourism 
and you come up blank. There is no brochure which really that you can send out to them. 
 
We had a number of industry and commerce reps, and I know what I have had to do in this instance is to 
refer them to the particular reps and, if they don’t get satisfactory information, then to come back to me and 
I’ll try further to assist them. But that seems to be the common complaint as to where they go. And I know 
there’s a lot of propaganda — and we’ll be coming to the advertising that you’ve been doing — a lot of 
propaganda, ads, and all over the world, according to your information. But there is a concern, as I say, of 
the business community in this province having a specific department in which to deal with. And what I 
want to ask you: do you feel that having divided up the two departments, that there is really less 
co-ordination to the business community within Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I think the opposite is true. And while there may have been some perception 
problems initially with the reorganization, the fact is it’s designed . . . The reorganization was designed to 
enhance access to the various government programs. And I’m sure that the member opposite will tell those 
four businessmen in his constituency that the office that they should contact is in Tisdale and the number is 
873-2663, and any program administered by my department, or by the business . . . or by the Tourism and 
Small Business Department, or by Science and Technology, can be accessed through either one of those 
departments. We are all housed in the same building. We share a common administration. And the purpose 
of that, of course, is that so that things can be dealt with as expeditiously as possible. 
 
And I would encourage the hon. member to help us in helping the business community and tell them just 
that. They can access any of our programs through any of those three departments. And the field men from 
the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources, in fact, look after our interests in the field, as well. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to move to one other matter, and that is the area of advertising, and the first 
document that I want to refer to is The Saskatchewan Promise. And I’d like to ask the minister how many of 
these he has had published, and whether he could get me 10,000 copies because I want to deliver it to all my 
constituents. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — There were originally 5,000 in the first run. There has been a reprint. And as it 
relates to your second question, I suppose we could have some printed for you for a constituency drop, but it 
would be at your cost. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — It may be a valuable one. Can you give the cost of the initial 5,000 production? 



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2661 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We don’t have that information here, but we will provide you with it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Will you also then provide, in respect to The Saskatchewan Promise, the number that you 
have produced, who did the work, published it for you, printed it, and the cost of the printing? . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I noticed that. 
 
I want you also then, in respect to Saskatchewan, Canada information folder, the similar information: how 
many were, in fact, produced; who produced them, and the cost of the production; and the number that were 
produced . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The Saskatchewan, Canada information folder. Saskatchewan, 
Canada information folder . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Can’t hear you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Yes. 
 
And also the third document of interest is the major projects inventory. I would like to know how many of 
those were produced, who produced those, and the total cost. 
 
The other information that I want — and I note that there has been a very large amount of advertising done, 
and I only have some samples of it. But this poster and 29,999 like it are promoting made-in-Saskatchewan 
products all over the world: and “Opportunity knocks,” and “Want to tap in on the 10 million-plus projects,” 
and “1983 export achievement awards.” Then you can go to The Financial Post and you see another ad: 
“When you look at the whole picture, Saskatchewan adds up to a plus.” 
 
There’s been a very considerable amount of advertising in national, weekly, and daily papers by your 
departments, and I wonder if you could provide a complete breakdown of the national advertising that 
you’ve done, in what papers and journals and magazines; the total amount of cost of the national advertising, 
and indeed, if there’s international, we want that included; the breakdown of that which you have placed in 
the weeklies, and the cost of that; and the amount that you have . . . the ads that you have put in the dailies, 
daily newspapers, and the total cost during the past year. Can you provide that information right away? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Some of those ads that you were flashing there were, in fact, Tourism and Small 
Business, but I have that information, and I’ll send it over to you, if you like. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And I would like also for you to provide me what is the total amount paid by your 
department to Dome Advertising Ltd., the total amount that is paid to Roberts Poole Advertising 
Corporation, and the total cost of any other advertising or placement agency. Some of that’ll be duplication, 
but I want it in respect to those particular advertising firms. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll send these . . . this ad information over — the publications and 
the costs. And while I’m on my feet I’ll ask the hon. member the question as it relates to Roberts Poole and 
Dome billings, for what period: this year or last year? Which fiscal year? Last year? . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . We don’t have it here, but we’ll get that for you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, I want to turn essentially to part of your industrial strategy, and one which you 
have a lot of rhetoric about, and that’s really the Industrial Incentives Program. And when one analyzes that 
program it seems to me to be very minimal in its assistance to the business community. The concern that I 
have here is that the program apparently is available only for one year in that applications can only be put in 
for one year until March 31 of ’85. So that’s a one-year program. 
 
The other basic problem that I see with your program which you are touting as being a very important one is 
getting both investment and also new permanent jobs — the other basic problem is, as I see, is that the 
individual who, say, invests the $30,000 to subsequently qualify for the $7,500 for the permanent job — it 
seems to me that, first of all, he has to apply; and I know that you have said in your speech that you would 
have that approved, if possible, within 15 days,  



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2662 
 

which obviously would be some record. I doubt if it’ll happen. But the basic problem is that the individual 
makes the capital investment, and he has up to one year to complete it. 
 
Let us say that it took one year, and he has that one year, as you indicated the other day, to complete that 
capital expansion or, indeed, a new manufacturing or processing plant. Now, if he takes that one year, then, 
if I’m not mistaken, if he creates a permanent job, then that permanent job has to be in existence for one year 
on top of that. 
 
And so really what you’re offering to the business community, under this Industrial Incentives Program, is 
nothing for the immediate. One year, if for instance, let us say it took him to develop it, then he has to create 
that permanent job, and that job has to be in place for one year again. So he can look forward to making a 
decision to expand his plant and, two years hence, get a $75 grant if he makes the 30,000 . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . $7,500, right. 
 
And I think that this is the basic weakness, as I tried to indicate to you before, is that it’s too far in the future 
to be of really determinant for the individual to really use the program. It seems to me that it would be much 
more effective if you had a program of reducing the interest rates substantially, like you promised during the 
election, to give loans to small business — that’s what you indicated — at nine and five-eighths per cent 
interest. So I ask you again: do you not admit that there’s a basic weakness in this program? Because the fact 
is that a business man who took a year to construct it, then hired someone on a permanent job, would have to 
wait two full years in order to get any benefits from the program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The minimum time they would have to wait, I suppose, would be a year and a little 
bit. The maximum time would be two and a half years, and the two and a half comes from the time that’s 
allowed to get the thing on-stream and up to complement after it comes into production. 
 
And while the hon. member’s concerns, I think, are put forward very sincerely, the other side of the coin is 
that a whole lot of other kinds of programs — federally, provincially, privately, whatever — there is a 
lengthy period usually, as well, for all kinds of analyses and audits, etc., etc. We don’t look beyond the 
application. 
 
We don’t impose our will on the business community. The business community makes the business decision 
as to whether they are going to go ahead or not under this program. And if they do, and if they spend the 
dollars and create the jobs, they get their cheque. And it’s that simple. 
 
There was one other point I was going to make, but I was distracted. So if it comes back to me, I’ll catch you 
up on it a little later. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I really, really insist that the basis of the program is really window-dressing and will 
not address the immediate problem as you have touted it — touted this program as being so effective, and 
one of the highlights of your economic strategy. 
 
But you mention also four or five points that make up this sort of economic strategy here in Saskatchewan. 
And the other one is: the second element of the strategy is the fixed interest rate program. Can you enlarge 
on that? I know you promised it during the election, and it’s two years plus, and you haven’t done anything 
about it. Why haven’t you come forward if you have this as a part of your economic strategy and assistance 
to the business community? Can you give me some of the details of that program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes. A couple of points. I want to go back to your earlier question . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . a flashback, yes . . . on the Industrial Incentives Program. Well, while you say that it’s just 
window-dressing, I want you to understand that when we brought this program in, we estimated that it would 
create about 1,500 permanent jobs in Saskatchewan.  



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2663 
 

And even though the bill hasn’t received Royal Assent yet, we’re well on the way to reaching 50 per cent of 
target by an early measure of the early returns. And so we’re optimistic that we will reach target and, in fact, 
the business community is very pleased with the program. 
 
As it relates to your fixed rate financing program, that one is administered by Tourism and Small Business, 
and the regulations are now being developed and brought forward. So I would have a little difficulty with 
giving you the detail of it at this time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — It just seems to me that we have dilly-dallied around. And I think if you ask the business 
community what is one of the most difficult part of financing their operation, and they would say they’ve 
gone through a very trying time with high interest rates. But high interest rates today, even where they are 
today, is a major obstacle for expansion of manufacturing and processing in the province. 
 
And what I can’t understand is a government which pretends to be committed to the business community of 
this province, and for two and one-half years now, even though you made a specific election promise of nine 
and five-eighths, you have sat on your hands and not addressed the major program which would, in fact, help 
the business community. 
 
You had no problems, immediately running to your friends, the oil companies, and saying, “Here, we’ll give 
you 100 million, 120 million a year. We’ll cut back. We’ll help you, boys.” You had no problem. But here, 
the very people that have built this province and who really deserve the breaks — because as all of us will 
know, that it’s the small-business community which provides the massive number of jobs. Every consultant 
will indicate that. 
 
And here you had an opportunity, Mr. Minister, to address the essential problem. And instead, what you did 
is run and give millions to the oil companies who are out-of-province. And they fill their pockets and go off 
and develop oil in competition with our product. But the sold citizens, the business community of our 
province, it seems to me that your government has deserted. What you have done, the whole emphasis that 
you have displayed, is: one, you’re friends of the banks; two, you’re friends of the multinational 
corporations, the oil companies, because you’ve handed it out to them, and you can’t deny it; and the third 
thing is that you’re looking for outside international investment here, rather than seizing upon the 
opportunity of Saskatchewan people participating. And what you’ve done is to deny the basic assistance that 
you should have been denying. 
 
And I want to ask you: can you justify deserting the business community of this province and going around 
the world and talking to the Arabs and people in Europe and asking them to come to develop it, rather than 
setting up a system whereby Saskatchewan people would be participating in the development of their 
resources and the benefits and the profits that are there to be had? Can you give us a rationale for this very 
backward approach by your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The hon. member is long on rhetoric and short on sense, and, you know, he talks 
about the oil companies. And I expect they’re doing all right, or they wouldn’t be here, and they weren’t here 
until we . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s almost the dumbest thing you’ve ever said, but not quite. 
 
There was, as a result of the increased oil activity here in Saskatchewan, there was $600 million direct 
investment into the province of Saskatchewan, mostly through the small-business sector in Saskatchewan. 
And you make all kinds of noises. Well, our friends in the small-business community that we have consulted 
with on an on-going basis, both through my department, the Department of Tourism and Small Business, and 
other vehicles, and we have brought forward the things — at least some of the things — that they’ve asked 
for, one of them being the venture capital program which is designed specifically to provide Saskatchewan 
people the opportunity to invest in Saskatchewan manufacturing, and processing, and tourism facilities. 



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2664 
 

So I really hope that those simple statements that I brought forth have brought the member back on track. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, discussing the other . . . That’s another program in your economic strategy is the 
venture capital program, and I just want to indicate that that is not a particularly new program. That’s a 
program that certainly was in operation in Ontario. It was a program, which some of you will know, that one 
of the candidates for the leadership of the Liberal Party was actively involved in Ontario where he formed a 
company, and had a large number of people put in their venture capital into that company. And there was 
seven companies — seven companies where people had invested venture capital, and there was a 
development of seven businesses. And in Ontario, in that particular case, five of them are no longer in 
operation and two are in trouble. 
 
And what I’m wanting to say to you . . . I’ve seen where there’s statistics of some 124 potential projects that 
venture capital could be used in. And you know what the . . . And this was a document, I believe, prepared 
by someone in your . . . of your officials or in the business community, and they clearly indicated that a 
major number of those potential businesses that could be created through venture capital were extremely 
high, high risk ventures. And it seems to me that, while you may indicate that this is new and novel and the 
first in North America, it’s just a copy of what has been going on in several of the other provinces. 
 
And when you look in Alberta, and what you’re doing here is following much the same as Alberta. And what 
the economists are saying there, in Alberta what they need is not these hodge-podge job-creation programs, 
this patchwork-approach to economic development, but what they need is an economic plan and an 
economic strategy. 
 
And so, I guess, I ask you: what in fact is your basic economic development policy as established by your 
government, other than helping big business? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I was going to ignore the earlier part of his comment. He talked about it not being 
the first of its kind in Canada or the world or otherwise and, in fact . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, it is 
the first. It’s the very first to use the tax system as the incentive to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It was not. 
It was not. You’ve got about as much sense of what’s going on in the world as you have about what’s going 
on in this House. 
 
And, in fact, it’s the first program to use the tax system for the incentive, and additionally I should point out, 
in case the hon. member hasn’t figured it out by now, the program is administered by the Department of 
Tourism and Small Business, and I would have thought . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, no, no. No, no, 
no. You’re nothing like the business community, I can tell you that. Nothing like the business community. 
 
But while I’m on my feet, I’m going to give you the numbers you asked for earlier on the folders, those blue 
folders. The quantity was 5,000, cost . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I want you to have this on record. 
Cost was $9,539. They were produced by Dome Advertising and Centax. 
 
A Major Project Inventory, quantity was 6,000, including reprints. The printers were Centax and Office 
Services. Got that? 
 
Saskatchewan Promise, the original run was 5,000 — cost was $50,000; reprint was 10,000, and the cost on 
that is estimated to be $20,000; produced by Dome Advertising and Centax. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want, if the minister . . . There has been a lot of talk. First of all, the Premier going around. 
He can no longer talk in Saskatchewan because he only has the one speech, and they’re tired of listening to 
it. But we’ve heard such expressions by the Premier, and presumably by other followers of his that 
Saskatchewan, indeed, is not participating in the economic recession; that Saskatchewan has a growing and 
expanding economy. 



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2665 
 

What I want to ask you is: will you indicate to this House what particular economic indicators you would 
look at in determining whether we have a relatively strong economy here in Saskatchewan. What are the 
basic indicators that you would take a look at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay, before I deal with that, can I give you the number that you asked . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I have yet to find just what your thrust is, my boy. But in order to keep everything 
on the record as we go along, you asked the question: amounts of money spent at Dome Advertising and 
Roberts & Poole. The total for Dome Advertising is $225,848.72. That, broken down, is 128,000 (ballpark) 
in advertising and 97,000 in media production. Roberts & Poole is $777.41. 
 
Some of the economic indicators: the Conference Board of Canada estimates that Saskatchewan’s real 
domestic product grew by 3.5 per cent in 1983. This rate of growth was the best of the Canadian prairie 
provinces, outstripped the Canadian average by 2.6 per cent. Total investment in Saskatchewan, according to 
the latest Statistics Canada data, increased by over 10 per cent in 1983 from ’82, to 3.85 billion, and 
investment by existing industries will increase again this year. 
 
In terms of unemployment, Saskatchewan currently . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . You should be paying 
attention. Do you want me to go over those again? And in terms of unemployment, we are the lowest in 
Canada and considerably below the national average. 
 
In 1983, Saskatchewan had the second largest increase of all provinces in the number of persons employed, 
compared to the year before. Some provinces, most notably Alberta and British Columbia, had a net 
decrease in employment, while the average Canadian increase was only 0.8 per cent. In 1982, Saskatchewan 
was the only province to show an increase in employment. 
 
Business failures in Saskatchewan in 1983, although up 12 per cent from the year before, are still the lowest 
in Canada west of the Maritimes, as a percentage of all businesses. The province’s failure rate in 1983 was 
approximately 1.2 per cent. 
 
In 1983, new business and corporations were up 8.4 per cent from the year before, and out-of-province 
businesses registering in the province increased by 14.7 per cent. Manufacturing shipments in Saskatchewan 
for the month of February, 1984, exceeded $197 million, an increase of 20.7 per cent compared to the same 
months in 1983. This indicates that the manufacturing sector is gaining strength. In 1983 the total 
manufacturing shipments were 3.5 per cent above the ’82 level. 
 
The Conference Board of Canada’s quarterly provincial forecast states as follows: 
 

The claim that the country had a recession but Saskatchewan decided not to participate is borne out in 
large measure by the conference board estimates of provincial real domestic product in 1982. Production 
in Saskatchewan fell by only 1.1 per cent as compared to 4.6 per cent national decline. 

 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to refer to some of your indicators. And I want to agree that looking at the gross 
domestic product . . . And I would refer you, rather than going to the Conference Board of Canada, that you 
take the budget address that was given in March 1984. And if you look at the gross domestic product, 
constant 1971 prices, and if you look at the annual rate of change, you know what happened in 1972 under a 
New Democratic government? 7.2 per cent increase. 7.2 per cent increase. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What year? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — 1981. In 1982, 4.6 per cent decrease. In 1983, it didn’t grow according to the  



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2666 
 

figures that you’ve given. It grew only by 1.5 per cent. And do you know what was happening in the gross 
national product in Canada? The annual rate change in percentage in Canada, where we went down 4.6 per 
cent, here in Saskatchewan we went down 4.4 per cent. Last year, in 1983, the gross domestic product in 
Saskatchewan grew by 1.5. In the rest of Canada, it grew by 3 per cent. 
 
And surely you’re not saying that these figures are inaccurate because if you look at them you find that, 
number one, we had increase in the gross domestic product in 1979, in 1980, in 1981; we had a decrease of 
4.6 per cent in 1982; and a 1.5 per cent increase in 1983. Compare that with Canada. I want to indicate that 
our performance was indeed poorer than the rest of Canada. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the document that you sent out of Saskatchewan, The Saskatchewan Promise, you look at 
some of the indicators, the years of steady growth. And this is a book, I think, which puts forward very 
clearly what was happening under the New Democratic government. And I want to again raise it: the 
province’s compound annual rate of real growth was 4.2 per cent between 1972 and 1982, compared to 2.7 
per cent for Canada as a whole. 
 
The gross domestic product rose strongly during those years, from 3.4 billion in real terms in 1972, to 5.2 
billion in 1982. Total personal income rose rapidly in that 10-year span, from 2.8 billion to 12 billion. And 
the per capita incomes have grown similarly, exceeding the national average. Those were the years under the 
New Democratic government. The value of commodity exports expanded by four times, to 6.5 billion by 
1982. And you even acknowledge that the population jumped by almost 10 per cent in those eight years, to 
just under one million in 1982. 
 
And you look at the indicators that you have shown here — 10 years of growth leader in Canada. And you 
look at the gross domestic product. And we find that in Saskatchewan, during those years that we were 
government, that there was a 51 per cent increase in the gross domestic product. In Canada, there was 30 per 
cent. 
 
If you look at the non-residential investment, we had 338 per cent increase compared to Canada, 275. If you 
look at retail sales, you find that in Saskatchewan, 197 per cent increase in those years; 186 in Canada. And 
the same in respect to personal disposable income — 333 per cent increase in Saskatchewan; 267 in the rest 
of Canada. If you look at total investment, they had 10.9 per cent average in increase; retail sales — 9.5; 
mineral shipments during those good years — 12.6 per cent increase; manufacturing — 12.3 per cent 
increase. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Minister, that there has been a tremendous amount of rhetoric on your side indicating 
that though Saskatchewan is not participating in the recession, that things are going so well here in 
Saskatchewan . . . Well, why don’t you level with the people of Saskatchewan and use your own statistics, 
and you will see that the economic growth is not taking place under the government opposite. And I’m going 
to use some of the indicators from this here book; compare that with the good seven years that you’ve 
acknowledged in The Saskatchewan Promise. 
 
And I say a good indicator is the gross domestic product, and in ’82, your first year, it went down 4.6 per 
cent; last year it only grew 1.5 per cent. Canada as a whole went down 4.4 per cent in ’82, but it grew 3 per 
cent last year — so our growth was slower. 
 
If you look at the value of manufacturing shipments in millions of dollars, and here you find that in 1981 
there was 2,504; in ’82 there was 2,362; in ’83 — 2,444. So what we find in the value of manufacturing 
shipments in millions of dollars decreased from 1981 to 1983. There was a substantial decrease in each year. 
 
If we look at the private and public investment, which is a good indicator of what’s happening, your own 
statistics indicate, in millions of dollars, you know, in 1981 — 5,151; in 1982 — 4,670;  



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2667 
 

in 1983 — 5,065. And that’s in millions of dollars. And so what you have is that you had higher private and 
public investment in 1981 than you do in 1982 or 1983. 
 
Do you know what? And if you look at the unemployment — and we’ve been through this many times, Mr. 
Minister — in the end of March, in Saskatchewan, 44,000 people unemployed; over 60,000 people on 
welfare; 18.4 per cent of our young people unemployed. 
 
And you’re indicating that this economic policy that that government is putting forward is working for the 
people of this province? Your indicators in the minister’s budget address, clearly, unequivocally indicate that 
we’re going backward, that your policies aren’t working. And I know that you’re very tired, but how can 
you, in fact, indicate that there’s economic growth in this province when all of the major indicators, which 
you use in your own brochures . . . We are falling behind — in most cases, behind where we were in 1981. 
 
I think that the economic policies that you have put forward have been a tragic experience for the people of 
this province. And when you talk to the business community — those, as I say, that helped, that were here 
for many years, those which built this province — talk to them. They’re not sharing in what you’re going 
around blowing about the great economic prosperity in this province; they’re having major difficulties. 
 
Sure, a few of the multinational oil companies are doing fairly well; they’re filling their pockets and 
investing it somewhere else out of Saskatchewan. But I want to ask you: how, indeed, when your own 
Minister of Finance indicates that an analysis of all the indicators that we’re doing badly, how can you say 
your economic policy is working? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t want to go over again all of the statistics that I’ve 
already covered as it relates to the lowest unemployment rate in Canada, and the highest number of people 
working ever in our history, and the largest labour force ever in our history. 
 
But I would like to add just one more to the record, Mr. Chairman, and that as it relates to in and 
out-migration here in the province of Saskatchewan. And I’ll go back to 178 and bring you forward to today. 
In 1978, Mr. Chairman, we had an out-migration of 3,701. In 1979, we had an out-migration of 3,510. In 
1980, we had an out-migration of 4,382. In 1981, we had an out-migration of 573. In 1982, we had an 
in-migration — 2,019. And in 1983, we had an in-migration of 2,377. And I think they’re fairly healthy 
indicators to what’s going on here in the province. 
 
To go back, Mr. Chairman, to a question asked earlier, I inadvertently omitted to give you the cost of the 
major projects inventory, which was $5,000, and the total cost for the Milan, Italy office, January ’83 to 
March of ’84, was $28,752.69. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, certainly I can see that the minister does not want to get into a debate on the key 
economic indicators that I have outlined to him. And I’m going to summarize on this here and make it 
perfectly clear that, if we look at the basic indicators as set out in the budget address, that the gross domestic 
product, unlike what the minister is saying, fell in 1982, and in 1983 it grew only by 1.5 per cent while the 
rest of Canada grew by 3 per cent. 
 
And I want to also say that private and public investment . . . This is what the boys were saying over there: 
we will get investment, Open for Business Conference, the former minister taking his tour over to Europe 
inviting all the international investors into Saskatchewan. And you know what has been the results? Well, 
private and public investment, millions of dollars, there was more millions of dollars in private and public 
investment in 1983 than there was in 1982 or in 1983. 
 
You know, the one thing that you have done fairly well at, and that is you’ve sort of, kind of  



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2668 
 

number one, Mr. Minister, and that is in respect to the consumer price index, the annual percentage change. 
And if you take Regina and Saskatoon, you can claim to be number one because there the consumer price 
index increased substantially to 6.4, Saskatoon . . . that’s Regina; Saskatoon to 6.3. The rest of Canada was 
5.8. That, indeed, you can take. And that was really part of your economic strategy, I guess, too — very 
substantial increases to the local business community with heavy increases in utility rates. 
 
In order to get yourself elected, what you did, you said you’d freeze the rates, but you didn’t tell the people 
of Saskatchewan that you were going to hose it to them a year later — 43 per cent increase in insurance, 
dastardly increases in telephone and power at a time when the economic conditions of our agricultural and 
small business community can least, can least afford to pay it. 
 
So I want to say then that your obvious direction of open for big business has not really opened many doors 
of new opportunities to the many citizens of this province. And you have been working on this major policy 
now for over two years, and I wonder whether the minister could indicate the array of new, brand-new 
manufacturing and processing plants that have opened their doors during this two and one-half years — the 
amount of the investment, the amount of employment. 
 
And I don’t want a list like the previous minister talking about, “Oh, we have 1,200 (he said), but it’s kind of 
secret.” He said: “I don’t know; I can give it to you on a confidential basis.” And then when he send over the 
list, it’s a list of established businesses under our administration who had added new windows or doors to 
their premises, and he indicated that it was a new creation of his tenure as being Minister of Industry and 
Commerce, or Economic Development. 
 
So can you outline some of the major successes that you have brought to the province of Saskatchewan in 
which the people of this province are benefiting, other than the oil industry where you have massive 
handouts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, while I don’t have an itemized account of all of the business 
that the hon. member is asking for, probably an indicator would be the companies that have applied for space 
in the Saskatchewan Manufacturer’s Guide. The company . . . In 1982 there were 1,179. In 1984 there were 
1,268, an increase of 7.5. And I have here a few newspaper clippings of businesses that have opened. Here’s 
one that says, “Jobs for Assiniboia.” And it’s a name . . . The name of the firm is CJV Ornamental Concrete. 
 
And I have one here that says, “New concept in housing to be manufactured here,” and this is a Yorkton 
enterprise that has opened up. 
 
And “Plant to open August 15,” Grandstand Steel Buildings, a plant in Weyburn that has opened up. 
 
And “New business opens in Tisdale,” and the name of that is Tisdale Log Structures Limited. 
 
And I don’t want to waste the time of the House by going through them all, Mr. Speaker, but yes, it is a little 
tough to get them back after the previous administration, for years and years and years, had an anti-business 
climate. Business wasn’t to succeed in Saskatchewan unless it was publicly controlled or operated business, 
and it’s tough to turn that around, but it is coming, and we look forward to bigger and better things in the 
future. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, Mr. Minister, wouldn’t a fair indicator be whether you’re having massive success, 
which you are trying to tell us again, that private and public investment would have increased under your 
administration? And it has gone down. Why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — You know I suppose we can make numbers do anything we want them to do, and 
the most recent Conference Board of Canada numbers, Mr. Chairman, show in  



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2669 
 

real domestic product, Saskatchewan, in 1985, for 1.5; and Canada at 0.6. And again in 1985, for gross 
domestic product, Saskatchewan had 7.5 per cent; Canada at 5 per cent. So you know, you can pull out your 
numbers, and we’ll put out our numbers, and we can have this little round until the cows come home, but I 
don’t know what it’s going to solve. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well this has to be the most remarkable performance I’ve ever seen. Here we have his 
colleague, the Minister of Finance, and I know you can be disgusted with him because his performance 
hasn’t been that good — the Minister of Finance. I mean, he has run us into the hole of 839 million. 
 
But Mr. Minister, I think it’s regrettable that you would go to the conference board’s statistics when before 
you are the indicators set forward by the Minister of Finance, which clearly indicates that your economic 
policy is a failure, is doomed to failure. And I think that it’s very clear here that the two contrasting 
performances are easily equated. I think the performance of our government, our administration, is clearly 
set forward in The Saskatchewan Promise. And I thank you for putting that forward, and I hope that you 
distribute it widely in Saskatchewan. 
 
But similarly, what you have done is also put forward your performance. And on every key indicator you 
have had a disastrous performance. No other word would describe it. And when I ask you to defend it and to 
indicate the results of your open for big business, you run to the conference board for some report outside of 
Saskatchewan. You won’t even turn to your colleague’s report and use that to defend your economic 
policies. 
 
I want to allow my colleague who wants to ask some questions . . . And I can only say, Mr. Minister, that I 
think it’s clear that with the unemployment, particularly among young people, the crisis that is developing in 
the financing of education, the whole economic climate is one of some considerable gloom among the 
business community, because what we had before was a lot of activity, both public and private and joint 
ventures. And as you have indicated in one of your brochures, your object is to minimize Crown 
corporations throughout the economy, and that brings me to the point that I want to raise. Can you, as sort of 
the head honcho of the economic development policy, indicate specifically what is your position vis-a-vis 
the Crown corporations, particularly those in resource industry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The policy as it relates to the Crown corporations was set out in March 21, I 
believe, in the budget speech. It talked about Sask Power bonds and a public offering of Saskoil, etc., and I 
suppose while we’re talking, as you were, about indicators, the ultimate indicator in all probability will be 
some time in 1986, and we’ll see what that ultimate indicator provides us with. 
 
And thirdly, I note that you’ve taken a great deal of interest in The Saskatchewan Promise. It’s an excellent 
publication and serves us well around the world, and I thought since you have taken such a great deal of 
delight in reading the first edition, I would give you a copy of the updated version. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, just a few questions. I first want to ask about a 
project which, I believe, was under way when your predecessor held the office, and it was a project being 
carried on by Pemberton Houston Willoughby doing a study on investment capital sourcing. Can you tell me 
whether or not that project has been completed, and has a report been rendered by Pemberton Houston 
Willoughby? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — There was a contract with Pemberton Houston Willoughby. It was cost-shared 
between this department and the Crown Management Board, and the report has been filed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, is the report available for perusal by members of 
the legislature, and if so, will the minister make copies available? 



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2670 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — No. It’s an internal report, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, can the minister indicate the cost of the report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The share paid out by our department was $82,856.67. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, did your department pay one-half of the cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — That’s right. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — The report cost something over $160,000, but it’s not public. 
 
Among other things, in preparation of that report you were inquiring about the use of various pension funds 
— the Government of Saskatchewan. Do you have any intention of using the pension funds of the employees 
of the Government of Saskatchewan for investment capital sourcing, and if not, why was your predecessor 
soliciting information on this subject from his predecessor? Why was the Minister of Industrial 
Development, then Mr. Rousseau, soliciting information from the then Minister of Revenue and Financial 
Services, Mrs. Duncan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I think that the answer to the question is that we were seeking information, or the 
report was seeking information about investment possibilities for pension funds, generally. And that just 
happens to be one of them that they were seeking information about. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, will you advise whether or not the report 
recommends that government pension funds be used for investment capital sourcing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I don’t know if I would. If I knew, and I don’t know what is recommended in that 
regard, so . . . And it’s his department now over in CMB. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, your department paid $80,000 for this report. It 
was the report of investment capital sourcing. I think we’ll all acknowledge that one of the possibilities 
being considered was using government pension funds for venture capital sourcing . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, for investment capital sourcing then, if there’s trouble with the word venture capital. 
 
Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I take it you will not deny that your predecessor, as minister, solicited 
information from the Minister of Revenue and Financial Services asking information about a description of 
the various pension funds and copies of the primary and secondary legislation to be provided to Pemberton 
Houston Willoughby for their use in the investment capital sourcing project. 
 
Now I take it you will not deny that. If you’re going to deny it, say so. But if you’re not going to deny it, and 
I doubt whether you will, clearly the implication to be drawn from that is that Pemberton Houston 
Willoughby were at least looking at this as a source of investment capital sourcing. Otherwise there would 
be no point in asking for it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — There might be a valid point in asking for it. And I can’t speak for my predecessor, 
and I don’t think you would expect me to. But I think there should be an interest in where Saskatchewan 
pension funds are being invested. Why, for instance, are they being invested in, say, Toronto or Winnipeg or 
Vancouver or Edmonton and not being invested in Saskatchewan, if that happened to be the case? And I’m 
not sure that that is the case, but I think that there would be, you know, a legitimate reason to have that 
curiosity. 



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2671 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I thoroughly agree with you; there’s a legitimate reason to have the 
curiosity. And there’s equally a legitimate reason to ask what the recommendations are with respect to the 
use of the pension funds. Your department paid $80,000 for this report, and you have no idea what the 
recommendations are. Is that what you’re telling us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay, Mr. Chairman. To the best recollection of the officials here with me, there 
was not a recommendation made. It was more of an information-gathering exercise. And we will check and 
let you know if, in fact, there was a recommendation made. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you. I must comment that $160,000 worth of information-gathering is a very 
considerable sum for Pemberton Houston Willoughby, if, in fact, that’s what they did — if they gathered 
information and made no recommendations — but I’m . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . All right, I’m sorry. I 
was misunderstanding what the minister was saying. What you’re indicating is that, while there may have 
been recommendations, you do not think there was a recommendation with respect to the use of pension 
funds. 
 
I turn now to another question, Mr. Minister. This has to do with the economic development councils, and 
there were a number around Saskatchewan, I believe, and I ask whether or not they get their grants from 
your department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — They were channelled through Tourism and Small Business. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, something like the Northwest Economic 
Development Council, in respect of which I’m sure the member for the Battlefords would be familiar, is 
handled through Tourism and Small Business? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
My next questions, Mr. Minister, deal with the grant to Expo ’86, the operating grant. Can you tell me a little 
more about this corporation, Expo ’86? Who is the president, and what are you paying him or her? And what 
staff complement do you expect this corporation to have which will be paid for our of the $292,000 in the 
budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, I will give you the names of the board of directors: myself is 
chairman, Hon. Jack Klein is vice-chairman, Hon. Gary Lane, Hon. Gordon Currie, Rosemary Bidzinski 
from Yorkton; Bruce Cowie of Regina; Will Klein of Regina; Karim Nasser, Saskatoon; and Fred Heal of 
Regina, formerly of my department, as corporate secretary. 
 
The president and commissioner for SaskExpo ’86, is Gordon Staseson. Vice-president and deputy 
commissioner is Fred Heal. Noreeta Finn is executive secretary. 
 
One of the reasons we set up the Crown and patterned it after the model of — what did you call that thing? 
— Homecoming Saskatchewan? — Celebrate Saskatchewan — was so that we could properly defend these 
things in a Crown Corporations Committee at the time of expiration of . . . or on an annual basis, rather than 
go through the exercise here in the House on an ongoing basis. So I would ask you to . . . (inaudible) . . . the 
numbers, because I think we’d have trouble gathering them up here very quickly to deal with it at the Crown 
Corporations Committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I don’t think I’m prepared to acknowledge that 
Celebrate Saskatchewan ever went before Crown Corporations Committee. The Crown Corporations 
Committee has traditionally only dealt with the commercial corporations, and if you’re telling me now that 
this horse-racing commission which you set up as a Crown corporation — you people have set up a string of 
Crown corporations. Here is the second one . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2672 
 

Well, indeed, you should look at your legislation some time, and I don’t think the horse-racing commission 
is going to find its way before the Crown Corporations Committee, and I doubt very much whether Expo ‘86 
will. However, I don’t want to pursue it all. Just tell me what salary Mr. Staseson is receiving and whether or 
not other people, anybody else will receive more. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — What I have here is the total for all staff: the president, who is under contract 
through his firm; and the vice-president, the executive secretary, receptionist, accountant and casual staff, 
the total is 211,700 budgeted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, you say that the president has a contract with 
somebody. Does he have it with Sask Expo ’86 Corporation? And what does that contract provide by way of 
salary benefits and remuneration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We don’t have the contract here, Mr. Chairman. I will endeavour to get a look at the 
contract, and if there were no undertakings as to business confidentiality or anything like that, I don’t mind 
providing it. But I, off the top of my head, don’t know the terms of the contract. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, will you acknowledge that there could be no 
possible public interest in not providing what we’re paying to the head of SaskExpo ’86 Corporation? Do 
you acknowledge that there could be no public interest involved in failing to disclose what is being paid to 
the president of the SaskExpo ’86 Corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I can’t imagine what would cause me to disagree with the statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I will look forward, then, to some of your staff being able 
to find the contract. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — . . . (inaudible) . . . that we have budgeted to the maximum of $85,000, and I don’t 
know what the contract is like. I can’t tell you what it is, precisely. Are you satisfied with that, or do you 
want me to go further? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Minister, I would prefer it if you did go further, but I’m not suggesting 
you do it now. I would like to hear from you indicating what you feel you can tell me about the terms of 
employment of the president. 
 
One final question, so far as I’m concerned, and that has to do with the industries which your predecessor 
indicated would be coming when he came back from Europe. Now, it may well be that this subject has been 
covered. But it has been a source of some fascination to me whether or not you were able to identify any of 
those industries. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — No. I don’t know just which ones he was talking about. Of course I know the hon. 
member doesn’t expect me to know what went on in this department prior to my being here, nor ask me to 
defend those, as is always the case in legislatures across the country. And I’m prepared to deal with anything 
that has happened in the department since I took responsibility. 
 
I think it’s fair to say that it takes a while to turn things around to get the confidence of the people to invest 
in Saskatchewan and to capture the opportunity that exists here, and we see that that attitude is, in fact, 
changing. And we look forward to things over the next months and years. And I look forward with eager 
anticipating to do some sod turning and ribbon cuttings. But I’ve found there’s a certain amount of risk 
involved in making the announcements before the concrete is poured, so I’ve exercised some small degree of 
self-discipline and I haven’t done any of it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’m delighted to hear the minister exercise  



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2673 
 

this uncharacteristic restraint. And all I can hope is that when he has, as he says, “turned things around”, that 
when he brings the Saskatchewan Promise up, updates it for the next two or three years, it will have as good 
a picture as the one that he very properly sets out here. 
 
I have no further comments, Mr. Chairman. I believe my colleague from Cumberland has a very few brief 
comments, and that’s it. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Deputy Chairman. Mr. Minister, I realize we’re running 
overtime here, but I have questions that pertain to very deplorable and unacceptable conditions in a certain 
part of our province, particularly the North. And I look at your throne speech presented here last fall, where 
it states: 
 

It has been the goal of my government to develop policies and programs which encourage initiative and 
not dependence . . . 

 
This was a quotation from last fall’s throne speech presented by the Minister of Finance. I want to ask you, 
Mr. Minister, in terms of your department: what investments have your department’s programs and policies 
brought into the North? And while I’m at it, Mr. Minister, I may ask, as well: how many jobs have those 
investments created? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — All of our programs, all of our programs can be accessed by all of Saskatchewan 
people, including northern people. Programs dealing specifically with the North have been transferred from 
the department of DNS to the Department of Tourism and Small Business. And I know the hon. member 
spent a great deal of time talking with the Minister of Tourism and Small Business when his estimates were 
up. Now if you want to plough the same field again, that’s fine with me. But, in fact, you’ve ploughed it all 
once with the minister who is responsible for that activity in the North. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I ask the minister responsible for Economic Development and 
Trade: what commitment does your department have, very specifically, towards the economic development 
programming for the North, and how can you demonstrate that commitment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, my commitment in this department is to Saskatchewan. As it relates 
specifically to the North, those programs are under the jurisdiction of Tourism and Small Business. And I 
know you ploughed all this ground with Tourism and Small Business, and I’m not sure what use of the 
exercise of going through it again is. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Chairman, I refer the minister to many of his world tours, and I am of the understanding 
that he goes out to promote various industries. And I want to ask the minister, very specifically, what, if any, 
promotional tours, promotions, have you dealt with in terms of, say, the wild rice industry, the native 
handicraft industry? 
 
Have you raised those specific points in some of your world tours? And as well, have you considered the fish 
industry, the forestry industry, the minerals, etc.? Have you promoted those resources that we have in this 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, wherever I’ve been, I’ve promoted all of Saskatchewan, from wild 
rice to tourism to uranium to potash. And wherever I’ve been, I’ve talked about Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Chairman, and the North is a very important part of Saskatchewan. And, sure, it’s as natural as night follows 
day that we promote, as you suggest, wild rice, tourism, uranium around the world, etc. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, very obviously the North top half of this province can see 
that your policies and your performance have not done any, have not supported any of the problems that we 
have in northern Saskatchewan. That is why, Mr. Minister, that we passed  



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2674 
 

and introduced that resolution here in this House yesterday. I read the last two paragraphs, lines of that 
resolution: 
 

. . . that this Assembly urges the Government of Saskatchewan to cease its attack on the victims of 
recession and to begin implementing concrete, positive, social and economic policies. 

 
For the people, particularly on the top half of this province. As far as I can see, Mr. Minister, to date you and 
your government simply do not care for the top half of the province. You and your government have 
discriminatedly abandoned northern Saskatchewan. That is a fact. We have yet to see something concrete in 
terms of an economic, self-sufficient strategy for the North. 
 
You claim that you have implemented in your government certain programs that will help alleviate the high 
unemployment that we have. We have high unemployment in northern Saskatchewan, and that is a fact. It is 
a disaster. If something were to happen similar to northern Saskatchewan, say, in Regina or Saskatoon, you 
would declare it a national disaster. You would immediately implement some solution, or try to engage a 
way to help alleviate that problem. 
 
But in the North, you don’t. You simply ignore it; you simply neglect it. You think that no one south of P.A. 
will hear the news of the deplorable conditions that these people are faced with, with respect to the high 
unemployment of, on the average of, 66 per cent — and in some of the more remote communities we have a 
95 per cent unemployment rate. We have 62 per cent, the raise in the welfare rates. 
 
Mr. Minister, we simply have to have some solutions for the conditions that are being experienced by the 
high unemployment, by the people in northern Saskatchewan regarding unemployment. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have no further questions. I simply would invite some comment, if you have any. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I acknowledge that there is a serious unemployment problem 
in the North, and I acknowledge that far more has to be done, not only in northern Saskatchewan, but right 
across northern Canada. And I also acknowledge that I don’t have all the answers. 
 
But I can tell you that the hon. member doesn’t have, in my view, a great deal of the answers, either. 
Because the answer is not to shut down the uranium development in northern Saskatchewan, if you’re 
talking about unemployment. The answer is not, as your administration did — in the last year in office, I 
think — budgeted $100 million for DNS. Is that not right? $100 million in the last year of your 
administration — and where was it spent? It was spent on bureaucrats, for the most part, in the South. 
 
So while I acknowledge that the unemployment problem exists in the North, I tell you that I, in my travels, 
in my travels, represent all of Saskatchewan — not just the North, not just the South — and the programs 
that are specifically related to the North are the . . . The programs that are specifically related to the North 
and northern development are administered by my colleague, the Minister for Tourism and Small Business. 
And I don’t know how many times you want to plough the same field. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I want to ask you, in your world tours . . . I want to 
ask the minister: when was the last time you were in northern Saskatchewan on a tour? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I believe, Mr. Chairman, the last time I was in the North was in November of ’83. 
And while I say the last time I was in the North was in November of ’83, I have, in fact, tentative plans for 
another trip into La Loche and area in the near future — as soon as we can pull it together. 



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2675 
 

And the reason that I’m going into La Loche and area in the near future is to look at a couple of projects, or 
potential projects, that were brought to me by the member for Athabasca. And I can tell you additionally, 
Mr. Chairman, that the minister responsible for the programs of the North has been in the North on several 
occasions. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I would like just further explanation. You indicated 
November of ’83 was the last time that you set foot in what is known as the northern half of Saskatchewan. I 
was wondering whether you could elucidate and indicate what constituted that attendance in northern 
Saskatchewan — what communities you went to, who you met with, how many days you spent. 
 
I notice when you went to Saudi Arabia, you had about 21 days to spend there, lifting the veils of any 
suspicion that the Arabs may have towards investing in Saskatchewan. What I am asking, Mr. Minister: how 
long, how long? How many days did you spend? How many days did you spend in northern Saskatchewan 
lifting the veils of suspicion that the Northerners have in respect to the economic policies of your 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Again, I point out, Mr. Chairman, that the responsibility for the programs relative to 
the North — all under jurisdiction of my colleague, the Minister of Tourism and Small Business. And the 
last occasion, the last occasion that’s caused me to be in the North wasn’t related to my department at all, 
but to the Crown corporation that I’m responsible for, Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Item 4 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just in respect to communications, you have five basic subvotes 
in your department, Mr. Minister, and other than the grants to local authorities, five basic subvotes. I look at 
communications and I find that that is the highest single item of expenditure in you entire budget. 
 
I noticed that other expenses has increased from $798,660 to $1,397,760. What I would like to ask the 
minister: is the communication that we are referring to here, the communication to be done on behalf of the 
Progressive Conservative Party, is this the hidden political machine assumed under the jurisdiction of the 
Deputy Premier? But to put it more succinctly, I want to ask you: could you outline and give me a 
breakdown of the estimated other expenses of over almost $1.4 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Of course, the short answer . . . The short answer to your question is, no. 
 
To add — I’m talking about the first part of your question — to add a little to that, it borders on lunacy. And 
thirdly, the budget — for the question that you ask, and the answer is probably one that you won’t 
understand, because the budget is for the promotion of Saskatchewan, and it’s largely advertising, largely 
advertising to promote Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan products around the world, and within Canada as 
well. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — It’s under communications, and I would have expected you to be spending it in some along 
that line. And I was wondering whether in drawing up the budget of $1.4 million to be expended, which is 
the highest single item in your budget . . . And what I would like to ask you: can you, in fact, give a 
breakdown of the items which would constitute other expenses under communications? 



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2676 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay. I’ll give you the major items here. Advertising — 738,400. The other one is 
miscellaneous contractual service, miscellaneous contractual service — 248,500. The next biggest is travel 
— 61,300. 
 
Item 4 agreed to. 
 
Item 5 agreed to. 
 
Item 6 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, with respect to the grants for investment and 
trade, would the minister be able to provide a list of the persons or organizations who are receiving the 
grants? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes, we can get you that information. What that is, is the transfer from Agriculture 
of the agricultural development fund to our department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could refresh my memory as to 
who the major recipients are from that particular fund. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — It’s fairly lengthy. Can I just send it over to you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Sure. 
 
Item 6 agreed to. 
 
Item 7 agreed to. 
 
Item 8 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, this has to do with the grant for the SaskExpo 
Corporation. Presumably this is the amount of capital to be spent in the current fiscal year. Can the minister 
give us a very brief outline of how much our capital expenditures in Vancouver are intended to be, and 
whether any capital expenditure anywhere else is intended. And roughly . . . well, that’s enough. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m guessing but it’s probably fairly close. The vast, vast, vast majority of the 
capital expenditure will eventually end up in Vancouver. We hope to do as much of it as we can here. The 
total budget for Expo ’86 over the full period is estimated to be in the neighbourhood of 6.5, about 5 of that 
being capital. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, then roughly speaking, about $5 million will be 
capital, $1 to $1.5 million or thereabouts would be in operating, and the $5 million, this is the first 
instalment of $800,000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes, that’s right. And recognize, of course, that those figures are only a best guess 
by me at this point. 
 
Item 8 agreed to. 
 
Item 9 agreed to. 
 
Vote 19 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2677 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND TRADE 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 19 
 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, just one question. Could the minister tell us how 
much money was vired into these votes by virement? How much additional money has been spent? The $30 
is obviously symbolic. You wouldn’t put it in there if you were only spending the $30. How much additional 
money was included? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — It’s simply set up . . . or simply put in there to set up the subvotes for the 
reorganization, and no additional money was spent. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Item 3 agreed to. 
 
Vote 19 agreed to. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND LOANS, ADVANCES AND INVESTMENTS 
 

SASKATCHEWAN MINING DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION 
 

Vote 166 
 

Item 1 — Statutory 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, was there an advance from the Consolidated Fund 
to Sask Mining Development Corporation in the . . . Is there intended to be an advance from the 
Consolidated Fund to the Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation in ’84-85 — I’m sorry — not of 
17,800,000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, in the absence of my officials from SMDC I would request that we 
pull this vote at this time, and if you have any questions I’ll get the answers later. We’ll deal with it later. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, if the minister can. I agree with the proposition 
he’s putting forward. If the minister could write a note, then the next time we have him about we can clear 
this off without the necessity of getting his officials down from Saskatoon. 
 
And there is . . . I’m just curious about the financing, and we’ve had our chance to ask about SMDC and its 
operations in the committee, and I don’t wish to revise that. If we can arrange that, I don’t want to drag your 
officials down for that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I would be prepared to do that on the 
undertaking that someone will . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay. I’ll send the information to the hon. member, and I’m prepared to deal with 
this now, if you like. 
 
Item 1 — Statutory 



 
May 16, 1984 

 

2678 
 

Vote 166 agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:36 p.m. 
 


