






















































Hansard: November 27, 1984


3513 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
November 27, 1984 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Assistance for Farmers 
 

Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question to the Minister of Agriculture, and my question 
deals with the farmers in north-eastern Saskatchewan, and they’re still waiting for your friends in Ottawa, for 
the Mulroney government to make a payment. 
 
Back in June the Premier promised, or assured us, that he expected the federal government to kick in about 
$20 million of assistance to farmers. During the federal campaign the Liberals promised about $16 million or 
$20 an acre. Your federal leader said that they would match that. 
 
My question to you is: four months later, the farmers are still waiting for this amount of money; they are in 
serious condition with no crop for three year s- will you put pressure on the Mulroney government to make 
good on that promise to kick in about $2 for every dollar you did, or $3 for every dollar you did? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member for his question, and certainly, in terms of 
having the federal government address the problems of north-east Saskatchewan, or, for that matter, 
south-east or south-west or south-central or, in fact, the farmers of all Saskatchewan, certainly I have met 
with the federal minister and many of his colleagues and brought to his attention that issue and many other 
issues that are, as I mentioned earlier, I would suggest, that are of great importance to all Saskatchewan 
farmers. As it turns out, when the former administration was in place – and I’m certain the hon. member 
himself can read Hansard, the federal Hansard – as it turns out, that proposal, while the federal Liberal 
administration was in office, had never been to treasury board, and, in fact, that’s at least one of the hoops 
that it is going through now. 
 
And I would suggest that we have represented the interests of north-east Saskatchewan farmers to the federal 
minister, just like we’ve represented all the interests of all Saskatchewan farmers to the new federal minister. 
And I might say it’s been a refreshing change to find an open door and a sympathetic ear. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — I have a supplementary for the minister, Mr. Speaker. The minister talks about a sympathetic 
ear he has there. I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, and I ask you: when can these farmers anticipate a 
pay-out? They got about $7 million early in August that helped them a little ways, but there’s no way these 
farmers are going to survive through the winter without an injection of cash, now. When can they expect you 
and your minister to stop talking and come up with some action on this one? If you’ve met with the minister 
and your proposal received favourable assurance, surely it doesn’t take that long to implement it. They’ve 
come up with money for other of their friends, but when are they going to come up with some, when are you 
going to come up with some money for the farmers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I would, in response to the hon. member’s question, just say that I 
cannot give a definitive answer on when they might expect an announcement. Had it been through the 
various groups prior to the election, it might have been sooner rather than later. And I can only reiterate that 
the minister is well aware of the situation, and that their  



 
November 27, 1984 
 

3514 
 

track record in terms of help for western Canadian farmers, I would suggest, is well-known, and, I think, an 
impressive one in a short time. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, 
you say that you don’t know when the federal government might come up with some money for this program 
to assist the farmers in north-eastern Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, can you assure this House, and the farmers 
in north-eastern Saskatchewan, that you will not allow this just to stand still for a while without the federal 
government making a move on it? Will you continue to pursue the plight of these farmers in north-eastern 
Saskatchewan with the federal government and make sure that this is coming forth very soon and not next 
year or the year after? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I have met with the federal minister. I have met and talked with 
his colleagues and his counterparts, and they are well aware of the situation. 
 
And I would simply ask, in fact, what have you done? Have you yourself written to the federal minister? 
Have you yourself talked to the – met with the minister? Have you met with any of his colleagues to press 
the case? 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, it is not what we ask the federal minister. I am 
asking you: are you going to continue to pursue the plight of the western or the north-eastern farmers and ask 
the Minister of Agriculture for Canada to come across with the money that they have promised in their 
election campaigns, and to assist the farmers in north-eastern Saskatchewan immediately? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, yes. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — To the Minister of Agriculture. Would your government support a three-party resolution 
addressed to the federal Minister of Agriculture regarding this specific situation? 
 
An Hon. Member: — There are only two parties in this House. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — There are three parties in the House. There are three parties. The debate isn’t the number 
of parties, but would your government support a resolution supported by all three parties in this House to 
your Minister of Agriculture requesting post-haste on this situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I, and I think my colleagues, in terms of what we support, and what 
we do not support in this House, give serious consideration to every motion, resolution, and piece of 
legislation that comes before this House, and certainly if the hon. member wants to play catch-up and get into 
the action so far as making our position known to the federal minister, I would welcome his help in that area. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — A further supplementary. My question – apparently the minister didn’t understand – was: 
will your government, through you, support a resolution to the federal minister requesting post-haste on the 
situation in north-eastern Saskatchewan, which, in fact, was committed by the Liberal government before 
they were defeated – before they were defeated, before they were defeated? And there is no reason why 
treasury board has failed to meet on this situation to date. There is absolutely no reason. Can you outline to 
me that you will support a three-party resolution, and give me in definitive terms? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, let’s get it in the record what, in fact, our government has done in 
terms of our commitment to north-east Saskatchewan. We have put your money on the table. The farmers, 
the 1,800 farmers up there, have got something close to $8 million in their hands, and in terms of 
co-operation and helping facilitate the process for the federal commitment in terms of those farmers, we have 
provided the names, the programs as we  



 
November 27, 1984 

 

3515 
 

developed it here, so they didn’t have to re-invent the wheel; we have co-operated fully. If that doesn’t, at 
least, I would suggest to all the people of Saskatchewan, point our commitment out to them in terms of 
helping them and facilitating them, then I don’t understand why the hon. member wouldn’t understand what 
our position would be. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — A simple question – maybe this government might understand it – is: where’s the money? 
Where’s the money the feds have committed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I think I, in answer to an earlier question, suggested that, based on 
what I have read in Hansard, and in answer to the same question that was put to the Hon. Minister of 
Agriculture in Ottawa, that in fact it has not been through treasury board, and that’s one of the routes it had 
to go, and I would read from that comment that in fact that’s the route it’s going through. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Minister of Agriculture, and I direct a 
question on the same subject. He will recall that his government promised $20 million, and suggested that 
the federal government might match it. That’s back in Prince Albert in, I believe, June or July. Your 
government has delivered $7.2 million, I believe, and that is better than nothing. Nothing is what the 
Mulroney government has delivered. Rumours are, in Ottawa, that the proposal has been . . . (inaudible 
interjections) . . . With respect to rumours, it’s very, very clear, Mr. Speaker, that members opposite don’t 
want to respond to rumours that appear in newspapers. 
 
What I would like to ask you, Mr. Minister, is this: in view of the fact, as my informants tell me, that the 
Mackenzie Progressive Conservative constituency association met in Tisdale last night and passed a motion 
calling for the Mulroney government to match at least the $16 million promised by the Turner government, 
will you urge the government at Ottawa, the Mulroney government, to honour that commitment, and do you 
agree with the position taken by the Mackenzie Progressive Conservative association executive at Tisdale 
last night? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member for his question, and although he may deal 
in rumours and innuendo, we deal in facts. And the facts are these: we put our money on the table . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — We have put our money on the table; we committed to help those people in 
north-east Saskatchewan, and that we have done. We have delivered our funds. And if there’s any doubt 
about the appreciation that those people in north-east Saskatchewan feel about that program, these are a 
sample of some of the letters, not only from individuals, but from rural, municipal, regional councils, 
thanking us for that kind of cash injection to farmers who are suffering an especial hardship. 
 
In so far as the resolution or the motion that was presented at an annual meeting last night, I have no 
knowledge of it, and I would not comment on it, having no knowledge of it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In view of the fact that the member for 
Souris-Cannington has indicated that the idea expressed by the PC constituency association at Tisdale last 
night sounds pretty good, does the Minister of Agriculture agree that it sounds pretty good, and will he 
support that resolution when it goes to the Mulroney government at Ottawa? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I will say again that I, as the Minister of Agriculture, on behalf of the 
farmers of north-east Saskatchewan, have made representations, sincere, honest representations on behalf of 
this government to the federal government, the Hon. John Wise, to urge him to make a speedy pay-out to 
those farmers relative to the flooding that has occurred  



 
November 27, 1984 
 

3516 
 

there in the past couple of years. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, in your request 
to the federal minister, did you request a payment to be made on the same basis as your provincial program? 
In other words, it’s going to be piggybacked on the provincial program within the five R.M.’s? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I made to him the same offer as I had made and, in fact, as the Premier had 
announced in June, is that we would offer to administer the program for them, and if they did not wish to 
re-write a new program, if you like, ours was there for the having. We provided them all the names of the 
recipients and, in the event that they wanted to piggyback directly on top of our program, we gave them 
every opportunity to do so and, in fact, offered to run it for them. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — New question to the minister. Mr. Minister, you waved a bunch of letters around a while 
ago, and I also have a few letters here from farmers not necessarily saying that they are pleased with your 
program, and one from your friends, the Royal Bank of Canada, that states that what you should have done 
with your program – although you gave them just a mere 7 million compared to the 20 million that you 
promised – what you should have done, Mr. Minister, they are saying, is going outside of the five R.M.s. The 
flooding didn’t occur within R.M. boundaries only. You should have gone to the people that were affected, 
the farmers that were affected, and provided them with the assistance they need. Will you, Mr. Minister, look 
at your program again, now, and see if you can provide the assistance to those farmers that suffered losses 
outside of the boundaries of those five R.M.s? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, the question of the boundaries for the designated flood zone were 
something that were not arrived at unilaterally by this Minister of Agriculture or this government acting in 
isolation or in a vacuum. To refresh the hon. member’s memory, how these were arrived at was after a rather 
extensive consultation, not only with myself, but the Hon. Minister of Rural Development was there, the 
Deputy Premier came along, I think the Minister of Environment was there, the chairman of our Agriculture 
caucus, MLAs from the area. And over the course of a couple of days we met and/or talked with, I think, 
something in the order of 15 R.M. councils, meeting of R.M.s and R.M. ratepayers to determine who, in fact, 
had a problem. After that consultation, the general view was that these five were the most severe and were 
worthy of some special consideration. 
 
And that doesn’t mean to say that there aren’t areas all over this province that are suffering from either singly 
or a series of natural or weather-related disasters, because there are. Drought has plagued some areas, and 
we’ve dealt with that. Wheat midge has plagued some areas, and we’ve dealt with that. Grasshoppers have 
plagued some areas, and we’ve dealt with that. Flooding had plagued that area, and, I would suggest to you, 
we have dealt with that. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to direct a question also to the Minister of Agriculture. The 
various Tory governments across Canada have been talking about the new co-operation between provincial 
and federal governments, and one of the basic commitments to western Canada, and to the Saskatchewan 
farmers by the promises of the Tory party prior to the election, was the removal of the estate tax in respect to 
the sale of farm lands. What I would like to ask the minister: have you had an opportunity to, in fact, meet 
with your counterpart in Ottawa, and can you give us an update as to the status of the commitment of the 
removal of estate tax, as clearly indicated would be forthcoming immediately? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not certain that I’m clear on what the hon. member is referring to 
in terms of estate tax, unless this is some kind of plan that your party has to increase taxation to farmers 
and/or business men out there, and that could well be. But I will comment on your point about the 
consultation and the co-operation, and it is there, it is evident, and it's been something that we haven't seen 
for some good long time. Evidence of that is things  



 
November 27, 1984 

 

3517 
 

like the removal of the taxation, the federal taxation on farm fuels which is going to amount to . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And we have already seen that announcement. Co-operation evidenced in another 
area by the fact that we have seen a substantial pay-out from the Western Grain Stabilization Fund, but more 
importantly, a commitment to look at using that fund in even a more meaningful and timely way for 
Saskatchewan farmers, all Saskatchewan farmers, given the economic hurt out there. I would presume that 
the point the hon. member is raising would be the one of capital gains, but perhaps he might want to clarify 
that for us. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I recognize the ignorance of the minister is being able to make the . . . understand that estate 
tax on farm land and capital gain are often used as synonymous terminology. I will want to ask the minister, 
in respect to a capital gains, the federal party, in fact, indicated in respect to capital gains, they indicated to 
the farmers of Saskatchewan that on their election they would, in fact, remove capital gains. What I’m asking 
you: have you met with your federal counterpart, and can you indicate to the Saskatchewan farmers an 
up-date as to the position of the federal government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member for his question. And I want to . . . I think 
we’re going to keep getting these questions pop up, and they are almost on an ad hoc basis, so let’s lay out 
really, in fact, what I did when I met with the Hon. Mr. Wise and Mr. Mazankowski and Mr. Mayer and the 
several other colleagues we have down there who understand agriculture. Well, the approach that you might 
take when you go to Ottawa is you’ve got one issue, you’ve got one issue on you mind, north-east farmers, 
or whatever, and that is all you might pursue. 
 
I want to tell you, this Assembly, and the people of Saskatchewan, I went down there pursuing the very 
specific issues, like the north-east Saskatchewan farmer situation. And as Minister of Agriculture and as part 
of a government that understands all the problems in Saskatchewan, I pursued and went to that minister with 
a wide variety of items. Now you might not understand that, but there are a number of issues facing 
Saskatchewan farmers today, and I thought and felt that it behoved myself, as a responsible minister of a 
responsible government, to address those several and many issues. 
 
Now as it relates to capital gains, you might pull that out in isolation and think that that is the only issue 
facing Saskatchewan farmers. But it is not. There are a number of tax issues. There are a number of tax 
issues facing Saskatchewan farmers, and I don’t pretend to be a lawyer and know the . . . I don’t pretend to 
be a lawyer, and my other habits are good too. But when I looked at tax issues, when I looked at tax issues 
. . . I raised these with the minister. I raised capital gains, I raised Agribonds, and I raised section 31, because 
they all impact on the tax – the income tax laws of this country. And I’m very happy to report that as a result 
of Michael Wilson’s statement, Mr. Speaker, he is prepared to refer all of those tax issues to a parliamentary 
committee on tax reform. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Allegations in National Newspapers 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct these questions to the Premier. I would have 
liked to have directed them to him yesterday; I would like to direct them to him today. I will, in his absence, 
direct them to the Deputy Premier. And the Deputy premier will know that newspapers all across Canada 
have carried reports which suggest that threatening comments were made about JoAnn Wilson in the 
presence of cabinet ministers. And they further go on to say that those ministers failed to act promptly, and 
thereby failed to avert a tragedy. My question to you, Mr. Deputy premier, is this: will you tell us 
unequivocally, that, so far as you know, those stories are false? 
 



 
November 27, 1984 
 

3518 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I will tell the hon. member that in so far as I know – in so far as I know 
– those stories are false. And further, in so far as I know, the hon. member is being less than accurate when 
he’s quoting those reports from the eastern media because, in fact, in one report that I saw, Mr. Speaker, it 
said clearly, “and that those incidents were reported to the authorities.” And the member opposite, clearly, 
has avoided or neglected to tell the Assembly that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — No, sir, Mr. Speaker, the member is wrong, and the record will show that. But I’ll 
ask you this question, sir. I want to make it clear that I am not asking about the words or the actions of the 
member for Thunder Creek except as they may be incidental to asking about your words and your action and 
those of your cabinet colleagues. 
 
Mr. Collver, in his testimony in Saskatoon, expressed the view that if, upon hearing certain statements, he 
had acted decisively and promptly, the whole tragedy surrounding the member for Thunder Creek might 
have been averted. 
 
I want to know from you, sir, whether the same statement can be said of you and your colleagues, and 
accordingly I will ask this: did you or any of your cabinet colleagues hear the member for Thunder Creek 
make a statement along the lines of those reported in the newspaper – and I don’t propose to repeat them – 
do you deny that a statement to that effect was made in the hearing of you or some of your cabinet 
colleagues? And in order to shorten the list, I will say, in your presence, or the presence of the member for 
Maple Creek, or the member for Kindersley, or the member for Meadow Lake, will you deny that a 
statement of the type quoted in the newspaper was said in the presence, or in the hearing, of one or more of 
those who I’ve named? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I obviously haven’t polled the members of caucus or cabinet, nor 
should I – nor should I. I’ll just reiterate, Mr. Speaker, the statement issued by the Premier on November 23rd 
in this House when he said: 
 

1. I never talked to Colin Thatcher about the Wilson incident, prior to it, or after it, inside, or 
outside the House. 

 
2. I repeat, as I’ve said before, his resignation from cabinet had nothing to do with the incident. 

 
3. Nothing to do with any part of the incident was ever discussed by cabinet at any time. 

 
4. All facts, rumours, innuendoes, or whatever, were given to the police authorities. 

 
5. And at no time did the former premier give any information about the Wilson incident, or its 

investigation, during his administration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Premier. Mr. Speaker, do I have the floor or does the 
member for . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I think the time has elapsed and we will continue this session another day. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Job Creation and the Crisis in Agriculture 
 

Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The official opposition presents Rule 16 motion today to drive home 
the point that there are three vital issues facing the people of Saskatchewan and this  



 
November 27, 1984 

 

3519 
 

legislature today. And those three issues are: (1) unemployment – I think everybody agrees that that is a 
major issue; (2) the crisis in agriculture; and (3) the government opposite’s warped spending priorities. And I 
would like to take this time today to deal with those three issues. These are vital issues we’ve been talking 
about for many months and which will continue to be emphasized by this opposition in the months ahead. 
We will continue to emphasize them, Mr. Speaker, in spite of self-serving ad campaigns at taxpayers’ 
expense, and television extravaganzas, and PR strategies, that this present government has failed to do what 
it’s required to do in the fact of these serious problems. 
 
And the record shows, Mr. Speaker, first of all, that there’s 34,000 Saskatchewan people that are 
unemployed this month, 34,000 according to StatsCanada, and an additional 4,000 no longer appear on the 
unemployment roll because they have simply given up hope and have stopped looking for work. 
 
In its last throne speech, just one year ago, this government has declared job creation to be the number one 
priority, job creation. In its March budget, the PC government has declared job creation to be its number one 
priority. After four days of group meditation by the cabinet at Government House in September, what came 
out of it, Mr. Speaker? Job creation is a top priority. 
 
Well, what’s happened during all this time and during all these think thanks? Well, in the 12 months just 
passed we’ve had the third worst creation record in all of Canada for job creation, and the number of 
unemployed in our province has jumped by another 3,000. Some priority, Mr. Speaker. Some performance. 
 
Now the Premier will tell you that his government is creating jobs at a record rate, but he just can’t keep up 
because thousands and thousands of people are flocking back to Saskatchewan looking for work. That’s what 
the Premier will tell you, but that’s not what the facts are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Over the past 12 months, Saskatchewan has had the second lowest labour force increase in all of Canada, the 
second lowest. Between October ’83 and last month the Saskatchewan labour force increased by only 1.3 per 
cent, 1.3 per cent increase in our labour force. The national average in that same period is 2.5 per cent. So the 
premier’s story about Saskatchewan’s labour force increasing at a record rate is just another story. In fact, 
over the past two and one-half years of PC government, the labour force has been increasing at a slower rate 
– can you hear this? – at a slower rate than it has anywhere else in Canada during the last two and one-half 
years. 
 
In his recent television extravaganza the Premier promised that he would appoint one full-time cabinet 
minister whose sole responsibility would be dealing with unemployment problems. We’ve heard his excuses 
of his usage of words. What he announced on December the 16th was a part-time employment minister. This 
is the biggest cabinet in Saskatchewan’s history, 25 members, and yet the Premier can’t shuffle the 
responsibilities to find one full-time job minister. Two without portfolios, and yet not one full-time minister. 
Some performance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The employment development minister, the member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, is also the Minister of 
Justice, and the Attorney General, and the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Human rights 
Commission, the Saskatchewan Legal Aid Commission, the Saskatchewan Crimes Compensation Board, the 
Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan, the Surface Rights Arbitration Board, the Public and Private 
Rights Board, the Saskatchewan Police Commission, the Public Utilities Review Commission, 
communications policy, Sask Tel, Saskatchewan Computer Utility Corporation – I maybe missed a couple, 
Mr. Attorney General, I maybe missed a couple – but does that sound like giving jobs a high priority, Mr. 
Speaker? Of course not. But it’s been the same throughout the government’s term of office, Mr. Speaker – a 
lot of talk but no action. 
 
There are many times that the PC government could and should, many things that the PC government could 
and should be doing to help generate more job opportunities for  



 
November 27, 1984 
 

3520 
 

Saskatchewan people. They could start by making good on their 1982 election campaign promises to provide 
low-interest money for Saskatchewan small-business men. They’re asking me for it all the time. There are 
about 35,000 small-business men in Saskatchewan. If each one of them could be encouraged just to create 
one additional position in their firm, the unemployment problem would be solved; the unemployment 
problem would be solved. 
 
They could move to get money in the hands of Saskatchewan family farmers, and that wouldn’t even have to 
add to the provincial deficit. But the minister says he’s doing something about that. All he’s done is talk. No 
action, no pressure. Even if the minister in charge of crop insurance would get his act together and quit 
playing politics with crop insurance, we could get that $150 million into the hands of farmers today when 
they need it, not before a provincial election. The money would be used by most farmers to simply pay their 
bills, and that would help to keep thousands of small-business men in rural Saskatchewan above water. 
 
The PC government in Regina could even pressure the Mulroney government to make good on their 
campaign promises of a full pay-out from the Western Grain Stabilization Fund. Back in the campaign, the 
PCs said they would approve a 5 or $600 million pay-out from the fund this year. Farmers got 125 million, 
with a promise that more might be coming next spring. Farmers need the money now to stay in business. The 
bill collectors and the banks are at bay. So helping small business and family farmers stay in business and 
have the confidence to even think about expansion is one way the PC government could encourage economic 
growth and new job opportunities for Saskatchewan. 
 
Another I would like to suggest, Mr. Speaker, would be that the PC government start showing some faith in 
Saskatchewan by building for our future, by moving ahead with research facilities, schools, hospitals. The 
member from Churchbridge thinks that’s a big joke, but there are people around Saskatchewan think there 
are some highways that need building. Nursing homes have been promises, and aren’t being constructed; 
other facilities that we’ll need to service a growing economy. But the Devine government has saw fit to 
refuse to do this, and started short-changing these vital sectors of our economy at the expense of long-term 
economic security. 
 
I’ve talked about the dismal job records of the PC government, but their record in agriculture is much worse 
– much worse, Mr. Speaker. The Premier keeps saying that he understands the problems of farmers; that he 
knows what the problems are; that he won’t let the farmers lose their land. The Minister of Agriculture spells 
out the true actions of the PC government. “We are going to shore up success,” are the words he used in this 
legislature. “We’re going to shore up success,” but what he’s really saying: the farmers that are in trouble are 
bad managers. 
 
The banks are foreclosing on Saskatchewan farmers at the rate of 50 a month. But what do you do, opposite? 
Nothing. Nothing. The truth is that this government’s agriculture minister and his programs are in a total 
shamble, Mr. Speaker, a total shamble. The operating loan guarantee program introduced with such fanfare 
last spring – this earth-shattering program is being launched, being laughed at, at every financial institution 
in the province. The livestock tax credits have proven to be little more than tax shelters for their wealthy 
friends and lawyers and doctors. 
 
There has been no drought assistance for Saskatchewan grain farmers. The minister stood up today and he 
said that we’ve acted on drought and we’ve acted on grasshoppers. That’s not the case, Mr. Speaker. They’ve 
done nothing. Nothing. There has been one of the promised federal assistance for flooded farmers in the 
north-east, as we discussed in question period today. New Democrats say that this legislation must act now to 
save our family farms. 
 
Number one, we need to pass a foreclosure moratorium to prevent any more farms from going under while 
the PC government searches for adequate assistance programs. Number two, we need to follow up that kind 
of foreclosure moratorium with a debt adjustment law, Mr. Speaker, which will force the banks and other 
financial institutions into renegotiating some of these farm loans that are just too steep. And number three, 
we need to introduce an effective farm  



 
November 27, 1984 

 

3521 
 

operating loan guarantee program. Did you notice I called it an effective one – the one that’s in place isn’t 
working – which will offer farmers and meaningful provincial government guarantee. And number four, we 
need to introduce an emergency drought assistance program that will provide up to $30 an acre to grain 
producers hardest hit by this year’s extreme weather conditions. Number five, we need to reverse the terrible 
amendments to the beef stabilization plan made by this government this summer, which cost feed producers 
$11 million. The PC government will no doubt say, “We can’t afford that kind of help for farmers.”  
 
It’s all a question of priorities, Mr. Speaker. The PC government found $32 million to guarantee a loan to 
help Bill Hunter build a hockey rink. They found $390 million to guarantee a loan to help an Alberta oil 
company build an upgrader. You found another $89 million – and this is the biggest mistake this government 
ever made – that they found another $89 million to help an Alberta coal company buy the Poplar River coal 
mine. This government found another $300 million a year for tax cuts to the oil companies. But what did 
they find for farmers, Mr. Speaker? What did they find for farmers, for your and my sons? They had no 
trouble finding $800 million for their wealthy friends, but there’s zero left for farmers and the unemployed. 
 
And this brings me to the third issue, Mr. Speaker, this government’s warped spending priorities. 
 
The PC government came to power promising to cut its cost of government. Well, this year the PC 
government is spending 31 per cent more – not 31 per cent less – 31 per cent more than the new Democrats 
did during their last full year in office. The government is spending your money and mine at the rate of more 
than $8 million a day. So it’s all a question of benefits from these expenditures. Over the past two and a half 
years the PC government has been busy using that money to benefit its powerful friends in big business 
while short-changing ordinary people. It’s been busy, as well, living the good life at the public trough, 
spending more money on self-serving advertising to the tune of $12 million this year; spending money on 
exorbitant salaries for political advisors, more than a hundred thousand a year in many cases; spending tax 
dollars on 34 international junkets by the cabinet ministers; entertainment expenses of $25,000 a month for 
some of these ministers. There’s been plenty of money for all those things, Mr. Speaker, but how much have 
they spent on ordinary people? How much have they spent on ordinary people? The money’s there, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s all a question of priorities. And that’s why it gives me a great deal of pleasure to move, today, 
seconded by the Leader of the Opposition: 
 

That this Assembly regrets this government’s totally inadequate job creation performance which has 
caused hardship for thousands of Saskatchewan families, and further, that this Assembly urges the 
government to take immediate positive action to deal with the crisis in agriculture and the need for 
job creation. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join the debate on this motion, and I would like to 
direct my remarks at the outset to the job performance which has caused hardship for thousands, the totally 
inadequate job creation performance which has caused hardship for thousands of Saskatchewan families. 
And I wonder if anyone can doubt whether thousands of Saskatchewan families have been caused hardship 
by their lack of jobs? I think nobody can doubt that. And nobody, I think, fairly can doubt that much of that 
hardship is because of the clearly inadequate performance of the government in creating jobs. Now that 
performance is dismal. The numbers will show that, the figures show it very clearly. 
 
I refer now to non-agricultural jobs, Mr. Speaker. In October 1981 there were 345,000 in Saskatchewan; in 
October 1984 there were 357,000, an increase of 12,000 jobs in three years - 12,000 jobs in three years, a job 
creation rate of about 4,000 jobs a year. Now that is a very low figure historically. During the 1970s the job 
creation record was between 9,000 and 10,000 a year  



 
November 27, 1984 
 

3522 
 

on the average, many years more than that, but certainly no period of three years with a rate of only $4,000 a 
year. So compared with the record of the government which preceded the one which is now in office – 
compared with the New Democratic Party record – this three-year record of job creation has been dismal. 
 
Now let’s compare it, not with what happened elsewhere or else in this province before the government came 
to office, but let’s compare it with what other governments are doing in Canada. And when you do that it is 
dismal. Mr. Speaker, I would be happy to compare it with any province which he likes except Albert and 
Prince Edward Island because, in fact, other than Alberta and Prince Edward Island, the record of this 
government in job creation is the poorest in Canada. 
 
Let’s look at the last three months. I could look at other periods, but I look at the last three months as the 
period for which I have figures readily available. During this period, in Canada the number of new jobs 
created was about 2 per cent above the year before in each of those three months – 2 per cent. In 
Saskatchewan it was about one-half of 1 per cent. And those figures are not my figures. Those are Statistics 
Canada figures, and if anyone doubts them they can look at the StatsCan figures. If there is the slightest 
doubt in the minds of any member, I know he will join this debate and put his figures on the record. 
 
But in August of this year our employment record, our job creating record, was the second worst in Canada, 
second only to Alberta. In September it was the third worst, second only to Alberta and Prince Edward 
Island. Now that is not a stellar record. That is a record of a government which is not bending any effort, 
every effort, to create jobs. 
 
This government says that its priority is job creation. It said that in last year’s throne speech; it said that in 
last year’s budget, this year’s budget as well; it said that after its think-tank in September. Each time it issued 
a statement saying that job creation was its number one priority. Well I think it’s time that we asked whether 
or not the facts justify the rhetoric, and clearly, on the figures, they do not do so. 
 
Sometimes it’s said that our unemployment is due to people coming into the province from outside, and it is 
because this story is sometimes used that I talked about the job creation record, not the unemployment 
record. Clearly, if people are pouring in from outside, we ought to be creating more jobs, rather than less. 
But, in fact, we are only creating jobs at the rate of about 4,000 jobs a year, unlike the record during the 
1970s which was $9,000 or $10,000 a year. 
 
But, in any case, the justification of people pouring into this province and the work-force growing is not true. 
It is not true, and the facts will state that it is not true. In fact, our labour force in Saskatchewan has grown at 
a rate last year, in the last year, which was slower than eight other provinces - slower than eight other 
provinces. This is hardly impressive. We are not having a rapidly growing labour force in Saskatchewan. 
That is simply not the case. Almost every other province has a more rapidly growing labour force than 
Saskatchewan, yet our unemployment keeps going up. With respect to our unemployment figures, they were, 
and these are the latest figures, Mr. Speaker; in October 1981, 18,000; October 1984, 34,000 – almost 
double. And I hope that nobody is saying that those figures aren’t accurate, because they are accurate. 
They’re StatsCan figures, and every month we look at the figures we see that our unemployment rate is very 
nearly double what it was short years ago, three years ago. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let’s forget the statistics for a moment, and let’s look at the real facts that real people face 
each day. I would invite the new job creation minister, the part-time job creation minister to come to my 
constituency of Regina Elphinstone and go up and down the streets of Elphinstone and talk to people there, 
talk to people and ask whether it’s easier or harder to get a job than it was three or four years ago. Just ask 
them. Just ask the people who graduate from Scott Collegiate whether or not they are finding it easier or 
harder to get a job. Just ask the  



 
November 27, 1984 

 

3523 
 

residents of that area of Regina who have graduated from the University of Regina, or the Kelsey Institute, or 
the Wascana Institute, or the STI at Moose Jaw, whether or not they’re finding it easier or harder to get a job. 
Talk to the young man, a young man that I know of great energy and initiative, who hasn’t been able to get a 
job and who started a little construction company – I hardly call it a company; it’s him and one other person, 
he and one other person – who’s building some decks and some steps, the sort of person who would have had 
a job building houses had we been building any houses, but we’ve got a very, very low rate of house 
construction. He is now virtually out of work since October, and he does not lack initiative or enterprise nor 
talent. 
 
Or talk about my neighbour who has been working with the Sears organization for a number of years, and 
she is a part-time worker, and she tells me that she is getting many fewer hours of work than she did years 
ago. She’s still got a job. She still shows up as employed, but she’s not getting the number of hours. She’s 
not getting the income. 
 
And if members opposite have a different experience in their constituency, I congratulate them, but I tell you 
that the experience that I am reciting to this House is all too common in most parts of this province, all too 
common. And these are real facts about real people. 
 
So on the basis of figures, or on the basis of some very human stories, jobs are scarcer. They’re harder to get. 
Many people who would have been working, and in many cases were working three or four years ago, are 
not now working. They want to work, they worked before, and they want to work again. And this 
government is not taking steps which are necessary in order that they may work again. 
 
This government says that it’s making jobs its priority. In fact, it’s making talking about jobs its priority, and 
it’s time that it stopped talking about jobs, and making jobs its priority. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It’s my duty to inform the member his time has expired. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was a little disappointed to hear the NDP opposition this 
afternoon speaking about a rather serious issue. That’s the issue of unemployment. And it was interesting 
that the NDP spoke this afternoon and did not have one suggestion for job creation. What did they talk 
about? What did they talk about? They talked about building highways. They want to build highways. That is 
their suggestion. The NDP say nursing homes, and, in fact, there are more nursing homes being built today 
than any time over the last several years, because the NDP had a moratorium on nursing homes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The NDP say there should be schools. There are schools being built today, more money 
going into education today than at any time in Saskatchewan’s history. 
 
Having said that, even if the NDP would open up their minds to new ideas, new suggestions, perhaps we 
would begin to deal with what I think all people will agree is a very serious problem. I’m disappointed. I’m 
disappointed that the NDP can stand up, Mr. Speaker, and say that the only way to deal with unemployment 
is to pour more government money into government projects. That is their sole solution. 
 
I have to take a look at their convention. And what do they propose? They propose, I believe, a six fifty 
minimum wage which will put a lot of people out of work in the smaller businesses. They talk about going to 
help those small businesses, but they put a rider on: only to those small business that will allow democracy in 
the workplace. In other words – oh, yes, it is a resolution. It has to be that they will have democracy in the 
workplace. In other words, they  



 
November 27, 1984 
 

3524 
 

have to be worker-owned businesses. The hon. member from Pelly disagreed with the NDP’s position on the 
minimum wage. So there’s division in the party. I’m glad to see that. One person disagrees. 
 
However, having said all of that, I also get a little disappointed in the NDP. The NDP stood up this afternoon 
and they say they are against a heavy oil upgrader at Lloydminster. And that’s what the hon. member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg said. He said, “This, the Progressive Conservative government, is helping out an 
Alberta oil company with an upgrader,” like we shouldn’t be helping out Husky Oil. Tommy Douglas sits on 
the board of Husky Oil. Tommy Douglas, former NDP leader, sits on the board of Husky Oil, and this is now 
all of a sudden become a large multinational, a huge oil company that we should not get into business. 
 
Let me tell you that this government is going to encourage and will continue to encourage that upgrader to go 
into Lloydminster whether the NDP like it or not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The NDP stand up and oppose the upgrader in Regina because it’s a give-away to the 
huge oil companies. The NDP say that we shouldn’t have an upgrader in Regina because it’s a give-away to 
the oil companies, and the people of Saskatchewan have heard this from one end to the other. Only the NDP 
in their perverse way of thinking would believe that the Consumers’ Co-op Refinery is a huge multinational 
that no government should get into bed with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — As a matter of act, when we look at approximately 2,500 jobs during construction in the 
city of Regina, the NDP said no, and the NDP wouldn’t even talk to the Consumer’s Co-op Refinery about 
an upgrader in the city of Regina. 
 
So let’s take a look at the job creation record of the NDP. The NDP want to bring back succession duties 
which will hurt the small-business man and put people out of work – another argument at their convention. 
 
The disappointment, as I say, Mr. Speaker, is that the NDP stood up today and gave some of their old 
rhetoric. The NDP are happiest in tough economic times and don’t know what to do. I just sit and I suppose 
on a personal matter, Mr. Speaker, think what we could do in terms of job creation if we had the 
$600-and-some million that was poured into uranium by the NDP. You know, if I had $600 million cash 
right now I think I could guarantee employment for every Saskatchewan citizen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That was an economic decision made by the NDP, and what happened? A terrible 
investment, a terrible investment. Mr. Speaker, as the minister responsible for the new agency and the 
employment development agency, let me indicate what some of the initial thrusts will be. 
 
One, for the first time a government in Saskatchewan is going to go out and consult with the people of 
Saskatchewan as to what they see the opportunities, and how a government can assist, encourage, or help 
them develop the new opportunities. Because every program . . . And I say right now that our government 
has some 26 different job creation programs, 26 different job creation programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the satisfying things to me after appointment as head of the new agency is the fact that 
the people of Saskatchewan are already making suggestions. Engineering firms have  



 
November 27, 1984 

 

3525 
 

come forward with proposals where they see an area of opportunity for Saskatchewan businesses to grow and 
expand, an area of opportunity for export. For the first time people are coming forward, the Christian 
business community, of what they can do in terms of job creation and where they believe they can play a 
role. 
 
That is in no way, Mr. Speaker, to minimize the problem. Saskatchewan proudly says that we have the 
lowest unemployment in Canada. The NDP in Manitoba had one month where they had a lower 
unemployment rate than Saskatchewan, all of a sudden realized that what they were doing was working. 
They threw up their hands, backed away, and up went their unemployment rate again. All of a sudden they 
saw this growth of the private sector and growth of business. It scared the heck out of them in Manitoba, and 
they got the unemployment back up again. 
 
So we do have, Mr. Speaker, we do have some pluses in Saskatchewan, notwithstanding what the NDP say 
in their negative approach. They discourage and criticize the fact that population is up 60,000. And let’s not 
say that those 60,000 are not working, because most of them are working. They say that we should not have 
upgraders, and they’re on record as saying that the thousands of jobs that will be created in the spin-off 
benefits should not be taking place in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The structural problem we have to deal with, and the serious one, is youth unemployment. And it’s 
interesting that a review over the last 10 years in the province of Saskatchewan shows that whatever the 
unemployment level is at any time, at least 40 per cent, and in 1976, 60 per cent of the unemployed were 
young people under the ages of 24. That is a tragedy. 
 
No one has sat back yet, and I say that with all respect to the previous administration, they did not begin to 
look at that fundamental question. Why did the young people even in 1976 when they were 60 per cent of the 
unemployed, drop out of school? Why did they decide at that time that they were not going to go on and take 
the skills and obtain the skills that are necessary for their full and active participation in the Saskatchewan 
economy and the Saskatchewan way of life? That problem, Mr. Speaker, will be one that is a serious one, 
obviously, and it is one that will take a long time to resolve. But when we have 16-year-olds, Mr. Speaker, 
that drop out of school, we had better find out why and we had better begin to try and find ways to encourage 
them to stay in the system, stay in the system. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, we got some criticism for welfare reform form the NDP because we said that 16 and 
17-year-olds should not be able to walk away from home, go down to the nearest welfare office and become 
fully eligible to receive assistance and not worry about their family ties. I suggest that that’s wrong. And I 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, with all respect to the hon. members, when that happens, we do not allow the young 
people, and we are not doing them any favour. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — It is my duty to inform the member that his time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Previous speakers on this motion have dealt with jobs and 
employment. I’d like to deal with the agricultural side of it, if I may. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Tell us how good it is. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — I shall. I shall definitely tell the hon. member how good it is. Now agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker, as we’ve said a number of times, is the main concern of this government. It’s the main engine of 
our ship of state in Saskatchewan. It really is. 
 
The motion introduced by the flying farmer from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg proves to me that he is an aviator 
and not a seaman on this ship of state. It’s very simple. When a fighter plan is hit, the  



 
November 27, 1984 
 

3526 
 

pilot yells, “Bail out,” abandons his aircraft, and floats down gently in his parachute. When a warship takes a 
broadside, the captain yells, “Man the pumps,” and tries to save her. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, our government in this province has taken several broadsides, from the previous Liberal 
administration in Ottawa, from mother nature. We’ve had a mutinous crew that took the form of the NDP 
opposition. Yes, we even had a rat on board. But it’s okay, he left and joined a sinking ship. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve not only manned the pumps and saved our ship, we’ve won a few battles at the 
same time. And that says something for this government. Let’s look at the “immediate positive action to deal 
with the crisis in agriculture,” to quote from the motion that we’ve already put in place. I’ll list some of them 
for the members opposite because they haven’t been listening. They can’t have been listening or they 
wouldn’t have introduced a motion like this. 
 
We identified interest rates as one of the main problems out there. So we introduced our farm purchase 
program to help young farmers get started. It replaced the old land bank program. It was fairly successful. 
Yes, it was. In two and a half years, we’ve got over 3,000 young farmers enrolled in this program that have 
started farming. Compare that to the 151 tenants who became farmers under the land bank system. 
 
Not only that, during the NDP administration, curiously enough we lost almost 10,000 farm family units 
from the statistics map in Saskatchewan – almost 80,000 farmers in 1970, and now there’s less than 70,000. 
Where did those 10,000 go? I ask the hon. opposition, where did they go? Did they just disappear into thin 
air? Curiously enough, you never hear the opposition mention those 10,000 farmers. That’s the NDP record. 
 
The Agricultural Credit Corporation was another item that we introduced. Farmstart was in place; ag credit 
replaced it. We streamlined it and made it reflect the face of agriculture today, the real agriculture today. It’s 
very interesting that their program, you could get support for feeding rabbits but you couldn’t get support for 
feeding cattle. It doesn’t make much sense to me. 
 
The sale of Crown lands- we believe that farmers and the people of Saskatchewan should own their land, not 
a government, not a state. So we introduced a program to help lessees buy their Crown land. That was 
something that the NDP would never have done because they don’t want anyone to own land. 
 
Crop insurance, crop insurance, there’s a good one. The hon. member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
yesterday asked some questions of the minister in charge of crop insurance. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He’s sorry he did. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — I’m certain he’s sorry he did now. And just so that he gets it straight, in case he hasn’t 
taken the time to do his homework, I’d like to point out some of the things that crop insurance is doing and is 
working on to alleviate the problems that we have. Are you listening? Good. Now remember it. 
 
We were accused of being an administration that was slow to act. Crop insurance was accused of being slow 
to respond. Well, I don’t mind you criticizing the elected members of this House, but you were criticizing the 
people who are working out in crop insurance for the farmers of Saskatchewan. You criticized those people 
for the job they were doing. That’s low of you, very low. You accused the minister of doing very little. Well, 
we’ve had an increase in staff of 28 per cent, trying to deal with it. Field persons have gone up 28 per cent. In 
1982 there was 237 field persons; in 1984 we’ve got 290 field persons. We realize there’s a problem out 
there and we’ve  



 
November 27, 1984 

 

3527 
 

met it head-on. We’ve tried to help take care of the bottle-neck in head office by bringing some experienced 
field staff in to deal with the heavy work-load and try to ease the work-load in the processing section. The 
corporation is constantly monitoring the grading station to reduce bottle-necks at that end of it. We’ve had 
more than 75,000 grain samples processed to date. Compare that with 50,000 in 1980, the previous bad year. 
 
I’d like to go on a little further in the amount of claims that have been processed. In 1984, to date – to 
November 19, I should say – there were 17,588 claims processed. In 1980, which was the previous very bad 
year, under your administration there was only 12,224 claims processed. That’s amazing. That’s amazing. 
That’s amazing. The amount of money that has gone out is significant. In 1984 to November 19, there has 
been over $80 million put out there to the people of Saskatchewan. And if that isn’t an answer or some help 
to the immediate problems facing our farmers, I don’t know what is. 
 
Oh, but let’s look at 1980 under your administration. Oh, you only had 43 million out there to them by this 
time. I wonder what was wrong? Were you buying more farm land with the money? You didn’t have it? Or 
what was it – Cornwall Centre? I’m not too sure what you might use the money for. 
 
I could continue with crop insurance and point out all the good features that our minister has introduced, but 
I’d like to go on to some of the other programs that we have. Those aren’t the only four or five. We’ve 
introduced a feeder-to-finish stabilization program. It works in conjunction with the cow-calf-to-finish 
program. We’ve had a lamb assistance program. Our sheep farmers had a problem out there - depressed 
markets, depressed prices; $208,000 has been paid out to those producers to help them over this cost-price 
squeeze. 
 
We’ve got a feed grain and forage listing service in place. We’ve got a pre-conditioned feeder calf program, 
Feeder Associations Guaranty Act, Livestock Investment Tax Credit – and that’s an interesting one. This is 
an innovation that the NDP could never fathom. They believed in grants and give-aways. We believe in 
incentives. And it’s very simple, very simple. You get a tax credit on your provincial tax payable, of $25 for 
every steer or heifer that you feed out; $3 for every hog you feed out; $2 for every lamb that you feed out. 
There’s nothing magical about it. It’s simple and straightforward and you might be right – it’s way too deep 
for them, as the member from Saltcoats says. Would you like me to explain it again just in case it went over 
your head? 
 
An Hon. Member: — The people in his constituency are using it. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — The people in his constituency are using it! Well that’s amazing. I’m glad to hear that. 
 
We had a farm business analysis program put into place. That’s to help people understand why they’re 
keeping books. It’s great to tell a guy, “Keep books and you’ll do fine,” but you have to have somebody to 
help him interpret his results. 
 
Our FarmLab program has been expanded and streamlined. Agricultural research has been enhanced. We got 
irrigation incentives, and in case any of you are interested, there’s even an irrigation manual out there that 
tells you all the programs and all the things you can get to help you. But of course you may never have taken 
the time to go down to your ag rep and find that out. You’re too busy flying your plane. 
 
Our counselling assistance program for farmers has been a success. We’ve dealt with just about 500 people 
that had problems this spring. We’ve worked with them; we’ve outlined the fact that counselling and 
consulting is one of the major problems that farmers have out there. We don’t just believe in throwing money 
at something until the problem goes away. We like to put in some long-term help. 



 
November 27, 1984 
 

3528 
 

Tax relief. The member for Quill Lakes talked about tax relief today. Well we’ve put in the Home Quarter 
Tax Assistance Program. Over $11 million went out to the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Utility benefits. We eliminated the education and health tax on farm use electricity. That’s right in our little 
“Pocket Politics” that the member for Quill Lakes is so fond of holding up. 
 
Flood assistance. We had questions during question period about . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It’s my duty to advise the member his time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I enter this debate with some pleasure because I think the motion 
that my colleague has put forward was a good motion, and one that this government should follow. It’s a 
motion that does indicate just how dismal the record of this government really is in job creation and in 
assistance for farmers. 
 
The member for Qu’Appelle and the member for Kelvington-Wadena made a few comments which I am 
going to address, Mr. Speaker. But I would like to say that the member for Kelvington-Wadena was talking 
about all the good things that this government has provided for the farmers of Saskatchewan, because he 
dealt solely with agriculture. And I say it’s a very good point to be making that agriculture is in trouble and 
we should be doing something for them. But he was talking about the crop insurance program and how much 
they’ve put into the crop insurance program. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, every farmer in this province knows that the only thing this government put into the crop 
insurance program was the administration costs, and that they haven’t done too well with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he talks about the benefits of utility rates. Well I wonder how many farmers out there today feel 
that their utility rates have gone down since this government has been in power. In fact, Mr. Speaker, talking 
to all the farmers out in Saskatchewan – and I can say so for myself too, my power bill in the past month has 
gone up by $50 in a three-month period. Fifty dollars. And that has happened to every farmer in 
Saskatchewan. And that, Mr. Speaker, was not because it turned cold a month ago. That was just an increase 
that was imposed by the government, by the utility review board that they put into place to try and blame 
someone else for increased cost of our utilities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — But the ones that are to blame for it, Mr. Speaker, is not the utility board. It is the 
government sitting across the House. That’s who is to blame for it. 
 
And the farmers are in trouble today because this government has increased all the costs that it had any 
control over to the farmers. It increased everything they could possibly increase. The federal government has 
done the same, and it doesn’t matter whether it’s a Liberal or a Conservative government in Ottawa. They’re 
both the same. And you can tell by the government that policies that the Liberals had – the policies that the 
Conservatives have now – that the same thing is going to continue to happen. People are going to see 
increased costs, less services, and it’s going to be hardships for everyone in this country. 
 
Looking at what – the member says, talk about community pasture rates. Well all you have to do is look at 
some of the newspaper articles that are out there that indicate just what agriculture is facing today, and it says 
“Thousands of farmers in financial bind.” And that’s not, that’s not an indication by the papers alone or by 
some author that nobody is aware of. This comes forward from the Farm Credit Corporation, and I can read 
you just a quote, Mr. Speaker, that the Farm  



 
November 27, 1984 

 

3529 
 

Credit Corporation, what they have to say about it. And it says that: 
 

16 per cent of Saskatchewan farmers were in serious financial condition during an extensive survey 
conducted earlier this year. 
 

That’s the Farm Credit Corporation. They see the problems that are out there. 
 
The National Farmers Union are saying the same thing. The farmers are in trouble. The National Farmers 
Union realizes that. The wheat pools realize the problems the farmers are facing. And, Mr. Speaker, even the 
Palliser Wheat Growers, the friends of this government, are finally realizing that there are problems in 
agriculture. It took them a long time to realize that, but only because they had one year of drought – one 
single year of drought and they finally realized there are hardships there. 
 
They didn’t say much about the north-eastern farmers that had three years of bad crops because of frost, 
because of excessive rain. But now they have one year of drought and they’re finally realizing that hardships 
can hit everyone. 
 
So there are many organizations and many farmers out there, Mr. Speaker, that know that there re difficulties 
in agriculture. Even the banks realize that too. The Farm Credit Corporation says that about 80 per cent of 
the farmers, or one-third of the farmers today are holding 80 per cent of the money that is outstanding – 80 
per cent of that debt, one-third of the farmers – one-third of the farmers that produce about one-half of 
Canada’s food. One-half of Canada’s food production is in trouble this year. And it’s going to be in worse 
trouble if this government doesn’t take some action to correct that. 
 
One can go to another statement from the Farm Credit Corporation which says that out of 39,000 farmers, 
1,700 farmers are expected to go bankrupt in the near future. Seventeen hundred farmers of them are going to 
go bankrupt, and I think that’s been quite evident from some of the actions taken by their friends, the banks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is no wonder that a lot of this is happening. One can understand why it’s happened, because if 
you look at what it costs a farmer to buy fuel 10 years ago – and I’ll just quote you some figures. They’re in 
here in the Union Farmer. If some of the members would take time to look at it, they would know what the 
problems are in rural Saskatchewan. Diesel used to be, 10 years ago, Mr. Speaker, used to run around 30 
cents a gallon. Wheat then was about three fifty a bushel. That could have bought almost 10 gallons of fuel, 
in excess of 10 gallons of fuel at that time, for a bushel of grain. Today, we’ve got wheat at about four and 
one-quarter. What are we looking at per gallon for diesel? A dollar eighty-five, Mr. Speaker. That was the 
price that I got today. A dollar eighty-five, Mr. Speaker, gives you what? About two and one-half, not even 
two and one-half gallons of fuel, and yet the price of wheat hasn’t gone up in proportion to what it costs the 
farmer for inputs. 
 
The same has happened with machinery, with chemicals, fertilizers. Everything has gone up, Mr. Speaker, 
and the farmer is in real trouble today, not because he is inefficient, as some of the members opposite do 
indicate from time to time, that a lot of our farmers should be off the farms because they are unproductive 
and inefficient and they shouldn’t be there. Mr. Speaker, those farmers are productive, they are very 
efficient, and they have proven that because they have been able to produce this grain, half the food 
production of this country. Using credit, they have been producing it at a price that’s way below what their 
inputs have gone up to. They should be getting a lot more for what they produce. But they are efficient, they 
are productive, and they have been able to continue producing. 
 
But how long can that continue, Mr. Speaker? How long can we expect our farmers to continue producing 
food for this country at a cost that’s almost below the cost of their production? How long can we expect these 
farmers to continue? 



 
November 27, 1984 
 

3530 
 

I think it’s time for both federal and provincial governments to realize the situation that agriculture is facing. 
It is time that they realized that something has to be done to assist agriculture and, in turn assist business 
people and create employment, and make sure that there is a supply of food for the people of this world. 
That’s what these governments should be addressing themselves to. But they aren’t. They can find $300 
million for oil companies, but they only find about $7 million to produce farmers that were hit by drought in 
north-eastern Saskatchewan. They promised 20, but they only found 7 million. But there is $300 million for 
oil companies. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think our priorities have to change. They have to change because we cannot eat oil, and 
the oil companies have never had a loss, but the farmers have. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I just inform the member that his time has elapsed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome the opportunity to be involved in this very 
important debate on an issue which is of importance to all Canadians and certainly people in Saskatchewan. I 
would like to quote the resolution, at least the first part of it, and it says the following: 
 

That this Assembly regrets this government’s totally inadequate job creation performance . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I regret this afternoon is that the members opposite, in approximately the hour and 15 
minutes that we have been debating so far, have not come up with one constructive, specific, 
forward-looking, innovative proposal to deal with job creation in the province of Saskatchewan. Not one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the resolution talks about a totally inadequate job creation performance for the province of 
Saskatchewan, and I want to ask the question to the members of the Assembly this afternoon: what would it 
be like to live in a province which had a totally inadequate job creation record? What would that province be 
like, Mr. Speaker? And I would suggest the following. 
 
I would suggest that the population in that province would be decreasing. People would be leaving that 
province because there weren’t opportunities for them and for their children. They would be seeking 
opportunities elsewhere. The population would not be increasing; the province would be decreasing. And I 
would remind the members of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that that’s exactly what took place in 
Saskatchewan in the early 1970s when the NDP took over. The population of this province went down. The 
people of Saskatchewan left because there were not job opportunities for them here. 
 
Today, just the opposite is in place, Mr. Speaker. The population is increasing and it is increasing 
substantially, Mr. Speaker – thousands upon thousands of new people, here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Why? Because of the job creation record of this particular government. Here’s where the opportunity is, and 
I believe we can all be proud of that, Mr. Speaker, the population would not only be increasing, the labour 
force itself would be increasing, and that’s what the statistics bear our, contrary to what the Leader of the 
Opposition had to say. Our labour force is increasing significantly. 
 
Perhaps the most important criterion, Mr. Speaker, that we should look at, is the unemployment rate. If this 
province had a totally inadequate job creation record, Mr. Speaker, then we would expect that the 
unemployment rate in the province of Saskatchewan would certainly not be the best. And I want to bring 
some statistics to your attention that the members opposite have ignored. 
 
In the province of Quebec, which has the fifth lowest unemployment rate, their rate is 12.8 per  



 
November 27, 1984 

 

3531 
 

cent, Mr. Speaker; Ontario – the bedrock of Canada – Ontario, 8.9 per cent unemployment; Alberta, 11.8 per 
cent unemployment. Here is Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, our unemployment rate dropped .6 of a percentage 
point last month, the largest single drop. September to October, since 1944 here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Today our unemployment rate is the lowest in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Seven point nine per cent. The Canadian average is 11.3 per cent. Now I ask the 
members of the Assembly: if the population is increasing, if the labour force is increasing, and if our 
unemployment rate is consistently the lowest in Canada, would anyone, Mr. Speaker, would anyone want to 
conclude that this particular province had an inadequate or even a partially inadequate job creation record? 
On the contrary, Mr. Speaker, I think that taking a look at those statistics that I have just quoted, that people 
of common sense and sound mind and rational thought would conclude nothing else but that this province is 
leading the way in Canada as far as its job creation record, and as far as the opportunities for employment in 
the country of Canada today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Minister of Social Services, I am of course concerned about those people that are on welfare, 
those people that might not have the opportunities that others have, for one reason or another. And I am 
pleased to tell the Assembly today that in 1984, during the last six months, the welfare rolls here in the 
province of Saskatchewan decreased 2,380 cases, the second largest drop in the welfare rolls in the last six 
years in the province of Saskatchewan. And one of the reasons why that drop took place, Mr. Speaker, is 
because we are paying attention to the employment needs of welfare clients, through our training programs, 
through our education opportunities, and through our direct job creation efforts. 
 
A good example is our Saskatchewan Employment Development Program, which this year created 1,532 
jobs. And I would want to quote to you, and to the members of the Assembly this afternoon, a letter that I 
received from the town administrator of the town of Radisson, which talks about the Saskatchewan 
Employment Development Program. And he says the following: 
 

On behalf of council, I want to convey to you and your government our appreciation for your 
approval of a project for the town of Radisson under the above-mentioned program. The approval 
will allow us to employ four persons for 26 weeks on designated community projects, which 
promises to benefit not only the employees and their families, but also the Radisson community, and 
we don’t mind admitting hat we do need the help. (And we, as a government, certainly want to 
provide that help.) We have always advocated a continuing annual summer program for those 
persons who are eager to work but unfortunately find themselves at the mercy of government 
assistance. We truly are in sympathy with these people. We want to compliment your government for 
supporting such a program. Please accept our very good wishes for your government’s continued 
good fortunes. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that is an example of one of the programs of this government that are directed specifically to 
job creation for welfare clients. 
 
We could talk about the opportunities in my colleague’s Department of Advanced Education and Manpower. 
There, Mr. Speaker, this year alone, a total of 6,132 jobs were created for a variety of people in the province 
of Saskatchewan. When you take the 1,500 in Social Services, the 6,100 in the Department of Advanced 
Education and Manpower; when you take the capital construction projects, whether it be the Nipawin power 
project, or the rural natural gas program for farmers; or whether you take the nursing home construction 
projects that the Attorney General talked about previously, clearly this government takes very seriously its 
responsibility to provide direct job creation benefits to the people of Saskatchewan in the order of millions 
and millions of dollars’ worth of job creation projects. 



 
November 27, 1984 
 

3532 
 

But, Mr. Speaker, if that’s all we did, we would be extremely derelict in our responsibilities as a government. 
I would suggest if that’s all that was done, that would be the NDP approach – direct job creation. And that’s 
all they advocate, if you listen closely. But more important, Mr. Speaker, than direct job creation, is the 
attitude of this government towards business, and particularly towards small business. I believe that people in 
Canada and in Saskatchewan agree with this government when we say that permanent, long-term job 
creation is not the result of direct government intervention. On the contrary, Mr. Speaker, it’s the result of 
business, and in particular, small business creating long-term permanent jobs. That’s where the activity is 
going to take place. We believe that very strongly, and that’s what we support, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we 
introduced our Department of Tourism and Small Business. And that'’ why we introduced the Department of 
Economic Development and Trade, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we introduced the Department of Science and 
Technology – three departments that are not going to work against the small-business man as the former 
government did, but three departments that are going to work with the business community in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — And what are the results, Mr. Speaker, of this particular approach to job creation that I 
have just talked about? Well the best example, Mr. Speaker, that we can talk about, you find in the oil patch 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. Never before in the history of Saskatchewan is there so much oil and 
gas well drilling and in spin-off activity as there is today. And it’s the result of a Progressive Conservative 
government taking those kinds of innovative steps that should have been taken a long time ago, but the 
former government chose not to do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whether it’s the oil patch, whether it’s the upgraders which are coming – and people are 
looking forward to those with great anticipating, knowing that they are going to inject literally hundreds of 
millions of dollars into the province of Saskatchewan; whether it’s the fact that the Prime Minister of Canada 
has designated Saskatchewan, in particular the capital city of Regina . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — It’s my duty to inform the member his time has expired. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to participate in this debate, Mr. Speaker, in a debate 
following the motion presented by my colleague, the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. The motion 
before us, Mr. Speaker, is simple. It calls the PC government to recognize that its job creation record has 
been poor. It calls on the PC government to finally take some positive, concrete steps to provide jobs for 
Saskatchewan people – to provide jobs, Mr. Speaker, to provide the opportunity for their secure, long-term 
future; to provide hope. 
 
We all know, Mr. Speaker, how Premier Devine and his PC members like to talk about jobs. They like to talk 
about their record, and they like to talk about their programs and their policies. But, Mr. Speaker, the people 
of northern Saskatchewan have had enough of those empty promises, empty discussions, etc. They’re fed up 
with the PC government’s neglect and abandonment for the people in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, my constituents throughout the North, in places like Sturgeon landing, Kinoosao, 
Wollaston Lake, Pelican Narrows, Deschambault, etc., La Ronge, have urged me to invite Grant Devine, the 
Premier of this province, to come out of his office, come out of hiding and to meet with northern people in 
the top half of this province. They have urged me to urge the Premier and his colleagues, cabinet members, 
to visit the northern communities and to see for themselves where unemployment levels are simply uncalled 
for. We have communities with unemployment as high as 90 to 95 per cent, where there is nothing but 
welfare dependencies, where we have social problems, a high incidence of suicides, alcoholism, etc. 



 
November 27, 1984 

 

3533 
 

 
We invite the Premier and cabinet members of the Conservative government to visit northern families, and 
also not simply to talk at them, but also to listen to the northern people, Mr. Speaker, to listen to northern 
families who want to work, who need work, who are prepared to move to a job, if only there were any jobs 
available. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my constituents, on behalf of the residents of the Cumberland 
constituency, I issue this open invitation to Premier Devine. Come up north and listen. Come up north and 
see for yourselves the desperate situation of communities that have no jobs, of communities and people with 
no jobs, and families without hope. 
 
I noticed today, Mr. Speaker, that in this debate none of the PC members are telling us that they have made 
Saskatchewan open for big business. They are not telling us that their open-for-business policies are a 
success. I suppose the reason for this, Mr. Speaker, is that they are not a success. Those policies have been a 
complete and total failure as far as the top half of this province is concerned. 
 
Since this government took office, Mr. Speaker, there are not more businesses open in the North, there are 
fewer. There are not more native Northerners in business in La Ronge, but actually very fewer. There are not 
more businesses in P.A., but fewer. 
 
Now it is certainly true, Mr. Speaker, that the Devine government’s open for big business policies have 
produced some profitable benefits for banks, for bond dealers, for big oil companies, and for the Hudson’s 
Bay Mining and Smelting Corporation. But I say to you, Mr. Speaker, there are certainly no benefits for 
Saskatchewan small businesses and farmers, no benefits for Saskatchewan people who so desperately want 
to work, who need to work, and who want to work. And while I know that this PC unemployment crisis is 
severe all across southern Saskatchewan, in Regina, Saskatoon, P.A., and smaller rural centres, I submit to 
you, Mr. Speaker, that nowhere is the job crisis more severe than it is in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
When this PC government was first elected two and one-half years ago, Mr. Speaker, my constituents in the 
North expected the worst and, unfortunately, that is exactly what they’ve got, that is exactly what we’ve got, 
a deliberate and steady set of PC government measures and policies which have weakened and threatened 
northern communities, which have halted economic activity in northern Saskatchewan – policies and 
measures which have cut back on people, PC policies which have undermined the dignity of northern people, 
which have undermined the hope of northern young people. 
 
My constituents, Mr. Speaker, know that it doesn’t have to be this way. The PC attack, neglect, and 
abandonment of the North is not the only way, and that is why they want Premier Devine to come into 
northern Saskatchewan and stop talking for a change, but to listen, because there is another way. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I support this motion put forward today by my colleague and I urge the government to 
recognize the social and economic hardship and pressures which exist for the people in northern 
Saskatchewan. I urge the government to do the following: recognize the desperate situation confronting the 
northern peoples. 
 
I urge the government to listen to their concerns, the concerns of their children, their future, and their 
communities. I urge the government to respect the dignity of northern people. I urge this government to 
respect their traditional relationships to each other, to the land, and to the natural resources around them. I 
urge this government to develop a concrete, positive set of measures for social and economic development 
for the North, and I urge this government to do that in consultation with northern people themselves. And 
finally, Mr. Speaker, I urge this government to stop talking about job creation, and I urge this government to 
come up with some concrete action to help alleviate the high disparities confronting northern peoples. 



 
November 27, 1984 
 

3534 
 

I will, therefore, Mr. Speaker, conclude my remarks today by urging all members to join me in support of the 
main motion as originally put forward by my colleague from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Basically what we have here, Mr. Speaker, is an NDP opposition charging that this 
government is not performing well in the areas of job creation and in agriculture. The Minister of Justice, the 
Minister of Social Services have proven the government’s case that we are number one in Canada in job 
creation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of agriculture, the member for Kelvington-Wadena laid out a number of programs that 
we are conducting now under the Department of Agriculture. He listed them all off. So one has to assume 
that this motion would never have hit the floor if, in fact, the members in the opposition, an NDP opposition, 
had been well advised, if they had been informed, had read the material that’s available to them, as it’s 
available to all other members. I was rather impressed with the long list of programs, the achievements that 
this government has already embarked on, has concluded a number of, that was listed by the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, rather than going through all of those again, I am going to just ask one of the pages to come 
over, if they would please, because I want to send across the House for the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg a whole series of pamphlets and brochures, plans and publications. It’s all here. If 
the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg will believe this, I thank you very much. The member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, if you wouldn’t mind reading all of that information, you will be so impressed with 
the Department of Agriculture, this government’s record in agriculture, that you’ll want to join this side of 
the House, Mr. Member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Now then there’s some very important things that have to be said and I realize my time is 
short, but I do want to draw to the attention of the House two resolutions that the NDP have as a result of 
their convention. One is support of one of those programs that you’ll come across, Mr. Member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg: long-term, low-interest rates for the beginning and developing family farms. We 
had that in place, and your convention has supported it. If there’s one other . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It’s my duty to inform the Assembly that the 75 minutes allotted for this 
topic have elapsed. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 24 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — To speak to item number 7, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The question was stood by the member who has put the motion on the floor. There is no 
opportunity at this time to speak to it. 
 

PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 



 
November 27, 1984 

 

3535 
 

Resolution No. 12 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I would like to speak to resolution number 7, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The opportunity is not there, I’m sorry. This particular motion was stood by the 
government. If the member wishes to speak, if he’s objecting to it, we’ll vote on it to see whether the motion 
should continue or not. Is that your intent? 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — That’s my intent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — All right. The question before the Assembly is the standing of Motion No. 7. The motion 
stands . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Order, please. When the House is moving down the order paper and 
members here at the table or I are on our feet, there is supposed to be silence in the Chamber. 
 

Resolution No. 13 
 

Mr. Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is whether or not we can stand Motion No. 9. The 
motion stands. 
 

Resolution No. 20 
 

Mr. Sveinson: — I’d like to speak to item number 10. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the standing of Motion No. 10. The resolution stands. 
 

Resolution No. 23 
 

Mr. Sveinson: — I’d like to have the opportunity to speak to that motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the standing of Resolution No. 11. Resolution No. 11 
stands. 
 

Resolution No. 14 
 

Mr. Sveinson: — I’d like to speak to Item No. 12, Resolution 14. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the standing of Resolution No. 12. Resolution No 12, 
stand. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 30 – An Act respecting the Protection of Farm Property 
 

Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity today to speak in support of 
Bill 30. This Bill was introduced for first reading about seven months ago. And it addresses clearly, Mr. 
Speaker, as I’ve said earlier today, the number one issue in Saskatchewan, the severe financial crisis facing 
family farms across our entire province. This Bill is long overdue. As I said earlier today, in the last two 
weeks we’ve lost more than a dozen farmers. We’re losing 50 farmers a month, Mr. Speaker, every day and 
every month that we wait to introduce this kind of legislation. And I invite the government opposite, I invite 
the members opposite to note that they have deliberately and repeatedly kept this Bill from coming forward 
since its introduction seven months ago. 



 
November 27, 1984 
 

3536 
 

The Bill that was introduced seven months ago, Mr. Speaker, was a major plank in what we then called an 
emergency farm assistance program. That was last spring, Mr. Speaker, when everybody in rural 
Saskatchewan, everybody except the Devine government, knew that there was an urgent and growing crisis 
in agriculture. Today I listened to the member from Kelvington-Wadena talk about the wonderful things this 
government is doing in trying to say that there isn’t an agriculture crisis. I say to the member, “wake up.” I 
said, wake up, it’s time you acknowledge that there is a problem. There’s a problem out there. They wouldn’t 
even debate this Bill, Mr. Speaker. They would not even consider the several legislative and final 
components of an emergency family farm assistance plan. When asked about this Bill, Mr. Speaker, how did 
they explain their delay and their inaction? How did they explain it? 
 
First, like I said earlier, they claimed the problem wasn’t serious. The Minister of Agriculture said that 
compared to the rest of Canada, things could be a lot worse in Saskatchewan. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, in 
the last seven months things have gotten an awful lot worse with the management, with the programs this 
government has introduced. Things have gotten an awful lot worse in the last seven months. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the Devine government refused to address this Bill because they claimed that 
pressing farm – increasing foreclosures and high level of bankruptcies are not a serious problem yet. They’re 
not a serious problem yet. But the real reason that this Bill wasn’t acted on, and the real reason why the 
government opposite refused to act, was revealed quite clearly by the Minister of Agriculture, the doctor for 
Weyburn, when he said, “It is our policy to shore up success.” Do you remember when you said those 
words? You’re going to shore up success. That’s why they didn’t need an emergency farm protection Bill. 
That’s why they didn’t need a Bill respecting the protection of farm property, and we certainly know what 
they meant by their policy of shoring up success. They were turning their backs on the thousands of family 
farmers under severe financial pressure. They were turning their backs on the thousands of the most 
productive family farms caught in the vicious cost-price squeeze. They turned their backs on the tens of 
thousands of farmers suffering under higher grain freight rates paid to the CPR, higher utility rates, higher 
property taxes, and higher interest rates added on to higher fuel costs. They turned their backs on the 
hundreds of family farmers who, just this year alone, have experienced the heartbreak of foreclosure. That’s 
their policy. Turn you back on it, don’t look at these family farms of Saskatchewan. 
 
And you move in the direction of shoring up success. Well, we certainly know who’s been successful under 
your government, Mr. Deputy Leader. We know who’s been successful. The chartered banks – record 
profits, and, in fact, are the most profitable in the world, the banks here in Canada. The CPR is successful – 
the CPR is successful, which has increased its profits two and one-half times over the last year’s level, and 
its profits are up because of higher grain freight rates. 
 
Shoring up success, the minister says. And others are pretty successful under the PC policies, too. Big 
corporations whose profits are reported to be up 33 per cent over last year, big oil companies who have 
received more than $300 million from this government, Manalta Coal of Alberta which . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The Bill that we’re debating is Bill No. 30, An Act respecting the Protection 
of Farm Property, and I fail to see the relation between Manalta Coal and the big oil companies to the subject 
under discussion. I would ask the member to stay with the subject discussed. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, the point I was trying to make is that this government is ignoring the grave 
situation facing our family farms. They’re ignoring this because they have their spending priorities 
elsewhere, and they don’t have money to take care of the farmers. If we’d have the money, the $800 million 
that was spent in the few examples I listed, if we’d had that money we wouldn’t need this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
There would be no need of a Bill to protect family farms if  



 
November 27, 1984 

 

3537 
 

the farmers would have the $800 million that was given to these companies. If I can’t list the companies that 
were shored up, I will say that the money that was spent on the companies that were shoed up could have 
been implemented in farm programs if you’d have taken my advice this spring. 
 
I gave you a five-point program to shore up the farmers, not shore up the successful business men. And what 
did you do? You laughed at it, and you treated it with scorn, and you turned your back on it. At least some of 
them will know, some of the members opposite will know of the thousands of grain farmers hit hard by the 
drought this summer, those who haven’t received a dime in emergency assistance from the Devine 
government. Not one dime has gone out to drought-stricken farmers. Some of them, Mr. Speaker, will know 
the frustration and desperation of hard-hit crop insurance claims, still waiting for their money from July – 
still waiting, bitterly frustrated by the weak, inefficient minister of crop insurance. 
 
And at least some of them, Mr. Speaker, will know that every month they have delayed, every month that 
they have promised action, every month that they have talked about action, Mr. Speaker, another 50 farmers 
have gone down the tubes. And you can sit by and twiddle your thumbs. You can sit by and twiddle your 
thumbs. Not since the last time Saskatchewan suffered under Conservative government, Mr. Speaker, not 
since the Depression of the ‘30s has there been such widespread and such alarming crisis in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some members opposite will remember, Mr. Speaker, that under the policies of the Liberal government in 
Ottawa and the Thatcher government in Saskatchewan, our farmers were in serious trouble in the early ‘70s – 
in 1970 and early ’71. For many of them at that time, foreclosure was a very, very real and pressing threat – 
1970. That is why, Mr. Speaker, we, immediately after the general election in 1971, the Democrats passed an 
effective farm family, family farm protection Act. It was in place for one year and it worked, Mr. Minister. 
That family farm protection Act solved the foreclosure problem, solved the higher interest costs, solved the 
court costs that would be faced by many people. And that Act worked. And that’s why we were so anxious to 
see that Act introduced today. 
 
That is the Act which has served as a model for this Bill that’s before us – Bill 30, the family farm protection 
Act of 1984. The central provision and thrust of this Bill is clear and simple, Mr. Speaker. The Bill will give 
a breathing space. If it would have been introduced in April like we had hoped, it would have given 18 
months. But it will still relieve the immediate pressure of foreclosure on family farms till they get a chance to 
get another crop next October. 
 
Essentially it says that all foreclosure action on farm land, on livestock or machinery, until next fall – until 
October the 31st, 1985 – until farmers have gotten their next crop off. 
 
I know there will be objections to this Bill, Mr. Speaker – strong objections from the big eastern banks and 
their friends in the Devine government. But before they speak up too loud in objection, Mr. Speaker, let them 
first acknowledge publicly, here in this Legislative Assembly, the close corporate and financial ties that bind 
the PC party to the chartered banks. 
 
In 1983, Mr. Speaker, $25,000 in direct financial contribution came to the PC party of Saskatchewan from 
the big banks - $25,000. That’s why they don’t want to move on this Bill. And in the same year, their further 
direct contribution went to the PC Party of Canada, not of $25,000. How much was it, Mr. House Leader? 
$180,000 - $180,000 from the chartered banks to tell this government, “Look boys, keep your hands out of 
the financial picture. Let us have our own way.” That’s what they’re telling them. That’s why you won’t 
move on this Bill. In 1983 the big banks and the bond dealers and other financial institutions directly 
contributed another $36,000 to the PC Party of Saskatchewan, and you wonder why you didn’t move on this 
Bill for seven months. That’s why you didn’t do it. 
 
I realize that some of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, may not be willing to reveal all the  



 
November 27, 1984 
 

3538 
 

details of these contributions to their constituents, or to the people of Saskatchewan, but I’m pleased to make 
them available to anyone that requests them. I am pleased to make them available. And so, Mr. Speaker, 
before the members opposite complain too loudly about this Bill, before they try to delay it still further, I 
simply invite them to do this: number one, acknowledge that you have deliberately delayed this Bill for 
seven months. Acknowledge you’ve deliberately been delaying it by saying it’s clearly unnecessary. 
 
Number two, acknowledge that similar legislation has worked effectively in Saskatchewan before. 
Acknowledge that. And number three, at least acknowledge publicly here in the legislature the details of the 
direct financial contributions from the chartered banks to your party and to the PC Party of Canada. 
 
Let me turn to the broader policy context of this family farm protection Act. It is obvious to us all, Mr. 
Speaker, that this Bill by itself will not address or fully meet the farm financial crisis that is so urgent across 
rural Saskatchewan. This Bill will not stand alone. That can be done not by a single Bill, but only by a broad 
comprehensive policy implemented by a government that cares for farmers, similar to the emergency plan I 
announced last spring. 
 
Unfortunately, the Devine government did not take the problem seriously then, and it failed to act thus far. 
And it’s failed to act on any of the program suggestions we make. But the farmers of Saskatchewan have 
waited long enough for this government. Indeed, they have waited fair too long. The time for talk is past. It’s 
now time to act. I therefore urge the PC members opposite to implement immediately and without delay a 
comprehensive and positive set of measures to address and deal with the urgent crisis across Saskatchewan 
agriculture, firstly by supporting the passage of this Bill to provide a breathing space till some of the other 
measures become in effect. If we pass this Bill, then an effective debt adjustment mechanism would work to 
ensure that the losses are shared equitably, to ensure that viable and productive farmers are not crushed by a 
huge debt burden, and to ensure that the big eastern banks do not continue to profit from Saskatchewan’s 
misfortunes. 
 
Number three, an acreage payment – an immediate financial assistance plan of about $150 million from this 
provincial government to the most severely pressed family farmers. Hundreds of millions of dollars were 
found, as I’ve said in the past, in loan guarantees for all kinds of Alberta companies. Hundreds of millions of 
dollars were found. But yet they haven’t found one dime for stricken grain producers. 
 
Number four, expand and equip the farm operating loan guarantee program. If we had this Bill in place and 
an effective loan guarantee program were in place – one that the chartered banks and the financial 
institutions wouldn’t laugh at like they do at your program you’ve got now – if you’d have an effective 
program in place, then this Bill would work. Then this Bill would work. If you’d implemented tax rebate on 
farm fuel of 32 cents a gallon – a substantial rebate, not a measly one that was announced in Ottawa – if 
you’d substantially reduced the property tax paid by farmers, if you would put pressure on the PC 
government in Ottawa to deliver on its many promises to Saskatchewan farmers, then this Bill would work. 
Then this Bill would become a cornerstone that would save hundreds and thousands of farmers in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Devine government should immediately call on the Mulroney government to honour its campaign 
promises – promises like the $500 million that was promised to be paid out in the Western Grains 
Stabilization Fund; promises to eliminate the capital gains tax on farms; promises to introduce Agribonds; 
promise to reduce farm credit interest rates and repeal the Western Grain Transportation Act. That’s the big 
one that really hurts. Every bush of wheat you haul, you know you’re contributing to the profits of the CPR. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, that’s what I call this government, and that’s what I urge this government to call on the 
federal government to do. And now, herein Saskatchewan, support and pass this Bill today. Support and pass 
this Bill today. And then address the financial crisis in Saskatchewan by  



 
November 27, 1984 

 

3539 
 

immediately introducing a comprehensive and positive sets of measures to address the crisis that farmers are 
facing. 
 
The time for talk, Mr. Speaker, is past. Let’s have no more Devine dithering. It’s time for this government 
which has talked and delayed and delay and talked – it’s now time for this government to put up. 
 
In conclusion, on behalf of the farm families of Saskatchewan, on behalf of the hundreds of rural 
communities right across our province, on behalf of the thousands of small Saskatchewan businessmen 
which are suffering no less than the farmers because of the farm crisis; on behalf of a generation of 
Saskatchewan young people whose future we are obliged to secure, not by a bunch of printed rubbish, not be 
a bunch of printed material that isn’t worth the paper it was written on. If you’d give one farmer the cheque 
for that reproduction, he could stay in farming, but you tell him to read that. FarmLab was around before you 
guys thought of getting into politics. FarmLab was around before you thought of getting into the 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say it’s simply time to put up or shut up. It’s time to act. It’s time to support this Bill and pass 
it today. Thank you. 
 
I move second reading of Bill No. 30, An Act respecting the Protection of Farm Property. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would just make a few comments on Bill No. 30, An 
Act respecting the Protection of Farm Property. In listening to the hon. member speak, I am a little bit 
confused insofar as where he is really coming from in terms of addressing the farm problem out there. When 
this Bill was placed before the Assembly last spring, at that time it was part of a six-point program. Then this 
fall, I see in the news media that he’s advocating a four-point program. Today, he advocates this as part of a 
five-point program, and so I have to wonder, tomorrow what will it be? 
 
The issue is a very important one in Saskatchewan, a very important issue. It is an issue that can affect not 
only farmers, but virtually the entire farm community out there. The farmer himself, of course, the 
implement dealer, the chemical dealer, the fertilizer dealer, the federated co-ops, that whole farm service 
sector. And I would just have to wonder if, in fact, the member has done his homework in terms of 
developing this Bill, and has he really talked to that very other large part of the farm community out there. 
 
It’s my view that this position is so important, Mr. Speaker, so important that I would want to, in fact, not 
only review what he has said, but as well, his analysis leading up to what he has presented, and at this point 
in time, Mr. Speaker, I would beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The minister had asked for leave to adjourn debate. Is leave granted? 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas – 46 
 
Muller Dutchak Rybchuk 
Birkbeck Embury Caswell 
McLeod Dirks Hampton 
Andrew Maxwell Gerich 
Berntson Young Boutin 
Lane Domotor Schmidt 
Taylor Muirhead Tusa 
Katzman Petersen Meagher 
McLaren Bacon Glauser 
 



 
November 27, 1984 
 

3540 
 

 
Garner Sutor Sauder 
Smith (Swift Current) Hodgins Zazelenchuk 
Baker Parker Johnson 
Hepworth Smith (Moose Jaw South) Martens 
Duncan Hopfner Weiman 
Currie Myers Morin 
Sandberg   
 

Nays — 7 
 
Blakeney Koskie Yew 
Engel Lusney Sveinson 
Lingenfelter   
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 105 – An Act to amend the Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have introduced and today I’m moving second reading of an 
Act to amend the Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act. 
 
This legislation will deal with the authority of this Assembly to regulate its own members. Specific powers 
and privileges necessary for the legislature to function, to protect its authority and its dignity are set out in 
The Legislative Assembly Act. But nowhere does that Act lay claim to all of the privileges that are 
exercisable. The power to expel does not specifically include the right to expel a member who is convicted 
and imprisoned for a criminal offence. Such a power is perhaps inherent in section 30. However, I am 
advised that there is a weakness in this power in that there is a lack of statutory authority for expulsion, 
particularly when many other powers have been legislated in The Legislative Assembly Act. This legislation 
will ensure, for certain purposes, that this legislature has these powers. 
 
There has been a question as to the applicability of section 682 of the Criminal Code in the circumstances 
that have brought this legislation forward. However, there is a legal difference of opinion, and because there 
are questions, it is the government’s view that the legislation should be amended to give certainty in some 
circumstances described in the legislation. 
 
Precedents from many jurisdictions reveal that where imprisonment renders a member incapable of carrying 
out his legislative functions, expulsion is justifiable. And I am taking the liberty, Mr. Speaker, of quoting 
from a paper prepared by the Clerk’s office, and I believe it’s been submitted to representatives of all parties. 
 

If it is desirable to expel a member on the grounds that the person has been convicted of a criminal 
offence and imprisoned, then the analysis indicates that the best way to implement this policy is by 
amending The Legislative Assembly Act and to create a standing disqualification from being a 
member. 
 

Even the United Kingdom House of Commons which hold all powers possible for a legislature to exercise, 
under the heading of privilege, has chosen since 1870 to impose a statutory  



 
November 27, 1984 

 

3541 
 

disqualification on members convicted of an offence and imprisoned. 
 
The circumstances that led up to the need for this legislation have been described as tragedy. I believe that all 
of us feel that the career of a man with talent has ended, a life has been lost, and families hurt and torn apart. 
But this legislature must act to maintain its dignity, and to maintain its stature in the eyes of the people of 
Saskatchewan. I move second reading of Bill 105. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want at this time to make a few remarks in respect to the 
comments made by the Minister of Justice. I think all of us here must look at this Bill, not just in light of the 
matter of dealing with the matter before us, the status of the member from Thunder Creek, but in the 
knowledge that this is legislation which is being put forward, that it could, indeed, be the law for decades to 
come. 
 
I think we have to review this law with care and a lot of thought. I say that because how often should this 
Assembly expect to have to deal with the expulsion of one of its members due to a conviction of a very 
serious criminal charge? I say, Mr. Speaker, history tells us not very often. In the 79-year history of the 
Saskatchewan legislature, this is the only time that such an action has been proposed due to a criminal charge 
conviction. The other expulsion that was in 1917, Mr. Speaker, did not deal with a criminal conviction. 
 
Having said that, I want to indicate that certainly we, as legislators, must in fact take upon ourselves the duty 
of regulating the affairs of this legislature. I think it is our duty to maintain the integrity of this House and, 
certainly, all of us will join in doing that. The major question is: how do we do that within the framework of 
the existing judicial system? 
 
I think that we have an opportunity to maintain the integrity of the House, and when one looks at the basic 
principles as being enunciated by the government opposite, we find that, first of all, it’s in respect to a 
criminal conviction, an indictable offence, sentenced for two years or more. But the principle that is of 
concern to us is that the action can be taken to expel a member, or vacate a seat, even before the entire 
judicial avenues of appeal are, in fact, exhausted. 
 
I think the second principle that we draw attention to is the right within the framework established in the 
legislation saying or indicating that once, indeed, a member has been thrown out of the Assembly and their 
seat vacated. But the legislation and the principle indicates it goes a step further, and indicates that such a 
person is ineligible to run for re-election for the rest of that legislature’s term, even if their appeal is 
successful and their conviction is overturned. 
 
In other words, even if they are eventually found to have been innocent of the charge, they’re not allowed to 
seek re-election prior to the next general election, which could end up being a number of years. 
 
I can give you a “for instance” in respect to the principle that is being brought forward. Let us illustrate the 
point in respect to the member from Thunder Creek and his particular case. The Conservative government 
passes the law today, as it is set out, the general principles that it has espoused. It can introduce a resolution 
declaring the seat of Thunder Creek vacant, even though the member is appealing the conviction. 
 
Suppose, for argument’s sake, that the Premier were to call a by-election for the Thunder Creek constituency, 
say, on February 25th of next year. And suppose that prior to that date the member of Thunder Creek appeal 
is heard and is successful, and his conviction is overturned. Under this law, under these principles, the 
member from Thunder Creek would not be allowed to run in that by-election. 
 
I think that we have a duty here to maintain the integrity of the legislature, and I want to indicate that this has 
been taken under advisement in other jurisdictions. Recently, only two or three years ago, in the Manitoba 
legislature, an elected representative, Mr. Robert Wilson, member of  



 
November 27, 1984 
 

3542 
 

the Tory party in Manitoba, was convicted of trafficking in drugs. The legislature at that time took the action 
of suspending the rights of that member. 
 
By doing that, and that is what we were saying here that the government, the principle that we should be 
establishing is to maintain our integrity, is that this House should be allowed to suspend a member with the 
particular circumstances that we face today. That member should, I think, be suspended. The privileges of 
that member should be suspended. He should not be able to sit in this House or speak in this House. Any of 
the income or salary of that member should be suspended. All of the prerogatives and privileges of that 
member should be suspended. But we are firmly convinced that the judicial process should be, indeed, 
allowed to proceed with. 
 
And here today what we see is not the government adopting a thought-out procedure which was set in place 
in the Manitoba legislature, which clearly what it does, is do is what we think that the principle that should 
be established here in this legislature. We feel that just as in the Manitoba legislature, and I want to draw all 
members to the attention of how it was dealt with in that circumstance, it says: 
 

That where a member convicted of an indictable offence, for which he is sentenced to imprisonment 
for a term of five years or more, he is ineligible to sit or vote as a member. 
 

And it goes on: 
 

If on the expiry of a time allowed for bringing in an appeal of a conviction, or of any decision of the 
court upholding the conviction, in an appeal of the conviction, he has not commenced an appeal of 
the conviction or of that decision, as the case may be; or 
 
(d) If on an appeal of conviction, or a decision upholding the conviction, to a court from which there 
is no further appeal, the court upholds the conviction, the member is disqualified as a member of a 
seat, and his seat is vacated. 
 

I think that that is the principle that we should be establishing here, that this House, where anyone is 
convicted of an indictable offence . . . And certainly we could argue in respect to whether it’s two years or 
five years. I want to indicate to the House that under the Criminal Code it’s five years. In the Manitoba 
legislation it’s five years. But that is not the essence. The essence of what we should be doing in principle is 
maintaining the integrity of this House by suspending the member, not allowing him the privileges of sitting 
here or being paid, but certainly we should allow the due process of law and justice to take its due course. 
We have, in fact, an indication by the member in question indicating that he is indeed seeking an appeal. 
And, if that’s the case, we could end up having taken the situation of vacating a seat, the member, in fact, or 
in the future, being found innocent, and we will have circumvented the due process of the judicial system. I 
think, I hope it is not the case, but when this legislation is reviewed I think that we have a situation where we 
have the government members, the Premier, the cabinet, embarrassed. 
 
I think what we are doing in this legislation is trying to put under the rug, once and for all, any further action 
or potential by the member from Thunder Creek, whether under the judicial system he were to be found not 
guilty subsequently. And that worries me because certainly we can indeed sustain, as the Minister of Justice 
said and well we should, the integrity by proceeding on the basis of suspension, and that is what we are 
urging the government to do in this instance. I think all of us . . . As I said, it does not appear before this 
Assembly on many occasions, in fact, the first time with a criminal conviction of any member that sat here. 
And I would say that that is the route that we should be going: a suspension, allow the court proceeding to go 
through, and only then should we, in fact, be declaring the seat vacant. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Speaker, I would at this time like to beg leave of your Chair on a point of  



 
November 27, 1984 

 

3543 
 

personal privilege. And I have circulated to yourself and your office earlier today . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. There is a question before the floor that is still open, and I think if you 
would wait until that one is complete then we’ll hear your point. If you’ll just wait a few moments. The 
second reading debate is still in process on Bill 105. Is there anyone wishing to speak? I recognize the 
member for Regina North West. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I would like to speak to Bill 105, and I realize it’s a very humbling experience to be 
involved in the situation that we’re presently involved with in this House, and member who have spoken to 
the issue have certainly alluded to dignity and principles and the protection of these principles within the 
jurisdiction of this legislature. 
 
I personally have certainly outlined at great lengths, and questioned the government at great lengths, for the 
haste in dealing with such a touchy subject for the members of this House. It’s not an easy area to debate. I 
think that when the Minister of Justice rose earlier he expressed it in very humble terms as well. It’s not an 
easy area that the government can come in and deal with legislation that possibly has to be tabled and has to 
be passed through this House when it deals with the expulsion of one of their own friends, and certainly one 
of their own colleagues who has run into, over the course of time, some difficulty – and certainly not relating 
singularly to this case, but it could be other cases, although before this House that hasn’t happened, as the 
NDP opposition alluded to earlier. 
 
I question the motives certainly of the opposition in their position initially to railroad this legislation through 
the House. Suddenly, they do have questions about the content of the legislation. I stand alone in examining 
the Bill and request the time that I was given, certainly not by the House, but certainly by procedural rules. 
 
Today or last night, the opposition raises questions to the Bill. Now I certainly have to look at their abilities 
within their own structure to come in as an opposition and protect the principles of this House. My debate, as 
was alluded to earlier by the Minister of Justice, was not in an exchange for responsibilities within the House 
or, as he said through the press, in an exchange for money. My debate was based simply on the principles of 
this House and how necessary those principles have to be followed in order that this House deal with such 
difficult legislation. 
 
They, the government, through I suppose an untimely arrogance – maybe they aren’t this arrogant at all 
times; I would sort of outline that position – but certainly did not discuss with this member of the opposition 
a Bill which if, in fact, it was going to receive first, second, third reading and Royal Assent last Thursday 
required unanimous consent. 
 
I simply asked: why the urgency? Why should we railroad? Maybe that’s not the correct term. We’ve been 
discussing arming issues here this afternoon, but it certainly brings the issue to mind, why should we railroad 
such touchy legislation through this House? This cannot be looked upon as short term, a short-term solution 
if, in fact, legislation is placed before this House. If we were dealing specifically with a single case scenario, 
maybe we could have acted more quickly. I don’t know. But we’re debating legislation which becomes law 
of this province and, until amended, would in fact govern any action of any member in this legislature who 
would thereafter commit a crime that would, in fact, receive a sentence of longer than two years in duration. 
 
I would simply say that on behalf of all the members that I feel that the innuendo that the special sitting has 
created was unfortunate, very unfortunate, simply because of the nature of the debate that we are faced with 
in putting this legislation through the House. 
 
I’ll try to keep my comments short and to the point. But I think that over this particular legislation, this 
government has been holding the House at hostage since last Friday. We chose not to deal with any other, 
any other business in this legislature. We came in, and many MLAs from around the province, I’m sure, 
came in understanding that this legislation was the legislation on the Table, the legislation to deal with, but 
certainly not with the understanding that other business in this House would not be dealt with. Other business 



 
November 27, 1984 
 

3544 
 

was not dealt with. This Assembly has been held hostage by this government simply because of a Bill they 
felt should have gone through this House last Friday. They were unprepared to deal with other legislation. 
Their single-minded obsession with ramming through a piece of legislation that carries far-reaching 
implications, Mr. Speaker, is a blatant disregard for the tried and the true principles of parliamentary 
procedure, particularly when they decide not to consult other members of the Assembly. 
 
II their proposal deal with a single-case scenario, as I mentioned earlier, that would certainly be one thing. 
But it doesn’t. It deals with long-standing legislation that this province will have to deal with for a long time 
to come and, hopefully, will never have to deal with again. 
 
But to implicate legislation, Mr. Speaker, that deals with such broad-sweeping powers to a government, that 
is something I feel that does need proper consideration by any of us and all of us in this legislature. 
 
While the issue is being considered, why not proceed with other issues that are, in fact, as important or 
possibly more important in the minds of some of the residents of this province? The government chose not 
to. They adjourned debate. They chose not to proceed. 
 
Farmers in the north-east are still waiting for a federal share of moneys to, in fact, dig themselves out of a 
situation which isn’t pleasant, isn’t pleasant, the same people that the Minister of Agriculture said were being 
ignored by the federal government. I’m just trying to outline a situation here, Mr. Speaker, that I felt didn’t 
require single mindedly dealing with one issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. You may have opinions about what should come before the House and what 
should not. But the item that is before the House is Bill No. 105 and your comments should be restricted to 
the provisions of that Bill. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My point is that the normal legislative procedures in dealing 
with this legislation, or any other legislation, should be honoured and should be recognized by this House at 
all times. And the British system is . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I’ve just told the member that the subject for discussion is the Bill, not the 
process of the House. And if the member has comments on the Bill, we’d like to hear them now. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Well, with respect to Bill 105, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the intent of this particular piece 
of legislation is necessarily to distance this legislature as quickly as we can from one member from Thunder 
Creek. I think the intent has a far more broad implication. And I would ask that the situation that we’re 
looking at today be looked at as possibly a single case scenario, and that the situation that’s outlined, that 
created the situation we’re in right here, the debate on Bill No. 105, that the part of the Act, the motion to 
eliminate the member from this House, be considered in a fashion that will maybe allow justice to be seen 
through to its logical and its procedural end. 
 
I support the idea that we remove from this member his abilities to function as a legislator, and certainly his 
remuneration that he would receive if he is functioning as a legislator. But I suggest to the government that 
the due course of law has not yet been completed, and if this member has to be removed from our Assembly 
prior to the due course of law finding its completion, I feel we’re eluding and we’re . . . The principle, 
basically, of justice is being severely eroded with the confines of our House. 
 
It’s a situation where, after the process is completed, if the member and the conviction are  



 
November 27, 1984 

 

3545 
 

upheld, I don’t think anyone in this province, or anyone in this legislature, would have any problem with 
vacating the seat immediately. But I do have some difficulty, with the legislature challenging the justice 
system and suggesting that we should hold court in this House and vacate that seat prior to the member from 
Thunder Creek receiving the hearing that he will get as a result of a system of justice in this country that is 
very – excuse me, I just have to take a drink – is designed, Mr. Speaker, to protect the integrity of the 
individual. 
 
I feel, if we take a course otherwise, that we’re setting a very dangerous precedent. I also have some 
reservations about the term, the two-year limitation that the government would place on the Bill if, in fact, 
the resolution and the resolution of this Act are to vacate the seat. I think that other jurisdictions with their 
five-year limitation, the five-year conviction, is a more reasonable course to take. And I think that certainly 
in the debate that will follow on the issue that is before this House, that reason would possibly dictate that 
that situation be changed. 
 
We have to come into a compromise with respect to this Bill. We just heard the reply from the opposition, 
and they have some difficulty with that area. I think the government, in its wisdom, could live with a change 
that will allow the member from Thunder Creek to, in fact, if his conviction were overturned, return to this 
House with a slate and a reputation untarnished. I’m certainly not defending anybody in this case. I just 
suggest that it does pose difficulties for the legislature, and for the government, in fact, if the member in 
question does find, after an appeal through the due process, that he’s found not guilty. And it has happened in 
the past, Mr. Speaker, and it certainly could happen again. 
 
It’s a situation that I know they’re having difficulty in dealing with it. It’s something that’s just not a very 
easy situation to either sweep under the table or continue debate on. Both routes were open. 
 
I suggest to the government that under the circumstances, that the compromise that will allow the member at 
least status and only status if the conviction were overturned, has some merit. Unlike the NDP, I certainly do 
not support their position, or even question the government’s position on any involvement in the situation 
before the House. 
 
I don’t think – and I know that there is no complicity in the case. I suggest to the government that there is no 
involvement if, in fact, he is not vacated from the legislature and his seat is not vacated, that that doesn’t 
implicate them and their involvement with him as a cabinet minister and as a former colleague. I think 
there’s a fear that somehow he will be entrenched and tarnish the reputation of this government if, in fact, 
that seat is not vacated. I don’t agree that that is necessarily the case, and I certainly would hope the people 
of Saskatchewan would not hold this government, or even suspect this government of any complicity in the 
case that this legislation is dealing with. 
 
I know that in past experience when this scenario was initiated, rather than government members discussing 
the issue, I think there was actually a very aggressive – probably that’s not the right term – but the issue, 
when it came up, fell on deaf ears. And I can say that of every member of the government who, in fact, was 
ever asked about the case on any occasion. So that complicity that this opposition has tried to relate to this 
government in the last four or five days, I don’t think, and I certainly don’t take seriously, but the implication 
has been made. And I believe just because the member would, in fact, remain as part of this House doesn’t 
necessarily, until after the appeal process, doesn’t necessarily involve him or, in fact, tarnish the government 
in any respect or, in fact, members of this House who sit here and decide on this legislation. 
 
That’s a great fear I can appreciate for the government who are looking at an election likely before the appeal 
process will likely be completed. But sometimes a short-term process will often be a long-term process. In 
other jurisdictions – I’m sure, in the Manitoba situation with Robert Wilson, he maintained his office. He lost 
his privileges as a legislator, and he lost his remunerations as a legislator. But until the appeal process was 
completed, he did maintain an  



 
November 27, 1984 
 

3546 
 

 office in the legislature. And that legislation, I think, should offer us some guidance. I’m sure they went 
through the same trials and tribulations that this House is now experiencing as a result of having to come in 
here to legislate against a member who, for whatever reason, has lost the confidence of the public and this 
House. And I would just hope that the government, respecting this particular section of the Bill, will, in fact, 
follow the course of reason. 
 
I have had a great deal of input from people all over Saskatchewan on the merits of the Bill and on the merits 
of the legislation we’re discussing today, and it seems to me that the opinion out there that I hear most 
frequently is: let’s stand on the side of reason on this issue; let’s not run off half-cocked and provide 
legislation that even wherever down the road we may have to encounter it again, we’ll create the same 
consternations that we have to deal with in this House today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a difficult area to find a legislature in a position where compromise may, in fact, be reason. 
I don't think any member of the opposition in this House will, in fact, deny a reasonable and a consistent 
approach to the legislation we’re discussing here today. I believe that the member for Quill Lakes just 
enunciated a position that outlined that that reason be followed. And I would beg of the government that, 
with respect to this legislation – and I’m sure you’ve all heard from people throughout your constituencies 
throughout the province whose consideration is no less than yours because of the complexity of what’s 
happening here today, who have begged of us all to approach the legislation we’re dealing with here today 
with the dignity that the Minister of Justice alluded to, and with the responsibility that each and every one of 
us has to live with as a legislature in this House. 
 
This will become precedent, I’m sure, for other jurisdictions. I know every one of us has had out the cases 
that have been aired recently involving criminal action. We’ve been back to 1917 in this debate. The 
question of length of sentence: in the case of this legislation, one Gilles Gregoire from Quebec would still sit 
as a member. And as I alluded to earlier, maybe a single case scenario is what we should be discussing in this 
House. I don’t know any of us in this legislature who would stand for a colleague who is convicted, tried, 
and served time for sexually related crimes with children. I think we have to keep that in mind. 
 
We don’t expect this to happen, and I don’t think we expected it to happen. The decision of the government 
has been to pass legislation that’ll govern forever the rules if, in fact, this happens again. I think we’ve got to 
look at it in great depth, Mr. Speaker, in the days that follow, before this legislation becomes law, and make 
some very hard decisions on exactly the course that the government and the House will take respecting 
legislation, or whatever is required to deal with this situation. 
 
I see, Mr. Speaker, it’s near 5 o’clock. I would like to read into the record – I’m just trying to locate some 
information. I can wait till after supper, in fact, to read into the record some of the input that I’ve had 
questioning the direction that this House may take. That input has come from children, ranging from 11 years 
old, to citizens in this province who are well into their eighties. So it’s an area that interests not only this 
House, as I’ve mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, but certainly involves every citizen in this province because 
of the nature of the legislation that we’re dealing with. 
 
I don’t still see any necessity for haste in dealing with an issue that will have such a monumental impact on 
this House. 
 
I suppose you could allude, if you would like, to a situation where one of the members of this legislature 
were to be involved in an automobile accident where, in fact, he would suffer injury that could, in fact, place 
him in a situation where he would be unable, Mr. Speaker, to deal with his constituents on an every day basis 
or, in fact . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Being 5 o’clock this House stands adjourned until 7 p.m. this  



 
November 27, 1984 

 

3547 
 

evening. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


	LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN
	November 27, 1984
	ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
	Allegations in National Newspapers
	MOTION UNDER RULE 16
	That this Assembly regrets this government’s totally inadequate job creation performance which has caused hardship for thousands of Saskatchewan families, and further, that this Assembly urges the government to take immediate positive action to deal w...
	That this Assembly regrets this government’s totally inadequate job creation performance . . .
	On behalf of council, I want to convey to you and your government our appreciation for your approval of a project for the town of Radisson under the above-mentioned program. The approval will allow us to employ four persons for 26 weeks on designated ...
	Mr. Speaker, that is an example of one of the programs of this government that are directed specifically to job creation for welfare clients.
	We could talk about the opportunities in my colleague’s Department of Advanced Education and Manpower. There, Mr. Speaker, this year alone, a total of 6,132 jobs were created for a variety of people in the province of Saskatchewan. When you take the 1...
	Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!
	Hon. Mr. Dirks: — And what are the results, Mr. Speaker, of this particular approach to job creation that I have just talked about? Well the best example, Mr. Speaker, that we can talk about, you find in the oil patch here in the province of Saskatche...
	Mr. Speaker, whether it’s the oil patch, whether it’s the upgraders which are coming – and people are looking forward to those with great anticipating, knowing that they are going to inject literally hundreds of millions of dollars into the province o...
	Mr. Speaker: — It’s my duty to inform the member his time has expired.
	Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to participate in this debate, Mr. Speaker, in a debate following the motion presented by my colleague, the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. The motion before us, Mr. Speaker, is simple. It calls the PC...
	We all know, Mr. Speaker, how Premier Devine and his PC members like to talk about jobs. They like to talk about their record, and they like to talk about their programs and their policies. But, Mr. Speaker, the people of northern Saskatchewan have ha...
	In fact, Mr. Speaker, my constituents throughout the North, in places like Sturgeon landing, Kinoosao, Wollaston Lake, Pelican Narrows, Deschambault, etc., La Ronge, have urged me to invite Grant Devine, the Premier of this province, to come out of hi...
	We invite the Premier and cabinet members of the Conservative government to visit northern families, and also not simply to talk at them, but also to listen to the northern people, Mr. Speaker, to listen to northern families who want to work, who need...
	And so, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my constituents, on behalf of the residents of the Cumberland constituency, I issue this open invitation to Premier Devine. Come up north and listen. Come up north and see for yourselves the desperate situation of com...
	I noticed today, Mr. Speaker, that in this debate none of the PC members are telling us that they have made Saskatchewan open for big business. They are not telling us that their open-for-business policies are a success. I suppose the reason for this,...
	Since this government took office, Mr. Speaker, there are not more businesses open in the North, there are fewer. There are not more native Northerners in business in La Ronge, but actually very fewer. There are not more businesses in P.A., but fewer.
	Now it is certainly true, Mr. Speaker, that the Devine government’s open for big business policies have produced some profitable benefits for banks, for bond dealers, for big oil companies, and for the Hudson’s Bay Mining and Smelting Corporation. But...
	When this PC government was first elected two and one-half years ago, Mr. Speaker, my constituents in the North expected the worst and, unfortunately, that is exactly what they’ve got, that is exactly what we’ve got, a deliberate and steady set of PC ...
	My constituents, Mr. Speaker, know that it doesn’t have to be this way. The PC attack, neglect, and abandonment of the North is not the only way, and that is why they want Premier Devine to come into northern Saskatchewan and stop talking for a change...
	And so, Mr. Speaker, I support this motion put forward today by my colleague and I urge the government to recognize the social and economic hardship and pressures which exist for the people in northern Saskatchewan. I urge the government to do the fol...
	I urge the government to listen to their concerns, the concerns of their children, their future, and their communities. I urge the government to respect the dignity of northern people. I urge this government to respect their traditional relationships ...
	Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!
	Mr. Birkbeck: — Basically what we have here, Mr. Speaker, is an NDP opposition charging that this government is not performing well in the areas of job creation and in agriculture. The Minister of Justice, the Minister of Social Services have proven t...
	Mr. Speaker, in terms of agriculture, the member for Kelvington-Wadena laid out a number of programs that we are conducting now under the Department of Agriculture. He listed them all off. So one has to assume that this motion would never have hit the...
	So, Mr. Speaker, rather than going through all of those again, I am going to just ask one of the pages to come over, if they would please, because I want to send across the House for the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg a whole series of pamphlets an...
	Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!
	Mr. Birkbeck: — Now then there’s some very important things that have to be said and I realize my time is short, but I do want to draw to the attention of the House two resolutions that the NDP have as a result of their convention. One is support of o...
	Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It’s my duty to inform the Assembly that the 75 minutes allotted for this topic have elapsed.
	MOTIONS

	Resolution No. 24
	PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS
	Resolution No. 13
	Resolution No. 20
	Resolution No. 23
	Resolution No. 14
	SECOND READINGS
	Yeas – 46
	Rybchuk
	Dutchak
	Muller
	Caswell
	Embury
	Birkbeck
	Hampton
	Dirks
	McLeod
	Gerich
	Maxwell
	Andrew
	Boutin
	Young
	Berntson
	Schmidt
	Domotor
	Lane
	Tusa
	Muirhead
	Taylor
	Meagher
	Petersen
	Katzman
	Glauser
	Bacon
	McLaren
	Sauder
	Sutor
	Garner
	Zazelenchuk
	Hodgins
	Smith (Swift Current)
	Johnson
	Parker
	Baker
	Martens
	Smith (Moose Jaw South)
	Hepworth
	Weiman
	Hopfner
	Duncan
	Morin
	Myers
	Currie
	Sandberg
	GOVERNMENT ORDERS

