






















































Hansard: November 29, 1984


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

November 29, 1984 
 
 

1 
 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I beg to inform the Assembly that I have received a communication from the private secretary 
to His Honour the Lieutenant Governor stating that His Honour will open the fourth session of the 20th Legislature 
at 2 o'clock p.m. today, the 29th day of November, 1984. 
 
2:05 p.m. 
 
His Honour the Lieutenant Government was then pleased to open the session with the following speech: 
 
MR. SPEAKER, 
 
MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY: 
 
It is my privilege to welcome you to the Fourth Session of the Twentieth Legislature. 
 
This Assembly reconvenes at a time when the people of Saskatchewan face a number of crucial challenges and 
opportunities. The severity of this year's drought and flooding is responsible for severe economic difficulties in 
some parts of Saskatchewan. Unemployment remains a serious problem as well, although Saskatchewan continues 
to have the lowest level of unemployment in Canada. 
 
To deal with these immediate and major concerns my ministers will develop policies and programs based upon the 
traditional Saskatchewan values of self-reliance and cooperation. In this regard, my ministers will continue to rely 
on these values in order to ensure that the activities of my government facilitate the initiative and enterprise of our 
business community, protect our common heritage, and enhance the quality of health, education and social services 
available to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
My government recognizes, however, that in order to be effective its policies and programs must also be developed 
in consultation with the federal government and the other provinces. Accordingly, my ministers are encouraged by 
the more open approach to federal-provincial relations exhibited by the new government in Ottawa. My ministers 
believe that economic renewal in Canada can only be achieved when the federal government and the provinces 
co-operatively develop national programs targeted towards job creation and other efforts that will stimulate the 
economy. 
 

WORLD AND NATIONAL ECONOMIES 
 
The prosperity of Saskatchewan also is dependent to a large extent on economic developments outside the 
province. Approximately 30 per cent of Saskatchewan's income is earned outside Canada, with another 15 per cent 
from the other Canadian provinces. 
 
The world economy is slowly recovering from the severe recession of 1981-82. The economic recovery in Canada 
is proceeding at a faster rate than in Europe, but is lagging behind the recovery in the United States. Unfortunately, 
the Canadian recovery is not yet strong enough to bring about a significant reduction in the national unemployment 
rate. Interest rates remain at high levels, hurting many sectors of the economy and dampening investment. 
 

SASKATCHEWAN ECONOMY 
 
The Saskatchewan economy weathered the world recession relatively well, but demand did fall off sharply in some 
key resource sectors. Recovery from the recession is now under way despite the recent negative financial effects of 
the drought on farmers and small businesses. 



 
November 29, 1984 

 

2 
 
 

 
Following my government's changes in the royalty tax structure, the number of oil wells drilled in 1983 was more 
than double the 1982 level. This year, a new record has been established, with more than 2,100 new wells drilled in 
the first nine months alone. For the period 1982 through to 1984, the changes to the royalty tax structure 
implemented by my government resulted in additional revenues of $193 million for Saskatchewan and the creation 
of 2,450 full-time jobs. 
 
On the investment front, new capital spending in Saskatchewan rose by 10.3 per cent during 1983, even though 
capital spending declined in the rest of Canada. Statistics Canada expects that in 1984 there will be a further 
increase in capital investment in Saskatchewan. 
 

RURAL SASKATCHEWAN 
 
Rural Saskatchewan experienced a difficult year in 1984. 
 
The depressed world market price of grain resulted in low returns on Saskatchewan agricultural products. Rising 
farm production costs left most farmers with reduced incomes, and some with difficulties in meeting financial 
commitments. Environmental factors produced additional hardships. Crop production for 1984 fell to 16.1 million 
tonnes, down about 20 per cent from last year's harvest. Receipts from production are expected to fall about $600 
million as a result of this year's drought. 
 
When and where necessary, my government responded to the situation created by these problems by developing 
sector-specific policies and programs. The Northeast Saskatchewan Flood Assistance Program provided $7.5 
million in assistance to some 1,800 farmers in the northeast. My government provided farmers and ranchers with 
assistance when the drought jeopardized water supplies and pasture conditions. In this regard, it provided 
assistance to move cattle to summer pastures and assistance to identify and develop alternate water sources. In 
concert with the federal government, my government also implemented the Prairie Livestock Drought Assistance 
Program which is providing $26 million to assist livestock producers. 
 
Farmers have welcomed the recent improvements to the Crop Insurance Program, a vital part of the safety net for 
the grain economy. My Ministers are working with their federal counterparts to ensure the necessary legislative 
changes for an early and substantial payout from the Western Grain Stabilization Fund. My Ministers also are 
exploring other co-operative, federal-provincial measures which may provide additional help for Saskatchewan 
farmers. 
 
In addition to the immediate financial difficulties caused by this year's adverse climatic conditions, Saskatchewan 
farmers continue to be burdened by the cost-price squeeze. Last spring, my government introduced an operating 
loan guarantee program for farmers to ensure they had sufficient funds to carry out their farm operations. Today, 
many farmers remain in business because of these loan guarantees. All of these measures I have mentioned will 
help alleviate the cash flow problems presently being experienced by Saskatchewan farmers and, in turn, protect 
the viability of the farm service sector so vital to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
1984 has, however, been a particularly difficult year for farmers, and further government action is required to 
protect the family farm. Accordingly, my government intends to introduce in this session comprehensive 
legislation to provide security for viable family farms jeopardized by uncontrollable costs, burdensome debts, and 
the impact of adverse weather conditions. 
 
My government is not prepared to see the security of the family farm endangered by short-term difficulties. My 
government is determined to provide Saskatchewan farmers with the opportunity to remain economically viable in 
the increasingly competitive and technologically sophisticated agriculture industry.  

WATER MANAGEMENT 



 
November 29, 1984 

 

3 
 
 

 
My government recognizes that we must begin to develop long-term solutions to drought and flood related 
problems through expanded programs in water management. The very dry conditions in southern Saskatchewan 
and the flooding in the northeast in 1984 are the most recent examples of two chronic problems that have plagued 
this province for decades. The Water Corporation will be increasing expenditures in 1985 and the years beyond in 
the water sector on capital works which will be of benefit to Saskatchewan. 
 
In addition, the Saskatchewan Water Corporation will continue to work closely with the agencies of the federal 
government to ensure their participation in the needed expenditures on planning, research, drainage control, 
irrigation development, and municipal water supply projects throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
These positive actions demonstrate my government's determination to resolve the long-standing water resource 
problems in the province, while at the same time expanding economic activity. 
 

SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
During the coming session, my government will demonstrate its continuing commitment to improving the quality 
of life for all Saskatchewan residents. It will do so by ensuring that its services and its service delivery systems are 
effective, comprehensive, and community-based. 
 
My government is determined to uphold this commitment for the population in general and for special groups. In 
consultation with the medical profession, my government is committed to identifying the most appropriate means 
by which it can end the practice of extra-billing in Saskatchewan. The new Kinsmen Children's Centre will open 
soon in Saskatoon, and progress is being made on the new Regina Rehabilitation Centre, a $35 million project 
which will see an $18 million therapy wing under construction in 1985-86. My government will continue to 
develop major initiatives in the field of Mental Health services, including a new Mental Health Act to ensure that 
the rights of patients are adequately protected. 
 
My government also will continue to develop services for the elderly. In this regard, it will continue with its major 
commitment to special-care home construction by spending $25 million over the next five years. Furthermore, my 
government's Seniors Bureau will ensure that the needs and concerns of seniors are communicated to government 
and that government programming will be available to seniors. 
 
My government is committed to upholding the dignity of the individual, protecting our children, and preserving the 
sanctity of the family. 
 
In April of this year, my government presented a brief entitled Respecting Human Dignity to the Fraser Committee 
on Pornography and Prostitution. The brief expressed the view that there is a great deal of violence and degradation 
directed towards women in pornographic material. Consequently, the brief recommended to the federal 
government that it strengthen its laws and policies against pornography. Recently, Saskatchewan also submitted a 
brief to the Canadian Radio-Television and Telecommunications Commission, requesting stricter regulations be 
implemented with respect to pornographic programming on pay-television networks. 
 
During the past year, my government undertook a comprehensive review of its Family Services Act and now is 
preparing new legislation emphasizing the prevention of child abuse, support for the integrity of the family, and the 
need for community involvement. It will, as well, continue to provide help in a co-ordinated, comprehensive 
fashion to women who are victims of family violence and to children in need of protection. 
 
Thousands of men and women, formerly dependent, now have the opportunity to regain their 



 
November 29, 1984 

 

4 
 
 

independence as a result of my government's continuing efforts to link job creation to skills development. My 
government is pleased to announce that the $12.6 million Saskatchewan Skills Development Program will channel 
3,500 welfare recipients through our community colleges and technical institute system, providing them with the 
skills required to compete for jobs and to become self-supporting. This approach to human development reflects 
my government's commitment to effective, preventive programming designed to provide productive opportunities 
to all our people. 
 
My government also has been successful in linking skill training to the market-place. 
 
The Advanced Technology Training Centre was established in Saskatoon in June 1984 as a joint 
government-industry venture. This Centre will provide retraining opportunities during the next five years for 
approximately 1,000 technicians currently employed in our high technology industries. 
 
Previously, my government announced a major expansion to Saskatchewan's technical institutes. These institutions 
since 1982 have increased their capacity by 1,000 training places, and there are plans to provide additional capacity 
in 1984-85. In addition, my government is providing in excess of half a million dollars this year for the delivery of 
career counselling services in both rural and urban areas through the community colleges. This will enable 
individuals to make informed choices regarding career training and personal development. 
 
My government will continue to place a high priority on the flexibility and accessibility of the training provided to 
our residents. In this regard, it has developed, and will continue to facilitate, improved consultation with the federal 
government, labour, industry, and the public to ensure it is tailoring programs and delivery mechanisms to meet the 
needs of employers, employees, and the unemployed. 
 

EMPLOYMENT POLICY 
 
These training initiatives are but one indication of my government's determination to focus its energies on 
employment issues. 
 
The efforts of my Ministers have contributed over the last year to a provincial employment situation which is the 
best in Canada. These efforts could not have been successful without the cooperation and involvement of many 
businesses, municipalities, and non-governmental organizations. 
 
Programs of my government, such as the Industrial Incentive Program, the Saskatchewan Access Youth 
Employment Program, Opportunities '84, the Students-in-Industry Program, and the Saskatchewan Employment 
Development Program depend on this cooperation and involvement. With this assistance my government will have 
created close to eight thousand jobs for students, social assistance recipients, natives, and the unemployed in 
general over the 1984-85 fiscal year. Other government programs with a job creation impact such as government 
and Crown capital construction programs, support services for the development of employment cooperatives, the 
Seniors' Home Repair Program, and the New Careers Corporation will add to this total. 
 
These efforts will be redoubled to ensure that this strong performance is continued. My government has already 
announced the designation of a Minister responsible for Employment. This House will be asked to consider 
legislation establishing a government agency to assist him in his duties. 
 
The Minister responsible for employment, in concert with his colleagues, will be refining and elaborating the 
employment strategy of my government. In this regard, my government intends to place a special emphasis on 
employment development in the private sector. The members of 



 
November 29, 1984 

 

5 
 
 

this Assembly will be asked to consider in the coming session the programs required to implement this strategy, 
including innovative approaches in the area of employment and training for our young people. 
 
Another important element in this strategy will be to respond immediately to the need for winter employment. 
Winter is typically a time when the economy slows down and unemployment rises. Immediate priority will be 
given to increasing opportunities for employment during this winter. My government shortly will be announcing 
new funding to stimulate activity in both the public and private sectors. 
 

The employment strategy of my government must, however, go beyond such specific measures to consider and 
deal with questions fundamental to the economic future of all Saskatchewan residents : — young and old, male and 

female, employee and employer. 
 
There are no simple answers to these fundamental questions. Almost half of Saskatchewan's unemployed are 
unskilled and untrained young people. More and more people are coming to Saskatchewan in search of 
employment opportunities lacking elsewhere. Women are becoming increasingly important contributors to the 
overall economy with their own unique mix of needs for employment opportunities. The very nature of 
employment itself is changing under the impact of international events and changing technologies. 
 
We, in Saskatchewan, must learn to respond to these events by adapting our traditional industries as necessary and 
by exploring the potential of new industries that may arise. The provincial government has a key role to play in this 
response, but others must be involved as well. 
 
Discussions will be required with the federal government in order to improve the co-ordination of federal and 
provincial employment and training programs. Dialogue with major actors in the private and public sectors of the 
economy, and with the public at large, will be established to ensure that policies match the employment needs of 
both employers and employees. 
 
My government believes that all of us must work together to explore every avenue that promises meaningful 
employment to our people on a sustained basis. In consequence, a further priority will be to ensure that the 
government's job creation efforts are consistent with, and support, the long-term economic development policy of 
the province. 
 

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
 
My government believes that Canada's economic potential can only be realized through a co-operative national 
effort that will allow the two orders of government to develop common solutions to the country's economic and 
social problems. My government intends to cooperate fully with the federal government and the other provinces to 
ensure a successful First Ministers' Conference on the Economy to be held here in Regina early next year. 
 
My government actively sought the opportunity to host this important conference because of its belief that 
Saskatchewan and Western Canada have a very real contribution to make to the economic growth of this country. 
Indeed, the agenda for the First Ministers' Conference on the Economy addresses Saskatchewan's priorities for 
economic renewal. In this regard, the agenda for the conference will focus on training, increasing investment in 
Canada, building on regional strengths, and developing an internationally competitive Canadian economy. 
Saskatchewan expects to make a significant contribution to the conference in the anticipation that major, new 
directions will be established. 
 
My government is committed to the development of joint federal-provincial initiatives aimed at encouraging 
economic development in Saskatchewan. In 1984, Canada and Saskatchewan signed an Economic and Regional 
Development agreement under which approximately $250 million in joint programs have been initiated. This 
agreement represents a cooperative process of 



 
November 29, 1984 

 

6 
 
 

economic development in Saskatchewan and ensures that the federal government's economic policies build on 
Saskatchewan's inherent strengths. 
 
Economic activity in Saskatchewan has continued at an encouraging pace. My government's Major Projects 
Inventory now monitors $9 billion in large-scale construction being planned for implementation over the next five 
years. My government is working hard to ensure that Saskatchewan firms reap the benefits of these projects. 
 
These major projects are important. However, it is the health and prosperity of individual businesses across this 
province that will ensure the continuing growth of the Saskatchewan economy. Sound, well-managed enterprises, 
build on our strengths, and spanning all sectors of the economy, will make by far the most significant contribution 
to economic performance and output. 
 
My government is committed to ensuring that these enterprises function in an environment which is conducive to 
growth and development. In this regard, my government has initiated a number of policies and programs to help 
our small-business community realize its potential and meet the challenges of the 1980's 
 
The spring budget this year introduced a comprehensive program for industrial development. The program 
included tax reductions for manufacturing and processing, sales tax exemptions for prototypes, tax credits for 
venture capital creation, and innovative industrial incentives for job creation and capital investment. 
 
These successful programs have provided an integrated approach to support economic growth. For example, 
commitments to date under the Industrial Incentive Program indicate that the program will meet its twelve-month 
target of 1,500 permanent jobs and more than $40 million in new capital investment in manufacturing and 
processing. 
 
The Venture Capital Tax Credit Act is encouraging the supply of Saskatchewan investment funds to small 
businesses in need of capital. This kind of assistance promotes the introduction of new technologies, products, and 
services, and creates jobs. 
 
These policies and programs reflect my government's continuing commitment to the creation of permanent job 
opportunities through sound economic growth. 
 

SASKATCHEWAN HERITAGE 1985 
 
1985 will be a special year for Saskatchewan and its people. My government has designated the year as 
Saskatchewan Heritage 1985 and the theme "Commemorating our Past, Building our Future" expresses the spirit of 
this year. Saskatchewan Heritage 1985 will be a year for the people of Saskatchewan to commemorate the 
accomplishments of our history, to recognize Saskatchewan's youth as a special resource with which we will build 
the future, and to honour the contribution of native culture to Saskatchewan through our remembrance of the North 
West Rebellion. In preparation for Saskatchewan Heritage 1985, my government will be facilitating the 
development of heritage committees and undertaking a number of promotional programs outside the province to 
attract visitors to Saskatchewan. 
 

CONCLUSION 
 
Various other legislative measures will be placed before you for your consideration. 
 
The public accounts for the last fiscal year, together with estimates for the year commencing April 1, 1985, will be 
submitted to you. 
 
I leave you now to the business of the session, with full confidence that you will favourably 



 
November 29, 1984 

 

7 
 
 

discharge your duties and responsibilities. 
 
May Divine Providence continue to bless our province and guide this Legislature in all its deliberations. 
 
His Honour the Lieutenant Governor then retired from the Chamber at 2:34 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Pro Forma Bill 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill respecting the administration of oaths of office be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I beg to inform the Assembly that Thomas Johnson, Lani Knaus, Tracey Loewen, Mary Ann 
McGrath, and Pam Switzer will be Pages during the present session. 
 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I beg to inform the Assembly that in order to prevent mistakes I have obtained a copy of the 
speech of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, which I now lay on the Table. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Speech from the Throne 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Souris-Cannington: 
 

That the speech of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor be taken into consideration on Friday, November 30, 
1984. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Printing of Votes and Proceedings in the Assembly 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Souris-Cannington: 
 

That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be printed after first having been perused by Mr. Speaker, that 
he do appoint the printing thereof, and that no person but such as he shall appoint, do presume to print the same. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now adjourn. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Before putting the question on that motion, I'd like, at this time, to express appreciation and 
thanks for the superb performance by the band that was playing in the foyer today. We enjoyed the very fine 
selections that we heard today, and it was also very enjoyable 



 
November 29, 1984 

 

8 
 
 

to hear some of the first Christmas music of the season. They did a fine job, and I'm sure that we all enjoyed all of 
the selections that they played today. 
 
HON MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — As has been the practice since 1981, a group of elementary school children have been invited 
to observe the ceremonial events connected with the opening of the legislature. This year the group is from 
Athabasca Public School on Princess Drive near Regina Avenue and Pasqua Street. The group is accompanied by 
the school principal, Dr. Orest Ochitwa and Mrs Norma Cholerton, the grades 4 and 5 teachers. The group 
comprises 39 students. I would like the Assembly to welcome the students to our Assembly today. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: As well, I would like to invite you to attend the Speaker's tea which will be held immediately 
after the closing of the legislature here today. The tea is held in room 218. It's on this floor, just to the left as you go 
out the doors here and down the hall. You're all invited. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 2:43 p.m. 


