



















































Hansard: June 10, 1985


3145 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

June 10, 1985 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure this afternoon to introduce to you, and through 

you to the members of the Assembly, 35 students from the Vibank Elementary School seated in the west 

gallery along with their teacher, Mr. Gary Pack; chaperon, Mr. Brian Flaman; and the bus driver, Vern Merk. 

 

We just met a few minutes ago on the steps, and if questions that I received are any indication of the type of 

questioning that goes on in your class, Mr. Pack, you certainly have a very good class there, and you’ll have 

a bunch of young boys and girls that know a great deal when they graduate from school. So welcome here to 

the Assembly this afternoon. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 

HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Speaker, I have distinct pleasure of introducing to you, and through you to the 

members of this Assembly, two groups of students from two different schools in Regina. There are 25 grade 

7 and 8 students from Douglas Park School who are here with their teacher, Ken Farago and Mrs. Price, and 

they are presently sitting in the west gallery. Also there are 32 grade 8 students from St. Dominic Savio 

School, and they are here with their teacher and principal, Paulette Vanderlinde. They are sitting in the 

Speaker’s gallery. 

 

To both groups of students, I hope you enjoy your tour of the Legislative Building. I look forward to meeting 

the Douglas Park students at 2:30 p.m. in the rotunda for pictures and later in Room 255 for refreshments. 

And at 2:45, I shall meet with St. Dominic students in the rotunda for pictures and Room 218 for 

refreshments. 

 

I would ask the members on both sides of the House to join with me in welcoming these young people. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to 

members of the House, a group of senior citizens in the Speaker’s gallery and a few in the public galleries 

and some on the floor. There are approximately 40 in number, some coming from the Senior Citizens Action 

Now group, and some are coming from other senior citizens’ organizations. 
 

They are here today to indicate their interest in the issue of de-indexing of old age security pensions, and I’m 

sure that all hon. members of the Assembly would want to join with me in welcoming all of them here this 

afternoon. 
 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Inflation Protection for Old Age Security Payments 
 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier, and it deals with the federal 

government’s decision to eliminate the inflation protection for old age security payments.  



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3146 

 

Last week, Mr. Premier, you declined to take a stand on this issue, saying you would prefer to study the 

impact of de-indexing on Saskatchewan’s 122,000 seniors. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, in light of the fact that the Manitoba legislature unanimously condemned de-indexing in a 

joint resolution passed last Thursday, and in light of the fact that the Premier Of Nova Scotia, Progressive 

Conservative the Hon. John Buchanan is reported to have similarly condemned de-indexing, I ask you 

whether you have reconsidered your position, and will you now support a resolution of this legislature 

similar to the one in Manitoba calling up the Mulroney government to reverse this decision? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, Mr. Speaker, two or three comments with respect to the Leader of the 

Opposition’s question. One is that the de-indexing does not apply to all seniors, and the Leader of the 

Opposition knows that. It only applies to a portion of the seniors, and that’s the portion that I’m going to 

address. 

 

For people who have very low incomes and are subject to indexing, and this portion of the de-indexing, then 

as I said the other day on Friday, I believe, or last Thursday, that I suggested the federal government look at 

ways to deal with that for those lower-income individuals that have no other source of income except for 

pensions and supplements and the like. 

 

And today, as a matter of fact, the Minister of Finance for the province of Saskatchewan wrote the Minister 

of Finance for the country, suggesting an alternative to protect those low-income seniors that were subject to 

the de-indexing, along the lines that we have done in the province of Saskatchewan, to make sure that: one, 

we provide help to those that need it; and number two, that we don’t get caught up in rebating the wealthy. 

 

And it’s a combination of what we’ve been doing here, and what we suggested they do in terms of general 

tax reform, which has the support of the Premier of Manitoba and the Premier of Alberta and the Premier of 

British Columbia with respect to the whole question of taxation and how you address the public debt 

question, but also make it fair. 

 

So I can read you the letter, and if you like, I will. But I will just say, at the outset, that we have suggested to 

the federal government that they should look at the kinds of things that we’ve done in the province of 

Saskatchewan to protect low-income people who have no alternative, and to make sure those people are 

protected. And I believe seniors across Saskatchewan today or tomorrow will be receiving a letter from me 

which outlines, not only the property improvement rebate for 1985 but, in fact, the increase in the rebate for 

seniors who have low income for 1986 and ’87, ’88, and so forth. And I use that as an example and as an 

illustration that we’ve said three things: 

 

1. We should have general reform to make it fair; 

2. That we should make sure that we’re not rebating the rich, and; 

3. We should make sure that the federal government, the provincial governments co-ordinate all their 

programs, because there’s a lot of program — several — and to make sure that the low-income 

people who are just receiving parts of their salary and their income, are protected. And that’s what 

the Minister of Finance has suggested in detail to the Minister of Finance at the national level. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. Mr. Premier, in view of the fact that every senior 

who gets an old-age security pension is affected by the de-indexing, and in view of the fact that every senior 

citizen in Canada is eligible to receive an old-age security pension, who is not affected by the de-indexing? I 

ask you that firstly: who is not affected by the de-indexing? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, there are some seniors who only receive pensions that are 

government pensions, and those individuals are affected directly by the de-indexing. As you get into other 

pensions and other forms of income and as your income rises and rises and rises, the  



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3147 

 

de-indexing has marginal effect, and then a smaller effect, and then virtually no effect at all. 

 

So when you’re looking at, say, in the province of Saskatchewan, something like 12,000 seniors who would 

be directly influenced by the de-indexing in a very direct way, we are saying to the federal government: 

make sure that those individuals and others up the line that are influenced by the de-indexing are addressed. 

And we have proposed a method of address that that would countervail this de-indexing for people who only 

receive government pensions. 

 

And if they do that, if they help those individuals, then in fact we don’t end up in a situation where we’re 

rebating somebody that might be making 60, 70, $80,000 in a pension. And we don’t think that they should 

be supplemented more if they’re making that kind of money. The low-incomers, yes, and that’s what we’ve 

done with respect to the property improvement grant. But for people who have a great deal of income, we 

said we must be beyond the point where we have to rebate the rich, and we’ll encourage the federal 

government to look at that with its whole basket of programs. There’s this program and that program and 

several others; let’s look at them all. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Does the Premier not agree that every single one 

of the 122,000 senior citizens in Saskatchewan loses money by the de-indexing? Point number one, don’t 

you agree with that? And secondly, do you state that all seniors who are not eligible for the guaranteed 

income supplement are somehow wealthy and are not suffering at all because of de-indexing? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I’m saying that there are people in the country who have a great deal 

of income, who get the guaranteed income supplement or get the OAS (old age security). Okay? And it 

they’re getting a great deal of income, why should we be supplementing them more? 

 

I mean, I don’t think that Canadians across the country here want to see us provide a great deal of additional 

tax dollars to people who are wealthy, that have an income of, say, 80, 90 to $100,000 worth of pensions and 

other incomes. Okay? 

 

Now for those individuals that are just on government pensions — just on government pensions — those are 

the people that we believe should be protected. If individuals are making a high income, and individuals have 

low income and no protection, we’re saying: why rebate the rich when you should be helping those that are 

poor? And that’s exactly what we’re doing with respect to our rebate program — helping those individuals 

that are poor and stop rebating those that are wealthy. 

 

Now I’m sure that the hon. member knows that there are many seniors who have a great deal of income — a 

great deal of income, a high pension, pensions that’ll run 50 to $100,000 a year. Those individuals, I suggest, 

and the Minister of Finance suggests, we shouldn’t be supplementing their income when the poor people or 

some individuals that have, say, $10,000 worth of income deserve more. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, or new question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: I 

ask you whether you believe it is fair for a person who is not a senior who has an income of $100,000 to get 

one level of tax, and a person who is a senior to pay the same level of tax substantially, and in addition suffer 

the de-indexing. 

 

Why are you asking seniors, some of whom do not qualify for the guaranteed income supplement — and you 

only have to have a very modest income to avoid being eligible for the guaranteed income supplement — 

why are you saying that those people, that they should make a special sacrifice of de-indexing when other 

people are not asked to make a similar special sacrifice? 



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3148 

 

We’re not talking about rebates now. Why de-indexing? And will you join with us and the entire Manitoba 

legislature and Premier Buchanan in protesting de-indexing? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — The point is, who does de-indexing influence? And if de-indexing has a smaller 

and smaller influence and impact on people who are quite wealthy, I don’t want to re-introduce indexing and 

pay the wealthy. I mean, you know as well as I do that we want to have money for lower-income people, and 

among people that have low incomes should receive some benefit and some help. That’s what the Minister of 

Finance has said to the national minister. 

 

I mean, in the province of Saskatchewan for years under your administration you rebated the rich, and not 

many Canadians think that’s a good idea, to rebate wealthy individuals. So take the money from wealthy and 

redistribute it for those individuals that are only on government pensions and who have no other source of 

income, and we’ll make sure those individuals, through one program or another, keep up with inflation. 

 

Now if they can keep up with inflation, that’s the idea. And there’s many ways to do that: de-indexing this or 

double-indexing that, or applying to a different program. There are several ways to do it. So what I’m saying 

is that most Canadians want to be fair to low income individuals, but they don’t see tax dollars and rebating 

somebody that’s making $100,000 worth of income. And that’s what you’re proposing. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Do I take it then that the position of your 

government with respect to de-indexing, that you favour or do not oppose de-indexing in so far as it applies 

to anyone who does not receive the guaranteed income supplement? Is that your position? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — What I’m saying is that there are many ways, through double-indexing or other 

programs, to make sure that low income people who have no other source of income, on government 

pensions, have their pensions ride with inflation. And that’s the intent of what Mr. Andrew, the Minister of 

Finance, has said to the Minister of Finance federally. 

 

Now there are many ways to do that. We have suggested one way that they can do it, and I believe that’s fair. 

I believe that when the Minister of Finance suggests that to the federal Minister of Finance and say, make 

sure those low income people who have no other source of income are protected, then that’s where people 

like to see their money go. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Premier, you talked a good deal in the Assembly and outside the Assembly 

about consultation that went on between yourself and the federal government I planning the budget, the 

federal budget. I wonder whether or not, when this proposal of de-indexing was brought to you, whether or 

not you agreed with the Mulroney government that de-indexing should take place, or whether you stated 

your opposition to it. Did you state your opposition to de-indexing, or did you agree with it when your 

consultation process was going on? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, the subject of de-indexing was not discussed with me. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder whether or not the Premier, who had indicated earlier 

that this de-indexing would help the seniors on the bottom end of the spectrum, do you want to elaborate on 

how de-indexing and taking $1,500 over four years out of pockets of senior citizens is going to help those at 

the bottom end of the spectrum? 

 

I listened closely, but I must have missed some of the important steps in this formula of how $1,500 out of 

the pockets of the senior citizens on the bottom end of the economic scale would be helped by this 

de-indexing. I missed a point there. Could you elaborate on how they’ll be helped? 



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3149 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member from Shaunavon says that he missed the point. I’ll 

agree he missed the point. He missed the point because this administration has made sure that low-income 

seniors get more help than they’ve ever had in the province of Saskatchewan before. Significant increases; 

that’s number one. 

 

Number two, our Minister of Finance has said to the federal Minister of Finance: do as we do in the province 

of Saskatchewan and make sure those low-income people that only have government pensions are protected. 

That’s what he said. Now you may not be able to understand that, but seniors understand that. They know 

exactly what I’m talking about. So when we bring in a program that provides even greater increases to 

low-income seniors, they appreciate that. When we increase their supplement, they appreciate that. We didn’t 

keep it to $5. I mean, we’ve increased it $50 in some cases. 

 

Now when we suggest the same thing to the federal government and say you care about the seniors that are 

on low income, fixed pensions, government only, and you help those, then it’s exactly what we’re doing in 

the province of Saskatchewan. And believe me, senior citizens appreciate that. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder whether or not the Premier, who 

talked about his finance minister discussing de-indexing with his federal counterparts, are you telling the 

Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan that the idea of de-indexing came from Saskatchewan and from 

your finance minister? Is that what you’re saying? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I just got finished saying, and I can read it to the member and if Mr. 

Speaker, would like, I can read the letter that the Minister of Finance from Saskatchewan sent to the Minister 

of Finance in Canada today. Now you didn’t understand it. So I can . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If you 

like, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker doesn’t want me to read the letter. 

 

The letter here outlines our position with respect to the Minister of Finance. The senior citizens or anybody 

else in the province may want to look at it and read it. It just elaborates in some detail what I’ve said already 

with respect to low-income seniors — that they should do at the national level what we’ve done at the 

provincial level in the province of Saskatchewan, and that is, protect them. 

 

Study on the Impact of De-Indexing 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to address a question to the Premier also. Last week, Mr. 

Premier, you refused to take a stand on the issue of de-indexing, and you indicated that you would prefer to 

study the impact of de-indexing on the Saskatchewan 122,000 seniors in Saskatchewan. I was wondering 

whether the Premier has had an opportunity to complete his study, and could he indicate to the seniors across 

this province what amount of money is going to be taken out of the pockets of the seniors as a result of the 

Mulroney government policy of de-indexing. 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, id I might, I could, in three or four paragraphs, outline the position 

that the cabinet has taken with respect . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You want to know what our 

examination has resulted in. This is what it’s resulted in. Perhaps I’ll just read it to the member and he’ll 

know exactly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is to Mr. Wilson. You asked to know what position we’re taking. 

 

I write to you concerning the recent budget announcement that, beginning January 1,1986, old age 

security benefits will be inflation-indexed only for that portion of the consumer price index in excess 

of 3 per cent. This will, in all likelihood, result in a future lower standard of living for thousands of 

Saskatchewan seniors. 



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3150 

 

(Okay?) I am sure most Canadians are of the opinion that all seniors deserve an adequate income and 

that lower income seniors in particular should be protected from the forces of inflation. 

 

While I appreciate that the federal government must take measures to control our national debt, in 

doing so we must not compromise the principle of protecting low income seniors from increases in 

their cost of living. I refer specifically to those seniors who rely totally on old age security, 

guaranteed income supplement benefits, and Saskatchewan Income Plan benefits. 

 

I am pleased to see that the guaranteed income supplement will continue to be fully indexed. 

However the de-indexing of old age security will, over time, result in a relative loss of income to 

seniors who are totally reliant on public pensions. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what I’ve been saying. 

 

I would therefore respectfully request that the recently announced de-indexing proposal be 

reconsidered by you and your colleagues with a view to amending it or replacing it with other 

measures that will not burden low-income seniors, and at the same time will not add to the public 

debt. 

 

As part of this review you may wish to give consideration to increasing the guaranteed income 

supplement beyond normal indexing levels in order to protect the income of those seniors. This 

would be consistent with your strategy concerning child and family benefits. Perhaps consideration 

should be given to restructuring old age security benefits based on income, introducing a seniors’ tax 

credit, or amalgamating old age security and the guaranteed income supplement into a plan based on 

income. 

 

I am sure after that review, various options will present themselves which will effectively meet the 

twin goals of maintaining relative income levels for low-income seniors while simultaneously 

managing the public debt. I would be pleased to discuss this issue with you at your convenience. 

 

Sincerely, Bob Andrew, Minister of Finance for Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — I will ask another question, and I’ll ask this specific question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier 

— a specific one. 

 

Last week in the House, Mr. Speaker, you indicated that you would do a study on the impact of de-indexing 

of Saskatchewan’s 122,000 seniors. I ask you: have you completed your study, and how many thousands of 

dollars will it take out of the pockets of the seniors who need this money? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member knows, the proposal out of the federal 

government is to take effect of January 1986. So to date there hasn’t been anything done. We have just 

presented our proposal to the federal government to protect low-income seniors, and we suspect that the 

proposal will be looked at seriously, which will mean that there will be no loss, no loss to low-income 

seniors in the province of Saskatchewan as a result, or if the federal government follows the advice that we 

have given and the Minister of Finance has sent today. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — A new question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, I want to refer you to an article here where 

it says: “Epp . . .” which is the Minister of Health and Welfare in the federal government, where it says: “Epp 

can’t name one group backing pension decision,” and it goes  



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3151 

 

 

on in this article: 

 

The finance department figures show that by having indexation kick only after inflation rises above 3 

per cent, the government will save $15 million in ’85-86 fiscal year, $245 million in 1986-87, and 

will be saving $1.62 billion a year in 1990-1991. And the above is expected to cost the average 

pensioner (it goes on to say) $1,500 to $2,300 over five years. 

 

Mr. Premier, do you not acknowledge that the de-indexing of the pensions by the federal government is 

going to create a crisis of taking thousands and millions of dollars out of the seniors’ pockets? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the question is a little bit hypothetical because the tax increase 

doesn’t take place until 1986 if, in fact, does increase . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, it doesn’t begin 

until 1986, so I don’t know where you get your number, 1985. 

 

We have examined the impact, and we have made recommendations to the federal -government that they 

deal with the low-income seniors. 

 

Now I know the members opposite have been accustomed to rebating the rich, and they like those kinds of 

programs. We said we want to provide more help to low-income seniors. That’s exactly what we’ve done, 

and we’re encouraging the federal government to provide more help to low-income seniors as well. I mean, 

I’ve got a whole list of programs that we’ve designed for seniors, and we’ve provided them extensive 

increases in supplement in the province of Saskatchewan. And they appreciate it. We’re encouraging the 

federal government to do the same, and hopefully they’ll listen. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I ask the Premier to clarify one aspect of the 

letter which he read wherein the Minister of Finance suggested that one way to provide help for senior 

citizens without costing the federal treasury money would be to provide that the old age security pension 

would not go to all senior citizens, or all in the same amount. 

 

Do you agree that what the letter says is that old age security pensions should be means tested or needs 

tested? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — No, I didn’t say that at all. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Well, would you read the portion of the letter again which says that the old 

age security pension might be revised to vary the income of the senior citizens. 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, what I said — and what is in the letter — on Thursday and Friday 

and today is that there are many programs structured for senior citizens. What we should do is take a look at 

all the programs, make sure that low-income people receive the benefit, and that we don’t tax the 

low-income individuals, and we make sure that we don’t rebate the wealthy, so that we can provide income 

and supplements and benefits to people making $10,000, or those on the low-income scale. 

 

The letter says this: 

 

I would therefore respectfully request that the recently announced de-indexing proposal be 

reconsidered by you and your colleagues with a view to amending it or replacing it with other 

measures that will not burden low-income seniors, and at the same time will not add to the public 

debt. 

 

As part of this review you may wish to give consideration to increasing the guaranteed income 

supplement beyond normal indexing levels in order to protect  



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3152 

 

 

the income of those seniors. This would be consistent with your strategy concerning child and family 

benefits. Perhaps consideration should be given to restructuring old age security benefits based on 

income, introducing a seniors’ tax credit, or amalgamating old age security and the guaranteed 

income supplement into a plan based on income. 

 

I am sure after that review, various options will present themselves which will effectively meet the 

twin goals of maintaining relative income levels for low-income seniors while simultaneously 

managing the public debt. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as we look towards reform, as we have Howard Pawley encouraging tax reform, and the 

feds looking at tax reform . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 110 — An Act to amend The University of Saskatchewan Act 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The University of 

Saskatchewan Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill referred to the Standing Committee on 

Non-Controversial Bills. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, during question period today, during the question and answer 

portion, the Premier in answering a supplement, members of our caucus believe, went on at great length. And 

in timing the answers, several of them were in the area of two minutes to questions that were very brief. 

 

I wonder whether or not we could get a ruling on this, and I must say as well that the caucus is having a very 

difficult time in understanding how these answers can be allowed to go on and on, that we have to stand up 

after . . . regularly after question period, and bring this to the attention of the Assembly. 

 

I wonder whether or not you could check it and bring back a ruling on it. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I listened very closely throughout question period today, and sometimes a question can 

be a short question, but it cannot be answered with a short answer. And I believe that the answers today were 

in order, and the point of order raised is not well taken. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Rule 39 
 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day I rise under the provisions of rule 39 

of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly, to seek the unanimous consent of the Assembly to 

present a motion of urgent and pressing necessity — that being the need to make the position of this House 

clear on the issue of de-indexing of old age security payments to Canada’s senior citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by way of brief explanation, this resolution that I would propose to introduce would be 

identical to a resolution which received the unanimous support f the Manitoba legislature last Thursday, June 

6. It was introduced by the Government Leader and supported by  



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3153 

 

 

the official opposition. 

 

If I have leave of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I would introduce a motion in the following terms: 

 

Whereas the recent decision by the Government of Canada to de-index the old age security pensions 

. . . (or I will use the exact words of the Manitoba one). 

 

Whereas the recent decision by the Government of Canada to de-index the old age security program 

will have a harmful effect on many senior citizens in Canada; and whereas the de-indexation of the 

incomes of our senior citizens will have a profoundly negative effect on the standard of living for 

many pensioners on old age security programs; and whereas the de-indexation of the old age pension 

is unfair to Canada’s seniors who have inadequate sources of income; 

 

Therefore, be it resolved that this Assembly demand the immediate reinstatement of full indexation 

of old age pensions for the seniors of Canada. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I seek leave of the Assembly to proceed with this motion now. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The Clerks have drawn to my attention that we do have a bit of a problem in the 

manner that the motion is put forward. In Beauchesne’s 423 and 424, if the members would like to refer to it, 

it says: 

 

A motion should be neither argumentative, nor in the style of the speech, nor contain unnecessary 

provisions or objectionable words. It is usually expressed in the affirmative, even where its purpose 

and effect are negative. 

 

And in 424 it simply gives the Speaker the authorization to amend the motion to bring it in order, and what it 

would take in the circumstances of this motion would be to drop the “whereas” clauses that . . . The first 

three whereas’s that were in the motion, and that the motion then would be: 

 

That therefore be it resolved that this Assembly demand the immediate re-instatement of full 

indexation of old age pensions for the seniors of Canada. 

 

Proceed. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, our resolution deals with the Mulroney government’s action in 

the May 23rd federal budget to cut old age security payments to Canada’s senior citizens. I say, cut, because 

the government’s decision to de-index these payments will se the purchasing power of Canadian seniors 

eroded each year by increases in the cost of living. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, old age security payments rise each year, and they rise the same amount as inflation 

rises. If the inflation rises 4 per cent, the old age security pension rises 4 per cent. The simple reason for this 

is so that Canada’s senior citizens don’t see their pensions eroded; see the purchasing power of their pensions 

taken away. That’s what indexation is all about, for senior citizens’ pensions or for other pensions. And the 

Mulroney budget does away with full indexation, effective next January. 

 

Beginning in January 1986, it proposes to cover only a portion of inflation, that portion over 3 per cent in any 

year. For example, if inflation next year was exactly 3 per cent, Canada’s senior citizens would receive no 

increase in their old age security pension. In fact their purchasing power would have eroded by 3 per cent. If 

inflation was 6 per cent, Canada’s senior citizens would receive an increase in their pension of only 3 per 

cent, and again their purchasing power of their pension would erode by 3 per cent. Only in the highly 

unlikely event that inflation is less than 3 per cent would the senior citizens face a smaller cut in the real 

value of their pensions, and  



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3154 

 

 

only in the almost impossible to conceive event that we have no rate increase in inflation would their 

pensions be protected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we say that under these circumstances the Mulroney budget guarantees that the incomes of 

senior citizens will be eroded, and I say guarantees that they will be eroded at the rate of 3 per cent a year 

over the next decade. I say this because I think there’s no real prospect of inflation being less than 3 per cent 

per year over the next 10 years. 

 

Someone may conjure up that vision, but certainly Mr. Wilson did not in his budget. He provided various 

scenarios about levels of inflation, and the lowest one — the lowest one — Mr. Speaker, was an inflation rate 

of 2.9 per cent, which for all practical purposes is 3 per cent. And unless that unlikely low one was met, we 

are sure that inflation will exceed 3 per cent. 

 

I refer hon. members who may be wondering about this to the document tabled with the budget, called 

“Canada’s Economic prospects, 1985-1990.” And there the government forecast of inflation is that it will 

remain about 4 per cent a year. And I suspect that’s right. I suspect that inflation will be of the 4 per cent of 

greater range. Certainly there’s nothing in the Mulroney budget which is likely to decrease the cost of living. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s why, notwithstanding any rhetoric you may hear, the Mulroney budget guarantees a 3 per 

cent year loss in income for Canada’s senior citizens in respect of their old age security pension. 

 

Mr. Speaker, New Democrats say that is wrong. We say it’s unfair. We say it’s unjustified. Certainly Canada 

needs to get its huge deficit under control — no one denies that — but not, Mr. Speaker, by asking for 

special sacrifice from senior citizens, from our pioneers; not on the backs of people who have built this 

province and this country and who have sacrificed so much through years that were less bountiful than this 

year, or less bountiful than recent years. 

 

We owe a debt to those senior citizens. They’re earned, through their hard work and sacrifice, the right to 

retire in dignity. We owe them that much. And I think that we should see that our pension provisions 

guarantee them that much. 
 

And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, we’ve introduced the emergency resolution this afternoon. The Assembly and 

the people of this province must go on record with one voice in clear opposition to this de-indexing proposal. 

It’s not good enough to say that we’re going to study it, not good enough to say it’s going to be matched by 

something else, not good enough to say, as the Premier said this afternoon in quoting from a letter from the 

Minister of Finance, that we might solve this problem by having the whole old age security scheme 

restructured so that it would be income dependent. We all know what that means, Mr. Speaker. It means a 

means test or a needs test for old age security in the same way that we have one for guaranteed income 

supplement. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we do not believe that that is fair or reasonable, and we do not believe that proposal is a good 

one from the government opposite. We do not believe the de-indexing proposal is a good one from the 

federal government. 
 

Saskatchewan’s 122,000 senior citizens are going to see their old age security income eroded by 3 per cent. 

Now either you think that’s right, or you think it’s not right. And we think that that’s a large income loss — 

3 per cent doesn’t seem much the first year, but another 3 per cent the second year, another 3 per cent the 

third year, and on. 
 

Indeed, Mr. Speaker, if you can postulate the fact a 3 per cent decrease for 20 years, then the value of the 

pension is cut in half. Three per cent per year compounded will cut the value of the pension in one-half. And 

that’s a very, very significant cut. We believe that the government opposite, and we believe that all members 

of this Assembly, should stand up and say that that is the wrong way to go. It is unfair to ask senior citizens 

to bear this special burden. 



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3155 

 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it is ironic that we are debating this resolution today because I believe today marks the 

beginning of Senior Citizens’ Week in Saskatchewan. A few days ago when he announced the proclamation 

of Senior Citizens’ Week, the Minister of Social Services said that it will be a time for Saskatchewan 

residents to, and I want to quote his press release, “ . . . express special recognition for the important 

contribution Saskatchewan seniors have made and continue to make.” And to that I say, hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Minister, and Mr. Premier, what better way is there to show that recognition and appreciation than to 

help protect the incomes of senior citizens? Heritage awards are fine; they’re worthwhile. Conferences 

involving senior citizens are important, yes. But they don’t pay bills, and, more particularly, they don’t give 

the sense of financial security that an indexed pension gives. 

 

What we owe to senior citizens is not only enough money for today, but some reasonable assurance that 

there will be enough money for next year and the year after, when a person is a senior citizen and when their 

earning capacity has all but ceased. And many, many senior citizens find themselves in that position. 

 

The question of security for years to come is a very real one. Those of us who are in the work-force, we 

comfort ourselves with the fact that if prices go up, probably our incomes will go up, and that, by and large, 

happens. The people who are living on pensions have no such assurance. The old age security pension was 

specifically set up to give some little measure of assurance that if prices went up, so would the pension go 

up. 

 

That level of financial security — and it’s far from generous — that level of financial security we owe to 

senior citizens. If we owe them heritage awards, fine; if we’re going to have conferences, fine; but we 

certainly owe them that assurance that we will provide financial security in the future, and that’s what 

de-indexing attacks. 

 

If we want to do something concrete, something meaningful for the pocket-books of Saskatchewan senior 

citizens, not only this year but in years to come, then we will support this resolution in the way that all the 

members of the Manitoba legislature did. We will stand up and say we believe you, the federal government, 

have made an error. We ask you to reconsider. 

 

I think that this could be done on a non-partisan basis in this House as it was done in the Manitoba House. 

There was no suggestion that anyone was scoring any particular points in the Manitoba House, and we will 

hope that the same thing would be true here. 

 

That would be a very, very concrete way to say to senior citizens in Saskatchewan during this Senior 

Citizens Week, we appreciate your contribution and we join with you in providing you with some measure of 

financial security. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I say that we shouldn’t target senior citizens for special sacrifice, I’m not suggesting that 

senior citizens shouldn’t sacrifice along with the rest of us. And they’re not asking that they be sheltered 

from the full impact of the Mulroney budget. That’s not what they’re asking. They’re asking that they not be 

picked out and singled out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will know that the Mulroney budget applies a new 10 per cent tax on things like soap and 

toilet supplies and fruit drinks and a whole series of other commodities — things . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Pet food. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Pet food — things which we buy and things which senior citizens  



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3156 

 

 

buy. And senior citizens have to pay that. And they’re not complaining. I suppose they complain like the rest 

of us about rising prices, but they’re not expecting to be sheltered from that because they’re senior citizens. 

 

In addition to that, a 1 per cent tax has been added to virtually everything we buy, and senior citizens aren’t 

asking to be sheltered from that. They say everybody has to share the burden. We will pay out share of that. 

 

But what they are saying is: having done that, having shouldered our share of the load with all other age 

groups in society, why should we now be targeted for special sacrifice by de-indexing? And I think their case 

is a good one. I think they’ve got a case which simply cannot be argued against effectively. 

 

I have to remind the House that this is not the only burden which senior citizens have been asked to bear 

recently. We have had the Devine budget, the budget of this government, of April. There was a 1 per cent flat 

tax on net income, and some senior citizens will be hit by that. There is an exemption, but it is an exemption 

which certainly will not spare all senior citizens. And senior citizens under that flat tax are not able to use the 

exemptions which are available to most people or some people under the flat tax. 

 

Not many senior citizens are able to use the shelters that frontier drilling credits, or MURBs (multiple unit 

residential buildings), or film and video shelters. And of course under the flat tax the age exemption which is 

given to them is taken away by the Minister of Finance. Any charitable donations which they may make is 

taken away by the Minister of Finance. If they have substantial medical bills, and some senior citizen do, that 

deduction is taken away by the Minister of Finance during the flat tax. So I’m saying, Mr. Minister, this is 

not the only burden they’ve been asked to bear. 

 

I won’t go into detail about our provincial budget. We know about that. We know about what it has done for 

seniors — or done to seniors is perhaps the best way to phrase it. I should point out that senior citizens who 

are renters have been very hard hit by that budget, and no relief is offered to them — none whatever. 

 

I think it’s fair to remind the House of a couple of points. We have 122,000 senior citizens who are being 

asked to bear the special burdens of the provincial budget and now the Mulroney budget. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to home in on one thing which the Premier at least suggested earlier in the House 

today. In the House, and elsewhere, the Mulroney government has claimed at one time that de-indexing 

would not hurt low-income senior citizens because the guaranteed income supplement remains fully indexed 

to inflation. Well, Mr. Speaker, that is a half truth. It is true that the guaranteed income supplement remains 

fully indexed. But we must understand that the supplement is just that — a supplement. It’s an add-on. It’s an 

add-on to the basic pensions of old age security. Nobody gets all of his income from the guaranteed income 

supplement. It is legally impossible. 

 

And so while the supplement may not be de-indexed, everyone who gets the supplement loses money. Now 

that point should be made over and over again, because there is a suggestion somehow that if you don’t 

de-index the supplement you are leaving people who receive the supplement in the same position as they 

were before. And we all know that that’s not true. 

 

If a person is on a guaranteed income supplement, he will be receiving the old age security pension, a 

guaranteed income supplement and perhaps the provincial supplementary income benefit. Leaving the 

provincial one out of it for a moment, referring to the two federal ones, if one of them is de-indexed and one 

is not, very clearly, that senior citizen loses money even  

 



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3157 

 

 

though the guaranteed income supplement may not be de-indexed. And that point must be made because of 

the many, many times that it was, in effect, denied in the early discussion of this issue. 

 

What bothers many people, Mr. Speaker, is that there’s a belief that this de-indexing proposal imposes a 

double standard. If, as it has been suggested, we wish to share the burden; and if, as has been suggested, we 

want to raise taxes on those with ability to pay, and lower taxes on those without the ability to pay, then there 

have been some very remarkable decisions as to who does not have the ability to pay, and who does have the 

ability to pay. 

 

We have a budget which incorporates vast, and I mean vast, tax cuts to the oil industry, and we have a budget 

which de-indexes pensions for every senior citizen in Canada — this presumably on the basis that the people, 

the old age pensioners who are getting their pensions de-indexed, have ability to pay, and oil companies do 

not have the ability to pay. That, to put it mildly, is a strange judgement; and it’s a judgement which simply 

will not bear any analysis. It does not bear any analysis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go through the other provisions of the Mulroney budget to make the similar argument, 

but one needs only to read some material that is put out by the investment houses in Canada, and from the 

investment houses has come a steady string of information, a string of promotional literature saying that this 

budget is a bonanza for sophisticated investors. 

 

Now I wonder, Mr. Speaker, whether many of the sophisticated investors fall into the low-income class, and 

many of the people who are getting OAS (old age security) and GIS (guaranteed income supplement) fall 

into the big-investor class. There is no question if you can believe the investment dealers who are sending 

out their material that the budget is a bonanza for people who buy shares and bonds, but particularly shares. 

It’s a bonanza for people who have large pensions gathered in through registered retirement savings plans. It 

is not a bonanza for old age security pensioners. 

 

And so on that basis, on the basis of fairness and the basis of equality of sacrifice, acknowledging that the 

federal financial affairs must be put in order, we acknowledge that all must pay. We do not acknowledge that 

senior citizens should be targeted. 

 

And so we are asking that the Mulroney government reassess its position. We are asking that they consider 

de-indexing, reconsider de-indexing. We are asking that they withdraw the proposal for de-indexing. We ask 

that whether or not you agree with my arguments and criticisms, you consider the issue of de-indexing. We 

ask that all members of the House ask themselves whether this is fair; whether this is the right way to target a 

group; is this the right group to ask special sacrifices from? I think the answer will be no. 

 

I’m pleased to note that the Manitoba legislature reached that conclusion. I’m pleased to note the Premier of 

Nova Scotia is reported in the press to have reached the same conclusion. And I would hope that this House 

would similarly reach the same conclusion. 

 

And with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I would move — and I do not have it available to me since it was moved 

in a different form — but I would move that: 

 

Be it resolved that this Assembly demand the immediate reinstatement of full indexation of old age 

pensions for the seniors of Canada. 

 

I so move, and ask all hon. members to join in supporting this resolution making it unanimous, as was the 

case in our sister province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3158 

 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. I would caution the members in the galleries that no one can participate 

in the debate in this Assembly except those who are elected to sit here as representatives. 

 

(1500) 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate very much the opportunity to become involved in this 

most important resolution. And one, as the member from Elphinstone has wished for or indicated, that we 

would like to have support of the government in sending a clear message to Ottawa that would basically say 

that we, on behalf of the seniors, the 122,000 seniors in the province, are in fact disappointed in . . . and that 

we re not going to sit idly by while many millions of dollars are taken out of the pockets of the present senior 

citizens and, I might add, the people who at the present time are planning for their retirement, those people 

whether they’re 45 or 55 or 64 are planning for their retirement who now, all of a sudden, have a 

monkey-wrench thrown into those plans. 

 

When the Mulroney government looks at the number in Saskatchewan of 122,000 senior citizens at the 

present time that they are gong to affect and affect directly, they have to realize, as well, that there are many 

thousands of individuals, as well, who are on the verge of becoming senior citizens and are looking at and 

planning, and they too will be affected in the very near future by the impact of this 3 per cent reduction in the 

old age security. 

 

And I think for them the question is maybe even more important than for the people who are already senior 

citizens at the present time. Because what we are looking at, and has been indicated already, that for 

somebody at the age of 45 who is planning for their retirement, that by the time they reach the age of 65 the 

old age security pension will have been effectively reduced to half of what it is at the present time. 

 

What we are saying, and I think that all members would agree with, that we are talking basically about 

fairness, about the problem that we are having in understanding where the Conservative government, both 

provincially and federally, are headed. 

 

We talk as well about double standards and the effect that these changes are going to have on those people 

who have basically built the province. And it’s not only the members of this opposition or the members of 

the Manitoba opposition and government who are opposed to it, but there are many, many people who are 

beginning to understand the impact of what taking $1.6 billion out of the pockets of seniors in the year 1990 

will have on the economy of the province. 

 

And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, whether or not it’s a mere coincidence that the number that is being given to the 

oil companies of about $2 billion in tax incentives, as they’ve called, is basically the same $1.6 billion that is 

being taken from the senior citizens. There are many, many seniors’ groups who are saying this. 

 

Now the Conservative government may say that they are being cynical when they say that it’s interesting that 

the amount of money being taken from seniors is the same amount that’s being divvied out to oil companies 

across Canada, but we have a difficult time understanding the credibility of a government that would say that 

oil companies who are already announcing record profits would need an extra $2 billion, and that should be 

shouldered on the backs of the senior citizens of this country. 

 

But Mr. Speaker, it is not only the seniors who are arguing with this change in the taxation or the tax reform 

that the Minister of Finance here and in Ottawa are talking about. And basically when we talk about tax 

reform, Tory style, we are talking about shifting taxation from the rich to those in the middle and low 

incomes. 



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3159 

 

 

And here is the most blatant example of all: where you’re taking $1.6 billion out of the pockets of the senior 

citizens and giving it to the multinational oil companies. That’s what we are talking about is fairness and tax 

reform and tax change. And I say that we are decidedly and unequivocally opposed to the kind of tax reform 

that the Saskatchewan Minister of Finance is talking about, and the federal minister, Mr. Wilson, is talking 

about when they’re talking about shifting the responsibility of paying taxes from those who can afford to pay 

to those who can least afford. 

 

When I say that it’s not only members of the opposition and senior citizens groups who believe this, I would 

like to quote form a couple of Conservative MPs who are also opposed to this shift in, and change in tax 

reform. Mr. Allan McKinnon, the former Tory defence minister — I’m quoting from a Toronto Globe and 

Mail report — and Allan McKinnon, a former Tory defence minister, whose Victoria riding is awash with 

seniors, says: 

 

There is anger and concern about de-indexing of the pensions. 

 

And another Conservative MP, an Alan Redway, whose York East riding is full of seniors, believes the 

government must review the issue. 

 

I would say to members opposite that if you are concerned about the plight of senior citizens and the plight 

of people who are, in may cases, at the bottom end of the economic spectrum, then how can you in all 

fairness continue this attack, whether it’s a removal of the renter’s rebate, whether it’s the massive increases 

we have seen in the nursing home rates, or the shift in taxation to the local government of the cost of building 

new nursing homes? In every area, what we are seeing is a direct attack, a direct attack on the individuals 

who can least afford to pay. 

 

What we would like to see when we are completing our remarks is the Premier or other members of the 

Cabinet stand in their place and defend or to argue against de-indexing. Because what we would like is a 

clear voice, a clear voice coming out of the province of Saskatchewan that would agree with the government 

and the opposition in Manitoba, that would say very clearly that we believe de-indexing of the OAS, the old 

age security, is an unfortunate, and a move that should not be allowed, and that we should be defending the 

122,000 senior citizens who will be directly affected. 

 

When we talk about the changes that are coming in tax reform in Canada and in Saskatchewan, I find that the 

words that were said by both this government in opposition and leading up to the last election campaign, and 

those words that were spoken by the now Prime Minister, when he talked about the plight of seniors . . . and I 

want to refer to one of his quotes that was given in Sherbrooke, Quebec, on July 26 in 1984, where he talks 

about the plight of senior citizens. And he said, and I quote: 

 

Senior citizens are often isolated, poor, and in a crippling state of dependency. 

 

And this was spoken by one of the aides of the Tory leader at that time, and he went on to say that: 

 

Recent statistics indicated that more than 60 per cent of women, senior women, and 40 per cent of 

men over the age of 65, who live alone, are on incomes below the poverty line. 

 

Now what have they decided to do to change that shocking statistic in Canada? Well, clearly, they have 

decided that living below the poverty line is not enough and that they should de-index the old age security 

that these 60 per cent of women and 40 per cent of men who are below the poverty line and seniors, are now 

getting. What they have decided to do to help these people out is to take 3 per cent away from them each 

year. And over a five-year period, we are looking at taking away from these people who are already below 

the poverty line, $1,500 in  



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3160 

 

 

actual money that they have at their disposal. 

 

And I say that it is clearly an issue of shifting taxation. And when we talk about tax reform, Tory style, that’s 

what we are saying. We are saying that we are going to take away from those people, who are in the middle 

and low income, and give it to those who already have. The oil companies who are announcing record 

profits, you don’t look at them to take any more money from. 

 

And I would like to have one of the Conservative members stand here and tell me why, when we’re looking 

at tax reform, we don’t have to say to the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right. Those are the very 

people that we should be going after. Yes, that’s right. People who are making 200,000 a year don’t pay. 

There are many people who don’t pay, and you should be changing the tax policy to plug those loopholes. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — I say to the Minister of Finance that the reason that he can’t take those people 

on is because he’s afraid of them. Who does he take on? I’ll tell you who this Minister of Finance and the 

Minister of Finance in Ottawa take on: they take on pensioners. They take on the pensioners, and they give it 

to the oil companies. These are the macho Tories and right-wingers in Ottawa and Saskatchewan who are 

afraid to take on the people with money. 

 

And I say to them, very clearly, I would like to know what the strategy is that’s causing you people to decide 

that those people who are making record profits should not be scrutinized in terms of paying their fair share 

of taxes. What sense does that make? 

 

We look at the banks, we look at the oil companies, we look at the railways — all of them paying or all of 

them declaring record profits, and not one move, not one move in the federal budget; not one move except 

for one little slight move in the provincial budget that would take into consideration those corporations 

making record profits. 

 

But we look at who they’re taking on. So they’ve got a deficit. They’ve got a deficit that they have built up 

here in the province and in the federal government. How are they going to solve it? 

 

Well, obviously, you don’t take on your friends. Issue number one, you don’t take on your friends of the 

Conservative party, namely the oil companies and the banks. You don’t take them on. 

 

Well do you take on the people who are in unionized positions? Well no, we certainly don’t want to, and no 

one’s going to take them on. 

 

Well who do we go to? The people we go to, if you’re a Tory, are the people who are on pensions. That’s 

who we go to. And I say to you that you’re making one fundamental mistake because you’re taking on the 

people who will not stand idly by and not fight back. 

 

You may assume that the seniors of this country are going to stand idly by and that you can get away with it. 

But these are the very people in this province, and I know many of them who built this province, who, when 

they were attacked by the grain companies in the early days, set up the Canadian Wheat Board and the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. And I want to say to you that when they were taken on by the banks in the 1930s, 

what they did is set up the credit union system to fight banks and to act as a lending institution. 

 

And I want to tell you as well that in de-indexing . . . and the Minister of Finance here can laugh about the 

people, 60 per cent who are below the poverty line, and where he’s going to take 3 per cent from. 



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3161 

 

 

Well you may think this is a joke, or what I’m saying is a joke. But what I want to say to you, Mr. Minister 

of Finance, that these seniors are not going to sit idly by while you take 115 bucks out of their pockets if 

they’re a renter. And they’re not going to sit idly by while you take $1,500 out of their pockets over four 

years in direct de-indexing of their pensions, because they’re fighters, and they’re going to fight back. And 

we will watch to see whether or not you will have the courage to stand up here and defend the seniors, or 

whether you’ll continue on down the path of taking on the side of the oil companies and banks and railways. 

 

This will really determine where you people stand on the issue of fairness in tax reform because I want to say 

that when we see tax reform, Tory style, in Saskatchewan and Canada, what it means is taking from the poor 

and giving to the rich. And it’s been mentioned in Ottawa any number of times over the last week of debate 

on this issue, the Robin Hood in reverse or the Robin-Hood-gone-mad mentality of Conservative 

governments in this province and in Canada. And I would urge all members to support the resolution and 

send a clear message to the government in Ottawa. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to make a few comments with regard to the motion of the 

Leader of the Opposition before I move an amendment to that motion. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition started out indicating that we should follow the lead of the province of 

Manitoba in a non-partisan way, in a non-partisan way, Mr. Speaker, and says: look, all together, let’s try to 

work this collectively. We won’t do it politically; we’ll do it in a non-partisan way. 

 

And then between him and the House Leader for the opposition, they proceed to make their patented political 

speech that we’ve heard in this House for the last two months. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that hardly strikes me as somebody that is looking at trying to do something in a 

non-partisan way. And we’ve had, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had experiences with the members opposite dealing 

with senior citizens. When I go back to the first election that I was involved in — and I anticipate we’re gong 

to see the same type of tactics — Mr. Speaker, I saw, in that first election in 1978, the NDP government of 

the day going to senior citizens, house after house after house, saying, elect a Tory and medicare will be gone 

— medicare will be gone. They said that in ’78, Mr. Speaker, and the people believed them — the old people 

believed. 

 

Then in 1982 they tried, and they said it again, Mr. Speaker, but the people that time said, no, I don’t believe 

you. I don’t believe those scare tactics this time. 

 

Three years later, Mr. Speaker — three years later, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. State your point of order. 

 

(1515) 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’m having a great difficulty understanding the relation between the campaign in 

1978 in Kindersley and the motion before the Assembly. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. Order. I’ve had a great deal of difficulty relating the comments of the Leader of 

the Opposition, the member for Shaunavon to the resolution as well, and when they’re broadening out like 

they have today on this motion, it’s very difficult to contain it to one subject area. 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, you go back, as I said, to 1978, and that was the tactic, and I think 

that is a shameful tactic, Mr. Speaker, to go to pensioners, to  



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3162 

 

 

people that have made great contributions in this country and in this province and lead them with the scare 

tactic that if you don’t be careful, you won’t get into a hospital, you won’t get to see a doctor. That kind of 

tactic, in my view, Mr. Speaker, has no place in Canadian politics, has no place in Saskatchewan politics. 

 

But let’s go back and look at . . . Prior to the amendment, I’m going to talk about the basic question. I want 

to talk about what we have done for senior citizens in this province, and it all starts with a series, one of them 

being in the area of nursing homes. This government has committed over 1,500 new nursing home spaces in 

this province — 1,500 new spaces. 

 

And I want to read to you, Mr. Speaker, and into this Assembly, two letters, Mr. Speaker. The members . . . 

the members should maybe like to hear these letters. One is a memo dated January 4, 1976, from a W. 

Smishek, Chairman of Treasury Board, to the Hon Herman Rolfes, Minister of Social Services . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. Order. Order, please. I would ask the members to co-operate a bit and debate the 

motion that is before the House. I’ve given you both some latitude; now I’d ask you to get back to the 

motion. 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — What I . . . I think what we have to look at in the context of dealing with funding 

to senior citizens, and I think the rationale of my argument is that you must have, you must look at all 

programs for senior citizens in dealing with the debate on this particular question. 

 

One obvious important area to senior citizens is special care homes for those people when they come to the 

point where they need institutional care. And I simply want to indicate — indicate consistently, Mr. Speaker, 

that we have increased the funding to those nursing homes very significantly. And what I wanted to read 

briefly, and it’s just two short paragraphs — two lines, in effect, Mr. Speaker — dealing with 1976, and this 

is . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. Order, order! I just cautioned the member and asked him to come back to the 

topic at hand. If you’re going to deal with the items in the manner that you are now, then I think we’re going 

to have to have a repeat of the throne speech and the budget speech, and I don’t think that’s what either side 

of the House wants. 

 

So I would ask you to come back to the motion. 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — I will stay away from the moratorium stuff, Mr. Speaker, of the previous 

government. What I would say, though, is that I think we have to look at funding to senior citizens in the 

very wide context and ask ourselves: what are the fundamental priorities that we have to provide to senior 

citizens in this country? What are the fundamental priorities? How can we best meet those priorities? And 

how can we generate revenues to meet those priorities? 

 

And I think that’s a question that all Canadians must face. And I quite frankly believe that senior citizens, 

equally, ask those questions and seek answers to those questions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we have to do, it seems to me, is the fundamental priority in this country. What is fundamental in this 

country, it seems to me is as a society we must look after those people that are less fortunate. And that 

applies equally to senior citizens. 

 

Now when we talk about de-indexation and we ask ourselves about the fairness of de-indexation, nobody 

suggests that’s a good program, Mr. Speaker. And we certainly haven’t suggested it’s a good program. But 

let’s look at how it impacts people. 



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3163 

 

 

Assuming you had a senior citizen making $100,000 a year form pensions, some of them, Mr. Speaker, just 

as an example, from investment income, from pensions, from whatever it might be. And then you have some 

other senior citizen that is making no more income, has no more income than the old age pension, the 

guaranteed income supplement and the Saskatchewan Income Plan — those three programs; that’s all the 

basis of their income. 

 

It’s very difficult for those people to make ends meet. We all agree with that. Those that have, perhaps, still a 

farm; those that perhaps have a good pension; and those that perhaps have some investments and have some 

income. What the de-indexation will do is take exactly the same amount, the same number of dollars out of 

each pocket. 

 

Now when we are as a society, is it not incumbent upon us to ask ourselves which of those in that group is 

most important that we assist? Which in that group is the most important for us to assist? Is it the people with 

an income that they can still save and can have what they need? Or is it those who don’t have enough to get 

by, day to day? And that’s a question for society, whether it’s people with a family, or it’s equally true it it’s 

people that are over 65. And I think we have to look a the same thing and the same way of looking at it. 

 

The number two thing we have to look at, Mr. Speaker, is this. The number two thing we have to look at is 

this: what do we do with the host of programs that we have? We have several programs for senior citizens. 

We have the old age security. We have the guaranteed income supplement. We have the SIP program 

(Saskatchewan Income Plan), senior’s program in Saskatchewan. And in that regard, Mr. Speaker, that 

program in Saskatchewan, we can make a contribution to single people, single individual senior citizens on 

SIP that make SIP. They get $50 a month — those that are on maximum OAS, GIS — $50 a month. Couples 

get $75 a month. 

 

Now let’s go to Manitoba and compare what they get there. In Manitoba — and this is where the motion 

comes — it’s easy to hear a motion. Where we give $50 a month to those low-income seniors, Manitoba 

gives $16. Where we give $75 to couples, senior citizens low income of $75, Manitoba gives $34. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we don’t speak to the senior citizens of our province through motions to Ottawa; we speak with 

money on the table and grants back to senior citizens. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — How do we deal with this, Mr. Speaker? How do we deal with this? It seems to 

me, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me the senior citizens, the low-income senior citizens in this county, the 

low-income senior citizens in this country deserve more attention, and the most attention, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s why we, Mr. Speaker, will be moving this motion that senior citizens on the low income should get 

more from their senior citizen’s rebate — those that are making over 30,000 and 35,000 should get 

significantly less. 

 

And what is wrong with that philosophy? Is that not the philosophy by which this country was created and 

built, helping those on the low-income level? Isn’t it ironic that I stand speaking on those terms that very 

often the Leader of the Opposition tried to build a career speaking on the same thing? 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the way we must move in this country, and that is why I move an amendment to this 

motion. And what we would propose, Mr. Speaker, is this: the savings that the federal government would 

make from de-indexation of the old age pension should be offset with increased benefits to those in the 

guaranteed income supplement. 

 

What that means, Mr. Speaker, is those with, give more, a little more to those without. And what’s wrong 

with that type of system, Mr. Speaker? That is what we were taught in this  



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3164 

 

country. That’s what we were taught in this province, and that’s what we believe in, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Therefore, I move an amendment to this motion, Mr. Speaker, that reads as follows . . . that the resolution be 

amended as follows: 

 

That all the words after the word “that” be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

This Assembly requests the federal government take measures that will ensure that the standard of 

living of low-income seniors is not eroded by partial indexing of the old age security program that is 

scheduled to begin January 1, 1986, and urge the federal government to consider instituting offsetting 

increases in the guaranteed income supplement payable as a possible measure. 

 

I move that, seconded by the member from Meadow Lake, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, unlike the Minister of Finance, I do not intend to try to cloud the 

issue by discussing every conceivable issue that has affected senior citizens in the last 10 years. Mr. Speaker, 

I want to be relatively brief and direct to the point. 

 

What the amendment amounts to — the amendment should be seen for what it is. It amounts to a refusal by 

the government members opposite to take a stand on this issue. It is patently — and the speeches by the 

Minister of Finance and whatever one would describe the performance of the Premier in question period — it 

is patently an attempt to confuse the issue and to avoid taking a stand. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, I would have thought that members opposite would have had the courage of the 

Conservative Party in Manitoba or the Conservative Party in Nova Scotia, and would have joined Liberals 

and New Democrats in Canada in condemning de-indexing. What in fact the government opposite has done 

is to introduce a confusing amendment that I want to speak to in a moment. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, rather, I would have hoped that members opposite could have found their way to 

saying to their federal brethren, you’re wrong, it should not be done. I would have hoped that they would 

have had the courage to do that. It’s a rather strange relationship. This government is slavishly tied to the 

skirts of the federal government while the federal government seem to pay them very little heed in return. It 

is a very strange, one-sided relationship. Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, I would have hoped they would have 

found the courage to do that. 

 

The old age pensions in this country are one of the genuinely decent things this country has done, and we 

initiated on our own, that was our idea. It’s been our contribution to a more civilized western society. And 

you are quite right — the old age pensions are not enough. And it has been the New Democrats in Ottawa 

who have taken the lead in urging that they be increased. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the indexing of those pensions was another compassionate step in an attempt, Mr. Speaker, to 

make old age pensions and the lot of senior citizens a better one, another genuinely compassionate decent 

thing this country has done. 

 

I would have hoped members opposite would have had the courage to defend and protect our old age pension 

system. They have not done so. They have refused to do so. Instead we have these bizarre performances 

today by the Minister of Finance, who spoke about everything else, and by the Premier, and I must confess I 

had no idea what he was speaking about in question period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendment deals with the proposition that the GIS, which has always been  



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3165 

 

means tested, and the old age security should be means tested. That is, in fact, just what the letter said. Mr. 

Speaker, the New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan has been the . . . the New Democratic Party in Canada 

and Saskatchewan has been the only parties which have consistently opposed means testing old age pensions. 

We are the only party that has consistently opposed it. Both Liberals and Conservatives have toyed with it. 

We opposed that. 

 

(1530) 

 

We opposed that because most senior citizens now live below the poverty line. Some 60 per cent of them do. 

Some 60 per cent of them do, Mr. Minister. Inevitably a means-tested old age pension will take income and 

money away from senior citizens who already live below the poverty line. There can be no justification for 

that. 

 

The GIS, which is now income tested, does not begin to assist in a full and fair way all those who are below 

the poverty line. Some 60 per cent of senior citizens live below the poverty line. Those 60 per cent of senior 

citizens do not all get the GIS. Indeed, I think it’s fair to say that only 20 per cent of those senior citizens 

who live below the poverty line get the full GIS. And, Mr. Speaker, to index . . . to means test, as this 

resolution suggests, as the amendment suggests — to means test the old age security will further erode the 

position of senior citizens. 

 

My colleague from Shaunavon read the statement by the Prime Minister in the federal election campaign 

with respect to what indexing should mean for senior citizens. I don’t intend to repeat it, and I frankly — 

although I must be forgiven for the source — I don’t think I could improve upon that statement. 

 

De-indexing pensions will aggravate the lot of the poorest age group in our society. I would have hoped 

members opposite, who I suspect know that this cannot be justified either on . . . certainly not on political 

grounds, and cannot be justified on policy grounds. I think they know it; I think they just haven’t got the 

courage to say to the federal government, you’ve made a mistake and you ought not to do it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said the other day, I would have hoped this government would have said no, we think you 

made a mistake — on compassionate grounds. I’d hoped they would have done it because it is a program that 

Canadians have developed which is decent and compassionate and has done a lot for senior citizens. 

 

But if members opposite have no compassion, I would have hoped, then, that they could have found some 

crasser ground, Mr. Speaker, in which to oppose the de-indexing . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the 

resolution deals with de-indexing, and that’s what I’m dealing with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would have hoped that they could have found some crass grounds to impose de-indexing. Mr. 

Speaker, as the Premier admitted Friday in question period when the matter was raised, it is unacceptable to 

Canadians that the financial position of senior citizens should be further eroded by any means. 

 

And if that occurs because the federal government removes the de-indexing, then the provinces may well 

find themselves being pressured to pick up the pieces. And thus we may have the federal government 

transferring a program to the provincial government. 

 

The provincial governments, most of them, are already hard pressed; certainly this government claims to be. 

So if the members opposite couldn’t find their way to oppose de-indexing on compassionate grounds, I 

would have hoped they would have done it on a rather more crass ground. They haven’t done so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the de-indexing of pensions is a further illustration of how Conservative  



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3166 

 

governments are shifting the tax burden from the rich to the poor. Mr. Speaker, we have seen the renter’s 

rebate taken away from senior citizens — at least those who live in apartments; we don’t know what’s going 

to happen next year. We now see the de-indexing of pensions further erodes their financial position. 

 

All of this done admittedly for only one purpose — to save the government money. Why? So they can reduce 

the taxes of the oil companies — reduce the taxes of wealthy Canadians — so that they will not have to pay 

capital gains on profits they make speculating on the stock market; and so that they will not have to pay 

capital gains on income, much of which cannot be defended, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, I don’t intend to go on at length, and I haven’t had a chance to discuss it. I can tell you 

that I will be casting my vote, Mr. Speaker, against this amendment and for the main motion. The 

amendment is nothing other than an attempt to avoid having to say yes or no. The amendment, Mr. Speaker, 

is an attempt by members opposite to say maybe. On this issue, Mr. Speaker, we think “maybe” just simply 

isn’t good enough. Members opposite should say yes or no. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would have hoped that the opportunity would have been 

provided to us to hear the Premier enter into this debate, and I certainly would have invite him to be a part of 

it because I think that senior citizens across this country are asking many questions. They are asking the 

question here in Saskatchewan, and they are asking it in respect to the Tory government now in Ottawa. And 

they are asking of who can believe the Tory promise. 

 

My colleague has indicated . . . In the last federal election the leader, the now Prime Minister of this country, 

indicated that there was a sacred trust that the seniors’ pensions would not be, in fact, disturbed, that 

indexing would continue back and be continued. And today it’s the seniors across this nation . . . and I ask 

the seniors who can remember the Tory government of the 1929 and 34 in Saskatchewan . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Order. I stopped the Minister of Finance from going back and reviewing 

history back from the beginning of time. And I’m going to ask the member here to stay on the subject of the 

debate. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Well, I ask the seniors across Canada to look back into history of previous Tory 

governments and ask themselves whether they have ever offered security and dignity to the seniors. And I 

ask them to look again today and watch what is happening across the world, and indeed in Canada, with 

right-wing governments. 

 

I’ll tell you that Brian Mulroney, the Prime Minister of this province, indicated clearly at Sherbrooke, 

promised unequivocally to re-instate complete indexing of old age pensions to the actual cost of living as of 

January, 1985. And they said also at that time that they would provide continuation of the security net — the 

safety net, as they called it — that that was a sacred trust. 

 

Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, that that promise has been broken to the people, the seniors of Canada. And I 

ask the seniors to remember the records of other Tory governments. You know, across the way they seem to 

think that it’s a kind of a little change; that it’s not going to affect anybody. But do you know the magnitude 

of what it’s going to take out of the average citizen? $1.62 billion, average citizens, the collective citizens 

across this nation . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and you might want to laugh because of the magnitude of it, 

but over an average of four years it’s about $1,500 our of every senior’s pocket. And they think that’s . . . 

That’s the new Tory justice — the new Tory justice. 

 

We were promised tax reforms by the federal government in respect to putting a minimum taxation on the 

rich — those that were escaping, the 750 that were making over 150, $200,000  



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3167 

 

range and were paying no tax. But no, no. That was too complicated. It wasn’t complicated; it was the people 

that they are acting on behalf of. 

 

So why would the Tory government effect a tax on wealthy? Of course not. They represent them. And so 

what are they doing now? They have decided to strike out against the seniors across this nation. And I want 

to say, one of the biggest myths that has ever been perpetrated, or pretended to be perpetrated, is by this and 

other Tory governments across this nation, and that is that they have consultation with the people that they 

are going to affect. Consultations . . . the new order of consultations, they say. Federal Tory government will 

consult with the provincial, and collectively will introduce fiscal responsibility. 

 

You know, when the Minister of Health was asked in Ottawa whether he had consulted in respect to 

de-indexing the pensions to the seniors, he had to admit . . . Epp can’t name one group backing pension 

decision. He hadn’t even consulted with the people — the seniors, the people that had built this nation. 

 

And one of the things, as the member from . . . my colleagues from Regina Centre indicated, what we had 

built here in Canada was a basic pension for all seniors, the old age security. Regardless of their income, 

other income, we said, in respect to your contribution in building this nation, we will establish for you a basic 

pension called old age security. 

 

And we went beyond that, and we said to those seniors who were unfortunate and need more income in order 

to sustain life in the dawn of their life, we set up the guaranteed income supplement. That’s what we did. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, the basic old age security has become an integral part of security for our 

seniors throughout this nation. I think it has been the envy of many people who have seen the respect and the 

dignity with which we looked at the seniors who, I say, contributed so much in the building of this province 

and this country. And today what we see is a further erosion of that which I thought all seniors could 

continue with security to expect would continue to exist. 

 

And so I am disappointed that here today that . . . in having the massive tradition, the massive tradition in 

Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan which was known as the social . . . which brought in so many social programs 

throughout the year. It was the social laboratory of North America — laboratory — and no doubt about it. 

And today what we see is again the right-wing Tory party attacking those very people who have built this 

country. 

 

And so I want to ask the seniors again to realize that here today what we ask the provincial government and 

members of this legislature to agree on. We ask to join together, as they did in Manitoba, and to send a 

message to Ottawa on behalf of the 122,000 seniors in this province, to send a message to Ottawa and to ask 

them to reconsider cutting back on the security of senior citizens throughout this country. 

 

(1545) 

 

And unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Finance got up said, well we can’t agree with that. 

We have to fudge it. We have to really go for a means test. That’s what his amendment does. 

 

No longer will we have the old age security as a right, and properly indexed as we had during the past 

number of years. And so it’s very clear here that what we have in a erosion of the safety net which has been 

provided for our seniors throughout Canada at the federal level. And there is, in fact, duplicity here in 

Saskatchewan. And if a government and members of the government refuse to agree with what was passed in 

Manitoba, being critical of the federal government’s  



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3168 

 

de-indexing of pensions, then we know exactly where this government stands in respect to seniors. 

 

And so I ask you, the seniors of this province, to certainly regard this as a right-wing Tory action and look 

across the world and look at it at Great Britain and see what is happening there so far as the social net; to 

take a look in the United States at the right-wing Reagan government. And I ask the seniors to look at what 

happened here in this province some years ago under the previous Tory government, and I ask them not to sit 

idly by but to take on the fight to prevent this right-wing government from destroying the network of security 

that took a number of years for various political parties to build up. 

 

And so, therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say that I am disappointed that here across are other 

Saskatchewan members of the government who absolutely will refuse to support the seniors of this country. 

That’s what it amounts to. If we don’t pass the resolution in the form that we put forward, what the members 

of the government caucus are saying to the seniors of this province and this country is that we tacitly agree 

with the steps being taken by the Mulroney government. 

 

I want to say that in our party we re going to continue the fight on behalf of the seniors in Saskatchewan and 

the fight for seniors across Canada. And I am glad to say that I have a member of Parliament in the House 

today from the New Democratic Party who are holding hearings across Saskatchewan and across Canada to 

hear what the seniors of this country have to say about this Tory policy. And I will tell you, I will tell you, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there is no doubt that the seniors, come the subsequent elections, will know what to 

do. 

 

And so I, on behalf of my caucus, indicate clearly that we are, in fact, joined in co-operation with the seniors 

of this province, of this country, and we will continue to fight for an old age security with the continuation of 

indexing. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just have a few words of comment with respect to the 

amendment that was proposed, and the resolution. I want to make sure that the public of Saskatchewan 

understands what it will mean if the opposition votes against an increase to the guaranteed income 

supplement. 

 

In this amendment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have proposed to help senior citizens with low income. And we 

have proposed to offset the partial de-indexing by an increase in guaranteed income supplement. And I want 

the entire province to know, and the nation to know, if the opposition in the province of Saskatchewan is 

about to vote against that, what that means to low-income people in this province, and what that would mean 

in principle to low-income people across this country. 

 

Now what it means is that they would rather have a system that supplements high-income people. Well I just 

want to make it very, very clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that our amendment would completely offset the 

de-indexing, and it would apply to low-income people, low-income people who need the help, and not to 

rebate the rich. 

 

Now speaker after speaker after speaker in the opposition is saying that they want to rebate everybody, and 

they want to provide more money to everybody, whether they’re wealthy, whether they have 100,000 or 

200,000 or 50,000. And we’re saying, Mr. Speaker, we can address  



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3169 

 

the problem of the de-indexing for low-income seniors by providing an increase in guaranteed income 

supplement. 

 

That’s very, very important, Mr. Speaker, because it provides for a mechanism which allows low-income 

people to be protected and still allows a tax base for provincial governments and federal governments and 

others to deal with their particular programs. 

 

The second point I want to make: I know the opposition has talked about oil companies in this debate. 

They’ve talked about capital gains in this debate. I want to talk about seniors. I want to speak about seniors. 

What kind of position are the seniors of Saskatchewan in today in the province of Saskatchewan? What kind 

of position are they in, and how would guaranteed income supplement increases fit with what’s gone on in 

the province of Saskatchewan today? If we can adopt this motion, and the federal government adopts our 

recommendation, it fits perfectly with the programs that we’ve initiated in the province of Saskatchewan — 

perfectly. 

 

As an example — and I’ll just touch on part of it — senior citizens will be receiving this letter from me today 

or tomorrow. It went out. And the letter in the first two paragraphs says this — just two paragraphs — as it 

applies to seniors in this province. I’m not talking about oil companies. I‘m not talking about capital gains. 

I’m talking about seniors and the impact that guaranteed income supplement increases would have on the 

programs that we’ve initiated here to date. The letter says this: 

 

During the past three years we have introduced programs to ensure security to seniors. We have 

doubled the maximum benefits under the Saskatchewan Income Plan for single seniors from $25 to 

$50 a month, and increased senior couples maximum benefits from $45 to $75 a month in the 

province of Saskatchewan for senior citizens. 

 

We established a 5-year, $20 million Senior Citizens’ Home Repair Program, and this year took great 

pleasure in announcing the Senior Citizens’ Heritage Rebate. 

 

Now the letter goes on to say about seniors in this province: 

 

The Senior Citizens’ Heritage Rebate Program offers $25 million in benefits to senior home owners. 

The program will reimburse seniors a portion of their 1985 property taxes that are paid by December 

31 of this year and ensure that senior home owners in Saskatchewan receive rebate benefits this year. 

 

This week seniors will receive the application form, and next year, Mr. Speaker, next year the senior 

citizens’ property tax credit will introduce . . . will be introduced, providing increased benefits, increased 

benefits to lower income seniors in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I raise that, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because guaranteed income supplements that would be 

increased will be focused and targeted on exactly the same individuals that have come to us from across the 

province and say, help those on lower income, or people who have fixed government pensions; make sure 

they are protected, and for heavens sakes don’t start rebating, and don’t keep rebating all those folks that may 

have incomes that are very, very large and larger than anybody in this room. 

 

Now we have addressed that because people have said to the province of Saskatchewan and the government, 

the finance minister and others, the low-income people need help; the wealthy people don’t need it. Tax 

breaks, benefits, supplements that would encourage more rebates to the rich; take the money and provide it to 

lower income people. 

 

The second point I want to make Mr. Deputy Speaker, with respect to how this program would fit with 

Saskatchewan, we have taken a look at seniors’ programs in this province and said  



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3170 

 

we must do more than has ever been done before. I mean, I think the Minister of Finance mentioned, in the 

province of Manitoba their protection for seniors is only a fraction of what it is here. And similarly I don’t 

believe that Manitoba even indexes at all their supplements to seniors. They don’t even index them at all, as 

far as I’m aware, but they’re talking about the de-indexing at the federal level. 

 

In the province of Saskatchewan, not only are we indexed, but we have put a great deal of money forward 

with respect to low-income people and seniors across the board. Now I’ll give you some examples, because 

this program announced today, or the amendment that we propose, fits with these. 

 

Fifteen hundred new nursing home beds planned for Saskatchewan. That’s a large construction project for 

seniors. Extra billing by doctors has been eliminated. I think that would be extremely significant and 

important to seniors in the province of Saskatchewan. And when you’re looking at low-income people, extra 

billing is precisely the individuals that are saying, that’s a problem for me. And we’ve addressed that 

problem head-on. And for decades and generations people have been trying to deal with it, and the Minister 

of Health in this government dealt with it. 

 

Provide province-wide foot care programs for seniors. And low-income seniors are those that need it, and 

that’s what’s provided here — up to $25 a month for low-income seniors, as I’ve mentioned. No Sask Tel 

increases for seniors and for citizens of this province for two years. A $1,000 home repair program, a grant 

program for seniors who own their own homes. Sales tax removed for power bills. Ask the low-income 

seniors if that’s important. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have put together programs for seniors in this province; a long list of them. And 

they are designed particularly for low-income seniors. When we announce a program — and I’m not going to 

go over the entire budget — when we announce a program that provides up to $600 million for economic 

activity and jobs, 300 million for health, senior citizens believe that that’s extremely important. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just let me close with this. Just let me close with this. I want the entire province 

of Saskatchewan to know two things; one, obviously what we’re doing for seniors and those on low income 

— and our new rebate program for seniors is designed specifically for those on low income. 

 

And two, I want the whole country to know, if the opposition in this House votes against an increase, an 

offsetting increase to guaranteed income supplement that would apply to all low-income seniors, I want the 

whole country to know that the opposition, that the NDP voted against that. Because I believe, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, if you help low-income people — and this would — it is not only responsible, it is not only caring, 

but it’s also wise in the sense that you’re not giving rebates to wealthy people. 

 

And I’ve said many times there’s a distinct difference between the opposition and this government with 

respect to the philosophy of rebating the rich. They were into it for years, and they carried on old programs, 

and they encouraged to carry them on, and we’re saying: we believe that it’s responsible to care and protect 

those low-income individuals, and that’s what this amendment says: to make sure that the guaranteed income 

supplement completely offsets the indexing, and if it does, it will do the job, and at the same time we don’t 

end up rebating the rich. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe it’s a very sound amendment, and I certainly will be supporting it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 

MR. ENGEL: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased to listen to what the Premier 

said today and how he’s trying to put up a smoke-screen so that this government  



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3171 

 

doesn’t have to go on record and doesn’t have to vote where they stand on indexing — on where they stand. 

 

This amendment, this amendment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that he expects us to support — instead of a motion 

that’s before the House, Mr. Speaker — this amendment here says that . . . urges the federal government to 

consider, to consider instituting offsetting increases in guaranteed income supplement payments as a possible 

measure. 

 

Let’s just say . . . please look at something. Go ahead and slap on an index. Go ahead and take the indexing 

away and say that we’re to go back, we’re going to go back to the days when the Tories were in power last 

time. Mr. Speaker, this move goes back, and, if we follow it through, if we follow it through to what it’s 

going to cost seniors, we’ll be back to where we were in the ’30s when there was no effective pension in 

place — when there was no effective pension in place. And we’re going to move back. 

 

And it’s even worse than that, Mr. Speaker, because what I heard today, what I heard today in both this 

amendment and in the question period and in what the previous speaker, what the Premier just said, if that he 

believes in a means test. He believes that there should be a means test to see who’s going to get a pension or 

not. He wants to be able to exercise his political will and say, look, we’ll allow this, but we won’t allow that; 

and we’re going to determine who . . . we’re going to determine who in Saskatchewan is going to get a 

pension or not. We’re going to determine that, and we’re going to do a means test. 

 

And as far as I’m concerned, as far as I’m concerned, this government doesn’t care, Mr. Speaker, about 

seniors. This government has demonstrated over and over they don’t care what the ordinary person is going 

to get stuck with. 

 

When we discussed the pay-out on Pioneer Trust, that wasn’t a problem. We paid out the money that went to 

people that were unsecured depositors, Mr. Speaker. But when we talk about indexing pensions, when you 

talk about indexing pensions, and you talk about the person that’s on a low level, we’re going to freeze them; 

in fact, we’re going to roll them back by 3 per cent. 

 

(1600) 

 

Seniors in my area are on the pension and never expecting an index spent a life’s savings to go on a trip, but 

we didn’t have $4,500 to rebate them. We didn’t have $4,500 for them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think that this amendment goes completely contrary to the original motion. This amendment is 

completely opposite because it says we’ll talk about possible measures of offsetting the cost, possible 

measures that might be instituted to offset the cost. Talk about urging the federal government to institute, or 

consider instituting, offsetting increases. Mr. Speaker, that waters down the intent because the resolution was 

direct and clear, right to the point, saying we don’t believe that the federal government should allow 

de-indexing of pensions. 

 

And I think that this amendment, if you look at the fine lines of it, shouldn’t even have been considered by 

this House today, Mr. Speaker. I question whether that amendment should be considered because it’s a 

completely different resolution. We were being specific and saying that we don’t believe in de-indexing, and 

out we come with a measure saying, well, if you’re going to de-index, go ahead and de-index. And by voting 

for this amendment, Mr. Speaker, you are telling me that I’m supposed to vote for and agree with 

de-indexing of senior citizens’ pensions. And that is completely and opposite to what our original intent was. 

 

I think the original intent was a good one. When I look at the article that’s in the Globe and Mail this past 

week, the federal leader, our Prime Minister, made a statement in Sherbrooke, Quebec,  



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3172 

 

on July 26, 1984, and Brian Mulroney promised unequivocally to reinstate complete indexing of old age 

pensions to the actual cost of living as of January, 1985. He was going after Liberals and said, you’re 

indexing those . . . And now he’s taken the indexing away — a complete turn-around. 

 

When you want to win an election in this country, you can make any kind of promise, and people will 

believe governments for making promises. But once the election’s over, then you go back on your promise. 

When the Prime Minister promised that we’re supposed to reinstate complete indexing of old age pensions to 

the actual cost of living back to January 1st, 1985 — he makes that promise on July 26, ’84, and by less than 

one year later, and it’s not July yet in 1985 — we’ve got a motion before the federal government that is 

going to go completely contrary to his word. 

 

So we don’t need to listen to election promises any more because they are just great for winning an election, 

but once the election’s over we can stand up in this House and say, taboo with the election promises, we 

don’t need to follow them, and we’re going to stick before you a little resolution, or a little amendment to the 

resolution that completely disregards the promises that were made earlier. 

 

And I think this amendment is one that we can’t consider today because it’s so far off what the original intent 

was. And to tell me that I’m supposed to stand up in this House and vote for an amendment like this that is 

the first step in the means test, I want to tell every Tory in Saskatchewan that here is one person that isn’t 

going to vote for a means test — not for senior citizens, not for child care. I don’t believe in means tests. I 

don’t believe in a means test for my medicare insurance, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t believe in a means test that 

this one sets out, that we would set up a possible measure that will offset the increases of indexing. 

 

I don’t believe that that’s the step we want to take. This is a brand-new motion. This moves us back to the 

'30s. I don’t think this House today is ready to do that. We’re not ready to take a regressive step like that. 

And I would urge the members of this House to consider what the finance minister is leading you into, and 

the letter he wrote. 

 

Consider the final letters your finance minister is writing and see the kind of trouble he is getting you into. 

The Premier stood up in question period today and he said he didn’t do a study, he didn’t do a study on what 

the impact this indexing is going to have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I look at some of the numbers that are raised, and the numbers here in the Globe and 

Mail, the federal government is going to save $15 million in 1985-86; $15 million is going to come out of the 

pockets of seniors in this country. And that’s going to go up to $1.6 billion by 1990-1991 — $1.6 billion is 

going to come out of the pockets of seniors. 

 

And they put up a little amendment here in a little motion that says the federal government should consider 

possible measures to supplement this amount of money — consider possible measures to supplement $1.6 

billion. Well I’ll tell you what the possible substitutes are, Mr. Speaker. The possible substitutes will be that 

much more money for the oil companies. That’s going to come out of the hands of senior citizens. 

 

And here it says to consider offsetting increases. Well, they’ll take that offsetting increase, and according to 

this article, that money is going to the oil companies and to the banks. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. The member knows that we’re not debating what will go to anybody 

except senior citizens, and I would ask him to stay on the topic. 

 

MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, I will just then not talk about where the money is going to go. But I know 

that out of the pockets of senior citizens is going to come $1.6 billion — $1.6 billion — just about as much 

as you’ve already got us in a deficit in this province. And you want to take that much more from the pockets 

of senior citizens. The amount of money that we’re talking about  



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3173 

 

here that will be in place if it’s de-indexed, by 1990 and 1991 budget will be the amount of Saskatchewan’s 

deficit. And that is a lot of money, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The amount of money is coming out of the pockets of senior citizens. And my parents, my parents are going 

to be stuck with this increase here. They didn’t do that well in their life, and they don’t own oil wells. They 

don’t have other sources of income. And my dad has always driven a comfortable car, but under the 

pressures facing him now . . . I saw him this weekend. He came home with a new Chevy, a little, tiny Chevy 

he bought, and that for him is really stepping down. And as old people, they have to go back and say, we 

can’t afford to live like we could when we had the good old days. We can’t afford to live like that anymore. 

We’ve got to cut back. And I think the cut-backs are terrible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you talk about the other offsetting increases to senior citizens . . . I have here a letter, Mr. 

Speaker, I have here a copy of a letter that was addressed to the Minister of Health, Minister in charge of 

Saskatchewan Health, room 38, Saskatchewan Legislative Building. And it talks about a local contribution 

for a new nursing home, Mr. Speaker — a local contribution for a new nursing home. 

 

The Premier talked about the advantages . . . And I see the Speaker’s probably planning on standing up and 

saying that this is going to be out of order. But what I want to point out is saying that with this amendment 

we’re talking about offsetting the increases that senior citizens are paying. 

 

I want to say what the offset really is in Gravelbourg. I want to tell you that what the offset is in 

Gravelbourg: they’ve changed the formula for senior citizens that were getting the indexing. Senior citizens 

who were getting the index, thanks to this government, have had their formula changed when they go to 

build a new nursing home from . . . The local contribution used to be 8 per cent . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. The member is off topic completely. I stopped the Minister of Finance 

when he wanted to talk about senior citizens’ homes and the amount of money, and so on, and I ‘m going to 

stop the member here, as well. 

 

MR. ENGEL: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when you were . . . I will accept your ruling and not talk about this, but 

when you were not in the chair and the deputy speaker was in the chair, the Premier listed for this Assembly 

quite a list of benefits that the seniors were getting as offsetting increases. That is on the amendment — 

offsetting increases. But now I can’t talk on this amendment about the offsetting increases that the seniors are 

paying, not the increases they’re getting. 

 

On one hand, the premier talked we can afford to de-index their pensions. We can afford to de-index their 

pension because they’re getting these increases, where it’s costing some money. I won’t bother; I won’t 

bother doing that. I won’t bother doing what it’s going to cost in Gravelbourg because if you de-index 

they’re going to lose some money. 

 

I’m saying that they’re not only going to get increases, because this amendment said we’re going to give 

them some increases and the federal government should consider instituting — consider, which isn’t a very 

strong word — but they said they should consider instituting some offsetting increases. 

 

Well I would suggest to the Premier of Saskatchewan that he should consider what some of the changes he’s 

made that’s affecting seniors over and above losing their annual increase that they would get. You’ve taken 

that away on them. You’re agreeing that the federal government should take it away and you’re saying that 

hey should do as a possible measure is giving some increase in guaranteed income supplement. 



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3174 

 

Mr. Premier, this is hog-wash. It is so flowery language through his cousins in Ottawa that it’s not going to 

do anything. It’s a statement that just doesn’t mean anything. 

 

I like what our counterparts is doing. I like to point out and say that my colleague — he’s not here anymore 

— but Les Benjamin came down and he brought us some copies of some petitions that are out. And I want to 

read that into the record: 

 

That the annual cut to each and every OAS pensioner in Canada will be $100 in 1986 ($100 this 

year); $205 next year; $315 per person, (Mr. Speaker) in 1988; $431 in ’89; $553 in ’90; and $680 in 

1991. 

 

That’s what we’re talking about. We’re talking about a lot of money for each and every senior citizen. This 

government is prepared to take from the hands of every senior citizen in this country $100 in ’86, $205 in 

’87, and all the way up to $680 in 1991. In 1991 that’s going to cost $1.5 billion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Flowery language like this little motion here, that says, oh, we’ll pat them on the back, take it away, but 

possibly consider a few alternatives — consider a few alternatives. 

 

Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Premier, that the senior citizens of Saskatchewan are considering the alternatives. 

They’re writing a letter. Read a copy of the letter that was written to your Minster of Health, that came from 

your brother-in-law’s home town. Read a copy of the letter and see why your sister-in -law did as well as she 

did. And I’ll tell you why: because they don’t like the cuts that are being given; they don’t like the increased 

funding that’s coming. And they like a government that’s in office that’s going to support them, and it’s 

going to support them and their role and their pensions. 

 

I don’t like an amendment that’s going to introduce a means test. I don’t like amendments that are going to 

set that precedent. And there’s no way I’m going to be tricked into voting for that amendment when we have 

a good motion before this Assembly. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not going to take a long time with the House today 

because I know that there are a number of other members that want to speak on this, and I’m going to be 

quite interested in hearing the comment form the seconder of this motion, the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Because, Mr. Minister, I want to indicate that I just got back from my constituency and a number of other 

constituencies over the weekend, and the de-indexing of senior citizens’ pension most certainly is an issue, 

and it’s a great issue out there. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — When we take a look at the motion that was presented here today . . . and I just want 

to indicate that that motion was spelled out quite clearly that it’s a motion asking the Government of Canada 

who has brought out in their last federal government the de-indexing of OAS pensions for senior citizens. 

 

And we have just heard from my colleague from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and he indicated what it is going 

to cost a senior citizen five years down the road, and that’s going to be taking out $680 from that senior 

citizen’s pocket. And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoken to many senior citizens on the weekend and they 

think it’s a shame that this would take place. 

 

And the motions that are going around . . . and let’s take a look at what the motion that we  



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3175 

 

presented here and asking the government members to support us in that motion. “Whereas, Mr. Speaker, the 

recent decision — (I’m not going to read the whole motion) — whereas the decision by the Government of 

Canada to de-index old age security programs was harmful . . .” Then we go on and we finish by saying, “. . . 

that this Assembly demand or request immediate reinstatement.” 

 

So what did the Conservative government do? And what did they did, they have watered it down. And I just 

want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that this is how they watered it down. And I won’t read the whole thing, but I 

want to go to how they ended off their resolution, which I consider to be a means test, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And here’s what they say: and urges the federal government to consider — they urge the federal government 

to consider; they’re not demanding; they’re not requesting; they’re not saying immediate — but to consider 

instituting offsetting increases in guaranteed income supplement payments as a possible measure. They’re 

not demanding anything — a possible measure, they want them to consider. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, the Premier got up in the House, got up in the House and indicated when you were not in 

your seat that if the NDP voted against this motion, if the NDP were to vote against this motion, that we 

would be voting against the senior citizens. 

 

Now I just wonder, Mr. Speaker, I have not heard of any representation prior to this debate today, by the 

Conservative government, by the hon. Premier of this province, to the federal government requesting why 

they have put in their motion. They have not written a letter to the federal government. All of a sudden today 

we’re debating a motion that we’ve put forward, opposing the indexing. Now they come up with an 

amendment to it and are saying that we have to support that, and if we don’t support it, we’re against the 

senior citizens. Well I just say: where was your government before today when we got into this debate over 

de-indexing? There was nothing said. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Premier got up in the House and he talked about the heritage rebate Bill that was 

coming in. And I want to say that that’s right, they’re bringing in a heritage rebate Bill. And he was the one 

who just got through speaking on that. And that has caused the senior citizens a lot of concern out there. Why 

did you take it off two months ago when you brought the budget in, and now two months later, you’re 

introducing another Bill, calling it the heritage Bill, to pay the senior citizens’ home repair rebate program? 

You didn’t have to do that and cause the senior citizens all this grief. 

 

I tell you, I know a lot of senior citizens who have cancelled their summer holidays — they have cancelled it 

because they did not believe that they were going to get that rebate. Two months later, here we got it. You 

were the one who had just got through saying that. 

 

You also talked about — and, Mr. Speaker, just prior to you coming back to your seat, the Premier got up in 

the House, and he said, the NDP didn’t say anything about the 1,500 nursing homes, and he qualified that: 

planned for Saskatchewan; not built, but planned. And that’s his words, and you can check Hansard. 

 

But I say, Mr. Speaker, that this is a good motion. This is a good motion that we put forward to urge the 

federal government to withdraw the de-indexing Bill, and it’s something that the senior citizens of this 

province deserve, and of Canada, they deserve. They are the ones who built this country, and I think that we 

owe them that type of respect. And I would ask all the Conservative members to join in this Hose together 

today and send a message to the government of Ottawa requesting that they withdraw the de-indexing Bill, 

and ask them to vote against the amendment that has just been put forward. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3176 

 

MR. SCHMIDT: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m of the opinion that every senior that needs a pension increase 

should get it. Of course, this is within reason. You can’t just give people everything that they ask for. But 

seniors are reasonable people and wouldn’t ask for anything more than a government could afford to pay. 

 

Also, I’m of the opinion that the federal government should adjust the guaranteed income supplement so that 

de-indexing would not hurt or cause hardship to our poorest senior citizens. 

 

Now on this issue, the NDP are repeating their deplorable and historical tactics. The medicare party, as they 

think they are, is really the medi-scare party, a name that I gave to them I this Assembly. In my constituency 

they are out scaring old people again. In Melville constituency they are preaching fear and deception. 

They’re saying to the senior citizens, they’re going to take your pension away. And that is the furthest thing 

from the truth. The truth is that those people who do not necessarily need an increase, may not necessarily 

get it. 

 

In my constituency I would say 75 per cent of the population receives the guaranteed income supplement. So 

there’s no need to scare those people. Their pension will continue as will everyone else’s. 

 

What we have is really the old game of misspelling. Now in my constituency many of us don’t spell very 

well, and the way we spell deception is NDP — the new deception party. And even the name of the 

deception . . . it should really be the old socialist party, why New Democratic Party? But in any event, the 

deception continues. 

 

Now the truth is, Mr. Speaker, that de-indexing will only affect people in years when the inflation is under 3 

per cent. I’m not saying it is necessarily the best course of action that the federal government can take, but it 

is one course of action open to them. I think that it is something that should be considered generally when 

you look at tax reform. And I wish to point out in the case of seniors, there’s a special exemption for seniors 

— in 1985 it will be $2,590. Now if $2,950 of 1985 income so seniors is tax free, that means about 80 per 

cent of the old age pension is tax free. 

 

Now income tax is based on the ability to pay, and I can’t really understand how the opposition believes that 

— to use an example of this nature — Senator Davey Steuart, who I believe is over 65, would pay 

approximately $1,250 less income tax right now than the Leader of the Opposition. Now on the same income 

a person who is 65 would pay less income tax. 

 

So there are hidden benefits to seniors that do not necessarily appear in this debate and are hidden by the 

members of the opposition. And what I’m trying to point out is that at some time when we reform taxes this 

special benefit will have to be taken into account in the ability to pay income tax and the ability or right to 

receive pension. 

 

The NDP don’t believe in a means test. They believe in equal poverty for all. They don’t seem to understand 

that if you give people with a lot of money some of the money the poor should be getting that the poor will 

get less. It’s simple mathematics, and they don’t understand it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, senior citizens demand and expect only fair pension increases. And if this amendment is 

passed, this will be the fairest type of increase that Canada has seen in a long time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, seniors deserve to pay fair taxes, to pay fair income taxes, and I’m only pointing out to seniors 

in this province, and in particular my constituency, that they have a very large benefit of $2,590 if they’re in 

the income tax bracket. At some time they will have to also bear the brunt of the fair taxation system. 

 

Seniors deserve a pension increase if they need it. And lastly, they do not deserve to be scared by the NDP. I 

will be voting in favour of the amendment. 



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3177 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I am speaking . . . I wish to wind up the debate . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Then I will speak to the amendment and wind up the debate after that then. 

 

With respect to the items which have been raised in this debate o the amendment by the Premier, and I 

specifically made notes and will go down them, and it will be recalled that he read or substantially read his 

letter to senior citizens around the province pointing out what benefits his government had bestowed upon 

senior citizens, and presumably it was relevant to this question of the guaranteed income supplement, and I 

will pick them up one by one. 

 

He spoke of the Senior Citizens’ Home Repair Program and, of course, that’s quite right. There has been a 

Senior Citizens’ Home Repair program for a good number of years, and it is still there. It has got a new 

name. And with respect to the program, Mr. Speaker, the amount available has been increased, as it has on a 

fair number of occasions over the 12-or 13-year life of the program. 

 

With respect to the Senior Citizens’ Heritage Rebate, we will be dealing with legislation with respect to that 

later in this session, and we will note with interest whether or not it provides rebates to the wealthy or not. 

I’m surprised at the Premier taking a very firm line against any rebates to the wealthy, and if this program 

should happen to have rebates for the wealthy. I presume that he will move the appropriate amendments or 

vote against the Bill. 

 

With respect to the increased benefits for lower incomes through the tax credit program, we will have an 

opportunity to debate that during the income tax arrangements. I’ve already alluded very briefly to that 

simplified tax measure contained in a simple 25-paragraph, several-page amendment. 

 

But I want to turn to the basic element of the Premier’s argument that he believes that it is all right to 

de-index old age security so long as we restore the indexation or the money lost to those old age pensioners 

who receive the guaranteed income supplement. To do otherwise he says, is to give money to the wealthy — 

to use his term, to rebate money to the wealthy. 

 

I don’t know anyone who was taking about a rebate, but he keeps using that term in his address in this 

House. We are now talking about the old age security pension and whether or not we should target in people 

who are receiving the old age pension but who do not receive the guaranteed income supplement. 

 

The nub of the main motion was: let’s not de-index old age security. The nub of the amendment is: let’s 

de-index old age security except for those who receive the guaranteed income supplement. The argument is 

that the people who don’t receive the guaranteed income supplement are, in the words of the Premier, the 

rich — the people who don’t’ need it. 

 

I want to advise the House that we do not share that view. We do not share the view that people who do not 

receive the guaranteed income supplement are the rich. We do not believe, for example, that a single person 

who receives an income of $12,000 a year all in, is the rich. 

 

Now that person does not qualify for a guaranteed income supplement. The Premier says it’s all right to 

de-index her pension because she’s probably a widow. I say that an income of $12,000 a year for a widow is 

not such a munificent and magnificent income that she should be specifically targeted, she should be asked to 

pay an extra amount over and above the amount we’ll all have to pay because of the increases in prices 

arising from this budget, that she should pay an extra amount by having her income reduced, in fact, because 

her pension is not indexed. He believes that that is the rich. I do not. 



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3178 

 

(1630) 

 

Or take a couple, both of whom are on old age security, if they get as much as $18,000 a year, they will not 

qualify for the guaranteed income supplement. The belief by members opposite is that they’re the rich, that 

they should be targeted, that they should have their old age security pensions de-indexed and that they should 

not have any protection for those pensions because they are the rich. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that we ought to provide security against inflation for senior citizens who have incomes 

as much as $18,000 for the couple. And I say that we ought not to decide that people with that level of 

income are the rich. I simply don’t agree with the Premier’s characterization of these people as the rich. 

 

Now this amendment very clearly says we want to change the motion so as not to protect people who get the 

old age security pension, but only those who get the old age security plus the guaranteed income supplement. 

We want to offer no protection to people who have incomes of something under $12,000 if single, or 

something under $18,000 if couples. I say that is niggardly, and I say that it is all too characteristic of the 

Progressive Conservative approach to social programs. 

 

In the Premier’s words, there’s a distinct difference in philosophy. And I say he’s right. He believes that 

when people are getting these sums of money, these $12,000 of a widow and $18,000 for a couple, it’s time 

to start cutting back their pensions. They are among the wealthy. They do not deserve the full protection 

against inflation. They say that the basket, the network of the social security safety net shouldn’t protect 

them fully. 

 

Well, believe you me, Mr. Speaker, there is a difference in philosophy. And I say that we are seeing a very 

clear statement of Conservative philosophy in this amendment. And I say to people, this now applies to old 

age security. You can expect that same philosophy of saying, we will provide protection and comfort only to 

the people at the bottom of the scale and not to the middle income. It’s hardly high income. But no, 

protection is not to be offered to them this time with respect to old age security. Next year it will be some 

other social program. 

 

We have heard the philosophy of the Conservative Party stated many times with respect to this. We are going 

to hear it many times again. We are hearing it today with respect to pensions. 

 

Tomorrow it will be with respect to some other program that protects the moderate-income people of this 

country — maybe medicare, maybe some other program. But surely the logic, the logic of saying that people 

with modest incomes should lose part of their pensions is the same logic which said that people with modest 

incomes should pay part of their medical bills. There is no difference in logic. It is the philosophy of the 

Progressive Conservative Party. It is not the philosophy of our party. 

 

This amendment is very clearly directed to derailing the debate having to do with universal old age pensions. 

We will therefore be opposing this amendment, and I will look forward to seeing whether or not members 

opposite support the proposition that old age security pensions should not be indexed for people who get 

these marginal incomes of $12,000 single or $18,000 as a couple. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 

MR. YEW: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just want to take a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, to join 

debate with respect to our motion and the amendment presented recently, just a few minutes ago, by the 

leader of the Tories. 



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3179 

 

Mr. Speaker, our resolution deals with Mulroney’s . . . with the Mulroney government’s unfair and 

unjustified decision on the May 23rd federal budget in Canada, and it deals with the cut-backs to old age 

security payments to Canada’s senior citizens. 

 

Devine’s amendment, or the leader of the government, the member for Estevan, proposes an amendment, 

which to me, Mr. Speaker, only confuses matters more. It is nothing but a smoke-screen as far as the Tory 

government is concerned. It waters everything down as far as . . . They have absolutely no sensitivity, no 

compassion, Mr. Speaker, when it comes down to senior citizens in this province. 

 

Our motion, on the other hand, talks about, Mr. Speaker, the reason why we have introduced a motion — the 

reason being that the Mulroney government has decided to cut the senior, the old age security system, and 

undermine the old age security system for pensioners in this country. 

 

I say . . . our motion says “cut” because the Mulroney government’s decision to de-index those payments 

will see the purchasing power of Canadian seniors eroded each year by increases in the cost of living, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

For the record as well, Mr. Speaker, old age security payments rise each year by the same amount as 

Canada’s annual inflation rate. If inflation is 4 per cent, old age security payments increase by 4 per cent. An 

example of this, Mr. Speaker, is the simple reason is that . . . is so that Canada’s senior citizens do not see 

their fixed incomes lose ground to inflation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is what indexation of old age security payments is all about. The Mulroney budget 

proposes to do away with full indexation. And like the Leader of the Opposition mentioned earlier, beginning 

in 1986 it proposes to cover only that portion of inflation above 3 per cent a year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the senior citizens that I represent in the top half of this province have a hard time making ends 

meet, as it is, today. None of the senior citizens that I know of living in the top half of this province earn 

anything close to 90 or $100,000 a year — none. 

 

As far as this member is concerned, as far as I’m concerned, the proposed amendment presented here today 

by the Leader of the Government, Leader of the Tory Conservatives in this province, is nothing, as I said 

earlier, nothing but a smoke-screen, a deliberate attempt to try to cover up the mismanagement, the 

misguided administration of Ottawa. 

 

Those people in Ottawa have no sensitivity, no compassion, no understanding. Their policies, as well as the 

government of this province’s policies, reflect only measures that safeguard the big industries, the wealthy 

people in this province — people that don’t need help; people that are wealthy already. Those are the type of 

people that this government advocates for. But they don’t realize the hardships that are encountered by 

people at the community level, at the grass roots level — people that don’t have any hope. 

 

Inflation is constantly rising in this province, continuously rising — high interest rates, high inflation. And 

those, Mr. Speaker, are the things that the Mulroney budget does not want to protect, in terms of the 

pensioner. The same thing applies with the Conservative government in this province. They do not want to 

protect the senior citizens of this province. They simply want to ignore people that are at the bottom scale, 

the people that are right at the bottom of our social and economic mainstream of society, the people that are 

having a hard time to make ends meet. 

 

Those are the people that this Conservative government wants to do away with. 



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3180 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 

MR. YEW: — Those people include those senior citizens living in the top half of this province, the people 

living in the northern administration district. Those people are hard up. Unemployment at the present time 

with these people is as high as 95 per cent. The welfare lines of the North, top half of this province, has 

increased dramatically. The people, the senior citizens of this province, are concerned that their old age 

security system is being undermined and being jeopardized by both the Mulroney and the Devine 

Conservatives in this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 

MR. YEW: — For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I support the motion presented here by the 

Leader of the Opposition, and I reject completely the resolution, the amendment presented by the member for 

Estevan. Thank you very much. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 

(1640) 

 

Amendment agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

YEAS — 33 

 

Devine Muller Birkbeck 

McLeod Andrew Berntson 

Lane Duncan Pickering 

Hardy Garner Smith(Swift Current) 

Baker Schoenhals Currie 

Dutchak Martens Muirhead 

Petersen Bacon Hodgins 

Parker Smith(Moose Jaw South) Hopfner 

Myers Rybchuk Caswell 

Schmidt Tusa Glauser 

Weiman Swenson Morin 
 

NAYS — 7 
 

Blakeney Thompson Engel 

Lingenfelter Koskie Shillington 

Yew   
 

Motion as amended agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 35 
 

Devine Muller Birkbeck 

McLeod Andrew Berntson 

Lane Duncan Pickering 

Hardy Garner Smith(Swift Current) 

Baker Schoenhals Dirks 

Currie Dutchak Martens 



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3181 

 

 
Muirhead Petersen Bacon 

Hodgins Parker Smith (Moose Jaw South) 

Hopfner Myers Rybchuk 

Caswell Gerich Schmidt 

Tusa Glauser Weiman 

Swenson Morin  

 

NAYS — 7 

 

Blakeney Thompson Engel 

Lingenfelter Koskie Shillington 

Yew   

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I would like to make a ministerial statement with respect 

to the Queen Mother’s visit to Saskatchewan. It’s very short, but I would like to . . . 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Queen Mother’s Visit. 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, it is with much pride and pleasure that I rise in this Assembly to 

today announce details relating to the July 16th visit to our fine province of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth, 

the Queen Mother. 

 

The Queen Mother’s visit to Regina will be her first visit to Saskatchewan since 1939. I’m delighted that she 

can be with us to assist in the celebration of the province’s 80th anniversary celebrations. Her visit promises 

to be a highlight of our Heritage Year celebrations. 

 

The Queen Mother will arrive in Regina from Toronto at 12 noon, July 16th. At 12:15 there will be an 

official welcome at the Legislative Building and an opportunity for Saskatchewan people to meet Her 

Majesty. At 12:45 the Queen Mother will be driven in an open landau north on Albert Street, along Victoria 

Avenue to the Hotel Saskatchewan, where the province will be hosting a reception and a luncheon. At 3:15 

Her Majesty leaves the Hotel Saskatchewan and is taken to the airport for departure for Alberta. 

 

While the Queen Mother’s stay in our province and capital city will be brief, I’m hoping that all citizens of 

the province of Saskatchewan will join me on July !6th in welcoming Her Majesty to our fair province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I know members of the opposition join with the Premier in 

welcoming the news that the Queen Mother, Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth, will be visiting us in July. We 

have had a number of successful royal visits in recent years. Saskatchewan people have indicated the warmth 

of their affection for members of the royal family and I’m sure the same will happen when Her Majesty the 

Queen Mother visits us. 



 

June 10, 1985 

 

3182 

 

 

There are many older Saskatchewan citizens who have fond memories of the part that the Queen Mother and 

her late husband played during World War II, and I know will want to pour forth their affection for the 

Queen Mother. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 

 

SASKATCHEWAN HOUSING CORPORATION 

 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 51 

 

The committee recessed until 7 p.m. 


