



















































Hansard: June 12, 1985


3299 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

June 12, 1985 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

CLERK: — I hereby lay on the Table a petition which was presented yesterday by certain citizens of 

the city of Regina praying that your hon. Assembly may be pleased to urge the government to 

reconsider their project in order that a solution may be worked out which would be of benefit to both 

the native people for whom the complex is being built and for the community as a whole. 

 

I hereby lay it on the Table. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

MR. MARTENS: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour for me today to introduce a class of 

students of Waldeck school to the Assembly, and I want to just make a point. Waldeck may be not 

known to many of you, but if you went back to the early 1900s, it was the largest cattle delivery point 

between Calgary and Winnipeg, and the ’76 Ranch hauled all their cattle to that location, and I don’t 

even know whether the students realize that. But it was one of the largest delivery points along the 

Canadian Pacific Railway for the livestock business. 

 

I want to welcome the students here, and I hope that their stay in Regina is going to be informative 

and beneficial to them. They are accompanied today by their teachers Miss Pat Dyck and Terry 

Klippenstein. 
 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, Hear! 
 

MR. YEW: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have the pleasure of introducing to you, through you, and 

to the members of this Assembly, a group of 9 students seated at the Speaker’s gallery, accompanied 

by Mr. Sam Rambaran and Mrs. Helen Sayies. This group of students are from the community of 

Sturgeon Landing, and they’re from the elementary school there. They have travelled a long distance. 

Sturgeon Landing is a good many miles north-east of Cumberland House. Sturgeon, in itself, is quite 

isolated, quite remote, and I’m very pleased to be able to introduce this group of students. 
 

I hope they enjoy their visit. I hope they find it educational as well as rewarding, and I wish them a 

safe trip home later on in the week. I will be meeting with you after question period for refreshments 

and pictures, and I would like to ask all members of the Assembly to join me in welcoming this 

group of students. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, Hear! 
 

MR. WEIMAN: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I apologize for being a bit out of breath. There is a bit 

of confusion regarding the school that is visiting us this afternoon. We got that cleared away. I might 

state that the confusion wasn’t on my part as an MLA, but rather on the part of bureaucracy down 

here in Regina. 
 

I’d like to introduce a school that was named in honour of our first Canadian Governor General in 

Canada. The school is situated in my constituency, and that is Vincent Massey School. There are 41 

students in grade 8 who are attending here this afternoon. They’re accompanied by their teachers, 

Harold Semchuk, Pat Thode, Murray Tufts, and if I recollect correctly, Pat Thode was  



 

June 12, 1985 

 

3300 

 

here a couple of years ago with her students. They’re also accompanied by their bus driver, Robert 

Walsh. 

 

Normally the course is such that the legislature is out of session by now, but in anticipation of your 

visit I impressed upon my colleagues on both sides of the House to try to extend the sitting of the 

legislature so that you would be here to be able to witness the legislature in action. And of course, I 

do want to thank my colleagues on my side of the House, as well as colleagues on this side of the 

House, to ensure that we were here for your attendance. I am sure you will find your visit here 

informative this afternoon. I look forward to meeting with you after question period for refreshments, 

pictures and some insightful questions. I hope that the members of the legislature here would join in 

with me in welcoming you here this afternoon. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce and welcome to the House and, 

through you, introduce to other members of the House a former member of this House, the former 

member from Melville, the former minister of public works, Mr. Wilfred Gardiner, who’s sitting 

behind the opposition rail. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, Hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Extension of Tax Royalty Holiday for Oil Companies 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I direct this question to the Minister of Finance, and it 

deals with the announcement this morning in Weyburn that his government has extended the tax 

holiday for oil companies to the end of 1986. 

 

A few days ago, Mr. Minister, your colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, said that Saskatchewan 

couldn’t afford an adequate grasshopper control program to avert a major disaster in that area — no 

money. For a number of days now they’ve claimed that Saskatchewan and Canada can no longer 

afford index pensions for senior citizens, but today you announce that your government can afford to 

give a major tax break of hundreds of millions of dollars to oil companies. 

 

Mr. Minister, I suggest that that is a double standard, and I ask you to explain to farmers who are 

battling grasshoppers, senior citizens who are facing de-indexing with the consent of your 

government, why your government has no money for them but has money in the hundreds of millions 

of dollars to provide additional tax breaks to oil companies? 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman . . . Mr. Speaker, the Premier in 

Weyburn today had a very, very successful, highly successful oil show in the city of Weyburn so . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. I believe that all hon. members know that this is a seat of 

government and we should maintain some decorum, and I would ask members to do that. 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — The statement made by . . . the statement made by the Premier today at 

the first Saskatchewan oil show in Weyburn was to the effect that we re extending the oil policy that 

we brought in in 1982, Mr. Speaker, to the end of 1986. 

 

What that oil policy has done, Mr. Speaker, for the people of Saskatchewan has been as follows. 

When we took office, 50 per cent of the oil industry in this province was shut in. It was shut in, Mr. 

Speaker. And what that meant is that the revenues to the government were dropping, Mr. Speaker. 

Our children — and I can assure you, as the member as the member from Kindersley —  



 

June 12, 1985 

3301 

 

 

the children of our province were going to Alberta and going to the Beaufort Sea and going to 

Hibernia to find work. 

 

We changed that policy, Mr. Speaker. It has meant more revenue; in fact, the largest source of 

revenue now for the province of Saskatchewan comes from oil. More revenue, Mr. Speaker; more 

jobs, Mr. Speaker; more activity, Mr. Speaker; new companies in the province of Saskatchewan. I am 

reminded, Mr. Speaker, of the advice my grandmother gave me a long time ago — when it ain’t 

broken, don’t fix it. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Minister, supplementary. Your government has told school 

teachers and nurses, other public sector workers, that you have no money for them; no money to add 

to their salary grid. Yet in your own words, you have announced today yet another tax holiday for the 

oil companies. 

 

And I would like you to explain to Saskatchewan teachers and nurses and other public employees 

why you were able to announce yet another tax holiday for the oil companies, which you did this 

morning, and continue to take the position that there’s no money to increase their salary grids. 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member makes the comment that the oil 

companies are not paying any money. In fact, they’re paying $200 million more to the treasury of the 

province of Saskatchewan than they were in 1982 when we took office — $200 million more, Mr. 

Speaker. And that $200 million is used by this government to build schools, to fund universities, to 

fund building of nursing homes, Mr. Speaker. That is where the action is being taken. 

 

The oil industry is the largest source of tax revenue in the province of Saskatchewan, and the 

members opposite don’t like that. They would have us go back to the old policy where the oil 

companies have to move out of the province, take the jobs out of the province, and take the revenues 

out of the province, so that they could end up running the oil industry by Crown corporations. We do 

not subscribe to that view. We have a success story in the oil industry, and we’re going to continue 

with that success story in the oil industry. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Cut-back of Teachers at Southend, Reindeer Lake 

 

MR. YEW: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my question to the Minister of Finance. Yesterday 

in this Assembly, Mr. Minister, I asked about the school closures which are under way in a number 

of northern communities: Southend, Reindeer Lake, for one; and Apitowkusisian. 

 

Parents are keeping their children out of school to protest the fact that next year teaching staffs at 

their schools will be cut by as much as 25 per cent. These cuts in teaching staff are due to a lack of 

funding for the Northern Lights school board, and by your government. 

 

Can you explain, Mr. Minister, to the students, and to the parents of northern Saskatchewan, why 

your government doesn’t have enough money to provide them with quality education, but you have 

hundreds of millions of dollars to give away to your wealthy friends at the big oil companies. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, Hear! 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that question yesterday was posed to the Minister of 

Education. I understand that she indicated to the House, Mr. Speaker, that the issue, first of all, of 

dealing with a number of teachers in a given school unit is the responsibility and the duty of that 

particular school board; that she and her department were aware of that; that they were  



 

June 12, 1985 

 

3302 

 

under negotiations with that particular school board. And I would have nothing else that I could add 

to that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Cancellation of Fresh Food Transportation Subsidy 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A supplementary to the Minister of Finance. In 

January your government cancelled the northern fresh food transportation subsidy to a number of 

remote northern communities, saying that it could not afford the $250,000 a year for that very 

important program. But today you announce your government has hundreds of millions of dollars to 

give away to the oil companies . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The Minister of Energy is talking from 

his seat again. 

 

Mr. Minister, how can you afford to give away hundreds of millions of dollars in tax breaks to the oil 

companies when you say you haven’t got a quarter of a million dollars to help northern families put 

fresh food on the table? Where is the fairness of your policy, Mr. Minister of Finance, and why are 

you penalizing the citizens of northern Saskatchewan? 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Speaker, I responded to the question that the 

oil policy is continuing — a very successful oil policy that is benefiting the treasury, is creating jobs 

in this province, and creating activity. 

 

With regard to the question of the food subsidies in northern Saskatchewan, perhaps . . . (inaudible) 

. . . 

 

HON. MR. DUTCHAK: — Mr. Speaker, the question that was asked by the member was asked 

roughly two or three weeks ago, the exact same question. And at that time I indicated that the 

northern food subsidy wasn’t working. The dollars weren’t getting to the right places, to the right 

people. 
 

At that time I indicated that I had met with different communities and community representatives in 

an attempt to find out if there was shortfall in the right kind of food getting to these people in the five 

committees, roughly. And at that time I indicated to this House that I had invited representation from 

those communities to improve the situation, if there was improvement which was required. 
 

I also on that date invited representations from the northern members to give me an idea of where 

they saw their shortfall. To date I haven’t received a single representation from either member, and 

therefore it’s difficult to deal with any issue or determine if there is any real issue. 
 

MR. THOMPSON: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister in charge of northern 

Saskatchewan, the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake. And my question to you, Mr. Minister: 

you have just indicated that you have no representation from northern citizens who were cut off. And 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, if you would go back in your files, and you will find that you have letters 

pertaining to that program. 
 

My question to you is, Mr. Minister: you provide subsidies to all the civil servants in northern 

Saskatchewan who live in the northern communities, and by the way of subsidies to . . . A northern 

allowance; all governments are paid northern allowance. And I ask you, Mr. Minister: do you think 

it’s fair to pay housing, subsidized housing for government officials, and northern allowance to civil 

servants who go and work in the North, but yet take away the food subsidy from the citizens of 

northern Saskatchewan? 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, Hear! 
 

HON. MR. DUTCHAK: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member is clearly stating a misleading statement 

by saying that I indicated that the Northerners hadn’t contacted me. I indicated quite  



 

June 12, 1985 

3303 

 

 

clearly that the MLAs from northern Saskatchewan have not proposed any solutions to me. And 

that’s the point I made. 

 

Further, Mr. Speaker, I am getting a little fed up with the member from Athabasca accusing the civil 

servants of doing improper things in northern Saskatchewan. The civil servants he spoke of some 

time ago in the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation were upset at accusations made by the member. I 

checked all these accusations and he’s bringing them up again, and they’re simply false. 

 

Any subsidies paid to assist in living allowance are the same subsidies used by the former 

administration. 

 

Aid to Farmers for Grasshopper Control 

 

MR. ENGEL: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, we’ve 

been asking questions while you were absent regarding the huge amounts of money you’ve given to 

the oil companies. And the question is: the province of Alberta introduced a simple, straightforward 

program to help the farmers to deal with the grasshopper problem. There’s no question in Alberta as 

to who gets the money. They know they’re going to spray their fields. They spray the road 

allowances, and they’re going to get paid half. 

 

The program is working, and everybody in Alberta understands it. In Saskatchewan you tell us that 

you can’t afford a program. You haven’t got enough money to help the farmers spray their 

grasshoppers. Many of the farmers hardest hit this spring are from your constituency. How can you 

tell those farmers that you don’t have 10 or $12 million to help them when you have hundreds of 

millions of dollars for the oil companies? How can you justify that in your own riding? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member brings up the oil patch. I will advise him 

that I just returned from Weyburn, Saskatchewan talking about oil royalties, and I heard a really 

interesting story about the alternative to Saskatchewan oil policy. 

 

And what they said to me in Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, with respect to oil policy and revenue, they said 

for years and years and years in the city of Weyburn and in that area they had an MLA who 

happened to be premier of the province who was always criticizing the oil patch as being big and 

large and not doing good for the community — those evil oil companies. 

 

And then they said, isn’t it funny today the former premier of Saskatchewan, the former MLA. 

NDP-CCF MLA, now sits on the board of directors of Husky Oil with a nice little fat expense 

account and a travel allowance, and that’s the man from Weyburn who said that oil companies 

shouldn’t be trusted? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, Hear! 
 

MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Premier. If I were representing Estevan 

riding, I’d like to tell stories about Tommy Douglas, too, when you’re not going to do anything, 

when you’re not going to do anything about the farmers that are facing a crop loss because of the 

grasshopper infestation. Many farmers have sprayed two and three times, and they’re not able to 

control the grasshoppers. You have $100 million more for the oil companies, but you don’t have a 

dollar for farmers. How do you justify that in your riding, let alone in our ridings where we have 

grasshoppers? 
 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what they say in Weyburn about the grasshopper 

program and about the oil program and about the Alberta program. 



 

June 12, 1985 

 

3304 

 

If the previous administration would have had half the smarts of the Alberta government today, to 

build some money and put it into a heritage program and a heritage fund, we would have had some 

money for savings in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But no, they didn’t do that. Do you know what they did? They decided to nationalize the uranium 

mines. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. 
 

MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Premier, I’ll give you one more chance to answer the question. The question 

is: you have $100 million for give-aways for the oil companies. Can you find 10 per cent — can you 

find $10 million for farmers out of that 100 million? Why don’t you take and give them 90 million 

and save 10 million to give farmers to control the grasshopper problem? 
 

How does the trickle-down effect . . . Are you going to feed the oil companies enough oats so there’s 

a little left for farmers? How is that going to work, Mr. Minister, . . . (inaudible) . . . 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member raises two points. He raises what we are 

doing for agriculture, and for farmers . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay. In terms of money and 

compared to Alberta. He says it’s 12 million. Was it 6 million or 12 million you’re saying Alberta’s 

giving — 6 or 12? $6 million. Alberta’s giving $6 million towards grasshoppers. 

 

The first point that I have to make is: Alberta has 12 or 13 billion in the Heritage Fund and the NDP 

didn’t leave us any. That’s the first point. The second point is: if you want to look at agricultural help 

in any province across Canada in terms of cash, you look at $150 million annually — 150 million, 

not 6 million, not 12 — 150 million new money every year in the province of Saskatchewan since 

this administration has come in. Twenty-five million dollars alone on 8 per cent money for young 

farmers, $35 million just on the rural gas distribution system. 
 

If you want to look at a program with respect to financing, help, and assistance, Mr. Speaker, we’ll 

add up dollar for dollar for dollar. Plus our contributions in terms of bargaining with the federal 

government is another $160 million. It’s over $5,000 per farmer new money in the province of 

Saskatchewan since we come in in 1982. 
 

Compared to what, Mr. Speaker? Do you know what that compares to? That compares to the same 

old rhetoric — the same old rhetoric — of buying the farm for the government, the land bank. That 

was their policy. This is an old Tommy Douglas policy. This is going to help the farmer. We’ll buy 

the farm. . .  

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS :— Here, here! 
 

MR. ENGEL: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know how many chances he’s going to have. 
 

Do you feel the program for controlling grasshoppers in Saskatchewan is adequate for farmers? Yes 

of no? 
 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well it’s yes, Mr. Speaker. 
 

MR. ENGEL: — Okay, that’s all. 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, Hear! 
 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier, who continues to go on 

berating and attacking a former premier of the province, Tommy Douglas. But I want to tell him that 

when  



 

June 12, 1985 

3305 

 

 

the . . .  

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Does the member have a question? 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well I do have a question and I wondered if I might be allowed the 

same latitude as the premier in talking about a former premier, but obviously I can’t. 

 

But I want to ask you, Mr. Premier: we have seen today where you have announced a $100 million 

tax break for the oil companies at the same time as we’re dealing with three tax Bills before the 

Assembly — the flat tax, the removal of the property improvement grant, and as well as the new tax 

on used automobiles which will amount to about a $100 million a year increase in taxes on ordinary 

people. How do you justify taking that money out of the pockets of people who are in middle and 

low income and giving it to the oil companies? 

 

Like, I would like you to stand up and justify how you think that that is reasonable. Because the 

farmers in your constituency, in Estevan and Weyburn, who watched you go down to Weyburn and 

announce another 100 million for the oil companies, when they’re struggling and going broke, don’t 

understand it. And I’d like you to explain it to them. 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member keeps raising the people of Weyburn and 

Estevan as if they might not understand the programs. Well, Mr. Speaker, I would invite . . . I’ll 

invite the whole eight of them — six of them, seven of them, whatever’s there, and I’ll even include 

the member from Regina North West . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. Order, please. Order! There’s so much yelling the Chamber today that 

it’s impossible to carryon business, and I‘m to ask the members to resume some form of decorum. 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — The people of Weyburn and Estevan, Mr. Speaker, and the farmers and the 

school teachers and the preachers and the children and the seniors, see more jobs, more economic 

activity, and more income than they’ve seen in years as a result of the revival of the oil patch. And if 

you’d care to go to Weyburn this afternoon and go to the oil show, the Saskatchewan oil show, and 

you start talking about the policies of the NDP or the policies of Tommy Douglas . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. Order, please. Order! I’m going to caution the members on this side of 

the House that when I call for order, I’m going to insist on it. And if the members persist, there’s 

going to be changes made here. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, question to the Premier. I wonder if he could answer the 

part of the question that said: how do you get off on increasing the taxes on used automobiles, putting 

a new tax on automobiles, putting a flat tax on people earning $10,000 a year, take the property 

improvement grant away from farmers and home owners and give it to the oil companies? That was 

the question because that’s what you’re doing. And how do you get off calling that . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please! I caution the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg for the last 

time today. 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Maybe we can help settle them down a little bit. What the hon. members 

know but they hate to admit, is this: oil revenues in the province of Saskatchewan are increasing to 

be larger and larger and larger. The number one tax contributor now in the province of Saskatchewan 

is not income tax, it is not sales tax. It’s oil revenue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, right now in the province of Saskatchewan, if you’re going to build a nursing home or a 

highway or a hospital, 25 to 30 per cent of that money is coming from the oil industry. The  



 

June 12, 1985 

 

3306 

 

revenue being invested by the oil patch, Mr. Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan, is $1.20 for 

every dollar of revenue that they’re earning. That’s an extremely large investment. 

 

What does it mean? It means Regina and Saskatoon lead all western Canadian cities in new job 

creation. That’s what it means . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, they do, 1982 and 1983 and ’84. 

You ask why. I’m telling you why: Saskatchewan has the lowest unemployment, the best job record 

in ’82,’83, and ’84. Why? Because of economic activity. 

 

Well, if you look at StatsCanada . . . Let’s publish them. let’s look at the results. Who was the best in 

’82, ’83, and ’84 in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Old Age Security Pensions 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for the Premier. Mr. Premier, this has 

to do with your government’s position on senior citizens’ pensions. And your position is to support 

the Mulroney government in the proposed de-indexing of old age security payments, and to go even 

further, Mr. Premier, by calling for an end to universality of old age pensions. 

 

Mr. Premier, are you aware that even national business organizations have joined the public 

opposition to de-indexing of old age security payments? The Canadian Organization of Small 

Business, have all come forward with public statements calling for the Mulroney government to drop 

plans to de-index old age security payments. 

 

Mr. Premier, are you in agreement with all of these blue-chip businesses that have opposed the 

Mulroney government’s program and are saying that he is wrong and that you should, along with the 

federal government, abandon your plans to battle the deficit on the backs of the senior citizens of this 

country? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member mentions several groups that have put their 

position forward with respect to de-indexing. I’m reading from the Globe and Mail, Wednesday, 

June 12, 1985, page 5. And I want to make it very clear that I am in accord with what’s being said 

here. And the hon. member just read it so I’m going to . . . just talked about it so I’m going to 

mention it: 

 

The president of the blue-chip Business Council on National Issues said it has always been 

the position of his organization that “the battle of the deficit should not be fought on the 

backs of the poor and disadvantaged.” 

 

Now listen. It’s exactly what we said. 

 

The council has consistently argued that the benefits of social programs should go primarily 

to those in need, he said. The savings that result from reducing benefits to wealthier . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Order. I’m just going to ask for silence while this question is 

given. It’s very difficult today and we haven’t been able to hear most answers. 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, the president goes on to say this: 

 

The savings that result from reducing benefits to wealthier Canadians could be used to enrich 

benefits for the poor and to reduce the deficit. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s precisely what I’ve been saying in this legislature and precisely what the 



 

June 12, 1985 

3307 

 

 

Minister of Finance was saying. He goes on to say: 

 

Spokesman Geoffrey Hale said in an interview that the organization supports the 

government’s partial de-indexing of old-age security payments as a deficit-reduction measure 

but argues it should have been part of an overall reform of the pension system. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what did we say here in the last three or four days? Tax reform is important. 

Pension reform is recommended. We said, Mr. Speaker, that the low-income people should be 

protected. Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to listen. They don’t want to listen to the truth. 

 

The truth is, most Canadians believe that the poor should be protected and the wealthy should not be 

rebated. That’s what most Canadians believe. We’ve recommended it. Other people are 

recommending it. We say that the low-income people, as this individual says, should be protected. 

But we are beyond the point. We must be more sophisticated now in Canada so that we don’t have to 

keep giving money to wealthy people. We’re saying, help the low-income people and protect them, 

and that’s exactly what we wrote the Prime Minister . . . or the Minister of Finance. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. It is my duty and privilege to submit today under section 30 of The 

Ombudsman Act, the annual report of the Ombudsman. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Referral of Bill to Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills 

 

HON. MR. MCLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, prior to orders of the day, and by leave of the Assembly, I 

would move: 

 

That the order for second reading of Bill 112 — An Act respecting Liens in the Construction 

Industry, be discharged and the Bill referred to the Standing Committee n Non-Controversial 

Bills. 

 

I so move, seconded by my colleague, the Attorney General. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 111 — An Act to amend the Statute Law to enable Urban, Rural and Northern 

Municipalities to Broadcast Radio and Television Signals 
 

HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to give second reading to this particular item of 

legislation. 
 

The Bill we are giving second reading to is part of an entire new initiative in Saskatchewan. The 

changes being discussed would herald the implementation of a new project designed to aid residents 

of small communities to receive more varied television programming. 



 

June 12, 1985 

 

3308 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan has been greatly assisted in the development of the project by the 

federal Department of Communications, and in the very near future we will be making a joint 

announcement of the national project with the federal communications minister, Marcel Masse. 

 

As a result of the Bill before us, municipal governments could be allowed to become directly 

involved in the ownership and operation of television retransmission facilities. This, we believe, 

could be a tremendous benefit to the small communities of Saskatchewan. 

 

I believe the government’s initiative is a very positive one and, when passed, it will mean the 

municipal governments will have an opportunity to become directly involved in the ownership, 

operation, and control of television retransmission facilities right in the communities themselves. 

 

This does not preclude ownership by private entrepreneurs, but that will be up to the local 

government. Rather, it is legislation which will provide additional alternatives, thus enabling 

Saskatchewan’s small communities to provide extended television program as varied as that which is 

being enjoyed by the larger urban centres. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Motion agreed, Bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 

 

FINANCE 

 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 11 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

MR. ENGEL: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, the plight of farmers that we raised in 

question period today regarding chemicals they’re buying for controlling grasshoppers is really one 

that is very severe. Farmers are phoning and are saying that, man, if we don’t spray our grasshoppers, 

if we don’t spray our grasshoppers, will they cut us off in crop insurance? What can we do? We’re 

running out of money. I’ve sprayed three times, one farmer told me. Another farmer said he sprayed 

twice and doesn’t know how to get after the railway company, if he should spray there. 

 

And the problem has escalated into one that is really a serious problem. And I think if you’d look at 

the numbers of grasshoppers that are infesting some of the parts of the province, and it’s a bigger 

area than first meets the eye . . . I wonder, could you work out a deal with the federal government to 

declare it a disaster area? If you haven’t got a few bucks, if you can’t find $10 million to pay half the 

spray, could you work out an area that you could call it a disaster area and get some money? 

 

Because if you don’t control them this year, Mr. Minister, I can assure you that the problem is going 

to be more than tenfold next year. It’s going to be more than tenfold because the grasshopper 

problem wasn’t a very severe problem last year. There were grasshoppers in some areas, and you 

could see them there, but you never got counts of 150 or 200 per square foot — never, last year. 

 

And this year we’re finding that kind of count. And if you start talking to your Minister of  



 

June 12, 1985 

3309 

 

 

Agriculture and he starts filling you in, is there no way at all that you could come up with some 

program that’s going to be simple to administer and easy to work, where the farmer saves his bills 

and gets some money and gets in and starts spraying? Because they haven’t got the money. 

 

They’ve suffered drought and crop loss for three and four years in a row, and this year it looks like 

the prospects are there for a crop. Don’t you want to protect your interests and your income at all? 

Because this could wipe out a crop. 

 

And once they’re big enough to fly and move, Mr. Minister, they’ll be devastating. And I think we 

should do something. I’m really serious. And if you can’t find the money yourself, can you get a joint 

effort and do like they do down in the States where they call it a disaster area and then make some 

money available? Is there nothing you can do? Is this what you’re telling us? 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, I think, Mr. Chairman, that that question has been raised with the 

Minister of Agriculture on several occasions in this Assembly. And the Minister of Agriculture, I 

believe, indicated to the Assembly that he was constantly monitoring the grasshopper problem. We 

all recognize the serious nature of the grasshopper problem. It’s constantly being monitored by the 

Minister of Agriculture, that he is in fairly close contact on a fairly frequent basis with the people in 

Ottawa, the Minister of Agriculture in Ottawa, and indicates that at this point in time the matter is 

under control, in his view. 

 

Now I think that that is the view of the Minister of Agriculture of this province, and I have faith in 

the Minister of Agriculture of this province. And I would hope that we could agree, at least between 

you and I, that the minister is, in fact, dealing with that question, dealing with a very important 

agriculture question. And I wouldn’t want to try to indicate what he should do. That’s clearly his 

responsibility within government, and I think it should stay that way. 

 

MR. ENGEL: — The claim that he makes, and the claim that the Premier made today, that what 

you’re doing is adequate: number one, your program in place indicates that railway rights of way, 

and highway rights of way, and municipal roads will be sprayed. 

 

A farmer phoned me today and said, I’ve got four miles of railway track. I’ve got four miles of 

railway track. He talked to all the officials in the Assiniboia area to see when they’re going to spray 

them, and they’re not spraying. And he said, the grasshoppers are starting to move in off the railway 

track. He says, I don’t have an aircraft to get over top and spray that right of way. I’ve no way of 

getting grasshopper spray on the railway right of way unless I go out there with a hand-gun and spray 

it, because it’s a rough terrain and it’s a graduated ditch and it’s got fences in the way. 
 

Why wouldn’t . . . What can he do, number one, to get the railways to spray? There’s a railway 

problem. The roadside problem, some R.M.s hire . . . I can name two R.M.s that hired aircraft to go 

in and spray all their roads. I can name another R.M. where the farmers started spraying their own, 

and then there was an R.M. program in, and it’s a confusing program, and nobody knows if they’re 

going to get sprayed or if they aren’t. But the serious areas where the grasshoppers are eating the 

crop as fast as it’s growing, and they spray, and the crop comes back up about an inch and a half high 

in another patch, and they spray again, and they’ve done that three times . . . How many times should 

a farmer do it, and he’s not getting any help? How many times can he afford to do it? 
 

(1445) 
 

And then you have a grass area where you pay lease fees of less than $1 an acre. I’ve got land on my 

area that’s leased for about $1.15, $1.20 an acre. Boyd Anderson’s ranch runs at about that price. 

That land in that particular area is cheap land, and yet the grasshoppers are hatching down there. 

They’re hatching galore. And these farmers can’t afford to spend $5 an acre spraying them. And 

that’s only one shot. And then they’ve got to hire somebody to put it on. And, Mr. Minister,  



 

June 12, 1985 

 

3310 

 

it’s a big problem. It’s a serious problem. These guys haven’t got the money to control them. 

 

One farmer — and if you want me to name him, I’ll name him for you — a young farmer that farms 

south of Woodrow in the Meyronne area between Woodrow and Meyronne, has a quarter section of 

pasture. He says they’re hopping thick there. And he says, I can’t afford to spray it. And yet they’re 

moving out on my neighbour’s summerfallow land that’s beside him. And he says, I’m afraid for my 

life if I don’t control those grasshoppers. Where do I get the money to spray them? And he’s leasing 

that land from you folks. He pays about $285 lease fees on that land, and it’s going to cost him 

$1,600 to aerial spray it. Sixteen hundred bucks. And it’s only worth $285 worth of grass. 

 

You know, it just doesn’t make sense, Mr. Minister. We’ve got to get a program in place, and if you 

think you have it in control, how come there are so many people phoning our office? If you think you 

have the grasshopper problem under control, why is there so much unrest right across the province — 

right across the province? 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Chairman, the details of a particular farmer and a particular R.M., I 

would hardly think the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg would expect that I would be 

cognizant of that particular thing. And I think that normally . . . normally, as I understood the way the 

process worked, would be that if a member from whichever side had a particular problem for a 

particular farmer, they would generally take that to the Minister of Agriculture if it was related to 

agriculture. If it was an environmental problem or a health care problem, we would take it to the 

Minister of Health and deal with that specific a case with that particular individual. Now that usually 

would be happening. 

 

You asked me a question with regard to a specific farmer and one and two R.M.s. Now all I can 

indicate to you is the Minister of Agriculture, who I have a fair degree of faith in, has indicated that 

his on top of the situation; that he has recognized it to be a serious problem. He is in constant contact 

with this particular issue. The fact of ministerial responsibility clearly falls upon his jurisdiction to 

deal with those particular questions. 

 

He’s indicated to me that he believes he is on top of the issue. I have a fair degree of respect for that 

particular minister, and I’m going to rely on the advice of the colleague of mine around the cabinet 

table whose responsibility it is to deal with agriculture. 

 

MR. ENGEL: — The reason I’m raising this with you as the Minister of Finance is because it is a 

special issue. This isn’t a general, normal, run of a farmer having a problem with a lease fee, of 

having some situation where there’s an individual problem. 

 

I could talk about individual problems, Mr. Minister, that farmers are having. And those aren’t 

problems that I’d raise with the Minister of Finance. But when I talk about a situation that is affecting 

at least 20,000 farmers, I’d say that an issue as broad as that — have you not looked at a map that 

shows the serious grasshopper infested area in Saskatchewan and in the provinces? Have you not 

looked at a map? 

 

We’ve got more than two acres per every acre in Alberta that’s serious. And Alberta decided to make 

a special grant of $6 million or up to 6 million, and they left it open-ended. They’ve got a $6 million 

program there to pay half the grasshopper spray that’s used, period, no questions asked. 
 

And those people there are going to control their grasshoppers. But I think you have a responsibility 

as a citizen of Canada to control the grasshoppers in our province. You have a responsibility as 

Minister of Finance because those grasshoppers are going to move. They’ll move, and they’re not 

going to stay in the south corner. They’re going to get to your area of the province. They’re going to 

move north into the Meadow Lake area. They’re going to move because there are that many 

grasshoppers around. 



 

June 12, 1985 

3311 

 

 

And if you don’t know what a grasshopper that is a quarter of an inch long is going to do, he’s going 

to eat locally until he gets big enough to fly, and when the grass and the crops are eaten off, they’re 

going to move. When my dad tells me about clouds, that the sun was blackened by clouds flying over 

of grasshoppers, Mr. Minister, that’s what we’re going to have. 

 

I’m warning you; I’m serving fair warning that if you don’t remember, and if you’re too young to ask 

any questions, and you’re too smart to talk to people that know what grasshoppers are going to do, 

get with it. Get with it, because that problem is going to grow. And if you spray them at the source, 

we can get them where they’re hatching, and they won’t fly and they won’t loop. But the farmers 

can’t keep up. How many times do you think one farmer should have to spray his own fields? How 

many times will you stand up in this House and say, now when he sprays that much, then he’s done 

his duty. How many times would you say is sufficient? 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — To ask me a question of how many times a farmer should spray his field, 

I think that . . . I doubt that the farmers of Saskatchewan are interested in the opinion of the Minister 

of Agriculture for Ottawa, or be interested in the Minister of Agriculture for Saskatchewan, or, quite 

frankly, that they’re interested in the views of any member of this Assembly to tell them how many 

times they should spray their crop. 

 

Now you know you’re not the only person that represents a riding that has been identified as a 

serious grasshopper area. I have . . . In the constituency of Kindersley is also an area that is from the 

potential map, or the map put out by the Department of Agriculture that the Minister of Agriculture 

referred to here in the last two or three days, is also an area of serious grasshopper infestation. 

 

I was into that constituency this past weekend, and I talked to a lot of farmers. Now what those 

farmers said to me is that (a) they are still concerned as to how fast they grow, and how the hatch 

comes on, and how fast the hatch comes on, or whether it’s going to hatch over a long period of time. 

And that’s something that quite frankly a lot of them do not and cannot see into the future as exactly 

what’s going to happen. 
 

By and large, most of those farmers in my area, or Kindersley area, have sprayed once, and most of 

that spraying has been in the headlands of the field, or on the area right next to the particular ditches. 

There’s some areas that tends to be seen as fairly spotty. Yet at this point in time, some farther south, 

closer to the river hills, are maybe spraying twice, and some have even sprayed three times. 
 

Now those farmers did not ask me — and I talked a lot to them — did not ask me, you know, give 

me some more money to spray the crop. Their concern, and quite frankly those farmers that talked to 

me were determined to deal with that particular dilemma and were hopeful that they could — hopeful 

that they could, and an ability to do it — anticipating exactly what might happen in the future; what 

might happen if the weather became very warm and they all hatched at one time. They were of the 

view quite frankly if the weather stayed cooler and perhaps more moisture that, in fact, that they 

would be able to get a better step up on it. 
 

They also advised — now whether this is true or not, I’m simply taking the advice of some of the 

farmers in my area — that if we were to get perhaps an inch, an inch and one-half, two inches of rain, 

followed by some good sunshine, it would make the crop grow very quickly in this province, that 

would be probably as strong a weapon as you could find to deal with the grasshopper situation. And 

my brother and my father operate a farm in that constituency. They’ve only been required to, at this 

point in time, spray once. That spraying has been in the ditches much like anybody else. And it’s still 

spotty within that area. 
 

That’s my personal knowledge of it. I have certainly a vested interest. I have a lot of family that farm 

in that particular constituency. Many of my constituents are, in fact, farmers. That constituency is in 

an area that is rated severe potential for grasshoppers. So it’s not to indicate  



 

June 12, 1985 

 

3312 

 

that I or any other member of this Assembly, particularly those members that are in an area like that, 

will not have a serious concern as to how we can, or should, or have, the potential to deal with it. 

 

I don’t think the people in that area though at this point in time had come to the point of giving up on 

the situation. In fact, the farmers that I talked to in a fairly large part of that particular constituency 

were worried about cutworms. And there was quite a significant outbreak of cutworms, and some 

people have been spraying three and four times this year for cutworms and were having a problem 

combating the cutworm, if you like. 

 

There was also, I think they’re army worms, I think is what they were saying. Whether they’re army 

worms or not, I don’t know. But cutworm was an area that would being, in fact, sprayed more than 

grasshoppers. That was in a key area. 

 

I suppose one has the problem of saying, do you cover the cost for a farmer for every severe 

infestation of any particular type of insect that they have. In other words, if one farmer has three or 

four goes at cutworms, should the government pay for that as well? 

 

All I can say is that (a) as a member of this legislature and as a citizen of this province, obviously one 

is concerned about the grasshopper problem in this province. 

 

Number two, as a member of the treasury benches of the government, one has to have faith in one’s 

colleagues that also sit on the treasury benches. And in this case the Minister of Agriculture, he 

indicates to us he is on top of the situation. I have respect, as I indicated, for that minister. I think 

he’s doing an admirable job. And I would simply go by what he tells me and tells cabinet, is that at 

this point in the monitoring of it he is satisfied with the program in place. 

 

MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Minister, I’ve been following your remarks very closely, and it’s painfully 

obvious that the grasshoppers are more severe in the lighter lands closer to hills, closer to pastures, 

and that in a heavier crop land in our heavier clay soils and where the farmers are doing a little better 

and control their green growth a little more than they would in a sandy or lighter land . . . I have had 

the experience of farming a section of land that was fairly light land for about four or five years, and 

in fall I found the best way to control erosion is to leave a little green growth on it and just leave a 

little cover there so it wouldn’t blow away on me. 

 

And those are the areas where the grasshoppers seem to have a better nesting, if I can call it that, 

where they laid their eggs and got into land that either was green summerfallow last year or was light 

land. 

 

And so consequently when it comes time to spray it, I can wager to you that if your area is anything 

like mine, the people that are the hardest pressed to make a buck are the ones that had to spray three 

times. Those are the ones that had to spray three times. I’ve had only one farmer that went in to buy 

chemical for the fourth operation. 
 

The other problem that I haven’t gotten to yet, and that is the kind of chemicals they’re using. And I 

think that’s one I should be discussing with either Environment or with the Minister of Agriculture 

because a lot of people are arguing with me that when the Bertha army worm was severe, a special 

chemical was approved by the federal government to allow using . . . and I’m sorry I don’t have my 

notes with you to name the exact chemical it was, but it was one that wasn’t licensed in Canada. It 

wasn’t licensed for use in Saskatchewan for controlling the Bertha army worm. We got special 

permission back about five, six, seven, eight years ago to spray a certain chemical that would have 

controlled and had a longer control. 
 

And I think we could also save some money with grasshopper control if we could use a Dieldrin type 

chemical that would be a poison rather than a contact spray, and that you could spray  



 

June 12, 1985 

3313 

 

 

down once and then the hatch would come on. 

 

I think if the weather conditions would have been ideal and we would have got a hatch in a given 

period of time, that the farmer could have waited and said, well now they’re now all hatched out; I’ll 

spray once. And he’d control most of them; he’d have some control there. But the spring has been 

such that we’d have a nice day, it would be warm, and then you’d have some cold weather for a long 

time, and then it would get warm again, and then a week later some more would hatch, and a week 

later some more would hatch. And consequently if another hatch comes on now, there’s going to be 

farmers who are spraying their fourth and fifth time. And that is severe. 

 

(1500) 

 

They’re spending . . . I can give you areas in Coronach and Bengough, in particular those two areas, 

where they’ve spent more money already than what they’ll collect in crop insurance. Their total cost 

for their sprays had been as high as the crop insurance payment’s going to be. That doesn’t cover 

them off for weed sprays. It doesn’t cover them off for seeding and fuel costs. 

 

And we’re expecting these people to carry that brunt of an area that should be considered a disaster 

area; an area that is something beyond their control; is something that is caused because of farming 

practices of their neighbours, even. Previous farming practices in the pasture . . . you follow all along 

the Grasslands Park area, that whole Grasslands area, anything north of that huge area where 

grasshoppers were in control last year because there was no grass there. There just was no grass, so 

the grasshoppers were in control. And they’ve moved out and laid their eggs in an adjoining area. If 

we’re not going to control them this year, they’re going to move again. And then we’ll have them. 

 

I haven’t sprayed grasshoppers. On my land I haven’t had to spray grasshoppers; we’re watching it 

closely. There’s the odd little one hatching in the areas, but the growth is good and lush, even in our 

grid road ditches. I don’t know if my R.M. has gone out and sprayed anywhere yet. They haven’t in 

our division, and we’re fortunate. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, I laid my hand down on some land south of Rockglen, the area there, and in 30 

seconds time I could pick up 50 grasshoppers. That makes you sick. You need that kind of lesson, 

Mr. Minister, and I would challenge you to come down and watch the parade in Assiniboia on 

Saturday, and then Saturday afternoon we’ll go down and I’ll show you some grasshoppers. If you 

don’t know what grasshoppers look like when they’re a quarter to a half inch long, and 150 to 200 to 

250 per square foot, that’s a lot of grasshoppers. That’s a national disaster. 

 

And if you minister isn’t getting you that information, you’d better start talking to some ag reps and 

seeing how bad it really is. Because I would suggest that if you have a matching grant program, the 

farmers aren’t going to spray more than they have to. They still have to pay the other half of the cost. 

And if you’d have a program in place that would pay half the chemical, we would have a war on 

grasshoppers. We would get a war on them, and we could control them, and we’d cut them back. 

 

And the other areas . . . I suppose I’d ask you, who would be the best person to meet with, to see or to 

discuss the problem with licensing chemicals, or bringing in a chemical, or where could we get some 

chemical that would be a poison rather than a contract spray? And that is the other area, besides the 

funding of it. The farmers are still anxious to control them, and they’re anxious to risk a little health 

problem even to save their farms and to save their land and their community. 

 

This is next year country, Mr. Minister, this is next year country. And most of the fellows that have 

phoned me . . . And I talked to eight farmers this morning — eight — and I’ve been returning calls, 

and there’s a list on my phone that high yet. And it’s really tough. I’d have to say that it’s hard to get 

back to all of them because it’s the worst problem I’ve ever had since I’ve  



 

June 12, 1985 

 

3314 

 

been an MLA in 1971, Mr. Minister. I’ve never had any other problem that’s been as severe as this 

grasshopper one, never — not even the drought; not even the problem with Tories in any kind. But 

this grasshopper is one where you should be acting on. People are concerned and are seriously 

worrying about it. 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — With regard to the lighter land and the land around the grassy lands in 

my constituency, which I’m familiar with, border up along the river, which has some row of grass 

there, of pasture land, I have a brother-in-law who farms down there. In fact, virtually the whole 

farming area down there is relatives of mine or my wife’s, for perhaps 50 miles down the road. And 

they’re indicating to me that, you know, the problem is clearly the lighter land, and that they’ve 

sprayed that a couple of times. I acknowledge that, and certainly pass that on to the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

With regard to the question of Dieldrin . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, some of the farmers in 

my area asked me also about Dieldrin and whether or not we could free up some Dieldrin to spray 

grasshoppers. Now that obviously, as you’re aware, is licensed at the national level by the federal 

people. 

 

I did have an opportunity, as well though, to talk to the ag rep, or the former ag rep who’s now the 

mayor of Kindersley but had been an ag rep for a long time in the province of Saskatchewan, and I 

asked him about Dieldrin. And his concern with Dieldrin as a person that had had a fair degree of 

experience with it was the fact that Dieldrin stayed in the land and on the plant for over a year, and 

you had to be careful that it did not get into the crop because the Dieldrin could then get right into the 

grain. And by getting into the grain, as poisonous as Dieldrin is, what we could end up is with 

poisoned grain, in effect, and the problem that would be associated with that, of course, is that we 

could then end up with even a more serious problem, and that is the fact that we could not, in fact, 

sell our wheat internationally because it’s contaminated. 

 

So his advice is that Dieldrin is . . . while it is very effective to kill grasshoppers, some of the other 

sides of it should not be overlooked because there’s a fair degree of danger with it. And so his advice 

to me was that we would make a serious mistake if we allowed the Dieldrin out on sort of a knee-jerk 

reaction to kill grasshoppers. 
 

Now that’s his opinion, and I don’t profess to be a chemist, and I don’t profess to know enough about 

that type of poison chemical. I only make the assumption — and perhaps it’s an improper assumption 

— that it was properly tested. It probably went through the mechanisms it had to go through in order 

to do this. 
 

Now I was further advised that there was another chemical — and the name escapes me, but it was 

similar to Dieldrin — but apparently it had a less of what do you call, a life, or whatever it might be. 

It dissolved within a period of five to six weeks. And I forget the name of that particular chemical. 
 

But again, those regulations were put in place obviously for some very important reasons, and one 

only makes the assumption that if you weigh those reasons, and if it’s just some long-haired 

environmentalist that is squealing and got it off the market, then I agree with you it should be put 

back on. 
 

If the rationale was solid in the sense that it could contaminate grain and therefore create a problem 

with international markets, or even worse create a problem that it could poison people, then 

obviously as a society I don’t think we can get into that type of thing. And that sometimes is difficult 

to tell a farmer who is more concerned about killing the grasshoppers that you refer to. But I think we 

do have to weigh those balances in a society. 
 

Now who determines that is certainly the federal government. I would assume if one wanted some 

further detail on that, what I can do is refer it to the Minister of Agriculture who might  



 

June 12, 1985 

3315 

 

 

check with his colleagues in Ottawa, either the Minister of Environment or perhaps more importantly 

the Minister of Agriculture, the minister of the Canadian Wheat Board, to determine the exact nature 

of that. 

 

Now perhaps the Minister of Agriculture . . . and he’s not here today, but was he here today perhaps 

he could have a list of other potential chemicals in that range, and we could try to find that out. I’m 

sure that he has investigated that. I can try to find that answer out for you. 

 

MR. ENGEL: — Basically when I mentioned Dieldrin I didn’t expect that Dieldrin would be the 

chemical used because of the potential hazard, not only to the food chain, but also to the applicator 

— you know, the farmer putting it on, it’s very potentially hazardous. 

 

But I said a Dieldrin-like chemical, one that acts as a poison rather . . . And I think Endrin is one that 

was used when they controlled Bertha army worm. And the areas that could be specified . . . And if 

the Department of Agriculture even wanted to get involved with their field men to use . . . And that 

would be on trap strips and check strips and poison strips that aren’t going to be cropped, you know, 

where farmers leave a 30- or 40-foot wide swath beside their grain field, and then when the 

grasshoppers are in there and moved into that particular area of the field you go down and spray it 

and work it in, and you haven’t got poison getting into your food, your food train. 

 

So there are some steps that should be taken very soon. The problem is imminent. It’s upon us. And I 

don’t think there’s a lot of time to study and look at it. 

 

And some of the calls I made to the chemical companies, even outside of Canada, were such that 

there are some chemicals on hand and would be available if they were licensed, and they would be 

approved for special emergency uses. But I would suggest that either through some aerial applicators 

that would be controlled by the department doing railway rights-of-way where you know it’s not 

going to get into the food train, or doing areas like that where the grass isn’t going to be pastured, I 

think are some steps that need to be taken along with the program you have in place. 

 

But the other end of it I think it’s very, very important, it’s very, very important that some funding be 

made available on a cost-sharing formula to farmers. And I would urge you, I would urge you, if the 

Minister of Agriculture fails to — the problem is severe, the problem is severe — and I would urge 

you to set aside some money because you’re going to save more than that; you’re going to save more 

than that on your tax alone. If you would spend $10 million controlling grasshoppers in 

Saskatchewan, I can guarantee that you will bring a $20 million benefit on income tax. If you would 

spend $10 million controlling grasshoppers, I personally will guarantee that you’ll get $20 million 

back because the farmer is going to save that much. 

 

A stitch in time, in this case, will save nine. And I’m sure, if you want, I can tell the farmers, look, 

contact the Minister of Finance because the agriculture minister isn’t responding. If you want to 

know how severe the problem is, everybody’s been phoning me. I’ve been giving him, Mr. Minister 

of Agriculture’s number. I almost said his name. But I’ve been giving them his telephone number 

and saying, phone this number, try and get some co-operation and help because it’s a serious 

problem. 

 

I would love to see farmers have a little guarantee that they could go to their supplier and say, look, 

I’ll be paying for this just as soon as I get my cheque from the provincial government, and I’m sure 

the supplier would give him some more spray. 

 

But there’s guys out there that say, I’ve used up my grocery money for fall, between now and fall 

already. I’ve spent $2,600 on grasshopper spray, and that’s what we figured we could live on. Mr. 

Minister, the farmers are back to the wall on this one. 



 

June 12, 1985 

 

3316 

 

And there’s guys calling me. Other guys — I could go along into a long harangue, and I don’t want 

to diffuse the topic — but your counselling and assistance thing, they’ve been assured by the 

counselling and assistance committee that they will get . . . they are in line for a loan. They go to 

their banks and they’re laughed out of the bank and the credit union. They’re not getting that 

guarantee. The money isn’t there. So it’s a serious problem. It’s a serious problem. And those are the 

farmers we want to protect, and we want to see them around so they can pay their bills and they can 

get a crop. 

 

We don’t want to let them lose their crop and then just get enough crop insurance to pay for their 

sprays. I think it’s a serious problem, and I wish you would look at areas like that, rather than just 

more money to the oil companies. I heard one of you tell a story. In fact it was you in question period 

today. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. I have allowed very far-ranging debate this afternoon in committee of 

finance. The question before the committee is finance estimates, and I would ask the members to 

relate their questions and comments to the finance estimates that are before the committee. 

 

MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Chairman, thank you. The point I’m trying to make is that out of finance and 

out of treasury today we had the announcement, we have the press release, that over $100 million 

more is going to be given to the oil companies. And all I’m saying is, haven’t you got $10 million for 

farmers? Haven’t you got $10 million for farmers? The trickle-down philosophy that the Tories 

believe in that if you feed enough oats to a horse, you don’t need to feed your chickens, isn’t going to 

work with the oil companies because no matter how much money Rockefeller gets from you guys, 

I’m not going to get any of it. It’s not going to land up in my pocket. I don’t have shares in 

Rockefeller’s oil companies. And I don’t have any shares like that, but I do have a horse and 

chickens. 

 

And Mr. Minister, you’ve got to put 10 or $12 million into the chemicals for controlling 

grasshoppers if we want to reap that benefit back. There’s the opposite. You feed the chickens, and 

the horses will survive on this one, because it just is chicken-feed compared to what you’re going to 

lose if they don’t get a crop. That’s the point I’m trying to make. 

 

MR. PETERSEN: — Mr. Chairman, may I ask leave of the Assembly to introduce some students 

from my constituency? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

MR. PETERSEN: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to introduce to the Assembly today some 

people from the Invermay Elementary School. We have 33 students here. I hope they’re enjoying the 

proceedings today. They are accompanied by teachers, Mr. Joe Kowalyshyn and Miss Jeanette 

Walker. Their chaperons are Mrs. Nancy Kresak, Mrs. Judith Bansley, Mrs. Linda Wilson; and their 

bus driver is Mr. Brian Parsons. 

 

I’ll be joining you later for refreshments and pictures. Hope you enjoy the proceedings. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, Hear! 

 

(1515) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 



 

June 12, 1985 

3317 

 

 

FINANCE 

 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 11 

 

Item 1 (continued) 
 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — The series of questions asked by the member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg with regards to the Dieldrin-related chemicals — the other observation that 

one would make, I was advised, is that some of those poison chemicals you have to be careful of, 

because they get into . . . If they’re fed at all to animals, they can get into the milk and create severe 

problems, number one. 

 

Number two, you can’t experience the problem that we look at with protectionism growing around 

the world, and which we saw with some of the American states placing embargoes on Canadian hogs 

because they were given some kind of chemical . . . I don’t just know what that is. 

 

With regard to the argument that if we spent $1, we would get $2 back in income tax, it seems to me 

that, given that the tax system only takes part of your income, that if the farmer invested $1, by the 

same logic he would get $2 and plus back, if that logic was to follow there. 
 

The other problem you have to look at is this: is that if you are to . . . If government is to pay for 

chemicals for farmers to deal with grasshoppers — and I assume you’d say all farmers would have to 

deal with grasshoppers — do you also then, as a government, have to pay farmers if they have a 

severe problem with cutworms, which some people in my area do? If you pay for grasshopper spray, 

does that mean you have to pay for wheat midge, spraying for wheat midge in the northern part of 

Saskatchewan? If you get into the program of covering farmers’ costs in any given chemical, what 

happens with a serious problem of wild oats, for example? Do you have to cover a really far more 

expensive chemical dealing with wild oats? 
 

And the list goes on and on as to government supplying the chemicals for virtually anything you 

want with regard to agriculture. Now I personally don’t believe that most farmers in this province 

expect or want the government to pay the costs of the chemicals that they use in their farming 

operation. I have a fair degree of confidence that, in fact, the farmers will deal with this question in 

an appropriate manner. 
 

I indicated to the hon. member that the Minister of Agriculture is monitoring this on a constant and 

ongoing basis, and one would have confidence. I think you should have confidence in that direction. 

If things get, as you say, where there’s a clouds of locusts and grasshoppers flying and blotting out 

the sun in this province, obviously that’s going to be a problem that we will have to deal with as we 

come to it, that everybody will. Everybody has to deal with that type of situation. I think it’s 

somewhat premature to think that we are going to have clouds of locusts, clouds of grasshoppers, 

blotting out the sun. I am confident that we will keep a handle on it than that. 
 

MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Minister, just one comment. You’re very optimistic that you’ll even have a 

chance to deal with the problems next year if you get up the courage to go for an election this fall. 

The farmers are going to say, Tories aren’t Tories. They gave you a chance — and this is financial 

estimates, Mr. Chairman — because they looked at Alberta and they said, what has Alberta got 

compared to Saskatchewan? In Saskatchewan we pay sales tax; Alberta doesn’t. In Saskatchewan our 

farmers paid all their fertilizer; Alberta, they got 50 per cent back. In Saskatchewan we pay property 

tax; Alberta doesn’t. Alberta farmers don’t pay. Did you know that? The Alberta farmers don’t pay 

property taxes — zero. 
 

The Crow rate, you let it go. You let the Crow go. Saskatchewan farmers are paying; thanks to your 

big fight to save the Crow, Saskatchewan farmers are already paying a big increase in the Crow rate. 

It doesn’t affect Alberta because of how much closer they are, the proximity to the  



 

June 12, 1985 

 

3318 

 

ports. The Crow rate has a third of the effect on them as it has on us. They have the Crow rate there. 

 

Saskatchewan pays the full price of the farm fuels. We pay the same as industry does for our fuel. 

Alberta gets 36 and 37 cents a gallon off. Now Alberta has implemented a program to get 50 per cent 

of their grasshopper spray. We have to pay all our grasshopper spray. 

 

How can our farmers compete on a world level when we have neighbours like that? Those are Tories. 

Here we’ve got people that love the frontier oil company. The $100 million you announced for the 

oil people today would pay these programs. But you haven’t got a dollar for them to save money on 

sales tax. You didn’t put up a buck on fertilizer. Do you know what the fertilizer bill is in 

Saskatchewan? — 17 per cent of his costs are fertilizer. Alberta put up 50 per cent of it. 

 

Property tax — you had a program in place for one quarter. You took that away. Alberta hasn’t got 

anything there. The Crow rate — you go down that list, Mr. Minister, and you’re batting zero. If you 

think you’re going to win a farm seat with that kind of performance, mister, even your riding is going 

to be in trouble. We’re even going to see socialists up there. That is going to be something that’s 

going to surprise you. 

 

The Minister of Justice has himself a good laugh. But we might have a name like Suzanne Murray in 

here next time around. That’s going to become a household word because they’re going to be the 

person that’s defeated the Minister of Justice, because he’s got some parts of Lumsden in his area 

where farmers are going to say, we’ve had enough of the back alley; we’ve had enough of the Lane, 

because they expect the same kind of treatment from Tories as they had in Alberta. 

 

You had a message from Alberta and a big flag you raised out there. Look at what Alberta’s doing. 

This is what we’re going to do, and you held that flag high. Well, the farmers see what Alberta gets. 

And what do we get in Saskatchewan? A big goose egg, just a big goose egg. And you can’t even put 

up $10 million to save a crop. Four hundred million dollars worth of wheat is going to go down the 

tubes for $10 million. Now that’s a good investment. If you’re a capitalist and you believe in that at 

all, they ought to work for you — they ought to work for you. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, why didn’t you act like your neighbours do in Alberta? Why don’t you give us 

some of the programs that they have there? The farmers . . . I’m not asking for something that’s not 

being done. I’m not asking for something that’s unreasonable. I’m just saying, of that whole list, look 

at the grasshopper problem. Just number one, start with grasshoppers. 

 

You know, you’ve done your sales tax; that’s gone. The crop’s in. You haven’t given us any money 

in fertilizer. The property tax — you took it away. The Crow rate — you let it die. The fuel tax — 

you’re not going to give us the fuel rebate of 34 cents. But at least come up with a grasshopper one. 

At least come up with one of the eight, just one. 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — The hon. member indicates that the NDP will win every riding in rural 

Saskatchewan. The members of your own caucus don’t even believe you when you say that. 

 

Mr. Chairman . . . 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. I would ask members, when you ask a question, to be quiet 

while you hear the answer. 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think that they will have their time — they will 

have their time in the near future wherein we can determine who is going to form the next 

government of Saskatchewan. I would be very confident that the rural people of Saskatchewan, 

farmers of Saskatchewan, will endorse the policies of this government rather than going back to  



 

June 12, 1985 

3319 

 

 

the old policies of the NDP. 

 

The policies that they’re advancing today with the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is exactly 

the same policies that they held out to rural Saskatchewan in April of 1982. And the people of 

Saskatchewan took them from a government of 11 years, a government with 44 seats, down to a 

government of eight seats. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I don’t believe the farmers of Saskatchewan will soon forget the policies of the 

former NDP government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, Hear! 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a comment on the Minister of Finance’s last 

statement about when the election was called and the fact that we were reduced from 44 seats to the 

eight seats we have now. I want to remind the Minister of Finance that in 1934 we had an election in 

this province and your same government never got one seat. Mr. Chairman, I wanted to add that 

because the Minister of Finance started debate on that subject. 

 

But I do want to go back today, Mr. Minister, as you are the chairman of treasury board and you 

made the decision to cut off the $250,000 grant to the northern food transportation subsidy, and I 

want to go back to question period today where you declined to answer the question but allowed the 

minister . . . or the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake to answer the question. 

 

I just want to get this on the record, Mr. Minister. Do you agree with the comments that were made 

today by the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake regarding the transportation subsidy in northern 

Saskatchewan? 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Yes, I endorse the statements and the policies made by our member, our 

minister of northern affairs. And that’s, to my learned friend of Athabasca, that‘s the way 

government, parliamentary government, works. 
 

MR. THOMPSON: — Okay. I want to say, Mr. Minister, that I’m not going to make any 

accusations in the House today regarding his statements. But I want to read Hansard tomorrow 

because as I heard the statements from the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake today, he 

indicated in his answer to me — and I am going to check Hansard tomorrow and make sure, because 

there was so much noise that I want to be accurate on this — but he indicated that there was no 

representation from Northerners regarding the removal of the subsidy. 
 

He also made the statement that there was no representation from the two northern MLAs. He also 

made the statement — and I’ll check this out, too, tomorrow — that he asked the MLAs for their 

input into the northern transportation subsidy program. Now as I heard it, that’s how I heard it, Mr. 

Minister of Finance. But I’m going to check that out. 
 

But I want to say this: I made representation on behalf of my constituents in northern Saskatchewan 

in a written letter to the Premier, and the Premier answered that letter. And letters were written to the 

Minister of Health, who administers that program that you cut off, and the Minister of Health has 

responded to that. And his deputy has responded to that request to have that reinstated. 
 

And I think that the answer that I got today is exactly what I heard, but I will check it out. And I 

think that that’s a sad situation when we have a minister who will get up and say that there has been 

no representation, indicating that he wants to find out how we should replace that program, or what 

should we do. And all I say is, Mr. Minister, it was a good program and it was doing its job. And 

what I’m asking you today is if you will make the decision to reinstate that  



 

June 12, 1985 

 

3320 

 

northern transportation subsidy to the citizens of northern Saskatchewan that you took away — 

reinstate it. 

 

You talk about . . . or your government, after you made the decision to cut that $250,000, indicated 

that tourist operators were taking advantage of it. It wasn’t getting to the local people. Well there’s 

letters on file to your government — the Minister of Health has it and the Premier has it — from the 

tourist association of the province, indicating that they think that that is the wrong excuse, that they 

were not taking advantage of the program. 

 

When I have asked the question in the House, Mr. Minister, it’s been stated that other individuals 

other than tourist operators and other than local people were also taking advantage of it and were also 

being subsidized, and I would assume that you’re talking about civil servants who get northern 

allowances or housing subsidies. And that happens up in northern Saskatchewan. If you ask a civil 

servant to go and live in Stony Rapids, you pay him a northern allowance — him or her. And that’s 

fair. I agree, because we need them civil servants up there and you have to encourage them to stay. 

 

But at the same time, Mr. Minister, you should realize that there are real people up there. There’s 

folks that live there. They’re not subsidized in any way. They’re paying the full cost. They get no 

northern allowance. And that was part of a northern allowance that they were getting — the subsidy 

on the fresh foods and the produce and the fresh meat. And they were utilizing it. And there are 

studies being taken up there by schools who will indicate just how much of this has been taken away 

from them — what they were consuming when the subsidy was in place and what they are 

consuming now. 

 

(1530) 
 

And, Mr. Minister, I ask you today to reconsider that program. And if you don’t think it was working 

quite right, at least put it back in, put it in place until we can . . . or you as a government can work out 

a new form. But don’t cut it off. And that’s my question today. Will you consider reinstating the 

northern food transportation subsidy? 
 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, you raised a couple of points. First of all, you raised an accusation, 

the hon. member from Athabasca raised an accusation that the minister responsible for Sask Housing 

. . . You raised the accusation against the minister of Sask Housing that he misinformed the House. 

That’s a pretty serious resolution to do. Now you indicated that he was indicating that he had 

received no representation on it. 
 

I think that Hansard will also show (and I don’t know the exact timing of this for the hon. member) 

that you had raised this matter in question period some — I would guess, almost a month after this 

House reconvened. And you raised it after a news report on CBC radio, and that’s when you raised it 

in the House. You did not raise it in the House before that. The action was taken in January and I’m 

not aware of any communications that you had with the minister responsible for northern 

Saskatchewan. I can only seek information from him as to the nature of your communication, your 

observations. I’m sure you can pick up the phone, and certainly you, as a member, I would be 

surprised if anybody in cabinet would not talk to you, because I think we’ve had a pretty good record 

of doing that. 
 

So I don’t know whether you’ve talked to him or not. Now you indicate that you spoke to the 

Premier with regards to the northern subsidies. That decision was taken by government. That was a 

decision based on cabinet. The minister of northern Saskatchewan indicated his rationale and the 

government’s rationale as to taking that position, and I certainly stand by the answers that he’s 

advanced for that. 
 

And the policy will stay in place. Any policy is subject to change, as you know, in any government. 

But that would tend to be focused or brought forward by the minister of northern Saskatchewan. 



 

June 12, 1985 

3321 

 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Well, Mr. Minister, you have just indicated to the House that it’s fine for you 

to go down to Weyburn and announce $100 million or more savings to the oil companies, giving 

them another year’s royalty holiday. But yet you indicate that you haven’t got the $250,000 a year for 

fresh food and vegetables and meat for the citizens of northern Saskatchewan, who you took that 

program away from. 

 

You also indicate that we should have been, or I should have been working through the member for 

Prince Albert-Duck Lake rather than the Premier. But I tell you, when I heard that program was cut 

off, I immediately went right to the Premier, and I thought that was the right thing to do, because I 

thought it was important enough of a program that I should go to the Premier. And I wrote to the 

Premier, and he answered. And that was the answer that I got — that they were going to look at some 

other ways. 

 

But for you to say that I have not made representation, and that I should go through the member from 

Prince Albert-Duck Lake, I don’t know where he has responsibilities for the food transportation 

subsidy. 

 

But you, as the Minister of Finance, are the individual, the chairman of finance, chairman of treasury 

board, and you made that decision. And I’m sure that your Premier had input into that. If you were 

just talking to the minister, the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake, and getting your advice from 

treasury board as to why you should cut that program off, well I think that’s wrong because I know 

the Minister of Health, he has answered that letter and said that he was going to replace it with 

another program. But that has not happened, Mr. Minister. 

 

But yet today you stand up and say that that $250,000 for fresh food, vegetables, and fresh meat to 

the Northerners has been cut off and that’s the way it’s going to be. But yet this morning you 

announce 100-or-more million dollars extra for the oil companies. Now I think that is highly unfair. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I’m going to check Hansard tomorrow morning. I most certainly didn’t try to 

mislead this House, but I . . . As there was so much noise, I was listening, and from what I heard, and 

for you to say that I may be misleading the House, I think that’s wrong. You’re assuming that I may 

have, but I think we both should read Hansard tomorrow . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I didn’t. 

I said, from what I heard, he could have, but I want to make sure by reading Hansard. I most 

certainly didn’t accuse him of that. But I said I wanted to read Hansard, and I suggest that you also 

read it. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, could you indicate how much money that your department, your government has 

saved by taking off the $250,000 for fresh food and fresh vegetables and meat to the citizens of 

northern Saskatchewan? Could you tell me now much you have reduced the deficit that we have in 

this province by taking away that food subsidy grant? 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — A goodly part of yesterday the Leader of the Opposition was 

hound-dogging me about having too high of a deficit. Now you’re saying that the deficit was being 

reduced with regards to that. 
 

We did not come prepared to answer that specific question. I can chase that number down for you 

and try to get it back to you with regards to how much was involved in that, and how much is 

involved in each of the spending estimates of northern Saskatchewan, and how much is involved, if 

you like, throughout the government in northern Saskatchewan. But I assume that you would have 

been asking that question, if you were concerned, in much detail, to the Minister of Health during his 

estimates. And I assume that you asked that question in some detail to the minister of northern 

Saskatchewan when you dealt with his estimates. 
 

Now I don’t know. I can go back in Hansard and look at that too, whether that question was  



 

June 12, 1985 

 

3322 

 

raised and the responses to it. All I’m simply saying to you is that I don’t think I would add any more 

to it than the response by the minister of northern Saskatchewan, the response by the Minister of 

Health during his estimates with regard to that situation. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Well, Mr. Minister, I don’t see why I would want to direct my questions to 

the minister of northern Saskatchewan or the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake, because I 

really don’t see his part in this decision. It is something . . . it’s a decision that you made yourself as 

chairman of treasury board, and the Minister of Health is the department that administers it. As I 

indicated to you, it was a good program and it was working well, and the citizens up there have felt 

the brunt of that cut. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, would you not agree that the reason that you have made this cut — because 

you’ve made many cuts in the province and I won’t go into the other cuts that you have taken out of 

this program was in part and parcel to pay for the deficit that you are now trying to recover? As you 

indicate, you want to get us out of the deficit we’re in. 

 

Is this part, this $250,000 — that decision was made on your behalf to reduce the deficit in this 

province. Would you not agree with that? 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, the hon. member could perhaps have a lesson in the working of the 

parliamentary system of government and the cabinet system of government, and that is that decisions 

like that are taken by cabinet as a whole. You should know that, but perhaps having never sat in a 

cabinet, that you would maybe not be familiar with how the treasury board function works. 

 

There’s five members on treasury board. Recommendations there go to cabinet. Cabinet made the 

decision on it. They can either reject it or modify it or accept it, however it might be. Those decisions 

are taken through that process, and any allocation of dollars, or reallocation of dollars, tends to be 

that. If we’re not going to spend dollars here, we’ll take and in turn send those dollars over here. 

 

If you look at the increase in spending of this government during this session, I think it increased 

some 4.1, 4.5 per cent. So it was not targeted for that at all. It was reallocating dollars, and might 

perhaps be a more appropriate way of doing it. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Final question, Mr. Minister, and I ask you once again: will you reconsider 

implementing the food transportation subsidy? And as I had said before, your government feels that 

it should be administered in a different way. But I ask you, will you reconsider implementing that 

program until you can work out another system, as you indicate, to bring lower prices for the fresh 

food in northern Saskatchewan? Would you consider implementing that program? 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — In further response to both the last question and this question, the budget 

in the Department of Health went up $6.1 million this year — 61 million. So you know, it was hardly 

used. If it was allocated, it would maybe be allocated in some other area. 

 

Your question has been posed on several occasions. I indicated that I would stand and endorse the 

position taken by the minister responsible for northern Saskatchewan. I would endorse the position 

taken by the Minister of Health in Saskatchewan, in allocating in where he believes it is most 

important to allocate those health dollars — some $1.2 billion of them. 

 

And so from that point of view, we do not intend, at this stage of the game, to implement that 

particular program. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I have a couple of questions. You were 

talking to the member for Athabasca regarding allocating or reallocating funding in different  



 

June 12, 1985 

3323 

 

 

areas. 

 

Well Mr. Minister, I’d like to ask you a question on your appropriation for highways. I know that the 

minister probably wasn’t able to get more money out of you, or probably hadn’t even tried. But could 

you, Mr. Minister, tell me why you made the decision to cut down the budget for highways, when 

you realized yourself that we have some terrible roads in this province at this time? There are roads 

that need rebuilding, roads that need some maintenance on them to the point now where maintenance 

hardly helps. But what we need is some money put into construction. And if it isn’t put in there 

shortly, we’re going to see a highway system that is going to be deteriorating to the point where it’s 

going to take massive amounts of dollars to get it back into shape. 

 

Why, Mr. Minister, did you allow the Minister of Highways to either not ask for it, or why did you 

cut him back, if you did cut him back, on the amount of money that would have gone into highway 

construction, so that we could have maintained a reasonably good highway system in this province? 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, I suppose one can argue whether or not we are maintaining a good 

highway program in this province. I believe we do. I believe we have and are maintaining an 

appropriate and proper highway system in this province. 

 

Obviously one could improve the highways. And you could spend millions and millions of dollars on 

that. That could be done. But I think what you have to do is determine which do you see as the higher 

priorities. And what we did in the budget this year, from the spending side, is tried to determine 

which did we see as the most important spending priorities, given this particular fiscal situation. 

 

(1545) 

 

So looking at that we went through the list of some 39 departments and obviously had to determine 

which ones that we felt were most important. Now we came to the view that education was very high 

on the list — perhaps top of the list — education both in the K-to-12 system, and education as it 

relates to university funding. We thought that was important, and I think the people of Saskatchewan 

believe that is important, both for today but also for tomorrow, the most important funding area that I 

think we could deal with. 

 

The second area that we saw as important was health; to be able to provide the nursing home 

facilities that are going to be needed now, and certainly the pressure that’s going to be on nursing 

homes in the future, and we felt that was important. We also felt it was important to deal with 

hospital construction, particularly the hospital construction in the major urban areas that require 

referrals very often for more sophisticated surgery, that being Saskatoon with the University Hospital 

in Saskatoon, St. Paul’s Hospital in Saskatoon, and City Hospital in Saskatoon. The same argument 

could be made in Regina. 

 

Third, we allocated over $600 million, which we thought was important, into the area of job creation; 

job creation through both the public sector, through the private sector, through assistance to small 

business that are, in fact, generating and producing most or many of the jobs, not only in 

Saskatchewan but in Canada today, and we felt that was also fairly important and fundamental. 

 

And the other one was agriculture where we felt a $200 million increase in funding to agriculture 

over the next five years was important to try to come to grips and to deal, not only with the problems 

of today, but also the problems of tomorrow. And I think people were asking, and I think people ask 

governments, so you have to look at those problems into the future. 

 

The reality of the situation, to the hon. member, is I think you are left with perhaps two choices:  



 

June 12, 1985 

 

3324 

 

do you allocate the same amount of money, basically, across to all departments, 1 or 2 per cent, and 

that was what was done in many other provinces this year; or do you re-allocate form more important 

to, well, not unimportant, but less important priority areas? 

 

I suppose, in response to your question, we could have spent $200 million more on highways and 

allocated $200 million less for agriculture budget, but would that have been wise? Would that have 

been a proper approach for our government to take? 

 

Or we could have allocated $400 million more to highways over the next five years, additional 

money to highways over the next five years, and not allocated the same or equivalent amount of 

money to education. In other words, was education funding more important, or was highway 

construction more important? And we had to take the decision that education ranked above 

highways, and the same can be said about health care, and the same can be said for job creation. 

That’s why we took the decision. 

 

Sure we would like to have built more roads. The reality is that you had to choose for those priorities, 

and I don’t think the highways priority was as high on the list of peoples’ concerns, one; or the 

economic realities that we faced, two. And therefore we chose the four cornerstones, the priorities 

that we saw were important. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I think we’d all have to agree that 

highways might, in your opinion, have been a lower priority than some of the other departments, and 

education and health certainly are of the highest priority of any government in this province, 

especially in Saskatchewan. And I don’t think I ever questioned the point of you spending the 

amount of money on education and on health. We need it there, and everybody expects it to be spent 

there. 
 

But, Mr. Minister, when you talked about job creation programs, well if you wanted to create some 

jobs, some of these programs that you came out with, you could have created those jobs by putting 

that money into highways and hiring a lot of those students for summer construction jobs. That 

would have created employment. It would have sort of solved two problems at the same time. You 

could’ve got a lot of those students working; you could’ve got a lot of other people working also if 

you would have gone into constructing highways. 
 

And although it’s not a high priority on your list, Mr. Minister, we’d have to, I think, admit that if it 

isn’t done now, you’re going to be putting money elsewhere. But in a year, or in two years’ time, 

you’re going to get to a point where you’re going to have to put highways on a high priority, 

otherwise it’s going to be to the point where the people are going to be afraid to drive on them any 

more. 
 

You say that the public wasn’t concerned about highways, and they didn’t think that that was one of 

the priorities that you should be considering. Well, Mr. Minister, I think we’d have to agree at this 

point that people are concerned. They are concerned about the condition of our roads because the 

majority of the highways, the only ones that are half decent today, are the primary highways in this 

province. But we’ve got a large amount of secondary highways, and those are in terrible shape, and 

people are getting concerned about them. 
 

When you’ve got roads that were a few years ago reasonably good, and today are nothing more than 

a bunch of patches . . . and they’ve got away from using asphalt and patching any more; they’re just 

filling them in with gravel and leaving it there for most of the summer because it doesn’t help to put 

any more oil on them any more. 
 

Well Mr. Minister, I think we’d have to say that there has to be a real problem in Saskatchewan on 

our highways. And that could have solved a lot of problems. Put a little more money into highways. 

You would have created jobs at the same time. 



 

June 12, 1985 

3325 

 

 

The way you’ve done it at this point, you’ve taken away money from highways and it wasn’t only 

this year. You’re talking about what your priorities had to be, and what you should have had in your 

budget. Well the Department of Highways has been losing money in every budget. It’s been going 

lower and lower. And the result, Mr. Minister, is one that’s very evident. All you have to do is drive 

some of our secondary highway systems in this province. 

 

And we could have kept our unemployment rate down for the last three years by providing work for 

the people, for the students, and at the same time constructed some road systems. And it’s not only 

for the students. It’s a lot of people that are on unemployment or on welfare. These people could 

have been productive. We are spending millions of dollars on those programs. Put that money into 

putting people to work. Give them something to do. They’ll be constructive. They’ll appreciate the 

opportunity to be able to work. And at the same time the rest of the public would be able to enjoy the 

efforts of their work. 

 

That, Mr. Minister, is what should have been done. And the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake is 

saying, why don’t we hire some of those on our farms? Well Mr. Minister, if agriculture was doing a 

little better, yes, the farmers would be hiring someone to work for them. But this province has got to 

a point now where the farmers can’t even afford to hire anyone because the majority of them are 

going bankrupt. So there we have a real problem. 

 

And it’s not only in agriculture. It seems to be a problem right around in this province now. So 

certainly if you kept agriculture strong, they would be able to hire someone, and that would also 

alleviate some of the unemployment problems we have in this province. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think using the excuse that we have to put money into health or into education, and 

we have to cut back somewhere else, it may sound like a good excuse. But certainly we have to put 

money into health, and it’s always been the case, and it’s always been there. But I think maybe your 

priorities were a little wrong when you decided to cut back on some of the other departments in your 

budget, because we have to look at what is happening in the expenditures for social services, on 

welfare, people that are unemployed — can’t find a job. And I think all we have to do is take some of 

the money out of there and put it into some area where the people could have been more productive, 

and I think in the long run that would have saved the province a lot of money. 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well if you want to talk about it in terms of man-years, $3,000 per 

man-year in Opportunities ’85, that means that for every $3,000 spent on Opportunities ’85 you get 

one man-year of work. That’s the one man working for a full year — spent $3,000 — because you 

contribute $1,000 and that lasts for four months, a four month job, you see. 

 

Now if you go to Highways, the hon. member from Pelly, it’s $35,000 per man-year per jobs created. 

In other words, if you spent your money on things like Opportunities ’85, it costs $3,000 per job. In 

Highways it costs $35,000 for jobs. So it’s almost 10 times as much money that would be spent by 

the treasury to create a job. 
 

Now it seems to me that if you were to use the Opportunities ’85 concept — you’re talking about 

helping students and young people — it seems to me to make a lot more sense to spend the same 

amount of money and get 10 times more jobs for it. Now that seems to me is a logical way to look at 

it. And I think that when you look at doing the budgeting, you want to look at it, if you’re spending a 

dollar in this area, that it’s primarily being driven to create jobs, then you look at the job component 

of that particular expenditure. 
 

If you’re on the other hand spending money on things like health and education, you’re less 

concerned about the job dimension of it on the immediate term, and more concerned about the social 

program that you’re advancing, or, number two, the long-term benefit that you would bestow in the 

case of education. 



 

June 12, 1985 

 

3326 

 

But if you were to compare employment by building highways versus employment by other 

programs, it’s far more expensive to create jobs through that. Now that’s not to say that you don’t 

create construction jobs, whether it’s highways or some place else. And clearly we have spent a large 

amount of money in this budget with regard to capital expenditures. We’re building hospitals, we’re 

building nursing homes, we’re building roads, and we’re building various other programs, and that 

obviously creates jobs. 

 

Now I think the argument you were advancing is that you should build these roads because you 

could, in so doing, create jobs, and it’s a good job-creation measure. I simply say that there’s other 

measures that get more people working than does building highways. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Well, Mr. Minister, you brought up a couple of points that I would like to touch 

on. One, when we’re talking . . . you brought up the fact of how much it costs to build that road, and 

how much it cost to employ an individual under your program of Opportunities ’85. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, certainly we realize that it’s going to cost more to build a mile of highway than 

to hire someone to do some small job through some employer that maybe wouldn’t have hired him 

without this kind of government assistance. That individual maybe would have got by without hiring 

a student under Opportunities ’85 if the government hadn’t put some money into it. 

 

And that’s one area that I’m not complaining about. This kind of assistance will allow some 

small-business people to hire someone at a little cheaper rate than what they maybe thought they 

could afford. 

 

I’m not sure as to how effective some of these programs are, or how beneficial they are. Looking at 

some of them, there’s a lot of strings attached to them, a lot of red tape to some of those programs. 

And we’ll never be able to compare the two and say, look, Opportunities ’85 only cost us $3,000 per 

job, but if we’re going to build a highway it costs us 35,000. Well we have to realize . . . Also, I 

suppose, if we want to compare it that way, to construct a new highway is going to cost money, and 

we have to be prepared to put that money into it. 

 

(1600) 

 

But if you’re talking about the individual that would be involved to build that mile of road, then the 

cost of that individual or that student would hardly be much more than what you’re talking about in 

your Opportunities ’85 Program, because it doesn’t cost 35,000 per mile or per man-year to build that 

road for that one individual, and $3,000 in some other area. If you hire that student, no one’s going to 

pay him $35,000 if he’s working on construction. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, if we’re going to compare the unemployed, or the student employment program, 

whether it’s on highways or whether it’s in any other small business, that amount isn’t going to be 

any different to hire that student to do the job. 

 

Surely it’s going to cost more to construct that mile of road. You’re going to have to put more money 

into the budget because it does cost a lot to build a mile of road. But it is beneficial in the long run to 

keep on building roads and increasing the budget. To cut back in any area and say that we don’t need 

the roads any more, or we don’t need to worry about education, or we don’t need to worry about 

health, it’s going to somehow affect the province in one or two or three years down the road. 

 

And I know — I can see from the look on your face right now — you’re saying, well, we need a 

higher . . . we’re going to run into a higher deficit. Well, Mr. Minister, that’s what you’ve got on your 

mind. But if we’re going to need some money to build those roads, let’s look at where that money 

should be coming from and who is using them. 



 

June 12, 1985 

3327 

 

 

Are the interprovincial trucking firms, running from B.C. to the Maritimes, paying for the cost of 

running through our highways and transporting their goods across the province. You’ve removed the 

tax. It doesn’t cost them anything. They can run through the province, but what have we got on the 

roads? 

 

The oil companies come in from Alberta or from the States or wherever they may come from, come 

into Saskatchewan. They use all of our roads. They’re making piles of money. You give them a tax 

holiday, an extended tax holiday yet. You’ve announced it. Your Premier has announced it today. 

And we don’t have enough money to build the roads. 

 

Well Mr. Minister, I think your priorities are all wrong. I think we should be looking at getting the 

money from the people that use the roads, not only from the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, because 

your tax reform now is going to do nothing more than tax the individual that lived here all his life. 

He’s going to be taxed a lot more in order to do some of the things that have to be done in this 

province, while others from outside of this province that get the benefits of the highways don’t have 

to pay anything. 
 

Mr. Minister, the oil companies, some of the interprovincial trucking firms, can afford it a lot more 

than the senior citizens or the farmers or the working people of this province. That’s who you should 

be taxing, and they should be paying their fair share in order to provide good roads for this province. 
 

And Mr. Minister, I’m only sorry to say, and I’m very disappointed that you have decided that your 

priorities were a little different, that the oil companies . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and the 

multinationals (if the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake wants me to say that), the banks and all 

of those, if they are the ones that are more important than the people of Saskatchewan and the 

programs that we had in this province, and the roads that we’ve had in this province — if those 

multinationals are more important, then I guess maybe in your opinion your priorities are on the right 

track. 
 

But Mr. Minister, I’ll have to tell you that I don’t think the people look at it that way. I don’t think 

the people would agree with you. I think the people will say that you are wrong, and that we should 

be going the other route, and we should be doing things that are going to help the province. We 

should be asking those people that use the service to pay some for it, to pay their fair share for it, and 

that way we could have a province that would be a better province for everyone to live in, and it 

wouldn’t be so expensive for the local people to live in this province and have to pay all of the costs 

that others benefit from. 
 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well I go back to a list of resolutions by the . . . it’s called The People 

and The Economy task force of 1984, recommendations, I believe, of the NDP task force on the 

economy. 
 

There should be a fair and reasonable tax on the consumption of gasoline. 
 

And this is your policy and what you’re basically saying there and have said sometimes is that you 

would see, if you were government, that we would put a gas tax, a 20 per cent ad valorem gas tax 

back on people. Now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, you say no. That’s been your policy for 

some time in your party. It continues to be your policy for some time in your party. And I can go 

through and read some more. 
 

Now you want to, as well, bring in a . . . You want to: 
 

Be it resolved that the NDP policy that a inheritance tax be introduced that will discourage 

the acceleration towards larger farms, from one generation to the next. 

 

Now you talk about wanting any kind of reform, and all your reform does is go back to where  



 

June 12, 1985 

 

3328 

 

you were pre-1982. You want sales tax brought back in. You want inheritance tax brought back in. 

Those are the types of taxes that you are . . . in your policy, in the NDP policy (you’re talking about), 

NDP resolutions, you’re talking about inheritance tax. You also want to bring back the gas tax. 

 

I don’t think the people of the province have changed their mind since 1982 when they decimated 

you down to eight seats. They don’t want the gas tax; they don’t see it as a fair tax. Saskatchewan 

happens to be the highest consumer of gasoline in the entire nation, and therefore why should they 

not have a break on their price of gasoline? But you want that back. 

 

You also say in this same document that you want to . . .your oil royalties you want going back to 

pre-1982. You want to go back to where you were. Every one of these seems like you want to go 

back. 

 

You also say the province should publicly own all potash industry in Saskatchewan. You want to buy 

the rest of the potash mines in the province. It’s been stated here in your policy. It also states that you 

would reinstate the land bank, and you want to buy millions and millions of acres of people’s land in 

the province of Saskatchewan. You want to take over the balance of the uranium industry — or you 

used to. I think you now want to just simply close it all down. 

 

But every one of the things that you talk about, hon. member from Pelly, is to go backwards. You 

want to go back to yesterday. And that’s the policy of your party, is to go back to yesterday. It’s a 

party of old people. And that’s the reality of it. You want to go back to yesterday. You want to 

reinstate inheritance tax, reinstate the gas tax, reinstate the policy of buying more and more 

businesses through Crown corporations. The people rejected that in 1982, dramatically, and I think 

they will reject it again. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I wonder if perhaps we could have a brief adjournment. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — The minister has asked for a brief adjournment. Is that agreed. A five minute 

adjournment. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Minister, I’m very pleased that you at least keep a close watch on what the 

NDP is doing when you have a proposed task force committee report. And, Mr. Minister, the one 

thing I’d have to say is that doesn’t necessarily mean that that’s NDP policy. That is a task force that 

went around to determine what people were saying, and some of that is what they’ve heard people 

saying. Policy is a total different thing, Mr. Minister. 

 

You talk about all the things that you’re going to . . . And if we wanted to talk about what someone 

may have said in the past, I can certainly go back to what a lot of . . . the things that the minister 

himself has said in the past and hasn’t happened. The 5 per cent sales tax removal — that is 

something the people expect you to keep. You haven’t done that, Mr. Minister. Are you going to 

remove that sales tax? A few days ago you said no. A couple of years, two years ago, you said yes. 
 

Mr. Minister, I noticed that you change your mind quite often. And that’s not on just a report of a 

group that went around listening to what people are saying, but that is policy that you said you were 

going to keep, promises you were going to keep and you didn’t keep, and promises that you broke to 

the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

(1615) 
 

You also talk about us going back and putting back the gasoline tax, road tax on gasoline. Well, Mr. 

Minister, I don’t think that any of the members on this side of the House ever said that we’re going to 

put the road tax back on gasoline. But when I talked about getting some money in for highways, Mr. 

Minister, I did say, and I’ll make it very clear, I did not say put the road tax back on  



 

June 12, 1985 

3329 

 

 

gasoline in this province. What I was saying that we should be asking, through some form, for the 

interprovincial trucking firms, for the oil companies, and others that use our roads to pay a fair share 

of the use of that road towards the construction of that road. That, Mr. Minister, is what I’m saying 

— nothing to do with gasoline tax or land bank or anything else of that nature, because that is not 

what I am saying, Mr. Minister, and that is not what I am proposing at all. 

 

Mr. Minister, one of the other areas that I think people are very disappointed — at least I’m very 

disappointed in — in your budget was the removal of the property improvement grant for farmers. 

Farmers, you realize yourself, are having a difficult time right now. A lot of them are giving into the 

banks, and they are letting their land go. They’re just moving off it. They have no choice because 

there is not assistance for them, no assistance for them at all. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, what do you do in your budget this year? You don’t support the farmers. You 

don’t try to help them, fight the battle against the banks and against other problems they had, the 

other costs, against the multinationals that charge so much for the chemicals, the fertilizers. You 

don’t help them fight those battles, Mr. Minister. But what do you do? You take away the property 

improvement grant that they had. You took that away from them. You took that home quarter school 

tax rebate that they had. You added, Mr. Minister, rather than removing the E&H tax, you went and 

you added or extended the E&H tax to used vehicles, again affecting farmers and agriculture. 

 

Mr. Minister, you have imposed an additional tax on rural Saskatchewan of at least 1,000 to $1,500. 

You’ve imposed at least $1,000 of your own from this province. And if you want to go to your 

friends in Ottawa, they’ve cost the people of Saskatchewan more money — and the farmers. 

 

So the farmers are going to be suffering. They are going to have to pay more money that they ever 

have before because of some of the programs you’ve removed and some of the taxes that you’ve 

increased, Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

And some of the members . . . the member for prince Albert-Duck Lake again is saying that’s false. 

Well, Mr. Minister, I think all we have to do is go to the farmers of Saskatchewan and ask them if 

that’s false. Ask them what it is costing them this year. Ask them what it’s costing them when they 

pay their tax and there is no more property improvement grant rebate, there is no more school tax 

rebate, and there is an additional tax, E&H tax, on every used vehicle that they buy. Mr. Minister, 

they don’t agree that that’s not true, because it is true, and it is going to cost them a lot more money. 

 

Mr. Minister, what you should have been doing in times when agriculture is suffering, and when 

rural Saskatchewan is suffering, is try to keep some of that money in that area rather than taking it 

away from them. 

 

Are you going to be prepared to change what you have put into your budget like you did for the 

senior citizen’s school tax rebate? Are you gong to be prepared at this time to say that you made a 

mistake and that rural Saskatchewan is going to lose a lot of money because of it, at a time when they 

could use that assistance? And will you put that property improvement grant rebate back in for 

farmers in rural Saskatchewan? 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well the hon. member asks several questions again. I think I indicated in 

questions from the Leader of the Opposition last night with regard to property improvement grant as 

to why we did it. I can simply repeat that for you is you like. I don’t think that’s your wish. 

 

I would like to point out a couple of other resolutions . . . It seems that you folks want to talk about 

elections; here’s another resolution of the NDP: 

 

Further be it resolved that the NDP support limit on coverage under  



 

June 12, 1985 

 

3330 

 

the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance program of $18,000 land assessment per bona fide farmer. 

 

Now what that means is a farmer in my constituency of Kindersley, where the land is assessed at 

$4,000, would be able to get for a crop insurance coverage only on 720 acres., Now that’s their 

policy. And that is to keep the size of farms down to 720 acres. That’s what it says. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition: 

 

Be it further resolved that the NDP support a limit on coverage under the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance program of $18,000 land assessment per bona fide farmer. 

 

Eighteen thousand assessment. That’s 720 acres — 720 acres of land, and that’s all that should be 

covered under crop insurance. 

 

Here’s another one: 

 

Be it resolved that the NDP support — support — workers should only work 30 hours a week 

and get paid for 40 hours a week. 

 

Now that, in effect, says all workers in the province now should work on a basis of so much money 

for 40 hours work week but only have to pay 30 . . . only have to work 30 hours. 

 

Those are the policies that you’re advancing here, and those are policies that we do not agree with. 

And I suppose if we want to debate whether we want this, or whether we want that, we will continue 

that debate. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Do we have to stack those against the policies of selling all the Crown 

corporations, which was the policy of your party? It isn’t, perhaps, the policy of your party, but it 

was certainly . . . Now just a moment. It was contained in a resolution that went forward to your 

convention. Table it. It’s a matter of public record. 

 

And the Minister of Finance, of course, is not saying that any of those resolutions ever passed an 

NDP convention. He’s not saying that. Or if he is, he’s misleading the committee very, very 

substantially, because there’s not a word of truth in it. He knows there’s not a word of truth in it. He 

knows that no resolution that he has read has passed any NDP provincial convention. He knows that, 

but he is still asserting it to be policy. 

 

Well if that’s the game, we presumably can assert anything that ever went to your convention as 

policy. One clearly said SGI should be sold. Well I am sorry, Mr. Minister, that you were in here 

advocating that SGI should be sold. We don’t agree with that. We don’t agree with that. You 

progressive Conservatives say that SGI should be sold. We don’t agree with that. 

 

Mr. Chairman, this sort of game of quoting a resolution which may have come from somewhere and 

went to a convention and was defeated, and asserting it to be policy, is a game which anyone can 

play — two can play. 

 

Two can play the game, and in accordance with the standard which the minister has set, I am 

surprised that you and his party would advocate the sale of all Crown corporations, particularly the 

sale of SGI, which this resolution did. And I’ll bring it along if he likes. 

 

He can look at all the resolutions brought forward by the young PCs. They wanted to sell all the 

Crown corporations, one by one. He knows this. Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, we can have an 

engaging time talking about what resolutions may have gone to conventions. 



 

June 12, 1985 

3331 

 

 

May I advise the minister that the policy of our party is contained in resolutions which are passed by 

conventions. And may I point out that the ones which he stated were — and you were very careful 

not to say they were passed, because he didn’t quite want to mislead the House to that extent. But 

many I just indicate the one which is such an egregious error — I remember it because we had a 

discussion about it and it failed massively — was any reintroduction of the fuel petroleum tax for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And you can look at the results of the wisdom of the NDP convention for what it’s worth. I don’t 

mind the minister criticizing our policy; I just think that he’s very well ill-equipped to state our 

policy. 
 

AN HON. MEMBER: — And to understand it. 
 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — And he may be ill-equipped to understand it, too. He’s ill-equipped to 

understand quite a few things, including anything he’ll need to understand in order to give this 

province some effective financial management, which he has not given since he took office. 
 

But that’s another matter. That is so obvious, so patent, that we don’t need to state it all the time. I 

just wanted to make the point for the record that no single one of the resolutions quoted by the 

minister was from the policy of the New Democratic Party. And it would be gracious if the minister 

would acknowledge that, and then I won’t have to get into the business of quoting all the resolutions 

which went to his convention, which I suspect were rejected — the proposals for the sale of all of the 

Crown corporations, the sale of SGI, the sale of the potash corporation. One by one they were in the 

resolutions which went to his convention. 
 

We’re at some disadvantage since the Progressive Conservative convention doesn’t say what they 

pass and what they don’t pass. And that makes it a little more difficult. And so . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . The hon. member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake suggests it’s hard on my heart. I 

suggest to him that I am here in very good heart today, and he obviously is a little troubled, otherwise 

he wouldn’t be speaking from his seat. I am speaking from my feet, and I would welcome any 

interjection by the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake. He then could make his contribution. And 

it’s quite in order, as I’m sure the Chairman will tell you, for all hon. members to make their 

contribution. And I very much hope that the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake will be joined by 

the member for Nutana, and others, in making their comments in this debate. 
 

But I do want to make the point. Not a single resolution quoted by the Minister of Finance is part of 

the policy of the New Democratic Party. He wasn’t quoting from a policy; he was quoting from some 

material which was prepared by, I think it was, five New Democrats, after listening to many 

hundreds of citizens who may or may not have been New Democrats. 
 

And who knows? They may be good ideas or may be bad ideas. All I’m saying is that they’re not the 

policy of the New Democratic Party. And I am sure that the Minister of Finance would not want me 

to take his time, and the time of others, quoting resolutions which went to his convention which were 

not passed. 
 

I would therefore simply correct the record to that extent. If the minister wants to make a reply, fair 

enough. Then I will ask some questions about the Ministry of Finance. It may well be that he will 

then have screwed up his courage to answer questions about his department and his government, 

instead of attempting to divert attention by quoting policy that was never policy. 
 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — I recall, and I think the people of Saskatchewan recall — and I certainly 

recall, and I think all members of this side of the House recall, Mr. Chairman — that prior to April of 

1982 there was, in fact, a gas tax in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Now the member says, oh, this is just some whim of some NDP. It’s no whim of some NDP, Mr. 

Chairman; it’s the policy of the NDP party. 



 

June 12, 1985 

 

3332 

 

Now, number two. The Leader of the Opposition is saying, well now, we didn’t talk about this in our 

convention. Well I understand they did talk in their convention, and they did talk about closing down 

uranium mines. And they talked about, in effect, eliminating, closing down, throwing away, if you 

like, $600 million of Saskatchewan’s peoples’ money that were in uranium mines, invested in 

uranium mines. And they would have it closed down. 

 

(1630) 

 

Now people of Saskatchewan believe that. That was a resolution of the NDP, and that is the policy of 

the NDP, and that certainly would be one of the first things that an NDP government would ever try 

to do, and that would perpetrate a terrible burden, Mr. Chairman, on the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, the policy of the New Democratic 

Party on uranium and others is well known, and is not as stated by the minister. It’s not as stated by 

the minister. 

 

Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, it is well known. For those who can’t read, I will send it along to 

them and it may well be . . . And the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake can tell me whether he 

falls into that category or not, and if he does, I’ll send it along to him . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, compared with some others in this House, even of fewer years than 

I, I’m fairly comfortable about matching grey hair, and I’m looking at the member for Meadow Lake. 

I’m looking at the member for Meadow Lake. And fortunately I have hair to be grey, and I won’t say 

who I’m looking at now. 

 

But I wonder if I could ask . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’ll ask a 

couple of questions of the merest detail. Can you tell us how many venture capital corporations are 

operating in the province? How many have taken advantage of the tax break which you have 

provided in a budget of a year or two ago? 
 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — With regards to that, that falls under the gamut of the Minister of 

Tourism and Small Business. I will undertake to get that information provided to you. That is not 

something that we would have readily available to us today, but we will undertake to get that . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 

The member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg says, well, we don’t have to talk about venture capital 

corporations. Well, I can assure you that we do want to talk about venture capital corporations on this 

side of the House, Mr. Chairman. We believe that that is a good policy. That’s not a policy, Mr. 

Chairman . . . 
 

That is a policy that’s in place now in virtually every province in this country. It’s a policy that is 

being used mostly throughout the western world. Quite frankly, it’s a way by which people can 

invest money into small enterprises, to use that money in small enterprises, to create the equity 

needed in those small enterprises, to get the small businesses going, and in turn create the jobs that 

are needed. 
 

Now we are in favour of that policy. The member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is against that 

policy, as he shouted from his chair. 

 

With regard to the question of the Leader of the Opposition, we will undertake to get that information 

to you from the appropriate ministry, and bring it back to you in due course. 
 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Minister, I think we would all be grateful if the Minister of 

Finance would answer for his department and for his government, and not while he’s on his feet 

attempt  



 

June 12, 1985 

3333 

 

 

to say what the views of members who are sitting down are. And you are among the few who attempt 

to say, the member for A believes this, and the member for B believes that. And I invite you to look 

at the record on that score. But I won’t further tax you on this. 

 

Perhaps you can tell me which department handles fixed-rate financing. The fixed-rate financing 

program which was announced by the Government of Saskatchewan on June 1, 1984 . . . well, it’s a 

little before June 1, 1984. But can you tell me whether the fixed-rate financing program that is 

offered to industry or to business, I’m not sure it’s all industry, but it is . . . you are, I think, familiar 

with the program whereby the . . . well, basically the program is one whereby the borrower can 

borrow at a fixed rate, the cost that they are acquiring their money going up, the Government of 

Saskatchewan buys one of their guaranteed income certificates or term deposits or the like so that the 

match of funds protects the financial intermediary. I know that the credit unions have been involved 

in this. So far as I’m aware there have been a few loans — six or seven through Saskatchewan credit 

unions. 

 

My question is: is that administered by your department or some other agency of government? 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — That is done by Tourism and Small Business, that particular program, 

and I could undertake to get you the information on that as well, if you like. 

 

Suffice it to say that that program as announced last year was not a tremendous take-up. And that’s 

why we responded this year with the nine and five-eighths program to businesses — a far simpler, a 

far more direct program. People tended to find that somewhat bureaucratic, find it is not a proper fix. 

Business community did not take up on it dramatically. It was something that we had talked to the 

lending institutions about that they thought that there would be more take-up on this. It didn’t in fact 

happen. That was a program in place for the most part in last year’s budget, and has been replaced 

this year with the nine ad five-eighths. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I turn to the auditor’s report, and I 

ask you, with respect to page 12 of the auditor’s report, the auditor states . . . And this deals with the 

investment by the Minister of Finance as trustee for some pension funds, and I am referring now to 

the Saskatchewan Transportation Company employees superannuation fund. And the auditor says at 

page 12: 

 

It is the view of my legal counsel that by acquiring an interest in land against which mortgage 

debts are secured, the fund has been increased in a way not authorized by the Act. 

Accordingly, in the opinion of my legal counsel, the Minister of Finance, as trustee of the 

fund, has exceeded his powers. Accordingly, I report that this investment of pension trust 

funds in real estate represents an investment for which there was no authority. 

 

Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, on the face of it this is a relatively serious allegation by the 

Provincial Auditor, saying that the funds of a particular superannuation fund, were invested in 

investments for which there was no authority. They were invested in real estate against which there 

was a mortgage. 

 

And I think that since the pensions of employees of the Saskatchewan Transportation Company may 

well be at risk, I would invite the minister to make a statement with respect to that. I know that to 

some extent some of these issues have been discussed in the Public Accounts Committee, but with 

respect to this House and the conduct of the Minister of Finance, I invite him to make a statement on 

this page 12. 

 

There are two separate problems, the SaskPen problem and the Sask Transportation Company 

problem, and I ask for a statement on the Sask Transportation Company problem. 



 

June 12, 1985 

 

3334 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — I’m advised by my officials responsible for that that their opinion, and 

the opinion of legal counsel that they employed, was that the fund does not assume a mortgage and 

therefore is not in contravention of the particular legislation that the auditor talked about. 

 

I think the Public Accounts Committee, in reporting to this Assembly yesterday or the day before, 

indicated the same thing, that there was conflicting legal opinions as to whether this should be done 

or that should be done, and made recommendations to the Assembly, and from the Assembly, I 

suppose, to the government, that the matter should be corrected by legislation so that the lawyers are 

not disputing one to the other as to whether it’s legal or not legal. That’s the view of the people that 

had put this together. 

 

I think you know, as previously as being in government, that these kind of decisions, by and large, 

are taken through the pension facilities, and not something that normally a cabinet or a minister 

would become involved in. 

 

I think pension funds across the country are used to invest in real estate. Almost all pension funds 

have invested in real estate in one way or another. I suppose if you get it down to the common 

denominator of whether pension funds should invest in real estate, I think the rules are fairly clear, 

that there is perhaps a small segment of that fund that could be invested in that regard. That’s in the 

wider sense. 

 

With regard to the technical question here, the auditor, as you perhaps are aware, is concerned about 

the “crossing the t, dotting the i” way of dealing with this particular question. And I understand from 

the members of that committee that the auditor was satisfied with the particular approaches taken 

provided that the legislation was in fact changed. I can advise the hon. member that the department is 

looking at that, and it would be our intention to bring forward amendments to that legislation 

consistent with the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee and consistent with the 

recommendations of the Provincial Auditor. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I understand then that legislation 

will come forward, and that will answer the legal aspects of it. 

 

I ask one other question with respect to the financial aspects of it, and that deals with the SaskPen 

Properties Ltd. and the investment of several of the pension funds, and they are noted here: the 

Crown investment corporation pension fund; the municipal employees superannuation fund; the 

power corporation; the Sask Government Insurance; the Sask Tel; and teachers superannuation funds, 

in an aggregate sum of $2.7 million. 

 

It was not a small amount of money; in the scheme of things, not a large part of all of those funds, 

but not a small sum of money. In real property, and not in first mortgages of that sort of thing, but 

another kind of investment in real property, though this vehicle SaskPen Properties Ltd. . . . And I 

note that some common shares were bought, I suppose at a nominal amount, and I imagine that’s a 

vehicle for control rather than investment. 

 

And the other matter of fully participating 3 per cent bonds. I’m not sure whether the minister who is 

the trustee of this money in a nominal sense is informed on the nature of these investments, but what 

is the nature of a fully participating bond? Does it participate in the profits of the venture as well as 

get a minimum fixed amount of 3 per cent? 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — I’m advised — and this is fairly technical, and I will try to respond in a 

technical way — that they are secured bonds with a 3 per cent minimum, but the total flow-through is 

through the bonds, and the common shares are simply normal in nature, and no dollars would flow 

through there. If you want more detail than that you’re going to have to talk to Morley. 



 

June 12, 1985 

3335 

 

 

(1645) 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I surmised as much in the sense that the common shares are control 

vehicles, and the money is like a participating preferred share in that regard. 

 

Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, one other matter that I wanted to ask you of an informational 

nature, if I may put it that way, and that has to do with the tax on pornography. How much have you 

built into this budget for the yield from the tax on pornography? 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — We have built in no money into this budget for a tax on pornography. I 

think I indicated in this budget that we were looking at that, and I think the rationale for it is that 

people had complained that if it cost sales tax for school books or this type of thing was it appropriate 

that you could have Playboys, etc., which would not draw a tax? It’s an area that is difficult to 

identify. It is difficult to determine jurisdictional questions between federal and provincial authority 

and the constitution and everything else. It would be our expectation from that point of view that if 

the tax is implemented in this fiscal year we would be lucky, and if it does it will not raise enough 

money to worry about trying to project it into the budget numbers. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’ve just been looking at the 

provisions of The Department of Finance Act with respect to special warrants, and it seems fairly 

clear that special warrants are designed to be used when expenditures are unforeseen and unprovided 

for. That’s not quite the words of the Act. But I believe the words of the Act are “unforeseen or 

unprovided for.” But from the context it seems rather clear that there appears to be some obligation 

on the government not to use a special warrant when they might well use an appropriation Bill when 

we’re before the House. 

 

Now whatever else one may say about the expenditure let’s say on your senior citizens’ property tax 

rebate this year, it’s certainly not unforeseen because we’ve got legislation before the House. The 

Minister of Urban Affairs has said that it’s going to cost $25 million. If we take his word for it, the 

vast bulk of that will be paid out before . . . in this fiscal year because it deals with property taxes for 

this calendar year. 

 

The great bulk of people will submit their application for a rebate probably in calendar 1985 or 

immediately thereafter. The pay-out will be prior to March 31, 1986. We all know this is going to 

happen. Why is it suggested that we should deal with this by way of special warrant and not by way 

of something in the budget? 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — I am advised by the officials that section 9 of that Bill which reads as 

follows: 

 

The Minister of Finance shall, on the requisition of the minister, pay out of the Consolidated 

Fund any sums required for the purpose of this Act. 

 

Now I’m advised that that clause makes it statutory in nature, and so therefore it is a statutory 

appropriation. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I noted that’s the same provision in the 

Pioneer Trust Bill which was, in effect, a statutory appropriation. And we will have . . . aside from 

the interim supply, we will have not one, not two, but three appropriation Bills in this session, and 

that would be a bit of a record, but many records have been set. 

 

We’ll have an opportunity to consider the record-shattering performance with respect to Pioneer 

Trust in a little while, but we can concern ourselves with a couple of other things at the moment. 



 

June 12, 1985 

 

3336 

 

Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I want to talk a little bit about the tax reform. We last night talked 

about this, and I frankly did not understand your explanation as to why the withdrawal of the 

property tax rebates added to the fairness of the tax system. It is obviously a tax reform, but in my 

judgement what it does is withdraw money from people who, by and large, are at the bottom of the 

economic ladder, and it gives benefits to people who are not at the bottom of the economic ladder. 

 

If you’re paying an extra $100 million for education, and I will accept your characterization of that, 

your choice clearly was to leave the property improvement grants in place and raise taxes, the 100 

million, by some other method, e.g., resource royalties or income tax or corporation tax, or withdraw 

the property tax rebates. 

 

It seems to me that the property tax rebate, the withdrawal of that, the effective taxation, and it can’t 

be argued that it wasn’t a taxation, is a less fair way to raise money. Taking $230 from every 

householder in the province, and I’ll just use that as an example, is a less fair way to raise $100 

million than attempting to get it from much more on the basis of ability to pay. 

 

No one can suggest that $230 from every householder is a tax on the basis of ability to pay. It takes 

230 from the person who’s got 20,000 in income, and it takes 230 from the person from the person 

who’s got 120,000 income. So it’s regressive in that sense. 

 

Do you not feel that you could have devised some tax regime which would have been fairer, which 

would have raised this $100 million which you needed — and I’m not quarrelling about that at the 

moment — raised it on some basis more approximating ability to pay than the withdrawal of the 

property tax rebates? That’s . . . You’ve put forward your tax reform on the basis of fairness. I want 

to inquire, and, in a preliminary way, challenge you because I think this is not . . . does not meet any 

test of fairness, and I ask you to elaborate on why it is fairer than other alternatives open to you. 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well I think the . . . Two points. With regards to major tax reform in this 

country, I think that it has to be done. I indicated, in response to a question from another member, the 

tax reform system in my view deal with (a) income tax as a large source of income, and that income 

tax must deal with both personal income tax and corporate income tax. 

 

Now the proposal put forth in the United States by the treasury, by Reagan, showed a fair or 

significant transfer of tax dollars from personal income over to corporate income. And I think any tax 

reform in this country has to try to involve the same type of attitude because I think we have to look 

at taxation. 

 

What people are telling me and I think what people are saying across most of North America, you 

have to be able to explain to me where my taxes are coming from, it’s getting so complex. I pay sales 

tax and I pay property tax and I pay income tax, and I pay tax here and tax there, and I’ve got rebates 

here and rebates there, and I’m not sure how I come out of this scheme of things versus somebody 

else. And the reason you have to be able to try to simplify that down is so they get a sense that they 

understand how much is here and how much is here. 

 

Now let me give you an example of what I’m talking about. If you go to 1981 and compare that to 

1985 . . . You look at a person making $15,000. In 1981 the person making $15,000 paid $406 

income tax. In 1985 he pays $117 income tax. The mortgage interest reduction program in 1981 

rebated to that person $211; this year, 1985, $65. The gasoline tax cost him $138 in 1981; and it 

doesn’t cost him anything today. The sales tax cost $192; $139 today. Now that’s Statistics Canada 

divided into that given individual. Property rebate is $230 in 1981; is zero today. 

 

Now for that individual that means in 1981 he spent $295 in tax. In 1985 that same individual is 

paying $191 in tax or $104 less. That is a 35 per cent reduction in tax for that individual. Now if  



 

June 12, 1985 

3337 

 

 

you took the same individual or a different individual making $35,000, you go through the list, and 

that particular person paid $3,276 in 1981. He pays $2,685 today, and that’s a reduction of 18 per 

cent. 

 

So what one is saying, I suppose, is that with tax simplification we must get down to the area of 

determining and establishing a system that is (a) understandable for people, and if it is 

understandable for people then through that system you can determine the fairness of it. And I think 

that we can argue the fairness of the progressivity of anything as how much a person 15 and 25 and 

35 and 50 and 100 should pay in tax, but now it’s very difficult to understand that. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:03 p.m. 


