



















































Hansard: May 07, 1985


 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 7, 1985 

 

1887 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
HON. MR. SWAN: — It is my privilege today to introduce to the Assembly 22 grade 8 students visiting from 
Rosetown, Saskatchewan. They’re seated in the Speaker’s gallery and are accompanied by their teachers, Randy 
Fox and Cheryl Harder. I would like to welcome these students to the Assembly today. I hope that you’ll find 
your time here informative and that you’ll enjoy the proceedings of the House. I’ll be meeting with you after 
question period for drinks and for pictures. 
 
Would the members welcome you to the Assembly. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MYERS: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to the 

members of the Assembly, 26 students of a grade 7 class from John Lake Elementary School. They are 

accompanied by their teachers, Barry Hill and Joan Fowler. 

 

I’ve had the opportunity to have a picture taken with the students, and I will be meeting with them at 3 o’clock 

in the members’ dining room. 

 

I would join in welcoming . . . I would hope all the members join me in welcoming them to the legislature and 

wishing them a safe trip home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to this 

Assembly, 30 young people from Regina North constituency. They’re sitting in the west gallery. They’re grade 

8 students from Dr. L. M. Hanna School in the Argyle Park area of our city, just around the corner from my 

home. I probably see most of theme very morning. 

 

They are accompanied here today by their teacher, Mr. Neuls, as well as Mr. Davidson, and Pakosh. And with 

them, too, is their principal, Mr. Garry Bryden, who is no stranger to those of us who follow the curling scene in 

Saskatchewan, and Mr. Bryden has had the opportunity of demonstrating his skills, and successfully I might 

add, to my colleague, the Hon. Rick Folk, on more than several occasions. 

 

These students are currently studying provincial politics, Mr. Speaker, and I am sure that we won’t disappoint 

them in the House today with our procedures, and that they find their visit educational and interesting. 

 

I look forward to meeting with them after question period to answer any questions that they may have, and I ask 

all members to welcome them to this Assembly. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Investigation of Possible Conflict of Interest 



 

May 7, 1985 

1888 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to address a question to, in the absence of the Premier, to the Deputy 

Premier, and that deals, Mr. Deputy Premier, with the suspension of the Legislative Secretary, the member of 

Prince Albert, over the alleged member’s involvement in the $3 million Rainbow Bay resort at Redberry Lake 

in north-west Saskatchewan. 

 

As the Deputy Premier will know, the Premier apparently ordered an internal investigation by the Minister of 

Parks, and what I would like to ask the Deputy Premier: can he provide the Assembly with a status of the report 

investigation? Has it been completed, and will you be able to file it today with the legislature? 

 

HON. MR. BERNTSON: — As I recall, the Premier did indicate to the legislature that he would be having the 

minister conduct an investigation, and as I recall, he did say that he would make that investigation known to this 

Chamber. Since he’s not here, and since I don’t know a great deal about it, perhaps we should wait until he gets 

back. I will take notice of the question. Thank you. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — I want to ask a further question to the Deputy Premier. Mr. Deputy Premier, in light of the 

seriousness of the involvement of the member from Prince Albert, and in view of the fact that part of the 

investigation, indeed, should be the actions of the ministers responsible in their respective departments, the 

public is indicating that such superficial review is meaningless. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Deputy Premier, in view of the fact that your Attorney General, the Minister of Justice, found fit 

to appoint a judicial inquiry into the employees of the city of Regina in respect to land transactions, will you 

now do the legitimate thing, forget about this whitewash and set up a judicial inquiry? 

 

HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, there are a couple of differences that I see, and I don’t claim to be 

the brightest in this Chamber, but a notch or two ahead of the member opposite. I want you to know that. 

 

But it seems to me that the investigation that has been ordered as it relates to the land dealings in the city of 

Regina was asked for by the city council, the local government . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, yes, that 

may be true, and that’s a very good question. I’m wondering . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. The member was given the opportunity to ask the question; he would give 

the minister now an opportunity to answer. 

 

HON. MR. BERNTSON: — And additionally, Mr. Speaker, I do have confidence in the minister responsible 

for Parks and Renewable Resources in conducting his investigation. And if we carry the argument of the hon. 

member opposite to its logical conclusion, I suppose that every farmer that sits around the cabinet table would 

in some way be found to be in conflict while we’re talking about programs to enhance agriculture in 

Saskatchewan, subsidized interest rates, tax credit programs for the red meat sector, all of that kind of thing. 

 

So I guess that short answer to the question is: I will not be asking for a judicial inquiry until and unless it is 

recommended by the minister responsible for tourism, or Parks and Renewable Resources, I’m sorry. And as I 

said earlier, I’ll take notice of the question and pass it on to the Premier. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Supplemental. You realize that’s a tremendous offer? 

 

A new question to the minister, the Deputy Premier. Do you know what you have indicated? You said that if the 

very minister who could, in fact, be directly or indirectly involved in supplying information to the member from 

Prince Albert, if he recommends, you will call a judicial inquiry. That’s exactly what you said. 



 

May 7, 1985 

1889 

 

I think it’s incumbent, Mr. Minister, that if the public and the opposition . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please, order. The member is making a speech rather than asking a question. If you 
have a question, we’ll take the question. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Are you saying that the only circumstance under which you would call a judicial inquiry is 
dependent upon a request of one of the actors, potential actors, in this regrettable land transaction? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — What I said, I think now three times, with a little bit of explanation, is that I 
would take notice of the question, and I will put it before the Premier, and he will deal with it in his own time, 
in his own way — in his own time, and his own way. And one more time, Mr. Speaker, I will take notice of the 
question. 
 

Repairs to Highways in Saskatchewan 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for the Minister of Highways. Mr. Minister, my 
question has to do with some of your answers in the Assembly yesterday, and that’s answers regarding the road 
builders of Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the authors of the very report that you were quoting from yesterday, Mr. Minister, John Barkman of the 
Saskatchewan road builders association, called your comments very misleading, and said the truth is that 
between 40 and 50 per cent of all Saskatchewan highways are in need of resurfacing and maintenance with in 
the next five years. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you now admit that your inadequate budget has resulted in a backlog of highway work, and 
resulted in the very deterioration of all of our highways in Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Minister, I cannot agree with the member opposite, and maybe we should 
just check the record again and set a few more facts out for the members of this Assembly and the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You know it’s very difficult to seem to obtain the facts from the NDP. I think we look at the record. The last 

three years the NDP government was in power in the province of Saskatchewan, they spent $505 million on a 

transportation budget. The last three years under Progressive Conservative government, we have spent some 

$650 million in the transportation budget. This means a difference of $145 million, or 28 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s quite obvious I cannot agree with the member opposite. The figures that I quoted yesterday I gave copies 

to the media, and I’m prepared to give copies to the member opposite to help them with their research instead of 

using the Leader-Post all the time, and the facts are there. It was a report done by TRIP Canada, and I will stand 

on those figures that I released yesterday. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Well, Mr. Minister, are you saying that TRIP Canada is wrong in the report that they made, 

that somehow they are misleading the public, and not you being the one that is misleading the public? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — No, Mr. Speaker, I’m not saying what Mr. Barkman said, or anyone else quoted in 

the Leader-Post. What I am simply stating is that facts are there out of TRIP Canada. I don’t imagine the 

member wants to take up all of question period. They’re in Hansard from yesterday. I can simply restate those 

same figures. Saskatchewan had the lowest number of kilometres to be resurfaced in the Dominion of Canada. 

It’s the fact there, quotes right from TRIP Canada, an independent consulting firm that did the report. I can’t 

add any more. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Would you not agree also that the roadbuilders and TRIP in that TRIP report, 



 

May 7, 1985 

1890 

 

that what that was indicating was some of the major highways in the province, the class A highways in 

Saskatchewan, and didn’t include all the other highways that we have. If you included the rest of the highways 

we have that the public has to travel on, that what you would require, or what there actually is, is about a 40 to 

50 per cent backlog in the highway work that you should be doing. 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, once again, you know, I will give something additional. It was in 

the TRIP program that was announced, and I’ll read the verbatim for the member opposite. You know: 

 

The condition of the province’s highways would be worse yet if it were not for the continued efforts of 

the Department of Highways and Transportation to achieve maximum possible results with the limited 

budgets. 

 

And those budgets were more money than what the NDP had spent before that. So I cannot agree with the 

member opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — New question to the minister. Mr. Minister, I would have to disagree with you also, as the 

road builders association has, that there are less dollars in your budget, Mr. Minister, for construction of roads 

today than there were in previous years. Even in some of your own budget there is less this year than there were 

in previous years. 

 

Mr. Minister, would you not agree that if you had put more money into the construction of roads and to the 

maintenance of roads, it would not only give us a good highway system, but it would create a lot of employment 

in this province? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, once again, yes, the more dollars that you could put in would 

definitely create more. But I guess I’m going back to the analysis of TRIP report that stated that the highways 

were the best in the Dominion of Canada, point number one; point number two, Mr. Speaker, we have increased 

our maintenance budget by 5 per cent to protect a system that is already there. And one third factor, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s quite obvious: the NDP opposite are trying to get me to stand up and do battle with the 

Saskatchewan road builders in this Assembly, or do battle with the department. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would just like to lay out to the members opposite, I am on the side of the people of 

Saskatchewan. I believe it is our responsibility, my responsibility, to provide the safest, most economical 

transportation system anywhere in Canada. I believe our government is doing that. And the accident statistics — 

the fatalities are down, the record proves that out. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Minister, would you not agree that if your real concern was the safety of the public of 

Saskatchewan, that what you would do is put more money into the maintenance and construction of the other 

highways, other than what was in the TRIP report, which was the Yellowhead and Highway No. 1, and look at 

some of the other road systems that we have, and make sure that you have enough money in there to upgrade 

the rest of the highways in this province if your real concern is the safety of the public of Saskatchewan? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, once again, you know, I mean, the member opposite is trying to 

project that we don’t, and we’re not reconstructing any roads in the province of Saskatchewan. Very simple 

mathematics: this year, 1985-86, we will be reconstructing over 945 kilometres of highways in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Last year we did 985. 

 

We’ve increased our maintenance budget. Our fatalities are going down. I am working on an ongoing basis with 

the road building industry, the department. And, Mr. Speaker, I believe this government can be proud of the 

network that we have in the province of Saskatchewan 



 

May 7, 1985 

1891 

 

because it’s working, and the NDP system failed. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister, I’d hate to say that you’re misleading this House, but, Mr. 

Minister, are you saying that you are going to be building some 900-and-some kilometres of roads in 

Saskatchewan this year in your new project array? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, here we go again. I tried to explain this to the members opposite 

yesterday. It’s the little blue pamphlet. We tabled it in the Assembly. It says: “1985-86 Construction Projects.” 

You simply total them all up and there it is, there’s the fact. And the fact is that we will be reconstructing 

945.69 kilometres of highways in 1985-86. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can’t explain it, I can’t explain it any simpler. The students in the gallery can understand it, but 

it’s obvious the NDP opposite want to scare the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Supplementary — or a new question to the minister. Mr. Minister, how many roads are you 

going to build, leaving put the re-oiling on some roads, ore resurfacing? Talk about the total construction and 

surfacing of those roads. Do you have 900-and-some miles or kilometres in your project already? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, once again we go back to the construction projects that I said, 

and the members opposite have it. I will try once again quickly. We have grading; we have surfacing; we have 

oil treatment; we have our major bridge construction, which doesn’t include miles. I think they can understand 

that. It’s right there. It’s in blue. 

 

Well, it’s in blue, Mr. Speaker. It’s in blue. Maybe there’s where the problem is; they can’t understand blue; 

they’re used to red. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the facts are right here. They just have to read it and understand it, and that’s all I can add to 

it. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — A new question to the minister, Mr. Speaker. I saw his blue pamphlet. Mr. Minister, that is 

the colour that some of the people feel in this province today because of the roads they have to drive over. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you go to your cabinet, will you go to your cabinet and demand more money from them? And 

also at the same time, will you cut back on your travelling expenses, on your publicity campaign, and put some 

of that money into the grading of highways, rebuilding of some of those roads, to give us a good highway 

system in the province like we had before, and have been used to? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, once again the very member that started asking these questions 

now is challenging the data that is in TRIP Canada (The Road Information Program of Canada) report that was 

presented all across our Dominion. He is challenging that. The facts are still there. 

 

I have to disappoint the member opposite. We have spent more money on highway and transportation budgets 

in the province of Saskatchewan since we’ve been government — in fact, $145 million more since the same 

comparison of three years under the NDP government. The facts are there. TRIP Canada report came in — the 

best system. Mr. Speaker, what more can I say? Fatalities are down. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to add one other point that is very important. The reason why fatalities are down is 

that this government is not only working with the road building industry, the Lights On For Life, the stop arms 

on school buses; the motoring public is working with us; we have 



 

May 7, 1985 

1892 

 

more registered drivers in the province of Saskatchewan; they’re travelling more miles on less fatalities. Mr. 

Speaker, I will let the record speak for itself. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Installation of Lights at Airport at Patuanak 
 

MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I direct my question to the Minister of Highways, and 

it’s regarding your commitment you made approximately two years ago to the citizens of Patuanak, and that 

was to put lights on that airport at Patuanak. A couple of months ago, Mr. Speaker, by way of information, I met 

with the band council, and at that time I directed a letter to you, which I have not had an answer to yet, and it’s 

regarding putting lights on that airport. Would you today, Mr. Minister, give a commitment to the citizens of 

Patuanak that lights will be installed on that airport this summer? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, once again I cannot remember, with all of the groups that I have 

met with, whether it’s the Red Coat Trail, the Yellowhead association, R.M. groups, urban city councils. I will 

have to take notice of the question, Mr. Speaker, and bring that answer back for the member opposite. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. A straightforward question, Mr. Minister. I never 

indicated that you should remember who you met with. The question that I asked you was — and it’s a 

straightforward and simple question; all I need, Mr. Speaker, is a yes or no — are you going to give a 

commitment to put lights on that airport this summer? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, it seems the members opposite are having trouble understanding when 

a minister says that he’s going to take notice of a question. I said I will take notice of it, as to when I met with 

them; when the commitment was made — if a commitment was made — I will take notice of it and bring a 

report back for all members of the Assembly. 

 

Houseboat Venture at Lac la Ronge 
 

MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Speaker, I now direct my . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Give the member the opportunity to ask his question. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Speaker, I direct my question to the minister in charge of Tourism and Small 

Business. Last night in the House, Mr. Minister, you indicated that your department had no financial 

involvement with the new venture on Lac la Ronge, and that was 25 houseboats that are going in there. 

 

My question to you is, Mr. Minister: did you have the full co-operation of the town council in La Ronge to 

allow that project to go ahead? 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Speaker, we didn’t put in the houseboat operation. We didn’t need anybody’s help. 

It’s a private enterprise situation going together for the residents of the North, and our department became 

involved to assist them in an advocate’s role to ensure that they met all the demands that were required by the 

province regarding their licences and application to operate. 

 

Now certainly they would have had to see the town as part of their obligation to get their licences. So to my 

knowledge, yes, they talked to everybody out there. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. You indicated you did not have any financial 

involvement, but you indicate that you did do the advertising, and through your department, Tourism and Small 

Business, you have advertised the fact that this new venture will be taking 



 

May 7, 1985 

1893 

 

place in La Ronge this summer. 

 

Is that not correct, Mr. Minister, and could you indicate if you had any correspondence from the town council in 

La Ronge indicating to you that they did not want that operation to take place on Lac la Ronge lake? 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll just refer to some of the questions that I replied to in estimates last 

night. Our department heads up the inter-departmental committee regarding various forms of tourist 

applications, or free enterprise situations, that want to apply for new types of businesses, and this was one. Part 

of that process includes them going to the various jurisdiction that they have to go to to obtain their proper 

authorities. They did this. And as I understand it they met with the mayor and a lot of other interest groups in 

that area as they were proceeding with this venture. 

 

I might add, Mr. Speaker, that a couple of weeks ago, or so, I had the opportunity to have a meeting with a lot 

of business folks in the community of La Ronge who were simply delighted with the situation that the 

houseboats are there. It will again act as a new attraction to the area. Tourists will come in, they will be able to 

buy their provisions, they will be able to arrange fishing trips from there once their visit with the houseboats are 

done, and it’s just about as simple as that. They’re going to be starting operation this summer, and everybody’s 

looking forward to it. It’s another new attraction for the town of La Ronge, and we are all anticipating it. 

 

Status of Vienna Trade Office 
 

MR. LUSNEY: — I have a question to the minister responsible for the agricultural development corporation, 

and it deals with the status of the Vienna trade office. 

 

In a written answer tabled in this House a few days ago, you confirmed that one Derek Bedson was paid some 

$70,000 a year in salary and allowances as manager of your Vienna office, and that he left that position as of 

June 30th of last year. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you please inform Saskatchewan taxpayers who has replaced Mr. Bedson in Vienna, and at 

what pay? 

 

HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Willie Kraetschmere, and I’ll find out how much. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Minister, can you please tell the Saskatchewan taxpayers how many staff are employed 

at the Vienna trade office? 

 

HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Willie Kraetschmere, and one part-time secretary. Willie Kraetschmere’s 

credentials are that he’s Austrian born; expert in marketing in eastern Europe; and spent four years in Canada 

working for external and marketing Canadian products. I’m going from memory. I may not be exactly right on, 

but I’d be more than pleased because we’ve got a lot to brag about in Agdevco, particularly in the Vienna 

office. I’d be more than pleased to spend a lot of time with you in Crown corporations dealing about all of the 

cattle we’ve put into Bulgaria, the drought venture projects going into the USSR, cattle going into — well, I 

don’t want to take up all question period on this, Mr. Speaker, but we’ve got a lot to talk about in Agdevco. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. Is this the same Willie Kraetschmere that used to be . . . 

formerly was, what was he? He was a Pepsi Cola of New York, Pepsi Cola International of New York. Is that 

the same Willie Kraetschmere? 

 

HON. MR. BERNTSON: — My understanding is that this Willie Kraetschmere was, in fact, the head of the 

Pepsi Cola Company marketing in eastern Europe, and was so successful that the worked himself out of a job 

and came looking for a new job, and happens to be very, very good. He’s doing a very, very good job for us. He 

saturated the market with Pepsi Cola in eastern Europe. 



 

May 7, 1985 

1894 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Supplementary. Mr. Minister, do you have any plans to open other trade offices in Europe 

or other countries. Do you have any other plans of opening trade offices in other countries? 

 

HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Well, not in Europe. We have a trade office in London in Saskatchewan House, 

and we have . . . And that’s through my department. Agdevco has the office in Vienna. Both of them doing very 

well. And we plan to open an office soon in the Pacific rim. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 68 — An Act to amend The Vehicles Act, 1983 (No. 2) 
 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The Vehicles Act, 1983. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Effect of Budget Tax Measures on Taxpayers 
 

MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I will be moving a resolution at the conclusion of my remarks: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the Government of Saskatchewan for having betrayed its election mandate 

and having imposed the largest tax increase in Saskatchewan’s history which is particularly harsh and 

unfair for farm families, working families, small businesses, senior citizens, and which further 

undermines the business and consumer confidence in agricultural sector and long-term employment 

opportunities. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it seems to me that Saskatchewan needs a resurgence of consumer and business 

confidence if we are to have long-term economic recovery. Unfortunately the new provincial budget 

undermines, rather than strengthens, the confidence. 

 

And I want to spend my time this afternoon doing two things. I want to review the Devine government’s record 

and explain why our motion speaks of the betrayal of this government’s election mandate. And then I want to 

move on to discuss some of the positive alternatives which we, in our party, have been putting forward and will 

be putting forward. 

 

First of all, let’s review why we say the government has betrayed its election mandate. In 1982 the PC party 

promised the people of Saskatchewan in their slogan, “There’s so much more we can be.” They promised so 

much more, but they delivered so little. 

 

Three years ago they promised the people jobs and opportunities. Instead, our unemployment rate has more than 

doubled. Today in Saskatchewan there are over 60,000 people looking for jobs, and our rate of new job creation 

is one of the worst in Canada. Three years ago they promised widespread prosperity, and instead, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, our province has more people on welfare than at any time in the history of this province. One in 16 

Saskatchewan people are on welfare. 

 

Three years ago they promised to preserve and protect our family farms, but today we find that 



 

May 7, 1985 

1895 

 

1,300 fewer farmers than when they took office. Three years ago they promised balanced budgets. Instead we 

have had four straight deficit budgets from the Devine government which has put this province in a debt of $1.2 

billion in the red. The interest alone on this Devine deficit is costing the Saskatchewan taxpayers nearly 

$400,000 a day. 

 

Three years ago they promised to make Saskatchewan open for business. Saskatchewan has . . . And what do 

we find? Today we find that Saskatchewan has the lowest rate of retail sale growth in Canada. The number of 

new housing starts is at its lowest level in more than 10 years. And last year 306 Saskatchewan-based 

businesses were forced to declare bankruptcy. So much for open for business. 

 

Now I come to the biggest betrayal of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Three years ago they promised to cut income 

taxes by 10 per cent. But the new provincial budget contains the biggest tax increase in Saskatchewan history. 

 

Starting in July, Saskatchewan people will pay a new 1 per cent, so-called flat tax under net income. That new 

tax will cost taxpayers $350 million over the next five years. And even worse, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this new tax 

hits low and middle income taxpayers, particularly families, hardest, while leaving untouched those who can 

afford tax shelters like MURBs, frontier drilling funds, and film and video investments. It makes an already 

unfair tax system even more unfair. 

 

Three years ago they promised to eliminate the provincial sales tax. Instead, this new budget extends the sales 

tax to include the sales on used vehicles like cars, trucks, and motorcycles. Like the new flat tax, the sales tax 

on used vehicles takes away money from the people’s pockets — $35 million over the next five years. And like 

the flat tax, again it hits the low and middle income people hardest. 

 

Three years ago they promised to deliver all of their campaign promises without slashing important programs 

and services, and instead the budget wipes out all property tax rebates for Saskatchewan farmers, small-business 

men, home owners, renters, and senior citizens. That will take an extra $400 million out of the people’s pockets 

over the five years. Home owners lose $230 a year. Small-business men lose 250 a year. Renters lose $150 a 

year. Farmers lose 375 a year, plus an average of $300 a year lost with the elimination of the home quarter 

education tax rebate. Most senior citizens will lose in the cut-backs of the rebates. 

 

In total, an urban family with an income of $25,000 will lose, in increased taxes and loss of property tax rebates, 

more than $2,000 in the next five years. A rural family with the same income will lose $5,000 over the same 

period. 

 

The finance minister calls this budget the most intelligent budget ever introduced in Canada. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I can assure him that that’s not what the Saskatchewan taxpayers are calling this budget. Saskatchewan 

taxpayers feel betrayed by the April budget. It contains the biggest tax increase in Saskatchewan history, and 

the biggest flip-flop in the Saskatchewan history, as a government which captured power promising to cut taxes 

now proposes to pick the pockets of taxpayers for hundreds of millions of dollars more each year. 

 

The government has no mandate to raise taxes, and I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it should call an election and let 

the people of this province decide just how intelligent that tax hike budget really is. People are upset with this 

budget, not only because it takes cold, hard cash out of their pockets, but also because it doesn’t demand a 

penny more from those who can afford it more. 

 

The government and the oil industry keep telling us that Saskatchewan has an oil boom. They keep claiming 

that the new federal provincial energy agreement will give the oil companies hundreds of millions of dollars, yet 

the budget won’t collect a penny more, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from oil companies over the next five years. 



 

May 7, 1985 

1896 

 

Sure the people of Saskatchewan feel betrayed because what this government is doing is giving the resources 

away to the multinational oil companies. If you look at the facts, the government’s own budget document shows 

that Saskatchewan taxpayers will actually collect $55 million less this year from the oil companies and our oil 

than they did three years ago. Three years ago we received $700 million in revenues to the province. We’ll be 

now only getting $655 million. Saskatchewan taxpayers are going to pay thousands of dollars more while the oil 

companies are going to pay less. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we say that that just isn’t fair, and most Saskatchewan taxpayers agree that it isn’t fair. 

And where will all that extra tax dollars go/ To finance the government’s generous give-aways to the big 

business and to support the government’s own exorbitant spending habits. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, you will recall some of the major give-aways: nearly $300 million a year in royalty breaks 

to the resource companies; $390 million loan guarantee to Husky Oil; 145 million in loan guarantees to Manalta 

Coal; and the list goes on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With respect to exorbitant spending, we have exposed to this House, and to the people of Saskatchewan, a 

number of examples so far during the session, examples of how the hard-earned taxpayers’ dollars are being 

carelessly spent by government extravagance. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they have the largest cabinet in the history of this province and a dozen 

back-benchers getting extra money, expenses, money as legislative secretaries. All this adds up to an extra $3 

million that it’s costing the taxpayers. And that cabinet has been seeing the world at our expense. 

 

At the last count, the PC cabinet minister had taken more than 50 international trips with few concrete results. 

No one knows exactly how much these international junkets have cost the Saskatchewan taxpayers. No one 

knows, because the government is hiding the facts. For two years we have had questions on the order paper 

trying to get the cost of the international junkets for the Premier and the Deputy Premier. Two years later none 

of these answers have been answered — none of these questions. 

 

But a few days ago in the Assembly we got a glimpse of how some of the PC cabinet ministers are living high 

on the hog at the taxpayers’ expense. It was a five-day trip. Some disgusted public servant sent along a copy of 

the Deputy Premier’s expense claim for the one night. One night at a hotel in Beverly Hills cost the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers just under $300. 

 

That’s the kind of spending the people’s hard-earned tax dollars are going to feed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A few days ago the Deputy Premier admitted that the Saskatchewan taxpayers shelled out more than 66,000 for 

a brochure which had to be reprinted because it contained an unflattering picture of the Premier and the Deputy 

Premier. It also had to be reprinted because the brochure, sent around the world to promote investment in 

Saskatchewan, forgot to mention the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the credit union, all of those organizations 

which played such an integral part in the development of this province. 

 

And because of the government’s vanity and carelessness, Saskatchewan taxpayers shelled out tens of 

thousands of dollars. That, I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a betrayal. That’s totally unacceptable in these rather 

difficult economic times. 

 

And these examples of careless spending are just the latest, not even the largest. Over all, after promising to cut 

government spending, this government has actually increased government spending by 35 per cent since taking 

office. 

 

In summary, the government’s record is one long list of promises made and promises broken. 



 

May 7, 1985 

1897 

 

And it’s why more and more people are asking: can you believe what they say when you take a look at what 
they are doing? 
 
So much for the sorry record, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of this Devine government. 
 
The Minister of Finance indicated that he introduced an intelligent budget, introduced what he said was 
revolutionary in the taxation field, the flat tax. And when we take a look, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at who is going 
to be hit, we find that under our administration that an individual with 15,000 income, under the previous 
administration paid only $107 in income tax; and under this new administration, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the same 
person with $15,000 income now pays $257. The shift of taxation from the multinational corporations to the 
ordinary citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1445) 
 
I want to say in conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this party opposite did not, in fact, have a mandate, did 
not have a mandate to increase taxations — taxation, the biggest in the history of Saskatchewan. They had no 
mandate in introducing the largest tax increase in the history of this province. I say that they have totally lost 
face with the people of Saskatchewan, that they should, in fact, be calling an election. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by my colleague, the member from Pelly: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the Government of Saskatchewan for having betrayed its election mandate, 
having imposed the largest tax increase in Saskatchewan history which is particularly harsh and unfair to 
farm families, working families, small businesses, senior citizens, and which further undermines the 
business and consumer confidence in the agricultural sector and long-term employment opportunity. 
 

I so move, seconded by my colleague. 
 

MR. WEIMAN: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to speak against the motion and 

amendment of the member of Quill Lakes. I will be very brief on it because much of this has been gone over 

already in estimates. I have spoken with pride and with vigour regarding the budget. And for those who are 

concerned with that, it is of public record in Hansard. And I don’t think we serve the purpose of this legislature 

well by being redundant day in, day out, day in, day out. 

 

Insofar as the motion presented by the member of Quill Lakes, first of all, I would like to comment that in my 

opinion it’s a double motion, that it’s neither here nor there. With one breath he is talking about the Government 

of Saskatchewan betraying the election mandate which was three years ago — of course, it is an ongoing 

mandate — and then immediately jumping into a second motion discussing the largest tax increase in 

Saskatchewan history. 

 

I would like to keep my comments around the topic of the election mandate because I suspect that the member 

from Quill Lakes, as well as members o his party, as well as people who profess to believe in that philosophy, 

are suffering from probably two things: one being a very selective memory; and the second, of course, being a 

fear aspect of what may transpire in the future. 

 

I brought with me this afternoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the actual brochure on which myself and fellow 

colleagues ran, which states very, very clearly the mandate that we sought from the public of Saskatchewan. 

And I think it would be proper to review those promises that were made for, as the member of Quill Lakes 

states, it was through those promises the people of Saskatchewan entrusted us to carry out that four-year, 

five-year mandate. 

 

The promises made back in 1982, spring of 1982, the mortgage interest reduction plan, 13.25 per 



 

May 7, 1985 

1898 

 

cent, and if I may read for the record, not only for the purposes of the House, but for the people out in the 

province: 

 

This will provide a ceiling on mortgage rates at 13.25 per cent on a principal residence. The 

straightforward plan will apply to existing mortgages, renewals, and new mortgages, with an upper limit 

of 50,000. 

 

And it goes on to state what the average saving will be. Now let’s put this into context. 

 

At the time that that promise was made back in March, as a matter of fact March of ’82, the previous 

government’s response to people in my neighbourhood in Saskatoon where there is a high density of residential 

dwellings, their response to the people in my area who were suffering under 18 and 19 per cent interest rates, 

some as high as 22 per cent, being faced with renewals, being faced with the possibility of losing their houses 

because their mortgage rates effectively were going to be doubled, their payments — well their response to that 

was, don’t worry about it, don’t worry about. Just don’t pay your money to the banks. Don’t worry about it per 

year. Don’t pay the interest. In fact, don’t pay the payments. 

 

Well I found it surprising in the city of Saskatoon I believe there were only two people who actually took them 

up on their great solution. I believe that the people of Saskatoon were much more responsible and realized that 

you don’t, you don’t run away from your responsibilities. But that was their solution: just don’t pay it. 

 

Now here is a party and a membership that have stood in this legislature in the three years that I’ve been here, 

and probably for the last 30 that I haven’t, talking about those big mean banks, and we’re going to control the 

banks, and we’re going to tell the banks what to do, and when it finally came to the crunch they backed off of 

any type of solution that was amenable to, not only the people of the province, but was amenable to their 

philosophy and amenable to their hatred for the banking institutions. They walked away from it completely. 

 

Well that was one of the promises. Now had we just stopped at that promise, I would think in itself during the 

mandate of whether it’s four years or five years, mandate of the term, that in itself would be significant. We 

went one step further because if you recall a year ago, the scare tactics were out again in this province, and there 

were scare tactics about housing once more. Well we went that step further and we said, no, we will not allow 

you to suffer in the future. We will not allow to put your security in jeopardy. And we said that we would 

extend the program, and in fact we have. 

 

We’ve extended that program to 1988 so that the persons in their homes in Saskatoon and in the rural areas have 

no fear of losing their prime security. We all here as family members realize that one of your key securities as a 

citizen of this province is for shelter. Well that fear is gone. 

 

But as I said, they work from selected memory. They go to other topics forgetting that the debate is to be on the 

mandate — to bring up the mandate. 

 

Another one of our mandates that was given to us and trusted to us by the populace of Saskatchewan was to 

eliminate the gasoline tax. We eliminated the gasoline tax immediately and, if memory serves me right, to date 

that has already saved $320 million to the taxpayers of this province — $329 million. With a population of 1 

million, already each and every individual in this province has saved $329. Now that’s an average, of course. 

There are some who have received more in savings, some of course who have received less. But on average, it’s 

$329 per person. 

 

Well I’m a family of four. So that means, using those figures, I’ve already saved $1,300. Now those people who 

live in the suburban areas of the city — and I’m sure that the rural people truly appreciate it — but those people 

who live in the urban settings and cities, because of the nature 



 

May 7, 1985 

1899 

 

of our cities, have to travel fair distances to and from work every day. They appreciate that saving. Much more 

so, the rural people where the distances are even greater — $329 per person. 

 

Now of course I’m going to have the member from the opposition, one of the members, or all of the members of 

the opposition stand up and say, well that’s not that important. What’s really important is the $230 you took 

away from the assistance program. The $230, that’s what important. That 329 isn’t important at all. And they 

will use that as the smoke-screen. 

 

As I indicated, rather than reiterating, I’d already indicated to you and this Assembly, and my constituents, what 

I considered to be the priority in terms of education, health, agriculture, and creation of jobs for that 230. But 

even if that wasn’t there, already we have saved the people of this province $329 per person with the 

elimination of the gas tax. 

 

The reason they don’t want to bring that topic up, and they think it is not . . . it doesn’t have any great import in 

this province, is because they’re on record as of even a week ago, the Leader of the Opposition at his 

tremendous renomination rally, uncontested for the time being — uncontested for the time being — bussed in 

from all over Regina, bussed in from all over Regina . . . Well the reason they don’t want to bring that up, the 

reason they don’t want to bring that up is because he is on record as stating 329 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

I’m talking about our mandate . . . $320 million is not important because, you see, we are going to retax you 

again. Soon as we get back in, on goes the gas tax one more time . . . (inaudible) . . . 

 

Let’s talk about our other mandate promise: revitalizing and improving health care. I don’t think there is one 

member within this province who can fault us for spending over $1,000 per person — $1,000 per person in 

medical care. There’s not one member in this province who can fault us for looking at our hospital care system 

and putting $50 million into expanding St. Paul’s Hospital; $27 million expansion of University Hospital; 

brand-new hospital coming to the city of Saskatoon, 1988 start date, which more than likely looks like it will be 

a 1987 start date. Not one member of this province will fault us for that. Not one member of this province will 

fault us for building additional level 3 and level 4 care facilities in Saskatchewan, particularly after a seven-year 

moratorium on building. Not one will fault us for that. 

 

What has become very, very obvious is the reason they have the selective memory, the selective memory 

regarding the mandate we received from the people of the province of Saskatchewan, is because it has been not 

only successful, but it’s exceeded itself, exceeded the mandate. 

 

MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — Order. The member’s time has elapsed. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to get into this debate on rule 16, a resolution that 

was passed by my colleague from Quill Lakes. Mr. Speaker, listening to the member for Saskatoon Fairview, it 

just brings me to the point where I have to make a few comments on what he was saying. 

 

Mr. Speaker, does that member talk about some of the things that they did promise and didn’t carry out? There 

are a good number of them. What was their mandate when they got elected to office, Mr. Deputy Speaker? The 

biggest one, I think everyone remembers, is the fact that they promised to cut taxes to every individual in this 

province. The tax cuts was their main plank. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve got their fancy brochure here, with the picture of the Premier on here, and it 

says, a commitment of theirs: 

 

Eliminate the 5 per cent sales tax. The measure will be the first page of a new PC government’s 

commitment to the complete elimination of the sales tax in its first term of office, and its commitment to 

ease the burden of inflation for Saskatchewan citizens. 



 

May 7, 1985 

1900 

 

In their first term of office. That’s the Premier saying that. 

 

What has happened since then, Mr. Deputy Speaker? What has happened since then? What kind of taxes have 

the people of Saskatchewan been faced with? Has there been a tax decrease? Well I think if we check closely 

we’d find that they didn’t keep that promise. They did not only remove that sales tax, but they extended it a 

little bit. They put it on to used vehicles, rather than removing it. 

 

They made another commitment in their pocket politics book and that says a 10 per cent reduction in personal 

income tax. That was their promise and their commitment. What did they do? 

 

Well we saw what they did in this last budget. We saw that in this last budget. Rather than reducing the personal 

income tax by 10 per cent, we see an increase in our taxes. It is not going to cost the people of Saskatchewan 

less now. It is going to cost them more. That is the kind of commitment that this government had to the people 

of Saskatchewan. They say one thing and they do another. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will judge them accordingly. They are going to judge them 

accordingly. They will remember the promises, and they will remember the increases, the tax increases that they 

have imposed upon them. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Fairview talked about the huge tax saving that the gasoline 

tax saved the people of Saskatchewan. Well when you add up the income tax increase, when you add up the 

losses in the property improvement grant, when you add up the increase in the sales tax or the extension of the 

sales tax, well, Mr. Speaker, that $329 that the people of Saskatchewan saved since they came to office is going 

to be gone in one year and it’s going to be gone not only by $329, but it’s probably going to be gone three times 

that, or four times that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is what this government has done for the people of Saskatchewan. They promised one thing; 

they did something totally different. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think if they are serious about keeping any of those commitments to the people of 

Saskatchewan, what they should be doing is cutting back on some of the money that they are spending, some of 

their personal expenditures as cabinet ministers, as legislative secretaries. 

 

One has to look at the cost of some of their junkets around the world. A million dollars, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

for some trips of the cabinet ministers to places like Saudi Arabia, Australia, New Zealand, Austria, 

Switzerland, Palm Springs, California. Possibly they went to buy some oranges in California, or some grapefruit 

in Palm Springs, but whatever it was, it cost the taxpayers a million dollars for those trips, Mr. Speaker — a 

million dollars that could have gone into the pockets of Saskatchewan taxpayers. But instead it went out of their 

pockets through tax increases. 

 

Advertising is another area, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this government has decided that they would put a lot of 

money into. They have decided that rather than provide programs for people to reduce taxes for people to lower 

the cost of living, what they are doing is trying to tell them how good it is in Saskatchewan, trying to convince 

them through all the advertising and news releases that they can possibly get out into the hands of Saskatchewan 

people. They don’t do it with savings. They’re trying to do it with news releases and PR. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, not only are they spending money on all those news releases, they are also 



 

May 7, 1985 

1901 

 

spending a lot of money on what one could possibly call patronage, and nothing less than that. When you look 
at what they spend on one part-time chairman of the Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board — $122,000 in 
salary and travel expenses for a part-time chairman of the labour relations board — well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
$122,000 a year for someone that works part-time that’s fairly good wages. It’s very good wages. 
 
I’m sure those people would like to see them back in government, because they’re the only ones making money 
in this government. They’re the only ones that can save something, but the general public of Saskatchewan is 
not saving very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We have in this province some 60,000, over 60,000 people unemployed. That is costing the taxpayers a lot of 
money. If people are working they’re being productive. They are paying taxes. That means that others wouldn’t 
have to pay as much. When you have that many people unemployed that means that we’re losing something like 
about $900 million a year in lost wages. We are losing about $100 million a year in unnecessary welfare 
payments. 
 
That is what this government has brought the people of Saskatchewan to. It has brought them to the point of 
having to apply for welfare because there are no jobs available. There’s no way that they can possibly survive 
unless they go on welfare. And that is costing the taxpayers a lot of money. All of these people would be just 
too pleased to be able and go and work, and to earn their own salaries, and make their own living to provide for 
their children. 
 
But what are they forced to do? Mr. Speaker, they’re forced to go to the level that this government has put them 
to, and that’s the way they have to plead for a little bit of assistance. They have to go on welfare, or they have to 
go to the food banks to try and survive. They go to the food banks so they can feed their children and families. 
That is what this province has come to in a short three years, Mr. Speaker. More soup kitchens and a lot of 
money being spent on the government itself. 
 
We see something like $3 million more being spent by this government than by the former government for staff 

salaries, for legislative secretaries, for the large cabinet that they have, which is totally unnecessary for what 

they are doing. If there was some benefit from that cabinet, one could say it may have been a good idea, but that 

has not happened. We have a lot of ministers but none of them have really saved the taxpayers any money. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to only say in summary that this government’s record is a long list of 

promises made and promises broken. 

 

MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — Order. The members’ time has elapsed. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MORIN: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Today I think is one of those days when we have 

an opportunity to talk in the Assembly on a matter of principle, and I’d like to commend one of the members of 

the opposition for showing their principles and not being here today to discuss this amendment or this motion. 

 

Clearly, the Leader of the Opposition isn’t here. He doesn’t want to be associated with this type of a motion, 

this foolish type of a motion brought forward. The member from Shaunavon is out checking his oil wells, and 

he’s obviously not too concerned with lack of employment in the province. I’ll be interested to know when the 

member of Athabasca, if he chooses to speak, how he’ll react to the NDP motion to do away with the uranium 

mining — throw away over $600 million in our province, put all the people of his constituency out of work. I 

wonder how he’ll response to that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have left are the people who are just opposed to anything, and I don’t 



 

May 7, 1985 

1902 

 

think that being anti-Conservative is good enough in this House, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly not good enough 
out on the streets, and it’s not good enough across the country today. 
 
They’ve talked a little bit about the cost of the changes in taxation. And the thing that I found the most 
interesting about their comments, Mr. Speaker, was this: they said, over the next five years it will cost the 
people this much money. Well, why didn’t they take it over the next 100 years? Why didn’t they take it over the 
next 1,000 years? I mean, what they’re trying to do, Mr. Speaker, is to trump up some huge number and hope 
that the people on the street are uninformed enough to be frightened by large numbers. And that’s really all 
they’re doing. And we’ve seen them do that in the past, and we’ll see them do it again. 
 
When they talk about tax increase, I’d suggest that they go back to the year 1977 where, when they were the 
government, they raised the total taxes in the province by almost $200 million in one year. They raised personal 
income taxes by 162 million. 
 
We often hear them in here crying about the tax on fuel farmers, but of course, that year they increased that by 
$17 million. They increased the tobacco tax by 4.6 million, and they increased corporate income tax by $10 
million — a total of just under $200 million tax in one year, or $2 billion in 10 years. A huge tax increase, and 
that’s year after year after year. Once they’d imposed it, it just went on. 
 
The people of the province decided they didn’t want any more of that, so they said, we’re willing to pay a fair 
tax; we’re willing to be reasonable, but you’ve done too much. So what did we do? Well, we took off the gas 
tax, and my colleague has mentioned that. And to the person and the average driver who drives about 25,000 
miles a year and gets 20 miles to the gallon, that saving alone has saved him $537 a year or, in the last three 
years, over $1,600. 
 
We took off the 10 per cent manufacturing tax on small business to make them competitive — to give them an 
opportunity to compete, not only across Saskatchewan, but in Canada, and into the United States. Today, 
largely because of that, I have a manufacturer in my riding who’s selling more product into the United States 
than he ever sold before in all of Canada. The American dollar is certainly helping him, but the thing that helped 
him to get started and keep going was the removal of that 10 per cent tax on manufacturing. They never 
mention that. 
 
We’ve removed the tax on children’s clothing, school supplies, taken the tax off some agricultural equipment — 
irrigation equipment and that type of thing — and the list goes on in terms of tax reduction. 
 
In terms of other tax reductions that we’ve come up with which they chose to ignore, there is of course the 
Mortgage Interest Reduction Program which is in fact a tax rebate, and the farm interest reduction program 
which is a tax rebate. 
 
If you look at the average home owner who had a $50,000 mortgage of 19 per cent, and had that mortgage 
written down to 13.25 per cent, over the last three years that individual has saved $7,566. If he’s also an average 
driver, he’s saved $1,600, for a total of almost $9,200 in three years. If he also has a power bill, an average 
power bill, the removal of the tax on that power bill would have given him another $216 which would push him 
up to almost $9,500 worth of tax saving in the last three years. 
 
And they’re asking us to believe, they’re asking the people of the province to be foolish enough to say: take 
away the property improvement grant, we didn’t do as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what I want to do is to amend this motion. I’d like to amend the motion by striking out 
everything after the word Assembly, and substituting it with: 
 

That the Assembly commends the actions of the provincial government in tax reform 



 

May 7, 1985 

1903 

 

and tax relief for families, farmers, small-business men, and further commends the government for 

keeping the rate of employment at 92 per cent, the highest in Canada. 

 

Seconded by the member for Saskatoon Mayfair. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they go on and talk about tax changes and tax increase but I’d like to . . . 

 

MR. GLAUSER: — Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker. The member from Quill Lakes has stated in his motion 

that we have not lived up to our mandate. I want to remind the member from Pelly, and it’s unfortunate that he 

left, and as was stated by my colleague, the member for the Battlefords — and our mandate was to eliminate the 

5 per cent sales tax on clothing and utility bills. But what did the member from Pelly say? The member from 

Pelly said, eliminate the sales tax. Just eliminate the sales tax. That’s all he said. He didn’t say on clothing. So 

let’s keep the record straight. 

 

(1515) 

 

Well for the member of Quill Lakes as far as living up to our mandate . . . With your indulgence, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I have a personal story of how business was conducted in this province under the NDP, how it was 

undermined. It goes back to 1945. 

 

When three of us brothers came back from overseas, we wanted to start a moving and storage business in 

Saskatoon. Saskatoon was a growing community. We had to apply for a permit to purchase trucks, and we also 

had to apply for a permit for running rights. If we would receive those, then we might be, we could be able to 

start up in business. However the city office of the government, the office in Saskatoon refused our request. We 

then got an appointment with a person by the name of Mr. Sturdy. Now there’s a building in Saskatoon and 

every time I go by that building that bears that name, it does something to me, and I guess that’s not really why 

I thought of this today. The minister in Regina . . . We got the appointment; the minister in Regina; we had the 

audience — and that was the end of it. 

 

It was but six months later, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that a company moved in to Saskatoon from Edmonton, a 

company by the name of MacCosham’s transport, and with running rights insured. Now what kind of 

hanky-panky went on there at the detriment of the citizens of Saskatchewan? 

 

We were strangers in our own province when we came back here after the war, I’ll have the members opposite 

know. We were not allowed to develop business, employ people in this province. And if anybody thinks that I 

got into politics on a whim, that was certainly not the truth. It is never too late, my friend. 

 

It was never too late to get involved in a government, in a PC government that would change the direction of 

this province. And I am pleased to be part of a government that has changed the direction of this province. 

 

I am not disappointed, and either are some other people disappointed in this province. Take a look at what the 

economists, what the economists think of this province. The performance of Saskatchewan’s economy in 1985 

hinges on the farm sector. An analyst by the name of Constantinou wrote in a recent report of the Conference 

Board of Canada: 

 

Assuming normal weather and average grain yields, the board predicted agriculture production will 

expand 16 per cent. 

 

. . . Saskatchewan’s economy will grow by almost four per cent, while other provinces languish at zero 

to two per cent. 



 

May 7, 1985 

1904 

 

It added that the province’s unemployment rate — the lowest in Canada for almost three years — may 

drop by up to one percentage point. 

 

Reza Ghaeli, the Royal Bank of Canada’s regional economist, predicts there will be a 3.5 per cent increase in 

real growth in the province. 

 

Another optimistic forecast comes from Informetrica, an Ottawa-based group, which suggests Saskatchewan’s 

growth may be as high as 7.2 per cent. That is the kind of optimism that is out there. And this is in Ottawa; this 

in Toronto; but try and get the NDP to have that kind of optimism in Saskatchewan. It’s a good thing they are 

not any better represented in this House than they are, or I’m afraid the doom and gloom would be above 

anybody’s able to surmount. 

 

It’s almost inevitable that in 1985 Saskatchewan will have strong growth, given, of course, a normal harvest. 

Last year Saskatchewan did not have a normal harvest, but yet farm income last year is considerably up. 

 

And then let’s take a look at the record from 1981 to 1984, and I think of Saskatoon particularly when 6,000 

jobs were created. And I can tell you that in the constituency of Mayfair, with 5,000 businesses, a lot of those 

people are employed in the Mayfair constituency in Saskatoon. 

 

Last year alone the labour force increased 14,000 or 3.5 per cent. And then they would have us believe that the 

employment, that the labour force is dropping, and that unemployment is going up at the same time: 5,000 more 

jobs in manufacturing; 6,000 more jobs in the service sector; and 2,000 more jobs in transportation. The record 

continues. In February to March, 1985, employment increased 7,000 on an unadjusted basis. This increase was 

seen in all sectors — agriculture, manufacturing, services, and retail trade. 

 

This government has currently 27 employment-related programs administered by 12 different departments, all 

under the Employment Development Agency, and that, all in all, is more than $120 million. And I could go 

through, project by project, but I don’t think my time will allow. 

 

Another 130 million is being spent in agriculture which will also provide both short-term and long-term 

employment, as well as improving the agriculture economy. There have been 6,015 jobs created over the past 

winter through a variety of programs under the winter works offered by the various departments. 

 

The current figure for employment in the province is 490,000 people, up from 474,000 in March of 1984. 

Saskatchewan is out-performing all western nations in growth of employment. The contrast is clear. Manitoba 

grew only 1.3 per cent compared to Saskatchewan in March. The record goes on. 

 

The Employment Development Fund which I talked about, of $600 million over a five-year program — more 

than 22,000 direct jobs will be created or sustained. From March to March, ’84 to ’85, as I mentioned — total 

employment at 490,000. The Employment Development Fund contains 27 employment-related programs 

administered by 12 provincial government departments or agencies. The fund will be co-ordinated and directed 

by Employment Development Agency. And as we heard last night in the estimates when the Minister of 

Tourism and Small Business so eloquently explained the programs, but which were not being listened to very 

well by the opposition, who could only attack on a basis of really nothing to attack, but not really going through 

the estimates on a line-by-line basis. 

 

This is a long-range development plan, five years, to ensure that our province and our community will have the 

necessary economic strength, structures, and stamina to sustain a stable environment of meaningful employment 

in the long term. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. It’s my duty to inform the member that his time has expired. 



 

May 7, 1985 

1905 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great deal of pleasure this afternoon to rise in the 

Assembly and speak on the main motion: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the Government of Saskatchewan for having betrayed its election mandate 

and having imposed the largest tax increase in Saskatchewan’s history. 

 

Before I get into my speech, Mr. Speaker, I want to make a couple of comments as to what has been said by a 

number of members in the House, and particularly by the member from Saskatoon Mayfair. He just stood up in 

the House and indicated that when the Conservative government went around this province electioneering and 

talking about tax cuts, that they didn’t really indicate that they were going to eliminate the 5 per cent sales tax. 

 

And I just want to quote, Mr. Speaker, from the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan and a 

commitment by Premier Devine. And I quote for the member for Mayfair: 

 

This measure will be the first phase of a new Conservative government’s commitment to the complete 

elimination of the sales tax in its first term of office. 

 

The complete elimination . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay. The member from Fairview, Mr. Speaker, from 

his seat says, this is the first phase. This is the first phase, Mr. Speaker, a $1.2 billion deficit on the type of taxes 

that have been put on the taxpayers of this province. 

 

The member from Saskatoon Fairview, when he got up and spoke on this House, he said the NDP were worried, 

and his quote: “. . . what may transpire in the future,” Mr. Speaker. And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, the NDP are 

worried about what may transpire in the future if we continue, Mr. Member from Fairview, to pile up deficits of 

$1.2 billion in the first three years; what’s it going to be like if you were to, as the member from Battleford 

suggested, why not add 10 years on to these figures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to start by saying that when you have a $1.2 billion deficit in the province, and I want to 

talk about just how that contributes to that sad situation that we have in the province today, and then added on to 

that debt, we have a budget that comes along with tax increases on second-hand vehicles. 

 

And let’s just take a look at what the tax on second-hand vehicles means to the citizens of Saskatchewan. And I 

know what it means to my own family because I have a son already that has purchased a second-hand vehicle, 

and he’s had to pay that tax. And just assume that if my son decides to sell it to one of his brothers then, of 

course, you have triple tax, and that’s exactly what’s taking place. This second-hand vehicle is not going to be 

just a simple tax on a second-hand vehicle. It’s going to hit individuals who resell that vehicle, and it could go 

over two or three times before that vehicle is finally written off. 

 

The home owners grant, Mr. Speaker. Let’s take a look at the home owners grant. In one sweep of the pen $100 

million a year has been taken out of the pockets of the citizens of Saskatchewan by eliminating the home 

owners tax rebate — $100 million with one sweep, with one program in your budget, not to mention what the 

flat tax means to this province. 

 

And I want to now turn to some of the problems and then the very serious problems, Mr. Speaker, that I see 

happening through this budget and the lack of planning for northern Saskatchewan. 

 

We have seen in the last three years in northern Saskatchewan an ever-increasing dependency 



 

May 7, 1985 

1906 

 

on welfare. We have seen unemployment rise as high as 95 per cent in some of our communities. We have seen 

a situation up there that is just hard to explain. And when you try to get the ministers and the Conservative 

government to go up North and to just see what’s really happening, and to take a look at the human tragedy that 

we have in northern Saskatchewan — and I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, since I have been in here in the House, 

the House has reconvened on April 10 — just in my own area, in my constituency, and the last tragedy was 

yesterday. We’ve had seven serious tragedies, the last one yesterday being a young mother. 

 

This is taking place on a daily basis. It is getting to a point where I just don’t know where it’s going to end. And 

if the government doesn’t get in there and start putting some money in and getting people back working and 

giving the citizens of northern Saskatchewan come hope, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to get worse and worse. We 

just can’t continue to sit back and overlook that. We just can’t have ministers going around the province and 

indicating that things are good up North. And I want to make a few quotes by the member from Prince 

Albert-Duck Lake, and I’m quoting from the Prince Albert Herald of Tuesday, April 16th. Pardon me, Mr. 

Speaker, from the Leader-Post, and this was the hon. member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake who has 

responsibilities in northern Saskatchewan for housing, and then for Indian and native affairs. And the member 

for Prince Albert-Duck Lake, and this is what he’s saying: 

 

Outlines of northern job creation programs were conspicuously absent in finance minister Bob Andrew’s 

budget address last Wednesday night. 

 

And this is what he’s really . . . I’m still quoting. 

 

That’s because the government is aiming at fuelling the North’s development the same way it was 

fuelled, job creation in the South, Mr. Dutchak said. 

 

The same way they had fuelled job creation in southern Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that alone is going to be 

very worrisome for northern Saskatchewan because they have enough problems as it is, but if they’re going to 

create the same type of situation in northern Saskatchewan as they have created in southern Saskatchewan, well 

let me tell you, then, the problems are really going to come to the forefront. 

 

(1530) 

 

Let’s just take a look what’s happening in southern Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, in southern Saskatchewan 

under the Conservative program we now have 60,000 people unemployed, the highest unemployment rate that 

this province has ever witnessed — 60,000 people unemployed. We have one in every 16 citizens of this 

province are now on welfare. One in every 16 are on welfare, and the minister in charge of northern 

Saskatchewan indicates that northern Saskatchewan will be fuelled with job creation the same in the North as it 

is in the South, and I say that is very sad. 

 

He also goes on to state in the same article, and I’m quoting, Mr. Speaker: 

 

. . . and small businesses are sprouting up all over the North, he added. Lac la Ronge has added 25 

houseboats to increase its tourist attraction. Ile-a-la-Crosse is trying to start up its own houseboat 

industry. 

 

Now we have a situation in northern Saskatchewan that I just indicated to you, Mr. Speaker, has become a 

human tragedy. It’s a serious situation that we have up there, and yet we have a minister who I have indicated to 

on many occasions in this Assembly that there is serious problems, and he has to take action, and he openly says 

that small businesses are sprouting up all over northern Saskatchewan. Well I say, Mr. Speaker, that he’s going 

to have to come up there, and I will go out with him, and we will have a look, and I want him to show me where 

all these small businesses are sprouting up all over northern Saskatchewan because that is what we need. 



 

May 7, 1985 

1907 

 

We need business opportunities. Northerners need opportunities to start businesses and to become 

self-sufficient. Until that happens, Mr. Speaker, I think that the situation in northern Saskatchewan can only get 

worse, and as I indicated to you when I first started to speak, yesterday was the last tragedy that I’m aware of, 

and it was a very serious one. 

 

Then he goes on to say: 

 

The government has no intention of ripping down the social safety net that the North still needs to 

survive. Dutchak said that the government will look for better ways, which may mean an end to those 

subsidy programs that aren’t working. 

 

It may mean an end to the subsidy programs that aren’t working. Mr. Speaker, we all know what has happened 

to the fresh food transportation subsidy up in northern Saskatchewan. They have already taken that away. This 

is what the minister . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. It’s my duty to inform the member that his time has expired. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker I will relinquish my place if there is someone else who is wishing to 

speak, but I’m happy to participate in this debate. 

 

As you will know, Mr. Speaker, we are talking about the taxes which were imposed by the last budget — in the 

view of this side of the House, the budget put forward by a government which was elected on promises of 

reducing income taxes by 10 per cent and eliminating sales taxes altogether. A government which was elected 

on those promises, and which brings in a budget which increases income taxes and increases sales taxes is, in 

fact, a denial of the promises made to the people of Saskatchewan and, in the words of the resolution, a betrayal 

of the election mandate which was obtained by that government. 

 

There, I think, can be no doubt that the tax increase is the largest tax increase in the history of Saskatchewan. 

Mathematically there is no other way to arrive at it, the three main components being: the increase in the sales 

tax of approximately 7 million a year; the increase in the flat tax which is approximately $80 million a year; and 

the removal of property tax rebates which are of the order of $100 million a year. 

 

Now that’s very close to $200 million a year, and that surely is the largest tax increase in the history of 

Saskatchewan. It may be asserted that to remove property improvement grants and other property tax rebates is 

not a tax increase. I think that simply will not stand. Last year the home quarter property tax rebate was 

instituted. It was called by the Minister of Finance and by his colleagues, a cut in taxes. Well, we agreed with 

that. It was a cut in taxes. Now, if it is removed, it is surely to increase taxes. And we have, therefore, the largest 

tax increase in the history of Saskatchewan. 

 

Our quarrel is not only with the fact that this is a large tax increase. Our quarrel is with two other facts. Firstly, 

many people who could pay money, could contribute to the coffers of this province and pay for the schools and 

the hospitals and the roads, which we acknowledge we need, are not being asked to pay. And here I speak 

particularly of the resource companies and, even more particularly, of the oil companies. 

 

There is nothing in this budget which raises taxes on oil companies by as much as a penny, while this budget is 

going to take $200 million a year, an average of $200 per person, per year, out of the pockets of ordinary 

taxpayers. 

 

Now those are hard facts. No one has suggested that there are any additional taxes on the oil industry. No one 

has suggested that the oil industry is anything but prosperous. All of the major oil companies increased their 

profits in 1984 over 1983. Imperial Oil, for example, had an increase in 1984 over 1983 of over 80 per cent. 



 

May 7, 1985 

1908 

 

No one can assert that this was all made in Saskatchewan, but certainly the profitable end of the business was 

oil production, and the unprofitable end of the businesses is the retailing of oil. Everybody in the oil business 

tells you that. Indeed, some entrepreneurs in the United States have built vast fortunes pursuing that particular 

fact in the oil industry, and there is, therefore, every likelihood that massive amounts of that increase in profits 

by these companies — and I’m instancing Imperial Oil — took place in our province. 

 

A simple look at the figures produced by the government itself will show that while the value of oil production 

has more than doubled over the last three years or so, the amount that is taken by the Crown in all its oil 

revenues has not increased. It’s substantially what it was three years ago, where the value of oil production has 

more than doubled. 

 

There is therefore no question, no question that the oil companies are able to pay a great deal more. A simple 

look at the annual report for 1984 of the Crown’s own oil company, Saskoil, makes it clear that it is making a 

great deal more money; it is paying a great deal less in royalties as a percentage of its total income and is 

making a great deal more in profits. And that strikes me, Mr. Speaker, as indicating that the oil industry could 

have been asked to pay its share and was not asked to pay its share. 

 

We know also that the oil industry will be even more prosperous in 1985, as a result of the agreement struck — 

the so-called western accord between western producing provinces and the federal government — which will 

cause a cash flow to the oil industry variously estimated at 1.3 billion, $1.4 billion a year. 

 

These are very large sums, and even if they cannot be stated with precision, it is very, very clear that the 

direction of these is that the oil industry is going to have . . . had an excellent year in 1984, and is going to have 

an even better year in 1985. 

 

Now I ask you, Mr. Speaker, which of our other citizens, corporate or individual, has made a great deal amore 

money in 1984 than they did in 1983? Is it our working people? Is it our people on minimum wage who have 

had no increase? Is it our working people who have had, in many cases, no increase, and in some cases, 1 or 2 

or 3 per cent increase? Is it our farmers whose net income has not gone up? Yet these are the very people who 

are being asked to pay more. Is it our small-business people? Have their profits gone up 84 per cent, as did 

Imperial Oil’s? For most of them the answer is a resounding no, and yet they are being asked to pay more. 

 

So that is one objection: firstly, that the broad group of people who are being asked to pay are not the only 

people who should be asked to pay, and indeed, some people who can pay have not been asked to pay. 

 

The second objection we have, Mr. Speaker, is that the taxes themselves are unfair. They’re unfair because they 

extract more from middle- and lower-income people, and less from higher income people, than properly framed 

taxes would do. 

 

Let’s take them one by one. We have the second-hand vehicle tax. Ask yourself, Mr. Speaker, whether 

low-income people ordinarily buy used vehicles or new vehicles. The question answers itself. Lower income 

people tend to buy used vehicles. 

 

What then is the effect of a tax which means less tax on a new vehicle and more tax on a used vehicle? It is 

simply to transfer the tax burden from people who ordinarily buy new vehicles, which on the average are 

better-off people, on the average are higher-income people, and transfers it to people who buy used vehicles. 

Now many of those people— not all of them, but many of them — are people with lower incomes. Indeed 

lower-income people habitually buy second-hand vehicles as opposed to new vehicles. 

 

So there’s no doubt about the move of that tax. It is a shift in the burden from the sort of people 



 

May 7, 1985 

1909 

 

who buy new vehicles to the sort of people who buy used vehicles. The higher priced vehicle you buy, if you’re 

buying a $35,000 vehicle, you get an even greater break, an even greater break if you’re turning in your vehicle 

every year, than you would otherwise have done. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the application of that tax, there is no doubt that it shifts the burden from 

people who are better able to pay to people who are less able to pay. 

 

Now let’s take the property tax rebates. The government claims that it proposes to do away with the property 

tax rebates and pay the money directly in school grants. That’s what they say. That’s what the Minister of 

Agriculture said the other day, very clearly, when he was attempting to defend the removal of the home quarter 

tax rebate. Let’s work that one through, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Suppose we have a farmer who is paying $1,000 in property taxes for school purposes, and suppose we have a 

potash mine beside that farm which is paying $100,000 in property taxes for school purposes, because the 

property . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. It’s my duty to inform the member that his time has elapsed. 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m quite pleased to speak on this motion today, for a 

very simple reason that I have for some four weeks now listened to the members opposite indicate the 

unfairness of the tax that we imposed this year in this last budget on the used cars. And it is not surprising to me 

that the members opposite fail to understand what the fairness in taxation is and should be. They’ve always 

taken the position, Mr. speaker, that they will go after certain parts or segments of the society and really nail it 

to them. It’s been obvious for many years, the way the members opposite have reacted. 
 
(1545) 
 
Yesterday in question period the Leader of the Opposition attempted to make a point of the amount of extra 
revenue that was going to be raised by the government in the taxation of used vehicles. As usual, he left out 
several very important facts because, Mr. Speaker, when we speak of the taxation of used vehicles, we’re 
talking about taxing motorists. And if there’s anyone in Saskatchewan in the last three years that has seen a 
reduction in their taxes, that has been the motorists. 
 
And let me outline to you, Mr. Speaker, exactly what I mean. We removed the gas tax; the motorist received 
that benefit. And that amounted to, this year would have amounted to about $135 million. In addition to that, 
Mr. Speaker, next week I am going to be sending out some $25 million to the motorists of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, we eliminated the $15 premium on driver’s licence. We reduced the premium, 
insurance premium on licence plates an average of over 7 per cent, and a further 10 per cent reduction on farm 
vehicles, passenger cars, for a total, Mr. Speaker, of $29 million. 
 
In addition to that, last fall I announced an increase in the benefits $3 million. In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, 
we are providing additional service to the people of Saskatchewan with respect to claim centres at a cost of $10 
million. Now if we add up those five figures: the $135 million tax; the $25 million rebate; and the other 
numbers that I mentioned, it totals $202 million in one year. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition yesterday made a point, and I’m sorry that he’s left the House. I’m sorry he’s no 

longer in the Assembly to hear this. He made a point of a $7 million increase and yet we removed 202, a saving 

of $195 million to the motorists. And that’s taxation, but it’s what I would call indirect taxation that the 

opposition members used to collect. So therefore, Mr. Speaker, the $7 million, the attempt for the Leader of the 

Opposition to be negative on the $7 million, Mr. Speaker, leaves little question in my mind as to what their 

integrity is and what their knowledge of the taxing system is. Mr. Speaker, I wanted to clear that point. I won’t 

get into the 



 

May 7, 1985 

1910 

 

other points because that point hasn’t been made. It has now been made. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Order, please. It’s my duty to inform the member that the time allotted has 

elapsed. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

TOURISM AND SMALL BUSINESS 
 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 45 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 

MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a few short questions, Mr. Speaker, on the La Ronge 

houseboats. Could you indicate to the committee whether or not you’ve had any representation from local 

fishermen, local commercial fishermen regarding the establishment of that industry on Lac la Ronge? 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Chairman, regarding the houseboat operation slated to open this summer, the 

commercial fishermen did not make any representation, to my knowledge, to the operators of that new tourist 

attraction in that area. Again, I would like to tell this Assembly that in a recent meeting in la Ronge with a good 

representation of the people of La Ronge, the business community, they seemed very happy to welcome a new 

corporate citizen into their area to supply yet another tourism facility. 

 

And as a matter of fact, Mr. Chairman, they expressed bitter disappointment in the fact that the elected 

representatives, or the elected representative of their area seemed, for whatever reason, unhappy with this 

operation, and they felt that that unfortunately is too bad because where the community appears to be 

welcoming them with open arms, they can’t understand why an elected member of the Legislative Assembly 

would not welcome a new tourist operator as well. Instead of showing enthusiasm and instead of showing 

hospitality with regard, it seems that they still go around preaching doom and gloom, and it just doesn’t make 

anybody feel good up there. 

 

The whole area is anticipating seriously the arrival of these people on the scene and are very anxious to see it 

succeed. And we have taken as a department all of the precautions that we could take, as being the lead agency 

of the interdepartmental committee within government, to ensure that all of the standards that are required of 

this operation are met. They will operate it in accordance with all the terms and stipulations that are given, and 

there just doesn’t appear to be any problems at all, and hopefully we can get this under way with everybody 

feeling good about it. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Minister, I don’t know if I’m hearing you right, but are you suggesting to the 

House that hon. member from Cumberland was not in favour of this venture and that had worked openly or 

otherwise to make them feel that they were not welcome to bring that venture into Lac la Ronge? 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — What I said, Mr. Chairman, is that the business community in La Ronge are very 

disturbed about the fact that the member, or members in the North . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes — do not 

really seem to welcome any activity that we do to promote the tourism facilities of the North, and where they 

are encouraged and happy, with it all, why wouldn’t those members go out and say, boy this is good. Here’s 

another activity that’s going to help create employment. It’s going to be an economic generator. And you know, 

why are they always down in the mouth on anything that we try to do up there? 



 

May 7, 1985 

1911 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Chairman, it’s all right, Mr. Minister, for you to suggest things that I may have said 

or have done, but you take advantage of a member who is sick at the present time and who is not in his seat. I 

think that’s getting pretty low. But if you want to take me on and my opposition to bringing the industry into 

northern Saskatchewan, well that’s fine. You can take me on. That’s no problem. But if you want to take on the 

member for Cumberland, I suggest you wait till the member for Cumberland is in his seat. That’s unfair. 

 

(1600) 

 

And I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, on what basis do you make your comments that the business community in 

La Ronge is mad at myself, is mad at myself because of the houseboat industry that’s going into Lac la Ronge. 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Chairman, I will not only take on the member opposite or his colleagues or the 

Leader of the Opposition, when it relates to the development of the North and when it relates to the 

development of tourism . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You’ll get your chance. 

 

Your doom and gloom philosophy that you’re carrying continually around the province does not make the 

business community of the North happy. And I have no fear in saying that. And when you come down into the 

southern part of the province and start preaching this doom and gloom philosophy, the business community in 

the North says, what’s happening? They’re discouraging people from coming to the North from the southern 

part of the province, because everything is bad. Nothing is good. It’s full of unemployment. There’s people 

sitting around ready to do this and that, and one thing or another. Why don’t they say like it really is? And the 

houseboats are a typical example. 

 

And every question that you have asked has been a derogatory type of a question, and there hasn’t been one 

little inkling of good for that entire project which will prove itself to be another worthy item of tourism in the 

North. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you stand up in this House and you holler and you scream 

and you talk about all the industry that you are putting up in northern Saskatchewan, and you’re suggesting that 

you’re going to take on me and you’re going to take on the Leader of the Opposition and the rest of the caucus 

to prove that your fact is right. And what you’re trying to prove is that I’m opposed to industry going into 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, I want to suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that you must have a very, very short memory. It has to be a short 

memory because only a few minutes ago I was speaking in this legislature, and if you were listening, you were 

in your seat listening, you would have heard, and you would have heard on many other occasions where I’m 

asking and pleading for the Conservative government to come into northern Saskatchewan and to bring 

development in. I’ve been asking you to bring development, and I am not opposed to it. I’m the one who is 

telling you to bring up the surface lease agreements, to bring it up to 50 per cent. I’m not telling you to keep it 

down. 

 

Let me tell you I want to see industry in northern Saskatchewan, and if you’d been in here about a half an hour 

ago, and listening to the speech when I was talking about the human tragedies that are taking place in northern 

Saskatchewan, the human tragedies, and the latest one yesterday of a young mother — you weren’t listening. 

But I was telling the government to get up there and take a hold of the situation before it gets so serious that 

there’s just no turning back. And I tell you it’s serious. But for you to stand up in this House, and tell me that 

I’m opposed to everything that’s good up in northern Saskatchewan, well I tell you, that is not a true statement. 

 

Mr. Minister, just before we get off that subject, will you indicate to the House whether or not that you have the 

full support of the tourist operators in the La Ronge area, the business community in the La Ronge area, and the 

commercial fishermen in the La Ronge area, to promote 



 

May 7, 1985 

1912 

 

and advertise the new venture that’s on Lac la Ronge right now. I know that any tourist industry that we have in 

the province, that your department is involved with advertising and promotion, and I would just ask you to 

confirm whether you have the full support of them three organizations. 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Chairman, I take on any challenge when I know that I have the support of the 

people that I’ve been talking to. And I’m sorry that I missed your speech this afternoon, but, you know, with 

only three members opposite, I don’t know who was here listening . . . none the less, what you indicated to me 

you were talking about is exactly what I’m talking about. 

 

Of course there are individual hardships, not only in the North, but in any area of our province, and when you 

continually take these individual cases and carry them about, what happens to the business community up there 

is they’re saying you’re making it sound so bad that nobody wants to come and visit us. And it isn’t bad up 

there — it’s good. And we should be encouraging visitors and tourists to go up into that area because it’s good 

for the economy. It creates jobs. But when you always bring up only small isolated specific concerns and try to 

make a big whoop-de-do about it, you scare people. Don’t do that. And when there are good things up there that 

are happening, be proud enough, be a good enough representative to say that. 

 

Now we don’t promote specifically any individual type of an attraction as a department of government. They do 

that on their own. So we’re not putting in any financial involvement. 

 

Regarding any opposition to that, as is common with any new business that operates, certainly there are going to 

be some concerns expressed by individuals that feel that in their own little personal way they are affected, and 

those people have come forward. So I’m not going to stand before you and say that I have 100 per cent support, 

because that never happens. 

 

Having said that, I can tell you that NSOA (Northern Saskatchewan Outfitters Association) as an organization 

has no official concerns. Commercial fishermen have no official concerns to my knowledge. And we have 

addressed any specific problems with any person that wanted to talk to either myself as the minister — because 

my door is always open — and I’ve talked to many, and I’ve put them at ease and they are satisfied with my 

response. And certainly my department is in touch with any people that have any questions regarding the 

houseboat operation, and that has ended it. 

 

There was some concern originally because they felt that originally there was no public process, and that they 

were disappointed in that. However, being practical about any business, I think that it’s fair to say — and that 

the members would have to agree — that when somebody wants to open up a business, you don’t go and ask 

everybody in the whole world if it’s all right if they do that. I mean, that’s just not the way it happens. But they 

do know the certain rules and regulations that apply in all instances of any operation, and what demands or 

criteria must be followed and met. And certainly in this instance, the promoters, or the developers of that 

particular attraction went through all of the processes that were required for them to do, and probably beyond, 

as it relates to visiting with the town administrators and town officials and so on. I’m satisfied that they have 

done their very best as a good corporate citizen of La Ronge and look forward to playing out just an important 

role for the community. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I thank you for that information. And you have indicated 

that your department has that full support. And I only assume that Tourism and Small Business would be out 

promoting endeavours such as the houseboat operation or any tourist operation that we have in northern 

Saskatchewan, and I will relate back to that. 

 

And I’m not going to get into a shouting match with you again on your remarks about the three members being 

in the House, because I think, once again, as I indicated, you have a very, very short memory. If you maybe just 

take a look around in your own backyard before you make them kind of statements. 



 

May 7, 1985 

1913 

 

And Mr. Minister, when you indicated that I was opposed to development in northern Saskatchewan and that I 

was opposed and using scare tactics and opposed to the houseboat operation on Lac la Ronge, first of all, let me 

tell you that I support that type of endeavour, and I want to indicate to you that that is not in my constituency, 

but Ile-a-la-Crosse Lake is in my constituency, and the community of Ile-a-la-Crosse are taking a serious look at 

developing a houseboat industry of their own right in that community in providing houseboats to the industry 

and hopefully an industry on Ile-a-la-Crosse Lake. So I most certainly support that type of an industry and 

anything that’s going to create jobs in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to now turn to a tour that was organized by your department, the Department of Tourism 

and Small Business, I believe, last fall, in which you took up into northern Saskatchewan or your department — 

I assume that you went along with them — a group of American business women, and I believe it was a group 

of American business women. I wonder if you could indicate just what your involvement was with that group. 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Chairman, I’m waiting for an official of mine to come into the Assembly to . . . so 

that I can describe to you exactly who those ladies were. But while I’m waiting for that information, first of all, 

I did not attend. I wasn’t there as the minister. 

 

We do know that a large number of women hold fishing licences. And also, in regard to family-type fishing, we 

want to encourage the women to go fishing as well as the menfolk. And as part of that development and 

educational program, this is the reason that it was put on for that particular type of a group. We have several 

what we call “fam tours” — familiarization tours — where we bring in sports writers from wherever to 

encourage them to visit our northern Saskatchewan. I do know about that group of ladies, but I will confirm 

who they are. In my next ensuing answer I will describe for you who they are. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I now want to turn to some remarks that were made by your 

colleague from Prince Albert-Duck Lake. He indicated that yourself and the minister responsible for the North, 

the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake, would be making a tour of the North. 

 

I just wonder if you could detail for me the amount of trips and the communities that you have met with in the 

past year, Mr. Minister. 

 

(1615) 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Chairman, to finish off the ladies familiarization tour, we brought them in at what 

we call a brought-up test. The ladies were from California, Colorado, Seattle, Minnesota. They consisted of 

travel writers and travel influencers. And development would include two wholesale programs. And support in 

this instance was received from Frontier Airlines, who recognizes the importance of our market and what they 

can do in servicing Saskatchewan because, as we all know, they do come into Saskatoon from the Los Angeles 

area through Denver. So we were able to make some arrangements with them to bring these influencers into 

Saskatchewan, and we’re just simply delighted with the corporate response that Frontier provides us in that 

area. 

 

Regarding your question of my dealing with the citizens of the North. I can tell you that I meet very frequently 

with people from the northern communities in my office. I can’t give you a detailed list, obviously, because I 

would have to go through my diary for the last year and a half to accomplish that for you. I have personally 

attended several meetings in La Ronge on several occasions, and on one or two occasions I have participated in 

these familiarization group trips into the North. I can tell you further that because of our offices in the North, 

both in La Ronge and Buffalo Narrows, again my department and people that work for us in our branches are in 



 

May 7, 1985 

1914 

 

continual discussion with the business community of the North. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. First I want to respond to the group of influential women that 

your department brought in from the United States to show them Saskatchewan, and particularly northern 

Saskatchewan. And I want to say that we, on this side of the House in the New Democratic Party — we approve 

of that, of bringing women in. But I want to ask you, Mr. Minister . . . You have brought a group of influential 

American women up to northern Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: will you now get a group of influential Saskatchewan women and Canadian 

women who, I think, are just as influential and just as important as the American women to our tourist industry 

in this province; will you and your department make sure that there is a trip like the trip that you took the 

American women on and make sure it’s Saskatchewan and Canadian women? 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Chairman, I guess tourism is kind of a complicated business, Mr. Chairman, when 

you don’t understand business . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Why don’t you be quiet and listen to the answer 

for a minute. When I use the term influential, I don’t mean influential by bringing in a well-known presidential 

candidate from the United States. I used the word “influential” in terms of business. These gals work for formal 

organizations that sell travel, that sell tourism in a huge, big market-place of tens of millions of people. 

 

Now the ladies themselves might not be known any better than some of the members opposite, but the job that 

they do is twenty-fold the job that some of the members opposite are doing, because that’s what I mean by 

influential. 

 

Now, having said that, I would dearly love to have a familiarization trip to the North for the members of the 

media because . . . particularly the members of the media from southern Saskatchewan who could tell the 

people here about the adventure product that we have in the North. 

 

But I can assure you, I can assure you just as sure as I’m standing here — and I’ll stand on my chair if I have to, 

to satisfy that guy — that if I had a familiarization tour that I would bring the local media to, the first thing that 

we would meet with from the opposite would be accusations of bribery to the media. Because you wouldn’t 

accept the fact that I would like to afford this media the same opportunity that we afford the writers from 

outside of your province. And I think it’s only fair. 

 

And if you would be in agreement to that, I would be delighted to have a familiarization tour developed for the 

media of our province, to go up, visit the North, see firsthand our camps, our fishing camps, all of our other 

tourist attractions, and come back and write stories on their own. I won’t attend with them because I don’t want 

to influence their stories, but, rather, that they do that. Or I could have the media contact the members opposite 

to see if they would agree to our development of that kind of a program. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Chairman, for the life of me I don’t know what’s going through that minister’s 

mind or if he’s listening at all. I never once in my question said anything about taking the press up there. I’m 

sure all the press are aware of northern Saskatchewan, and they make many trips up there. 

 

The question that I asked you, and you scooted all around it, you never answered it: will you make available to 

the women of Saskatchewan and the women of Canada, the same trip, the same opportunity of a trip, this 

summer, as you did to the American women? That was the question, Mr. Minister. 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Chairman, is the markets that we’re looking at, and when we’re trying 



 

May 7, 1985 

1915 

 

to develop specific markets, if we could find women travel influencers in Canada or in Saskatchewan that do, in 

fact, sell and promote fishing trips or outdoor activities so that they could qualify for that, we would have no 

hesitancy in spending the taxpayers’ dollar in that fashion. But when we’re trying to develop this specific 

market as best we can and, again, using the women travel influencers to the best of our ability, and the markets 

that they can bring the customers to the North, that’s where we are spending our limited dollars on. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Well, Mr. Minister, you still haven’t answered the question. But it’s quite interesting, 

Mr. Minister, that you stand up in this House and indicate that you could not find influential Saskatchewan 

women, influential Canadian women, because you indicated when you stood up in this House . . . I asked you a 

question if you would make available the same opportunity to the women in Canada and Saskatchewan; you did 

not answer that. But you said if . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

If the Minister of Social Services would just listen, I will repeat what the member just said. He said, “If we 

could find . . .” and you can go back in Hansard tomorrow and check it out for yourself. Mr. Chairman, the 

minister said, “If we could find influential women in Canada and Saskatchewan like we did in the United States 

. . .” And the only trip that was taken was by a group of United States women, not Canadian women, not women 

from this province . . . so what you’re indicating, Mr. Minister, is you have not been able to find women of that 

calibre in Canada and Saskatchewan, so that is why the American women were taken up there. 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Chairman, I can say it slower; I can say it louder; I could answer your question a 

dozen times. I say women travel influencers . . . women travel influencers are a whole lot different than 

influential women. Now I don’t know, Mr. Chairman, how I can say it any . . . I’ll repeat it one more time. 

There are influential women in our society. That’s true. There are influential women in Saskatchewan, in 

Canada, and outside of our borders. That’s true. There are women travel influencers that we are aware of 

outside of Canada. Those are who we brought on the “fam” trip. We are not aware of any women travel 

influencers in Canada, nor are we aware of any women travel influencers within Saskatchewan that devote time 

in selling fishing packages or outdoor activities in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Well that’s quite interesting, Mr. Minister, that you would make a statement like that. 

I’m sure the women influencers in Canada and Saskatchewan are going to be really impressed by the statement 

that you have just made. 

 

You have indicated to this House that you could not find that type of a woman in Saskatchewan, and that you 

could not find that type of a woman in Canada. That’s what you have just stood up in this House and said. 

 

Now Mr. Minister, I want to put this question to you again: will you make available — because I say to you Mr. 

Minister, there are many women in Saskatchewan and Canada who fit the same category just as well as the 

women that you brought in from the United States — will you agree to make available to Canadian women and 

Saskatchewan women that same trip that you made available to the women of the United States? 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Chairman, I have already indicated that if somewhere in Canada exists a woman 

travel influencer that deals with fishing packages, that would promote the outdoor activities of northern 

Saskatchewan, by all means we would put a fam trip for that. There probably is a woman travel influencer in 

our province. Unfortunately, that person is probably selling packages to Hawaii from Saskatchewan. 

 

When we want somebody to come to Saskatchewan from Minneapolis, it’s highly unlikely that a woman travel 

influencer in Saskatoon knows the Minneapolis market to bring them here. So that’s why we bring them in from 

the other areas. They’re the ones that are selling Saskatchewan. 



 

May 7, 1985 

1916 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Are you suggesting, Mr. Minister, that the influential women that you brought in from 

the United States are selling only Saskatchewan tours? Are you suggesting that — that they don’t sell tours to 

Spain or to any other country in the world? That’s what you’re saying . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s 

exactly what you’re saying. 

 

I’m going to get off this subject, Mr. Minister, because you have indicated very clearly to the women of 

Saskatchewan, and to the women of Canada, just where you stand on your priorities, and that is what the 

conservative government stands for. You represent the Conservative government. 

 

Mr. Minister, you and your colleague, the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake, talk about all the businesses 

that are popping up all over northern Saskatchewan. Could you indicate to me, Mr. Minister, in the last year 

how many new businesses that your department has created and are now operating in northern Saskatchewan? 

 

(1630) 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Chairman, it’s going to be a lengthy response. It appears as though we’ve been 

doing our homework up in the North, and there’s the list. 

 

But first of all, I just want to clear up a little misunderstanding that still seems to exist with the hon. member 

across, regarding women travel influencers. Of course the American women travel influencers sell more 

packages than just fishing trips into Saskatchewan. That’s exactly why we go and visit these people. Because if 

we don’t go and visit these travel influencers, how on earth can we expect them to sell fishing packages to the 

North? How on earth can Frontier Airlines develop that market? Why do they co-operate with our department? 

Because Frontier Airlines know that through the promotion and the effort and the work and the contracts that 

our department makes, we are successful in what we set out to accomplish. 

 

And when we were seeking names of the best women travel influencers we contacted Tourism Canada offices 

in both Canada and the United States. The names that we got from these contacts of Canada Tourism only 

identified the women travel influencers from the USA as being the best market for us to go after in terms of 

drawing visitors to northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And I will go one step further. You don’t have to worry about carrying my message to the women business 

community because our Progressive Conservative government is sponsoring the first women and business 

conference in the history of our province, and it’s June 11, specifically designed for women entrepreneurs, 

either in business — and that is where you’ll meet your influential women. You might meet an influential 

woman travel influencer. You know, you can never tell. And then, that way I could say, here’s one woman that 

represents both of what I was trying to explain. Anyhow, having said that . . . 

 

We don’t create businesses, either in the South nor in the North. We are a catalyst with the private sector to 

assist them to create their business opportunities. I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, without going through these 

lists, that we have more than several in various regions of northern Saskatchewan that we have been working 

with the business community to establish these things. Probably if I counted them all up there would be well 

over 100 business people that we are talking to at the present time that are in various stages of development. We 

have approved 25 commercial loans and I think that this list here represents perhaps 20 or 25 just on the east 

side of northern Saskatchewan businesses that are presently in operation. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Chairman, it’s quite interesting how the minister has tried to skirt around the 

women’s issue on travel. You stood up in the Assembly a few short minutes ago and indicated that you took 

only the American women up there because the women who are involved or who are influential, who are 

influencers in the tourist industry in Saskatchewan were not really interested in selling northern Saskatchewan 

and fishing, but rather they were 



 

May 7, 1985 

1917 

 

interested in selling trips to Hawaii. That was your statement. You made that statement in this House — that 
that was the situation in Saskatchewan — and that’s why you went to the States. 
 
The question that I asked you, Mr. Minister was: how many new industries have you started up in the last year, 
and are operating in northern Saskatchewan now — new ones? 
 
HON. MR. KLEIN: — While my officials are adding that, I can answer your question with none. We as a 
department have started none. But I can tell you that I don’t retract any statement that I have said about the 
women travel influencers. You don’t talk to the business community. 
 
I belong to several different associations not the least of which is the travel association . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I’m not skirting around any issue. I talk to them all the time and by their own admittance, if you 
took the time to talk to them, they sell the Hawaii and Florida market because that’s where they make money 
from. And they don’t sell the northern part of our province because their travel agencies are not designed for 
that. 
 
Mr. Chairman, on the west side of our province, in the North, the private sector has either opened or reopened a 
total of 16 new businesses. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Minister, you indicate that on the west side of the province there are 16 new 
businesses that are either operating or have reopened. Could you indicate how many of them are new and how 
many have been reopened? 
 
HON. MR. KLEIN: —Mr. Chairman, I’m happy to tell you that there are eight new businesses on the west 
side. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Minister, we know that on the west side we have a major problem with 
unemployment and we have some very large communities up there, one being La Loche where we have a 
population of approximately 2,200 people. Could you indicate how many new businesses you have opened up 
in that area where the need is so great? 
 
HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Chairman, again I would like to point out that we don’t open up new businesses — 
the member should know that — the private sector. We encourage new businesses to open. Otherwise, every 
business in the North would be a Crown corporation. So that the private sector is encouraged to open up or 
reopen new businesses. And in La Loche there has been one that has opened. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Minister, you indicate that you are not involved in economic development. And 
maybe I’m wrong here. Does your Department of Tourism and Small Business not administer the economic 
development branch fund in northern Saskatchewan? 
 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Chairman, very, very clearly, again for the record, our department does not open 

and operate businesses. I’ve said that several times, so I wish that the member would catch it once and for all. I 

have never said that I am not involved in economic development. Of course, I am. Of course, our department is 

involved in economic development. But there’s a whole lot of difference between being involved in economic 

development and acting as a catalyst and opening up your business — a great deal of difference. 

 

And yes, we do administer the loan fund, and we have had a record year with that loan fund, far beyond 

anything that the prior administration could ever say. I’ll read the numbers again — far beyond anything that 

the other administration could ever say. And I’m also happy to report as I did to this Assembly that not only 

have we had a record year of use of the loan fund, but our collections are the same. We collect our money. 

 

Now having said that, the businesses that I refer to are primarily a list of businesses involving only that loan 

fund. But there are other businesses involved that do open in the North that don’t 



 

May 7, 1985 

1918 

 

involve the use of the loan fund, and therefore they just open — sometime with, sometimes without the 

assistance of our government, because in the private sector they’re used to doing that. But they do come along 

to ask what programs so that if we can assist in job creation they take the benefit of that program so that we can 

create those badly needed jobs. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Well, Mr. Minister, that’s what I’m trying to get at. You say that you don’t open and 

you don’t operate. Well naturally. But you provide the funding for businesses to reopen or to get started anew. 

That’s the function. If there’s an industry up there and it looks viable to you, your economic development fund 

will provide the money to that business. As you indicated, you opened one business in La Loche. Most certainly 

it’s not a Crown corporation. Could you indicate just what type of business that was that opened in La Loche? 

And also could you provide for me the number of businesses that were opened in Buffalo Narrows and what 

types? 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Chairman, in La Loche the private sector opened a bulk fuel plant. In Buffalo 

Narrows there was a video shop and an auto body shop that opened. And these openings are not primarily on 

behalf of the loan fund. They can do this with private sector funding. I can tell you that 25 commercial loans 

were approved in the loan fund in the amount of $2.2 million. A 54 per cent loan approval rate is indicative of 

strength in lending. Sixty-one fishing and trapping loans approved in the amount of $220,000. The net dollar 

value approved represents the highest level of lending activity since the program’s inception in 1974. 

 

The northern revolving loan fund has a statutory limit of $10 million of which $3.2 million is available to lend. 

Actual loan disbursements in ‘84-85 are $2 million — a little bit higher; 460 person-years of employment have 

been created and/or maintained as a result of the loan fund lending activities. I’m just talking the loan fund for 

you now. Cumulative revenue figures will be approximately $1.8 million, nearly double the previous year as a 

result of an intense collections policy. 

 

(1645) 

 

A total of 107 loans were repaid in full during the year. Of 66 loans approved, where loan repayment was 

scheduled to commence last year, 60 accounts or 91 per cent are current, and the lending activities in the North 

have directly stimulated private sector investment in the order of $1 million. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Minister, you have indicated that you have financed a bulk fuel agency in La 

Loche, a video outlet in Buffalo Narrows, and a body shop is financed in Buffalo Narrows. Is this right? 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — No, I didn’t say that. I didn’t say that at all . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No. Just a 

moment, Mr. Chairman, please. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I wasn’t getting specific because due to client confidentiality I obviously can’t tell you. And if I 

broke down who did and who didn’t have the loan funds, then you could figure it out for yourself, and I don’t 

believe that that’s fair to the businesses. 

 

I can tell you that in Buffalo Narrows there’s a total of more than two — there’s three or four, some of whom 

have access to the fund, some of who haven’t. And obviously in La Loche, the same thing. I have no problem 

with naming the types of businesses, but I think you understand that I cannot tell you who accesses the loan 

fund. You know, we have to be cognizant of the business and the information that we supply. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Yes. I was not asking for any specific names, Mr. Minister, and I wouldn’t expect you 

to provide me with that information, but you did indicate to me in my original question that you . . . when we 

were talking about the businesses that had opened up and were 



 

May 7, 1985 

1919 

 

operating under your assistance in the last year, you indicated a bulk fuel station in La Loche and you indicated 

a video outlet and a body shop in Buffalo Narrows, and that’s the question I was asking, if that was the extent of 

your financing in the two communities that I mentioned. 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — No, I didn’t say that that was the extent of the financing. I indicated that in those two 

particular communities those were the businesses that sprouted forth. And again, I didn’t say that with any 

particular viewpoint of who did or who did not access the fund. Some did; some didn’t. And I think by being 

vague about that, I’m not releasing any confidentiality. And my response was to what business is open in La 

Loche, that was a bulk fuel; and in Buffalo Narrows we had a body shop, a video rental, a restaurant, and one 

other one, a pharmacy. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Minister, then if Buffalo Narrows it’s not just a video outlet, a body shop, but it’s 

also the pharmacy that you’re involved in too? 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Yes, a pharmacy and a restaurant, Mr. Chairman. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Now you’re into a restaurant. Your first answer was that there was two businesses in 

Buffalo Narrows that you were involved in. Now you add a third one, the pharmacy. And just when you were 

sitting down you added a fourth one, a restaurant. Is that right? 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Chairman, let’s clarify this. We’re not involved in them, and I don’t say that we 

are involved, and I always have continued to avoid the use of the word “involved in.” I am telling you, in 

answer to your question of La Loche: one business, bulk fuel. In regard to Buffalo Narrows: four businesses — 

auto body shop, video shop, a restaurant, and a pharmacy. Four businesses. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — And Mr. Minister, are all the four businesses that you have mentioned in Buffalo 

Narrows that your department was involved with — you have just mentioned them — are they all operating 

today? And are they all new businesses, new businesses in the last year operating today? 

 

I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman. Are you indicating then that the four businesses in Buffalo Narrows are all new 

businesses in the last year, because that was my original question, and that the four businesses — the café, the 

pharmacy, the body shop, and the video shop — are now operating, and this year was the first year of operation 

for al four? 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Chairman, one is presently under construction, brand-new. Two others, brand-new. 

One is a reopening. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — You indicate that there’s three brand-new ones. Could you indicate what businesses 

they are? 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Chairman, the restaurant is presently under construction, the pharmacy is new, the 

video rental is new. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Are you telling me, Mr. Minister, that the video business, the building that the video 

business is in, the building that the pharmacy is in, are new businesses that you have started up in this 

community? 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — No, I didn’t say that, Mr. Chairman. I said the businesses . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . I’m talking about the business. I’m not talking about the building. There’s a difference. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Well, Mr. Minister, you’re getting very touchy here because . . . And I want to ask a 

number of questions about the businesses. You stand up in the House and you 



 

May 7, 1985 

1920 

 

indicate that you have started three new businesses — that three new businesses have sprouted up in Buffalo 

Narrows and are now operating with your assistance. 

 

Now I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, that that pharmacy building has been there for a number of years. I want 

to tell you that the video building that you’re talking about has been there for many years. They’re not new. The 

body shop is not new. The only that that is, it’s the individuals that are in there. 

 

I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: could you indicate if the individuals that are operating the four businesses that 

you are talking about in Buffalo, plus the one in La Loche, are they all operated by individual who were born 

and raised in Buffalo Narrows and La Loche? 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Chairman, I suppose that if he insists on that information regarding their place of 

birth, I could look into that and find it for you. 

 

I apologize for appearing short tempered, but there’s a big difference between a business and a building. It’s 

about the same difference as buying a car and buying an airplane. You know, one has nothing to do with the 

other. Some businesses need buildings; some businesses don’t need buildings. Some businesses need brand new 

ones; some can use old ones. A business is one thing. It’s kind of like socks and shoes. Just because you put on 

a pair of socks, you don’t particularly need a pair of shoes. And just because you put on shoes, you don’t 

particularly need socks. 

 

So having said that, I have always indicated and referred to businesses, never a building. There’s a huge, great 

difference between a business and a building. 

 

And for the umpteenth time, we don’t . . . I have never said that we have provided assistance to those businesses 

because, again, for the sale of confidentiality, if you want to get specific about the type of assistance, and our 

consultants were in and helping them with business plans and so on, yes. But I will not tell you what businesses 

actually referred or get assistance as it relates to financing. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Okay, Mr. Minister, you indicate . . . And then we were discussing the Economic 

Development fund that your department administers. You administer an Economic Development Fund that you 

indicate is over $1 million — close to $2 million — that you have available for the residents of northern 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, the fund that we are talking about, is it referred to as a northern economic 

development fund? 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Chairman, yes we do operate the northern revolving fund and there is $3.2 million 

available to lend. There is criteria that must be followed to access this fund. And I can assure the member if 

that’s what he is trying to get at in a roundabout way, and to save time for this Assembly, that in instances 

where applications are made for access to the revolving fund, that criteria must be met. And instances where 

they do not access this fund, they go to the private sector for their funding. That’s why in some instances you 

may or may not have anybody that you’re trying to get at. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Well I want to make it very clear, Mr. Chairman, to the minister, that I’m not trying to 

get at anybody. I’m just trying to get the truth out of you and the facts of what has taken place up there. And one 

thing we want to make clear, we’re talking about the northern economic development fund, and you talk about 

the criteria to be available to get money out of that fund. 

 

Could you indicate if the criteria is the same that it used to be tog et funds out of the northern economic 

development funds? And that criteria was 15 years, or half of your life in a northern community. 



 

May 7, 1985 

1921 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Chairman, the residency requirements have not changed. I’m happy to tell you that 

a couple of other things have changed. We go about collecting the returns because we explained to the people 

that this is a loan and they must pay it back. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Well, Mr. Minister, you indicate that the fund we are talking about, the northern 

economic development fund, and the criteria is the same as it used to be — 15 years or half your lifetime in the 

community. You indicated that there were 16 loans that — or 16 businesses that started up on the west side of 

the province, and I will assume that the west side will be from Green Lake north and encompass mainly the 

Athabasca constituency. 

 

Could you indicate of the 16 businesses that started up in the last year, if they all met the criteria that you’re 

talking about — 15 years in the community or half their lifetime? 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Chairman, first of all, I’d like to reiterate one more time that not all the businesses 

access to fund. I think you understand that. Of the businesses that did access to fund, it’s fair to say that all of 

the criteria was met, and in one instance I used ministerial discretion, which is exactly the same criteria that was 

in existence in the loan fund prior to our administration. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — So you say then, Mr. Minister, that of the 16 new businesses that started up on the west 

side, they all fall into that category. They met the criteria, that had financing through your department, with the 

exception of one which you used your ministerial powers and approved outside of that criteria? 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Chairman, again, of those that financed through the revolving fund — because not 

all of the businesses did — they all fell into the prescribed criteria. And I did use ministerial discretion on one 

But that criteria was in existence prior to our administration and I simply used the tool of the criteria that was 

available to the prior administration. That is available to me. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


