






















































Hansard: June 17, 1985


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

June 17, 1985 
 

3449 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
HON. MR. DIRKS: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to introduce to you and to the Assembly 
today, three very special young people who are seated behind me in the east gallery, and who will be 
members this year of the 1985-86 student council at Martin Collegiate which is situated in the Regina 
Rosemont constituency, and I would ask these people to stand as I indicate them to the Assembly. 
 
The president of the student council, Jodi Hiller; the drama representative, Rob Evans; and the newspaper 
representative Gaylene Erickson. We’re delighted to have you with us today, and I would ask all members to 
join with me in welcoming them to the Assembly. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a great deal of pleasure that I introduce to you and 
through you to the Assembly, some 25 students, grade 4 students from the Lumsden elementary school at 
Lumsden, Saskatchewan. They are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. They are accompanied by their teacher, 
Mrs. Karen Klippenstine; chaperons, Mary Lou Spence, and Joan Britton; and the bus driver Fred Dodds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will have the pleasure of meeting with the students after question period. I look forward to 
entertaining question and answer period. I hope they find question period interesting and informative, and I 
wish all hon. members would join with me, Mr. Speaker, in welcoming the Lumsden students to the 
Assembly. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, and through you to the members of 
the legislature, some guests seated in the Speaker’s gallery today. And in fact I do this not only on behalf of 
Saskatchewan Agriculture, but as well, on behalf of the Deputy Premier and the minister in charge of 
Agdevco. 
 
The people with us here today are Mr. Sun, the mission team leader, all these being from Jilin province; Mr. 
He, Mr. Li; and from my department, Mr. Harold Ellis, and Mr. Choon Yong. I would ask that all gentlemen 
stand and be recognized by the members here, please. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, Hear! 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — They are here, Mr. Speaker, selecting our first plane-load of dairy cattle to go 
to China. I think all members will see that the fruits of the agreement, the twinning with Jilin province, are 
bearing fruit, and we do wish the gentlemen a successful stay here in Saskatchewan and, as well, a safe trip 
home. 
 
MR. TUSA: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure on behalf of my colleague, the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena, to introduce to you a group of 34 students from Invermay High School. They’re in 
grades 7, 8, and 10. They’re accompanied to the legislature this afternoon by their teacher, Mr. Cal Tomilin, 
and Mr. Keith Kirkham, along with their bus driver, Earl Parsons. 
 
They will be touring the legislature this afternoon and I trust they will enjoy question period  



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3450 
 

and their tour, and any other points they may visit in Regina today. 
 
I ask all members of the legislature to please welcome these students. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
MR. TUSA: — It’s also my pleasure this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you and through you to the 
House, on behalf once again, on behalf of my colleague, the member for Kelvington-Wadena, a group of 50 
grade 7 students who are in the west gallery. They are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Semens and Mr. 
Samuel. And they’re also accompanied by a large group of interested parents, namely the following: Mr. 
Markusson, Mr. and Mrs. Helgason, Mrs. Krisjanson, Mrs. Barber, Mr. Gustafson, Mrs. Smith, and Mrs. 
Larson. 
 
It’s a pleasure to have all these people with us this afternoon to witness question period. I’m certain that they 
will enjoy the questions and answers, and they will enjoy the tour that they will be making of the Legislative 
Building. 
 
I might add that I’ll be meeting with this group at 2:30 for pictures and drinks, and also with the group from 
Invermay at 3 o’clock for pictures and drinks. Please welcome the students from Foam Lake Composite High 
School. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce through you, 
and to all members of the Assembly, a former member of the Assembly for many years, for over 29 years, 
Mr. Fred Dewhurst, representing the Wadena constituency. And as members will know, those that were here 
prior to the last election, Mr. Dewhurst held the office of Speaker for a number of years. 
 
I would ask all members to join in extending a welcome to Mr. Dewhurst. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Expenditures of Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to direct a question to the minister in charge of the 
Saskatchewan Forest Products. 
 
My question is: according to the corporation’s 1984 annual report for the Saskatchewan Forest Products, they 
nearly lost $4.5 million last year. And one would have expected that under such circumstances that senior 
management would have been extremely careful with expenditures. Yet I have here, Mr. Minister, a series of 
documents. The first document, it is an invoice and a copy of a cheque for the printing of the 1983 report. 
That cost the taxpayers $1,658 in 1983 through the Queen’s Printer. 
 
I have a further document here, Mr. Minister, which indicates in respect to the 1984, an invoice and a copy of 
the cheque of the amount that was paid. And the amount that was paid was $12,070 to a company in 
Saskatoon known as Smail Communications. 
 
I would like to ask the minister: can you explain to the taxpayers why a company which lost $4.5 million last 
year went out and paid 12 times the amount for the printing of the annual report? Who made that decision, 
and was the work awarded by tender? 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, let’s set the record straight; it was $8,000 for the  



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3451 
 

printing of the annual report. The additional money that’s in the total amount of the cheques the member’s 
referring to was money that was done for picture taking, some other work we had them do in regards to some 
other . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . One was a 10th anniversary of the Saskatchewan Forest Products 
operation. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, in regards to that total amount, instead of getting just 200 copies, we had enough 
copies made up — I believe 1,000, it was, made up — so we could send one out to every employee that was 
out there. So there was additional copies made up, many more, and also there was other stuff involved in it. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Minister, are you aware that they payment made to Smail Communications was 
approved by a Daryl Binkley, your former executive assistant and former candidate for the federal PC 
nomination in the Mackenzie constituency? Can you tell the Assembly when Mr. Binkley was hired by 
Saskatchewan Forest Products, what position he holds, and what his salary is? 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Mr. Speaker, our belief is that he went into Sask Forest about after October 31st of 
’84, and he went in there for one reason, Mr. Speaker. We had the audit done, provincial audit done on the 
accounts, and they found some irregularities that should be cleared up. I think the accounting wasn’t done 
right; we sent him in there to check it out, to make sure . . . 
 
He is a Chartered Accountant, Mr. Speaker. He has been there for about six or seven months now, or eight 
months — I’m not sure of the exact length of time. And I don’t know what his wages are, but certainly not as 
much as you would pay a chartered Accountant. He’s just regular wages. I don’t know what they are. I could 
find out and get back to the member. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. I have here photocopies of a series of cheques and invoices 
issued by Saskatchewan Forest Products which indicate that you are paying David Binkley Consulting Ltd. 
of Tisdale $5,040 a month. 
 
Can you explain what duties Mr. Binkley performed for the level of remuneration that is being paid, and can 
you explain what qualifications he has to receive that level of payment? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Mr. Speaker, his wages include all benefits inclusive, so whatever the amount 
would be . . . all expenses. Second of all, he is in charge of finance and administration within the corporation. 
The corporation handles approximately $35 million a year, Mr. Speaker, and there should be somebody in 
charge of finance and administration. There’s been some changes made, and he’s in charge of that. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — A further question to the minister. Mr. Minister, I have here also a photocopy invoice and 
also a copy of a cancelled cheque in respect to a cheque issued on March 14th of this year to one Daryl 
Binkley of Tisdale, for $3,000. Can the minister explain why the Saskatchewan taxpayers were called upon 
to pay these moving expenses, and what was the reason for the relocation? Three thousand dollars for 
moving expenses. 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what the expenses were for moving, but he was 
appointed to finance administrator in the Sask Forest Corporation. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Well, Mr. Minister, are you aware that in march you paid $3,000 for moving expenses, 
which I have documentation, for Mr. Binkley. Yet in May, two months later, his monthly payments of 
$5,040 were still going to his address in Tisdale. Why was this man given 3 to $3,000 when it appears that he 
hadn’t even moved? He was still in Tisdale. 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — I couldn’t tell you, Mr. Speaker. I know he works five days a week in  



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3452 
 

Prince Albert and he does have a home in Prince Albert. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, new question to the minister in charge of Sask Forest Products, 
and it has to do with the fact that the corporation that you are supposed to be running, lost $4.5 million. One 
would assume that they would be very careful with their expenditures, but I have here some documents that 
would indicate that in May of this year Sask Forest products paid out $1,400 in air fares from Regina to 
Vancouver, plus $1,800 in expenses for a week-end trip for three management personnel and their wives. 
 
One of the documents which I have here, says that this was approved by the board of directors of the 
corporation. And in the documents that we have here there is hotel rooms at the Sheraton-Plaza in 
Vancouver. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could explain these trips, these little holidays, that members of 
your management are taking to Vancouver at taxpayers’ expense. 
 
Can you say whether or not you approve of them and why you’re spending the taxpayers’ money for these 
kinds of trips at taxpayers’ expense? 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, he’s making a lot of assumptions. The management team went 
out to look at some plywood factories, operations on the west coast. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they went out there to look at some operations of the plywood factories out there that was set 
up for them to meet with management. They were gone more than just the weekend. And I don’t know if 
their wives went along or not; I couldn’t tell you. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — This is like the Minister of Highways when he talked about his trip to Maui, 
Mr. Speaker, but . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. If the member has questions, I’d ask him to stay on the subject of the 
questions. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — I certainly do have a question, and it has to do with the documents that were 
filed by these individuals. I would like to quote from them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The one that refers to the trip of Mr. Glen Colvin says that: this trip has been approved by the board of 
directors and includes the fare for my spouse, or the spouse of each of the above. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I wonder why, if this trip was taken to look at business of the corporation, it was taken 
on the weekend, refers to taking the spouse of the individuals along. And another document refers to . . . and 
it, on their expenses account they say: to Vancouver re complimentary trip and return May 22nd, ’85. This 
includes the expenses of spouse. 
 
Now can you stand in this Assembly and explain that this was a business trip when it was taken on the 
weekend, and the individuals say that it was a complimentary trip? Can you stand and explain why it was 
taken and whether or not you think the individuals should pay for it rather than the taxpayers? 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll take notice of the question, although I will . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I’ll take notice of the question, Mr. Speaker, and bring it back to the Assembly — the 
particulars that he’s talking about. I do not know in general, I can say in general why that was given or why 
they went out there. They went out there for two reasons. One, they went out there to look at the plants into 
operation. 
 
The second one, Mr. Speaker — the second reason, Mr. Speaker, is that for over a month, almost a month 
and a half at the plant at Hudson Bay, we had no manager, and we put together a management team of five 
people, a management team of five people, a management team who run the plant entirely for six weeks or 
seven weeks while we found a manager to put into there. And in lieu of giving them any  



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3453 
 

benefits above and beyond, you know, extra wages for doing it, they were given an opportunity to go out and 
look at the mill, and if they took their wives along, I’m not aware of it. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Minister, the individuals who are claiming this expense are more honest 
than you are, and they refer to it as a complimentary trip — not a business trip, but a complimentary trip. 
What I would like to know from you, Mr. Minister, is whether you were at the board meeting where this trip 
for these individuals was approved? Were you at the meeting and did you vote on whether or not these 
expenses should be approved? Now I don’t think you have to take notice of that; you should remember. And 
I would like to know whether you approved these holidays to Vancouver. 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Mr. Speaker, I was at a board meeting when we approved a trip for these five 
management team. If they wanted to go out and look at some mills on the West coast, and in lieu of it they 
were going to incorporate the weekend so there would be some benefits accrued for them — in lieu of any 
additional wages that they would have had coming to them. 
 
They spent many days there, Mr. Speaker. They worked seven days a week there, the entire management 
team, as well as doing their own jobs. so if there was any additional expenditures, it was well warranted. But 
I will take notice and bring back to the member all the particulars. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — A final supplementary to the minister. I wonder if he could inform the 
Assembly how much these hard-earned people are earning, that they needed an extra trip, a holiday, at 
taxpayers’ expense. 
 
It seems to me that in going through the salaries of political executive assistants, we find out the massive 
increases they are getting, and now we find another means by which you are forgoing and going around the 
limits that you’re setting on other civil servants, teachers, and nurses, where you’re paying for luxury trips 
for individuals to Vancouver. 
 
And can you tell me what the salaries of these individuals are, that that isn’t enough and that you have to 
give them paid holidays to complement and supplement their income? 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll take notice of how much the wages are, but let’s set it straight 
who these people are. These were five foremen off the floor that run the plant — five foremen. They weren’t 
top management people. Five foremen. 
 
I don’t know what they would have made. Very little above hourly wage, at the hourly wage an earner would 
be making there. In fact, if I’m not mistaken, it would be awful close to identically the same. 
 
There were five foremen from the floor that run the plant. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. I’d like quiet on both sides of the House, and the member that’s hollering 
from the back row is usually the that’s hollering first. 
 

Disposal of Contaminated Wastes 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Minister of the 
Environment, and it deals with the burning of PCB-contaminated oil on electrical transformers near uranium 
City on May 12th and 13th. 
 
Mr. Minister, it has been a little over a month since that incident. Can the minister advise the Assembly how 
this unauthorized open-air burning of these toxic materials took place, what legal action your government has 
taken, and if none has been taken, what legal action you contemplate? 



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3454 
 

HON. MR. HARDY: — Mr. Speaker, in regards to the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I won’t take 
notice. I have some information here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in regard to the information that was, or is being supplied to us by Eldorado Nuclear, or 
Eldorado Corporation, we don’t have all the particulars yet with us. My understanding is that there was 
approximately 30 transformers burnt within, up there. 
 
There was approximately 7,500 gallons of mineral oil containing less than 5 parts per million of PCBs. There 
was . . . the transformers, I did understand, did have in some cases anywheres from 80 parts to 180 parts PCB 
contamination. But the total estimated amount of oil that was in those transformers was approximately 2 
litres, which would be approximately 1 gram of PCBs, you know, to put it in its own context, that was 
destroyed within the, when they burnt them. 
 
We don’t have the final report back yet, from Eldorado. My department has it; they’re evaluating it. They got 
it a few days ago, and some time this week I should be able to bring it into the Assembly here. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. As the minister will know, when PCBs are 
burned under certain circumstances, they can be deadly dangerous and can contribute to birth defects, cancer, 
many, many other medical problems. 
 
This was a dangerous incident for the people living in the Uranium City area, and when, Mr. Minister, are 
you going to explain to the people in the Uranium City area just what happened, how it happened, and 
whether or not you are going to take steps to see that it doesn’t happen again? 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we never want it to happen again, any place, first of all. Second 
of all, in regards to Uranium City, up there, I mean, it’s all cleaned up. There’s nothing left up there. It’s all 
been burned off, so it won’t happen again in uranium City, and we’ll do the best we can to see it doesn’t 
happen any place else. 
 
I suppose the main thing to take notice of is that the oil that we did allow them to burn was less than 5 parts 
per million. We did do a check of the soil sampling of the ground afterwards, and there was less than one 
part per million in the soil samples afterwards. 
 
And the regulations under the hazardous goods act will certainly be in place. Part of it’s in place now, where, 
as the member well knows, we’ve been drafting regulations in regards to that. And surely there should be by 
the end of this year, have some of that in place, and it would, in fact, control some of this. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister, Your answer suggests that this was an isolated 
incident, and you are going to see that it doesn’t happen again. Can you, Mr. Minister, confirm that this is the 
first time that PCB-contaminated material was burned at the former Verna mine site in Uranium City area? 
Can you confirm that there was another burning back in April — two months ago, as opposed to the one in 
May one month ago — and can you tell us what were the circumstances surrounding that earlier one? I won’t 
call it the first one because there may have been many, but the earlier one in April. 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the information I have here says that there was one in April, 
and another was on May 12 and 13. That was the date the other burning took place. I don’t have any other 
information with me in regards to it. I can get it and bring it back though. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — A short supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Can the minister advise how once this 
unauthorized burning had taken place in April, and the department was alerted of it, the same unauthorized 
burning or an even more serious one took place in May after the department had been fully warned that there 
was a problem there? 



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3455 
 

HON. MR. HARDY: — Mr. Speaker, the one in April was not unauthorized. The one in May was 
unauthorized. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, in that burning of the PCB-contaminated 
transformers, have you at any time referred this question, since it was not authorized? Have you referred it to 
the Minister of Justice for action by his department against the people responsible? 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — No, Mr. Speaker, I have not. Until we have the full report back from Eldor, and the 
department has done a complete evaluation, we wouldn’t refer it to the Minister of Justice. When we have a 
full report back and have had an opportunity to discuss it, you know that’s always an opportunity. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, when do you expect to have that report so 
that you can deal with it? 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Mr. Speaker, I said this week we’d have the report back. 
 

Cost of Out-of-Province Trips 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, my question if to the Premier, and it deals with another of your 
series of boondoggles. On Friday, June 1, 1984, more than a year ago, your government agreed to an order 
for return dealing with the cost of your out-of-province trips at taxpayers’ expense. That request for 
information dealt with trips as far back as March 25, 1983, more than two years ago, which was the last time 
your government provided any information to this Assembly on the cost of your international trips. This has 
nothing to do with your estimates, but is a motion of this Assembly by which the government agreed to 
provide the information. 
 
When, Mr. Premier, is that information going to be forthcoming? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will take notice of the question with respect to the timing of 
the information. And I provide on an annual basis the information on my trips for estimates so that you can 
review where I’ve been and so forth. And my estimate will be coming up again, and I’m sure the hon. 
member will be able to address them at that time. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well that will be a . . . New question; that will be a brand new start, if we can, 
because you haven’t provided the information at any of your past estimates, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, by way of background, your government seems to think it’s fine to flit from one end of the 
globe to the other while farmers have no money for grasshopper sprays . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. If the member has a question, I would ask him to get into it without a 
speech. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I said it was . . . I indicated that it was a new question, and the background is, Mr. 
Speaker, relevant to the question, Mr. Speaker. Your government thinks it is find to deny money to farmers 
and people on welfare, Mr. Premier, while at the same time going on, what is clear to even casual observers, 
paid holidays at taxpayers’ expense. 
 
So I take it, Mr. Premier, by the fact that over . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. The member is making a statement, he is not asking a question. If the 
member has a question will you please get directly to it. 



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3456 
 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Do I take it, Mr. Premier, by the fact that you have failed to answer these 
questions in over a year, that you acknowledge that the trips and the expenditures are improper, and do I take 
it that’s the reason why you haven’t provided us with this information? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — No, not at all, Mr. Speaker. If my colleague wants me to talk about the money 
we’ve spent on agriculture, because he raised it as something that . . . (inaudible) . . . I’ll go through millions 
and millions of dollars. 
 
If you want a preamble and ask questions about what we’re spending in agriculture or on welfare, I’ll be glad 
to go through it. Now he knows we’re spending more on agriculture than any previous government ever 
spent on agriculture, and we’re happy and proud of that fact, and we will continue. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Premier, if you believe that you can justify these trips to the taxpayer, then 
why in over a year have you not provided us with information which wouldn’t take your staff more than 20 
minutes to assemble? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, we will be providing information with respect to where I go, and the 
fact that we’re twinning with the province of China, and I go to China and the Chinese come here. We’ve put 
together trade arrangements. 
 
We do the same in terms of potash sales to South America or the United States. Or, in fact, I’ve just returned 
from Europe in January with respect to talking to investors, people who are investing in uranium and so 
forth. I’ll be going through those expenditures so people can see the benefits — they can see the sales; they 
can see the jobs; they can see the investment. 
 
So of course, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be glad to provide them with the information. Because with people like we 
have in the audience today, obviously we’re very proud of the fact that we have a good international trade 
relationship and one that is much better and looked on much more positively around the world than the 
previous administration, because all they did was nationalize companies. They would take over this company 
and take over that company. We don’t do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Premier, since you avoided it, I want to re-ask the question. By way of 
background, Mr. Premier, let me remind you that your estimates have been before this House twice, and the 
order for return was passed a year ago, and you have refused to provide us with information about your trips. 
You refused last year. 
 
My question, Mr. Premier, was: why haven’t you provided this information in over a year? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, the information will be provided, and we may even get to my 
estimates today so that the hon. member can ask questions with respect to what we did in China; why we 
decided to invite the Chinese over here; and the twinning of the two provinces, the Jilin province and the 
province of Saskatchewan; the cattle sales that we’ve initiated; the technical exchanges, and all the rest of it. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Supplementary. Mr. Premier, do I take it you’re so busy going to china and other 
far corners of the globe that you haven’t got time to answer these questions? Is that why you haven’t 
answered them? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member talks about the fact that I go to China, or I might be 
in Europe, as if he never travelled, or the former premier of the province never went to Russia or never went 
any place else. I mean, and they don’t even like to hear the fact that as ministers they travel. Well I’ve got 
documents this deep that I can talk about the travel of the 11  



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3457 
 

years of the NDP, and it was all over the place. And the results were, the province got into more and more 
trouble and the reputation was absolutely awful because it was: nationalize this, nationalize that, turn this 
down, the kids can leave — all those problems. 
 

Re-seeding Winter Wheat 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for the Minister of Agriculture and it has to do 
with re-seeding orders for winter wheat. Farmers are facing me with the situation where the conditions are 
fairly dry. The winter kill was such that there’s less plants per acre than what the crop insurance would deem 
would make a crop. And they claim that if they don’t re-seed within the next few days, they won’t get crop 
insurance on their winter wheat. 
 
Have you some information to farmers in the fairly severe dry area about re-seeding and loosening up their 
land . . . (inaudible) . . . erosion. We didn’t get this moisture down there. And to prevent erosion, would you 
recommend that that re-seeding order be carried out, or can the farmer make that decision himself? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Speaker, hon. member, I’ll take notice of that question on behalf of the 
Minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 81 — An Act to amend The Workers’ Compensation Act, 1979 
 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister please introduce his officials. 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to introduce my staff; Don Rowlatt, deputy 
minister of labour; to his right, Dick Moody, the acting chairman of the workers’ compensation board; 
directly behind me, Phil Leduc and Bob McWhillie, members of the board; and John McLean, executive 
director of adjudication. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — John who? 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — John Mclean. 
 
Clause 1 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. Minister, I see on my desk, House 
amendments. While I have not had a chance to peruse them very closely, they appear to deal, in part at least, 
with the problem which I mentioned in the second reading, in which I gather you have now thought better of. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you about another matter that I raised I second reading. That was a proposal of 
Mr. Justice Muir to index the maximum wage. I don’t have my notes with me, but I’m going from memory. 
You undertook not to do that but, rather, to raise the minimum wage and set another limit on it — I think a 
$51,000, if I recall it correctly. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if I might ask you why you chose not to accept the recommendation to index the 
wage, but instead to set an arbitrary figure on it, a figure that is going to have to be — unless you intend this 
government intends perpetually to do a number o the injured workman — it’s going to have to be raised 
periodically by the legislative Assembly. I wonder what was the problem with Judge Muir’s 
recommendation? I thought it eminently sensible. 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as the member knows, we’ve spent a number of  



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3458 
 

months going over the committee of review’s report. We’re pleased that in this particular Bill that we are 
addressing, about 30 items or recommendations of the committee out of 33 — two of them did not go all the 
way that the committee requested. We have made the change of going from 775 per cent of gross to 90 per 
cent of net, and the change of the indexing is reflected in that area. 
 
We have raised the cap to 48,000 a year, which is the highest in Canada. And as I said, there’s been months 
of consultations, and we’re pleased to say that both the labour side, and with some reluctance on the 
management side, that the changes were made. But generally speaking we have consensus throughout the 
province on the moves that we made and have covered a goodly number of the recommendations made by 
the committee of review. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I’ll grant to you it took months to bring the amendments forward, Mr. 
Minister. I’m painfully aware of that, and so injured workmen who waited far longer than they should have 
for these amendments. 
 
Mr. Minister, just a word with respect to your consultation process. It took many months, but that had little to 
do with consultation, unless you spend all your time talking to selected employers. Both the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour and the injured workers’ association, when I met with them, complained about the lack 
of consultation and the fact that they have never seen these particular amendments, which are the subject of 
the House amendments, before they were introduced. I take it, Mr. Minister, since you retreat in terror when 
the criticisms were made of the amendments, that you admit you didn’t discuss it with anyone. 
 
My question though, Mr. Minister, is not who you consulted with or why you took three years when you 
should have had them through in the first session, but rather, what, specifically, was wrong with Judge 
Muir’s suggestion. I thought it sensible, and it would mean that the Act wouldn’t have to come back to the 
Assembly periodically, but they would get cost of living increases which I think we all agree they should 
have. 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — Mr. Chairman, hon. Member, we have to look at the Bill as a total package. I 
don’t think the committee of review would have expected that maybe we would have gone as far as we have 
done in looking after 30 of their 33 recommendations. 
 
And speaking about consultation, the board members have been in touch with both sides. In fact, The SFL 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, and I did at the last meeting with the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour 
where we asked them to help draft some of the concerns that they had with two or three of the clauses. We 
had a very amiable meeting and it was worked out in conjunction with the two groups. They are happy with 
the Bill the way it is right now. 
 
There’s another review committee will be getting put in place coming this fall, and I’m sure there will be 
other items required to be looked at. But generally speaking, it’s a complete package that both the labour 
movement and basically, the management groups are happy with. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, one of the basic concerns, and I’m wondering 
whether you have received any concerns, and that is really the basic fairness of the workers’ compensation 
board in actually dealing with people who are dealing with the workers’ compensation. 
 
I was wondering, have you had any representation of difficulties that people who are receiving benefits from 
workers’ compensation, and did you have any discussion with at least the workers, the injured workers, in 
order to determine whether or not you should, in fact, be included within the Bill amendments which would 
improve the protection of the workers in dealing with the workers’ compensation? 



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3459 
 

(1445) 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we’ve gone a long way in addressing the concern 
raised by the member opposite just in the fact that we are going to be opening or allowing the files to be 
opened up for the inspections. 
 
We have increased a number of the awards or amounts that are to be paid, especially for the injured workers, 
from $1,000 to $3,000 and so on, and the appeal process, the advocates, we’ve added extra staff from there. 
And I would suggest that the Ombudsman has given us three and a half stars as far as the workers’ 
compensation board is concerned. We are aware of some of the back log that has developed, but we are 
addressing that by . . . have put extra people onto and looked after improving that situation. 
 
So basically we’ve had representations from some groups, some individuals, but that’s on an ongoing basis. 
And we have felt that we have addressed it and are improving the work that is being done at the board level 
and the appeal and the advocates. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — There is a considerable concern because I’ve had representation from a number of 
people, and they have tried on the basis of . . . within the Act, the purview of the Act. And I just want to 
indicate my particular case and the problems that this individual has had in respect to getting recourse. 
 
An individual, seriously injured, no doubt about it, medical support, and then during winter the individual 
injured that had planned a trip with his wife — injured people do goon trips too — and what the 
compensation board two days beforehand indicated that he had to come in for treatment, for rehabilitation. 
 
And even though he had a medical report from his doctor indicating that it would be good psychologically 
for him to proceed with the holiday, you know what the workers’ compensation board did in respect to this 
individual? They cancelled out his coverage during the period of time that he was away on that holiday. 
 
And then this spring the same individual ran into another problem. He was down here in Regina for 
rehabilitation. And right in the midst of seeding when they called him in, and he asked for permission to go 
back to supervise. He has a son doing the farming. And they said, well if you go back even to supervise your 
farm, you’re cut off, and they’ve cut him off again. 
 
And this is the type of problems that have been raised with me. And he has sought out . . . I have contacted 
the board in respect to it. And I think it’s totally unreasonable when this is a responsible individual and this is 
the type of conduct that is going on with the board. And I just ask you seriously look at the . . . whether there 
is fairness in dealing with injured workers. 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m certainly not personally aware of the particular case 
and I don’t think I can . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, how would I if I wasn’t’ advised? All I can say is 
that we get letters and that from various people on their concerns, and I would suggest that the member 
opposite send me the name of that particular case. We have the advocates, we have the medical review panel, 
and we can steer the person through that course to look at his situation. 
 
I’m not aware of the case, and my board members can’t recall it just at the moment. But send the name 
across, and we’ll have a look at it. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I just want to make one comment, Mr. Minister, and no matter how tempted I am 
by your response, I’m going to leave it at one comment. 
 
Mr. Minister, you say you have a backlog of claims. You’re quite right; you do. That occurs, in  



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3460 
 

part, because you have ceased enforcing the occupational health and safety legislation, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, the administration of the workers’ compensation ought to be an embarrassment to you. 
 
This is like an old movie. I remember when Ross Thatcher was in office. The largest single problem which 
many members, including the one for whom I work, the member from Riversdale, the largest single source of 
complaints was injured workmen, Mr. Minister. And then when we were in office for a couple of years, it 
died away. As I say, this is an old train going past us, the same thing happening again. 
 
For some reason or other, old-line parties seem to think it’s smart politics to take it out on those who have 
been injured at the workplace. Mr. Minister, there is no question that the volume of complaints that elected 
members are receiving from injured workmen has grown dramatically in the last couple of years. 
 
I think you’re right. I think part of the reason is that there are more claims. And I think that’s because you’re 
not administering other areas of your department that are supposed to protect workmen on the job. 
 
I also believe however, Mr. Minister, that those claims are not being properly adjusted, and that’s why 
there’s so many complaints — the complaints which I and other members of the Assembly who are 
accessible enough to receive them. And I can understand why many members opposite would never have 
been contacted. 
 
But the source of the complaints which I and many other members receive is that (a) you do have a backlog, 
but (b) when the claims are dealt with, they’re dealt with in a harsh manner as described by the member from 
Quill Lakes, which approach downright cruelty. There’s no excuse for it, unless you think it’s smart politics 
to hang injured people up by the toenails, in a figurative way. 
 
So I say, Mr. Minister, that the administration of this fund does you no credit, just as the administration of he 
fund did no credit to the government of the former premier, Ross Thatcher. As I say, I make the comment. 
No matter how tempted I am, I’m going to try to refrain from responding to you, whatever your come-back 
is. 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I have a lot of difficulty accepting what the member 
opposite is saying. We want to do everything that we possibly can under the Act for the injured workers of 
Saskatchewan. And I think the fact that we have come with some 30-odd or 30 recommendations — the 
acceptance of 30 recommendations out of 33 — that the unions, the work force of the province, and the 
management have accepted the fact that we have come with this good legislation, some of the best, if no the 
best o fall of Canada. And we intend to keep following along and improving it wherever we can. And we 
have already got more advocates on staff to look after and speed up the process. 
 
And if you look at the ombudsman’s report, he is even saying there that I most cases it’s cut in half as far as 
the waiting time is concerned. But we opened the files for the workers, which they’ve wanted for years and 
years and years. We’ve got the rehabilitation centre in the planning, which was asked for for years and years 
and years, and you know it. We have good legislation coming here that is going to help the injured workers 
of Saskatchewan, and I won’t take a back seat to any other jurisdiction I the country with it. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Chairman, on that line of questioning, and that is the concern about the rate of 
processing, Mr. Minister, I have another instance that I cold give you — and I contracted the board — of a 
miner who was injured at Lanigan potash mine. And he is looking for benefits. His medical reports went in, 
he tells me. Got his doctor to send it in. He is without income, having to borrow money from his brother, 
waiting for it to be processed. Can’t you understand  



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3461 
 

that if a worker is injured that he may need the regular income? 
 
And I phoned the board and they say, well, we haven’t done our final medical assessment. Well that’s very 
easy, you know, to say that you haven’t completed the medical assessment, but the problem is that many of 
the workers out there do not have any income. They go from month to month on their basic cheques. 
 
And again I can give you that specific example. and he may have, you know, run out of borrowing power by 
now, but I’m going to refer that one to you too, Mr. Minister, so that you have an appreciation of the 
problems that are created within your administration. There are two, just in the last three weeks that I have, 
and I’ve tried to go through the board rather than through you. And that’s where we should be able to go, but 
there’s no response. And so I ask you to, in looking at it and making the amendments, to also look at the 
need for increase in the rate of processing. 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve already stated that we are looking at increasing — and I’m 
talking the advocate side now — if there’s some difficulties at the board level, and I don’t think it’s any 
different now than it was for years and years, they still have to go through the process and get medical 
records before a decision can be made/ 
 
And we have 40,000 claims or 38,000 claims a year to process. And all I ask the member opposite is to send 
me the person’s name, and we will certainly look at it in the context of what the board has to look at, we 
have a large number of claims to look at it, and the Act is in place to look after that, and we’ll get them 
processed as quickly as we can. And I would say it’s no different now than it was under your administration. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 20 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I want to go back to section 15, if I might. Do I take it, Mr. Minister, that the 
board has some reasonable grounds for believing that moneys awarded under the workers’ compensation 
fund will not be taxable in the hands of the recipient. Do I take it . . . is that what I assume from the fact that 
you’re paying them 75 per cent of net as distinct from 90 per cent of gross? 
 
(1500) 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — Yes, that’s correct. It’s non-taxable. 
 
Clause 20 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 21 to 27 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 28 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — There’s a proposed amendment to Section 28 of the printed Bill, by striking out 
Section 28 of the printed Bill and substituting the following: 
 
Section 28, subsection 161.1 and 2 are repealed and the following substituted: 
 

(1) The Department of Labour may employ persons to be known as Workers’ Advocates. 



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3462 
 

Clause 28 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 29 agreed to. 
 
Clause 30 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — There’s a proposed amendment. do all the members of the committee have a copy of 
the proposed amendment? Do you wish the amendment read? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — No. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Will you take the amendment as read? 
 
Clause 30 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 31 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill 106 — An Act for the Protection of the Health of Persons exposed to Radiation  
and for the Safety of Persons in Connection with the Operation and use of  

Radiation Producing Equipment and associated Apparatus 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — I was just waiting for my official to come in. I’d like to introduce him as soon 
as he’s here. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you. I have no questions; other members might. But I have no questions, if 
you want to proceed. As far as I’m concerned, you can proceed, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Clauses 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — There’s an amendment to section 5: 
 

Amend subclause 5(2)(b)(ii) by striking out “that” in the second line, and substituting “than”. 
 
Clause 5 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 6 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 11 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — There’s an amendment to section 11 of the printed Bill: 
 

Amend clause 11(b) of the printed Bill by: 
 
striking out “16(3)(b)” in the second line, and substituting “16(5)(b)”. 

 
Clause 11 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 12 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3463 
 

Clause 16 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — There’s an amendment to section 16 of the printed Bill: 
 

Amend clause 16(2)(a) of the printed bill by: 
 
striking out “carry out an inspection or an accident “investigation” and substituting the following: 
 
carry out (1) an inspection or (2) an accident investigation. 

 
Clause 16 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 17 to 24 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 81 — An Act to amend The Workers’ Compensation Act, 1979 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments be now read the first and second 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, be leave of the Assembly I move that Bill No. 81 be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time. 
 

Bill 106 — An Act for the Protection of the Health of Persons exposed to Radiation  
and for the Safety of Persons in Connection with the Operation and use of  

Radiation Producing Equipment and associated Apparatus 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I move the amendments be now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move that Bill 106 be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Dirks that Bill No. 
113 — An Act respecting Facilities that Provide Certain Residential Services be now read a second time. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of my learned friend, the member 
from Shaunavon, I want to say to the minister and to the members of the treasury benches opposite that my 
colleague has some questions. They are the sort of questions  



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3464 
 

however, which might be better put in committee of the whole. Therefore he’s going to forgo the normal 
speech on second reading and put the questions directly to the minister in committee of the whole, where 
hopefully this government will break with precedent and provide some answers for a change. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Embury that Bill No. 
103 — An Act to repeal Certain Acts respecting the Payment of Grants or Rebates of Property Taxes 
be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 24 
 
Devine Birkbeck McLeod 
Duncan Katzman Pickering 
McLaren Garner Smith (Swift Current) 
Baker Hepworth Schoenhals 
Dirks Martens Maxwell 
Young Domotor Parker 
Smith (Moose Jaw South) Caswell Schmidt 
Zazelenchuk Johnson Swenson 
 
 

NAYS — 6 
 
Blakeney Engel Lingenfelter 
Koskie Lusney Shillington 
 
Bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 10 
 
Item 1 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to introduce officials to the committee 
who will be assisting me today. Mr. Norman Riddell, deputy minister and cabinet secretary; Elizabeth 
Croswaite, clerk of the executive council and assistant cabinet secretary; Brian Liebel, director of 
administration; and Lynn Schellenberg, administrative officer. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the department of Executive Council provides support to me, as president of the Executive 
Council, and to the members of Cabinet. Because of this special relationship, I would like to comment on 
some of the major reforms and accomplishments of the Government of Saskatchewan during the past year, as 
we begin the discussions on the 1985-86 estimates of the department of Executive Council. 



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3465 
 

Let me begin with agriculture. Agriculture is the backbone of the Saskatchewan economy, and the 
government’s responsibility is to pay special attention to the short and to the long run challenges in the 
agricultural community. Our government’s approach has been two-pronged. First, we’ve provided a short 
term safety net for people needing help as a result of drought, flood, grasshoppers, high interest rates, and so 
on. We provided interest relief to farmers through the farm purchase program and the Agricultural Credit 
Corporation, and we have nearly 5,000 new farmers on the program. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Chairman, our natural disasters response: we had $550,000 to move cattle to suitable pastures; 
14.75 million to assist livestock producers, directly, for the first time in the province of Saskatchewan; 7.5 
million for flood relief; and the counselling assistance for the farmers program and The Farm Land Security 
Act. 
 
In the longer term, Mr. Chairman, we’ve initiated a rural gas program that provides $35 million a year; the 
Livestock Investment Tax Credit, $5 million a year; the Feeder Associations loan Guarantee program; and 
introduced a major irrigation development program of 2.1 million. 
 
In this most recent budget, Mr. Chairman, we provided $200 million Agriculture Development fund, a brand 
new fund, which will accomplish even more. And to give you an idea, Mr. Chairman, let me just add up the 
federal government as well. 
 
We look at $35 million a year as the farmer’s share in the gas tax removal we initiated in 1982; $34.6 million 
a year on rural gas distribution to farmers; $29.5 million in drought assistance; $25 million on an 8 per cent 
program for farm purchases for young farmers, particularly; 4 million on the ACC (Agricultural Credit 
Corporation) loan rate; 7.5 million on the north-east flood assistance; 5 million on the Livestock Investment 
Tax Credit; 1.3 million on tax removed on power bills in terms of the home owners; irrigation development 
grants, 2.1 million; and, Mr. Speaker, when you add these all up, including the homestead rebate and the 
quarter tax assistance program in 1984, there’s something like $161 million in agriculture in the province of 
Saskatchewan — approximately $2,400 per farmer, looking at something like 66,000 farmers. 
 
Now if we add to that, Mr. Chairman, the reduction of the FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) loan rate that we 
bargained hard to get, that’s worth $5 million to the Saskatchewan farmer. A fuel tax rebate which we 
encouraged the federal government to do in 1984 is $40 million. The capital gains tax removed from farm 
land in the province of Saskatchewan which people have been lobbying for some time is $50 million a year 
— every year — to the province of Saskatchewan in agriculture; $29 million on reduction I freight rates and 
putting — removing the cap on the statutory rate; another $29.5 million on prairie drought assistance. You 
add that up, Mr. Chairman, and in the province of Saskatchewan in our term, as well as including the last few 
months of the federal government, we’re looking at another $161 million annually from the federal 
government. 
 
That in total is over $300 million annually going into agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan, or over 
$5,000 per farm, on average — $5,000 per farm. 
 
Now if we add a few more, Mr. Chairman — I just wanted to make this point because agriculture is 
extremely important in our province. We look at 161.3 million provincial; 161 federal; we look at the 
stabilization and insurance programs — 636 million; we have 958 million. On a provincial basis we’re 
looking at $2,400, and federal basis, $2,439. The stabilization is $9,600 per farmer, including insurance. 
That’s $14,519 per farmer in the province of Saskatchewan as a result of provincial and federal programs 
we’ve initiated in the last few months, and over the last 18 months in terms of our administration. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I point that out because agriculture is extremely important, and we have taken some very 
direct short-run and long-run measures with respect to agriculture. 



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3466 
 

The second point I want to comment on is economic development and, particularly, job creation and 
employment. It’s not government that creates jobs, but it’s government that provides the environment where 
business can create economic activity and jobs for the people throughout the economy. 
 
Our job record in the province of Saskatchewan is the best in Canada. We are the only province to grow in 
the prairie provinces in 1984. We’ve had the lowest unemployment in the year of 1982, 1983, and 1984. And 
we’re proud to say that the cities of Regina and Saskatoon have led all western Canadian cities in new job 
creation in the same period, from 1982 right through to 1984. And I’m confident, Mr. Chairman, that they 
will lead the country in new job creation, and certainly western Canada, in 1985. 
 
And we have new business opening across the province and new companies coming into cities of Regina, 
Saskatoon, Estevan, Weyburn, Kindersley, Prince Albert, and so forth. 
 
Secondly, the government’s oil industry program created 3,800 brand-new jobs, which is something that 
does not even include, Mr. Chairman, the spin-offs brought in nearly $1 billion in new investment, increased 
government oil revenues by $300 million; and oil is now the largest single source of revenue in the province 
of Saskatchewan. It’s ahead of income tax, sales tax, and all other forms of revenue. 
 
And the excitement that goes with it is encouraging more and more investment in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and obviously we’re looking at new things, like upgraders, that are very exciting — 25-year 
projects, looking at 3 to $4 billion on one; at least half a billion dollars on another one here in the city of 
Regina. 
 
Three, we’ve had a positive response to the venture capital program also, in providing a shot in the arm for 
the Saskatchewan economy, and particularly, Mr. Chairman, in the rural areas. For example, many venture 
capital corporations have already been formed. 
 
Four, the Community Economic Development Program has also been well received by our smaller 
communities. 
 
Five, business resource centres. Now, in Saskatchewan, we have one-stop information centres for business 
and industry. And we’re also receiving more and more inquiries and are helping communities and people 
throughout Saskatchewan to invest. 
 
Six, Saskatchewan is in a period of growth in departments such as Energy and Mines, Economic 
Development and trade, Tourism and Small Business, Science and Technology. See that growth reflected in 
the positive response to their policies and programs. People asked for them, and they were delivered. 
 
When we look at employment policy, Mr. Chairman, the top priority is job creation and job security. 
Programs such as small business employment program, the Industrial Incentive Program — all have been 
extremely successful in facilitating employment in the private sector. 
 
Also, we intend to do more. For 1985-86, we have allocated $9 million for the nine and five-eighths program 
for small business across the province of Saskatchewan — it’s an interest rate reduction program; and $12 
million for other economic development programs; and $58 million for capital projects; $16 million for 
youth job creation program; $20 million for initiatives to assist social welfare recipients. 
 
And in our recent budget, Mr. Chairman, a total of $600 million over the next five years to a brand-new 
Employment Development Fund, which we believe will be responsible for Saskatchewan not only having the 
best job creation record, and the best employment record  



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3467 
 

over the last three years, but obviously into the years to come. 
 
(1530) 
 
The third area that is very important, Mr. Chairman, is education. This government will continue to link skill 
training to the marker-place, which is the key to long-run employment. Our labour force now in the province 
of Saskatchewan, as a result of our very rapid population growth, is over 500,000 people and is growing. 
Saskatchewan was the prairie province that grew in 1984 and created thousands of new jobs, and I believe in 
the last months our record was 19,000 jobs, compared to the province of Manitoba, something like a 
thousand. 
 
Seventy-five million dollars more in funding to our technical institutes, while we’ve increased seating 
capacity by almost 60 per cent — as an illustration, as a symbol of the kind of support we have for education 
and the educational institutions — 150 million more for funding of university operations. Now we believe 
this is extremely important. Many governments across Canada, and indeed the United States, are cutting back 
on educational facilities. We’ve taken the opposite point of view. We’ve decided to invest in our future, 
particularly for young people. 
 
Eight million dollars in funding . . . increased funding for community colleges. One million more for funding 
for vocational centres. Twenty million more in terms of aid to students while approving more than 5,400 
applicants. And the future prosperity of this province is in large part dependent on the quality of education, 
and we recognize that. 
 
We intend even to do more, Mr. Chairman, through a $400 million brand-new Education Development Fund, 
and that is a commitment to education in the future. 
 
So we’ve committed to agriculture, to job creation, and to training. 
 
A fourth area, Mr. Chairman, is health. I am committed to ensuring that the people of Saskatchewan will 
continue to have high quality health care in this province. We do not merely talk a good line; we have 
produced, and the record speaks for itself. 
 
We have improved cancer treatment services in the province, improved ambulance services, improved 
medical services, millions more spent on hospitals construction in both rural and urban areas of our province, 
and millions more spent on nursing home construction. In fact, the buildings construction program across 
Saskatchewan is exciting and, as you go from town to town and village to village and city to city, you can 
see the excitement. 
 
We intend to do more. In fact, we’ve established a $300 million Health Capital Fund, a brand-new fund, to 
make sure that people across this country, as well as in Saskatchewan, know that we have a major priority in 
health. 
 
We asked people what their priorities were, Mr. Chairman, and they said agriculture, they said jobs, they said 
health, and they said education. And we, Mr. Chairman, have decided, and we have put forward a five-year 
program in terms of expenditures that I believe will be among the very, very best in Canada, and will 
certainly rank. 
 
And as I look at the record over the last three years, and particularly the last year, Mr. Chairman, and as a 
result of the reforms that we’ve initiated, we look at record population growth; we look at a record in job 
creation; we look at the lowest unemployment record; a record in health expenditures and a record budget in 
that regard; record oil production; drilling reserves, and revenues; record number of towns and villages 
receiving natural gas; record new technical school capacity — and I just returned yesterday from Prince 
Albert where we made another announcement with respect to the capacity and the new ideas that are being 
produced in that brand-new facility; record increases in the number of regulations in government. And we 
look at the  



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3468 
 

number of young people in the province of Saskatchewan who now can get access to farm lands for 8 per 
cent money, and we have almost 5,000 new farmers on this program, and they asked for years, and years, and 
years to receive rate protection, and it’s now being delivered, and they’re very happy. 
 
A record number of tourists coming into the province. A record public investment. This morning, I 
announced, for example, we have the series two, power bonds, for sale; and we sold, I believe, 50 to $60 
million in series one. The public of Saskatchewan enjoys that participation. We’ve never had such 
participation in crown corporations in our province. The oil bond issue was very, very successful. The Sask 
Power bonds are very successful. Our credit rating is first class. Other provinces around us see a decline in 
their credit ratings, like Manitoba, and so forth, but ours is very good. 
 
A record number of people coming into the province, and working, and staying, and the forecast for 
Saskatchewan are excellent. It is a good province, some good people, and good resources, and when we look 
at the kinds of things people ask for . . . Yes. Mr. Chairman, they ask for interest rate protection at thirteen 
and a quarter; they got it. They asked for eight percent for farmers, and it was delivered. They wanted sales 
tax removed on gasoline, and it was. They wanted rural gas system, and it was. They wanted nine and 
five-eighths for small business, and it was delivered. They wanted a brand-new health care system that would 
have extensive funding for nursing home, and hospitals, and so forth, and it’s being delivered, and the same 
applies to university. 
 
So when I look at those, Mr. Chairman, I remind my colleagues in the legislature that the things that the 
people of Saskatchewan asked for, the things that are important — agriculture, jobs, health, education, small 
business — they have been delivered in good fashion, I would say, Mr. Chairman, with respect to the last 
year and in the last three years. 
 
Let me turn for a moment to the whole question of management philosophy under this administration, and 
particularly in Executive Council. I believe that the major accomplishments and new initiatives that I have 
just talked about are not only the result of the government’s common sense approach to policy issues, but 
they also do impart to the administrative and managerial reforms that the government, and this government, 
has introduced since taking office. 
 
We’ve seen a period of reform, a time to listen to people. We’ve seen a time of excitement in resource 
development, a time to exploit new technologies, a time to build on our strengths. Three particularly positive 
strengths, powerful strengths: one is good people, two is a rich resource base; and three is access to very, 
very good technology. 
 
In this regard, before discussing the division of administrative responsibilities and some of the major 
accomplishments that have occurred in Executive Council for the past year, I’d like to take just a moment to 
outline to the members present the approach we use, and the approach which reflects this new management 
philosophy that I have instituted, not only in Executive Council, but in the government as a whole. 
 
Upon taking office we found that the management philosophy which had been utilized by the previous 
administration did not conform to the needs and aspirations or, for that matter, to the values of the people of 
Saskatchewan. Quite frankly, they didn’t listen closely enough and, as a result, they were not all that 
successful. Because, one, they were out of touch and they offered no solutions, in my view and the people’s 
view, in 1982, and really the solutions offered today are really not much better. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we had to learn from their mistakes, and obviously there were mistakes. We found a highly 
centralized and closed administration, lacking both accountability on one hand, and responsiveness on the 
other. We found that line department managers were no longer  



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3469 
 

responsible for the programs they were mandated to deliver. We found the decisions regarding program 
delivery were being made by central agencies that lacked the expertise in the particular program areas. And 
we found that individual managers had no mechanism for which they could improve their programs, and thus 
their productivity. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, to rectify this situation we reformed the system and instituted a management committee 
of treasury board, consisting of both elected government members and deputy ministers, to provide a forum 
for managers to present detailed reviews of their programs. We found, Mr. Chairman, that managers had not 
been given the tools to do the job. 
 
For example, we found that government was still using a manual budgeting system and other outdated 
information systems. We reformed that as well, Mr. Chairman. 
 
When and where necessary, we have introduced the most up-to-date information systems to enable managers 
to improve the efficiency and the effectiveness of departmental programs. When we came to office we found 
out there was both low morale and a lack of productivity in the public service. Needless to say, this is having 
a significant impact on the program effectiveness and efficiency. We reformed the old management approach 
and considered the individual as the key link to the system. And I believe that’s extremely important, not 
only in dealing outside of government, but particularly inside of government, to recognize the individual as 
the important link. 
 
We instituted across-the-board productivity improvement program to address this particular issue. The basic 
principle behind this initiative is to encourage managers on the front line to take responsibility for their 
programs by allowing them to take the lead, their lead, in making innovative changes in the area of 
responsibility. 
 
We found central agencies from the previous administration had a great deal of responsibility, but on the 
other hand, no authority or mandate to co-ordinate government-wide programs and policies. And we found 
line departments with no clear focus or mandate at all. 
 
How could there be, really, when you’re looking at — they weren’t directly involved in the decision-making, 
and I go back to my earlier comment. The strength of the organization and the strength of government is to 
go back to the individual responsible, and that individual is key in providing new ideas and carrying out the 
responsibility. And under my direction, as much responsibility as possible goes back to those individuals 
who are working in the area. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — To address this particular problem, we realigned and rebuilt certain functions 
between existing departments and mandated agencies such as the Women’s Secretariat, the Employment 
Development Agency, and the Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat, to ensure greater co-ordination and 
consultation across government for these particular areas. 
 
Regulatory reform is another example. In the area of regulatory reform we have abolished more than 1,000 
out-dated or frustrating laws and regulations that hindered people in the community, whether business men 
or individuals, and more are being abrogated as the weeks go by. These changes have greatly improved our 
overall service and accountability to the public. 
 
And we’ve initiated budget reform. Upon coming to office we found that the previous administration had no 
mechanism in place by which they could receive the views of the public on such important matters of budget. 
We believed that it was imperative to develop such mechanisms in order to ensure that the people of 
Saskatchewan were involved in all aspects of government decision-making.  
 
Accordingly we initiated, for example, a budget consultation process that is, in my view,  



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3470 
 

unmatched across the country, where people and groups of people throughout the communities, rural and 
urban, can provide input into the entire budgeting process. 
 
But this was just a first step. With the introduction of the Partnership for Progress, we have now, in 
consultation with the people of Saskatchewan, taken a further step by developing a more sophisticated and 
long-term approach to public sector budget-making. 
 
I know, Mr. Chairman, on occasion that during the past three years we have been accused by the opposition 
of instituting a system of patronage in government. May I remind the members of this House that when we 
took office we found 650 orders in council, 650 order-in-council appointments — more order-in-council 
appointments than in the entire Government of Canada at any one particular time. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we are in the process of instituting a management classification review system in order to 
eliminate such blatant patronage. In addition, I have established two brand-new advisory committees to aid 
the Premier. A cross-section of people are now providing advice to the Premier; the senior Saskatchewan 
economic development advisory committee; people from all walks of life; and they come into the committee, 
and they go out of the committee; and a youth advisory committee do the same. 
 
In summary, Mr. Chairman, we have developed a self-confident style of management that encourages and 
rewards good service to the public, and that allows for and rewards innovation by government employees. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, it’s working. We have over the past three years endeavoured to create a more open, 
democratic government, a government that listens, informs, and consults, but does not dictate. The 
government does not come first in this administration. The people do, Mr. Chairman. 
 
We have led the country in reform — welfare, budget, Crowns, royalty, administration, health care, energy, 
education, and regulations, to name a few. In this regard I believe that we have renewed the public’s faith in 
government by endeavouring at all times to adhere to a philosophy of government that allows for the public 
to participate in government decision-making. People are part of the process under my administration. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the management principles that I have initiated across government have also been applied by 
me in my own department with the assistance of my senior administrator, the deputy minister and the cabinet 
secretary. The results have been impressive and have significantly contributed to the accomplishments of my 
ministry. Let me comment on some specific sections of Executive Council. 
 
First is public affairs. I’d like to spend a few minutes now discussing in details the ways in which public 
affairs section of Executive Council, under the direction of the director of public affairs, Don Rennie, assist 
this government and me in communicating with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
In fulfilling its mandate, public affairs does the following: 
 
1. It distributes news releases to the media throughout the province, providing information to the people of 
Saskatchewan on policies of government, new programs or services, and where to get information. 
 
2. It provides clips from news conferences and ministers’ statements to television stations throughout the 
province through its video news service. 
 
3. Public affairs also co-ordinates the purchasing and placement of paid advertising on behalf of government 
departments and Crown corporations. 



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3471 
 

Mr. Chairman, governments have a responsibility to share information with the public served, and 
advertising is the only way to guarantee that a message gets out when it is important that it does get out. How 
do I apply for this program? How do I get that program? Many, many programs are important — for example 
the Employment Development Agency. Many young people are asking: how can I participate in this program 
and that one? 
 
(1545) 
 
The highly successful promotion encouraging public participation, for example in Saskatchewan power 
bonds, Saskatchewan oil bonds, are two examples of campaigns that exceeded all expectations. When? At 
what rate? When’s the next one coming up? How much money can I have? When can I redeem them? How 
often? And so forth. That require information that comes from my office and obviously through the 
government. 
 
On the program side, I don’t think people throughout Saskatchewan would criticize us for ensuring our 
seniors, for example, are aware of the existence of, and services provided by, the senior citizens’ bureau. I 
believe everybody would like to have as much information on that as possible. 
 
And who would not want us to promote fire safety, given the enormous importance of our forests? 
 
Who would say that the school bus safety advertising campaign was unimportant or that our investment 
promotion program was money wasted? I believe not very many, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Who would condemn us for the impaired driving program, when we all know the need to reduce deaths and 
injuries as a result of drinking and driving? 
 
One of my personal responsibilities is to elicit the opinions of the people of this province on a wide range of 
issues, and ideas and various suggestions so that I can communicate with them, and they can provide various 
concepts to the government. 
 
The best way that I find, Mr. Chairman, is to get out of the office, out of the legislature, and meet the people 
face to face in the province of Saskatchewan; to speak with them about their priorities; to talk to them about 
their goals, and about our government; and to learn from them, firsthand, their concerns and their views on 
how we can build on our strengths together. 
 
I deliver, I would venture to say, over a hundred speeches in any given year. The public affairs staff are kept 
busy preparing notes for me as I attempt to go to many places, and also collecting the information as people 
come and talk to me, and we put them together so that I can be prepared to respond to them as well as be 
prepared to make presentations. 
 
In the past 12 months I’ve made many presentations to audiences, both large and small, at home and abroad, 
describing what this government has attempted to do locally, nationally, and internationally since assuming 
its responsibility and its enormous mandate in 1982. 
 
I also recognize the importance of working closely with the media to discuss with them the programs and 
policies of this government because the media, in many, many cases, can help us promote and advertise the 
kinds of programs we think are helpful to people across the province. 
 
It is for this reason that I have recently appointed a senior adviser in Executive Council — to ensure that the 
media are given every opportunity to discuss with me issues of the day. And I don’t believe, Mr. Chairman, 
that I have ever turned down an interview with the media. I may have, at one particular time, for a short 
period of time, but certainly in the course of a day or two or three days I have ready access to the members of 
the media. 



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3472 
 

Finally, while I cannot always meet people who wish to communicate with me, I encourage them to write me 
and write and give me their ideas, their aspirations, and their concerns. And they do. And the public affairs 
division of Executive Council routinely, in any 12-month period, receives up to 10,000 letters requiring my 
attention. 
 
These are letters from citizens all over, from all sectors of Saskatchewan, from all corners of the province — 
some with concerns; others with ideas; some with proposals; and still others with requests for information. 
And we provide a great deal of information. 
 
Public affairs also assists in learning more about how the people of this province feel about issues, what they 
would suggest we consider in building an even stronger Saskatchewan. For example, following the highly 
successful first ministers’ conference on the economy, held in Regina, I wrote to more than 1,400 community 
leaders in all walks of life asking for their suggestions about the province and about the country and what 
should be done. I invited them to provide me with their opinions and suggestions for improving the quality of 
life and the scope of opportunity for people in our economic times. 
 
I am delighted to report, Mr. Chairman, that replies are coming in regularly, and each is being carefully 
considered and studied. I examine and review these letters in detail. 
 
In summary, the public affairs section has an important role to play by ensuring that the public is informed of 
policies, programs, and services that are put in place to the benefit of our people, and by assisting me in my 
endeavours to hear what people, citizens, men, women, and children from across this province are saying or 
thinking about in terms of new ideas, new programs, businesses, and so forth, so that I can have the 
information to make sure that we can do a first-class job. 
 
The second division that I’d like to comment on, Mr. Chairman, is that of intergovernmental affairs. 
Intergovernmental affairs is under the direction of the associate deputy minister of intergovernmental affairs. 
One of the major responsibilities of this department is the improvement of Saskatchewan’s visibility on the 
international scene. 
 
And because it is important, I have it under my responsibility. In this regard, it is one of the major vehicles 
through which I attempt to open Saskatchewan to the rest of the world. And for too long Saskatchewan was 
the best-kept secret in North America. People knew, that grew up in here and grew up in the province of 
Saskatchewan, that this is a vibrant, powerful, strong province to live in, but many, many people did not 
appreciate it. In fact, they said, well, Saskatchewan was probably a good place to come from. 
 
Well I’m proud to say, Mr. Chairman, that I believe more and more people are saying Saskatchewan is a 
very, very good place, not only to come from, but to come to, in today’s economy. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Saskatchewan is one of the strongest and most dynamic economies in North 
America. This strength is due in large part to the significant contribution which exports have made to the 
Saskatchewan gross domestic product. More than virtually any other province in Canada we need markets 
and customers and continued customers if we’re to provide jobs and opportunities for people in this 
province. For this reason alone the efforts of the province beyond its borders are critical to its well-being and 
to its residents. Exports mean jobs and money in the jeans of people here in the province. 
 
United States, for example. There’s little doubt that Saskatchewan’s most important international partner is 
the United States. To enhance this relationship I’ve agreed to: establish the  



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3473 
 

Saskatchewan-North Dakota boundary commission; and its most recent meetings several transporter issues 
and initiatives were discussed. Including among these was a commitment to investigate the potential for 
economic development activity along highway 35-85 border in the U.S. and Canada. Two, I’ve given 
keynote addresses to the last western governors’ conferences in the United States. Three, under my 
government Saskatchewan invited the first U.S. governor to speak in the Saskatchewan legislature as a result 
of our invitation here, and I have made potash, oil, financial, and agriculture addresses in the United States. 
 
We see the United States as a very, very important market and jobs for our province. We know something 
like 18 per cent of the entire world trade between countries takes place between the country of Canada and 
the country of the United States, and certainly Saskatchewan, in terms of agriculture and oil and potash and 
so forth, depends to a very large extent on U.S. markets. It’s important that we’re there. 
 
China. On a separate front, the province has mounted an ambitious and challenging effort to enhance its 
relations with the People’s Republic of China. Some of them were in the gallery today, Mr. Chairman. Just 
an example of the kind of relationship we have, they’re buying cattle here, and we’ll be flying them to the 
Chinese. China ranks third in terms of Saskatchewan exports abroad. The total value of exports to China in 
1983 was $625 million — almost 11 per cent of Saskatchewan’s exports. 
 
In June of 1984 the Government of Saskatchewan was pleased and honoured to formally enter into a protocol 
of friendship and understanding with the people’s government of Jilin province. The protocol will serve each 
province by providing enhanced access to the respective foreign markets. Saskatchewan to China, and Jilin 
to Canada. 
 
European markets and investment. My visit last January was part of an ongoing series of initiatives to 
improve the relationships between the province of Saskatchewan and European communities. To be frank, 
Canada is still feeling the effects of the previous federal government’s policies such as the national energy 
program and FEARO (federal environmental assessment review organization), and nationalization programs 
that took place in the province of Saskatchewan in the previous administration. 
 
Time and time again when I was in Europe, people would say, well, you’re from that province, aren’t you, 
where you took over the potash mines? I said, no, that was the other people. And they’d say, well, that’s 
where you were going to nationalize farms; and I said no, that was the previous administration. They still 
remember those things. And when the potash companies moved from here and went to New Brunswick to 
expand, people in Europe noticed that. And people said, well, is that you, or is that the other administration. I 
said, no, that’s the other people. So the reputation of Saskatchewan and Canada in Europe is extremely 
important. They are happy with the change in the government in Ottawa today, and I might add they’re 
happy with the change in the province of Saskatchewan since 1982. 
 
The focus of the trip was on improving the image of Saskatchewan and Canada’s economic and investment 
environment. I pointed out at every opportunity that Saskatchewan has products and technology to trade, and 
opportunities to be capitalized upon, and good people. And this is an excellent province to invest, and to live, 
and to work, and to stay. I was told quite frankly by the European community they were pleased with the 
political endeavours they’d seen in Canada over the last couple of years, and they had renewed interest in 
Canada and in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me turn to Saskatchewan’s role on the national scene. Intergovernmental affairs, also is mandated to 
present and protect Saskatchewan’s interest in Canada, and to ensure that all our activities, in relation to 
other governments in Canada, are conducted in a co-ordinated and a  



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3474 
 

consistent and professional manner. 
 
First: the essence of intergovernmental relations in this area, as embodied, of course, in relations between 
first ministers. Intergovernmental affairs has played a major role in preparations for such conferences. The 
recent first ministers’ conference held here in Regina proved to be one of the most successful conferences of 
its time in history, of its kind in history. It was the first time that we could entertain all the premiers and, 
indeed, the Prime Minister, in the province of Saskatchewan. It was an historic event, and intergovernmental 
affairs, under my jurisdiction, worked very hard to make it a very successful event. 
 
Secondly: intergovernmental affairs is also responsible for co-ordinating Saskatchewan’s participation in 
annual meeting of Canadian premiers and Western premiers. The second last meeting of the Western 
premiers in Kelowna produced a major statement on trade policy, for example. This paper had a major 
impact on the trade constellation papers recently released in the federal government, and our government 
here, the Department of intergovernmental affairs, put forward those ideas and those programs on expanding 
trade and markets two years ago, and again last year, and now they’re becoming extremely well received and 
endorsed across Canada. 
 
The most recent meeting in Grande Prairie saw Saskatchewan get a consensus on tax reform among all the 
Western premiers. And freer trade common market with the United States was something that was picked off 
on by the premier of Alberta as a result of our previous meetings in Kelowna, and previous meetings in Swift 
Current. 
 
And again I give a bouquet to intergovernmental affairs in my shop because they have been providing the 
kind of information to other governments to make it understandable, and now it’s being endorsed. And 
particularly, recently, to get three different political parties: Howard Pawley in Manitoba, obviously 
representing the NDP; Peter Lougheed, PC; and other people in British Columbia — three different political 
parties; four Western premiers to agree on reform, and tax reform, wand we’re taking it to the national level. 
 
The third part is intergovernmental affairs also plays a key role in preparations for bilateral meetings which 
I’ve had with the Prime Minister, and other premiers. 
 
Another major area of activity for intergovernmental affairs is the management and co-ordination of 
federal-provincial program development, implementation, and evaluation. 
 
One such thrust is the Canada-Saskatchewan Economic and Regional Development Agreement or ERDA. 
Intergovernmental affairs has been working for some time putting together a very important package 
between the federal government and the provincial government so that we can sign it. And since January of 
1984, the province has been successful in negotiating nine subsidiary agreements with the federal 
government, with total commitments in excess of $230 million. 
 
Finally, Mr. Chairman, intergovernmental affairs takes an active role in the management of the new era of 
federal-provincial relations. And I say the new era because in the last first ministers’ conference that we had 
here in the province of Saskatchewan was indicative of the kind of co-operation that we see now between the 
provinces and the federal government. Under the Trudeau administration and the previous administration 
here, we have found that it was confrontation, confrontation. 
 
As a result of what we have been doing recently, we see co-operation. We see co-operation on drought 
assistance. We see co-operation on oil. We see co-operation on job-related programs. The combination of 
this new era of federal-provincial relations and new ideas in a new management style has resulted in many, 
many benefits to the people of Canada and I would say to the people of Saskatchewan. 



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3475 
 

The benefits can be significant. And it is up to intergovernmental affairs to continually assist me in 
identifying how they can be realized. Co-operation, and not confrontation, is the key. 
 
In summary, it is obvious that the new era of federal-provincial relations has arrived. The first ministers’ 
conference held in Regina is just one example of the much closer relationship and understanding established 
between the federal government and the provinces. There will always be, Mr. Chairman, conflicting issues 
due to regional needs and geographical differences, but governments must demonstrate the capacity to 
manage these conflicting issues in constructive ways. 
 
The key is to co-operate, to listen to people, to have them involved; it’s better than confrontation. The fact 
that intergovernmental affairs reports to me is indicative of the priority which I place upon this important 
function. It is a reflection of my personal concern that this government maintain a co-ordinated and 
consistent and co-operative approach in its dealing with provincial, national, and international governments. 
 
I believe that the province that depends so heavily on its exports — interprovincially, nationally, and 
internationally — it is important that the reputation of this province be one of understanding, to be hard 
bargainers, but to be one of co-operation and to build so that we can build on each other’s strengths and in 
fact provide and identify those complementary factors in each of our regions so that we can be more 
successful. 
 
I might add, Mr. Chairman, intergovernmental affairs has an attitude that says, if we don’t do it, if we waste 
too much time, if we confront, then obviously we’re going to fall behind the Americans, we may fall behind 
Japanese, further behind the Europeans, and so forth. It’s my view, the departmental view, that we should get 
on with building and co-operating with our neighbours to make sure that we can. 
 
(1600) 
 
The third part of my office that I want to comment on, Mr. Chairman, is the protocol office. In keeping with 
their mandate, I have instructed the protocol office to focus its energies and activities on activities that we 
will build upon the self-confidence and talents of the people of Saskatchewan. This important responsibility 
has been sadly neglected by previous administration, and I am determined that this government shall not 
make the same mistake. 
 
Saskatchewan people have a great deal of pride in their accomplishments, in their work, in arts, in energy, in 
agriculture, in business, and so on. And they need to be recognized. In this regard, let me give you some 
exciting examples of the accomplishments of the protocol office over the past year. 
 
First, the Governor General’s visit. The Governor General of Canada visit was the occasion for a memorable 
event in the province of Saskatchewan. To honour Madame Sauve and to recognize Saskatchewan’s 
contribution to Canada, we invited a large number of Saskatchewan achievers to join the Governor General 
at a gala banquet. 
 
I mention this event in honour of Madame Sauve because it shows the world-class calibre of Saskatchewan 
people. It shows that we have achievers and achievements of which we can be very proud, and our 
government intends to tell the world about them. We want people to feel good about the very, very positive 
aspects of their life, their accomplishments, and we have people that are doing and leading, on the leading 
edge of accomplishments all over the world in many, many professions. 
 
And I believe for years and years people wanted to be recognized, but often they had to leave the province of 
Saskatchewan to find that recognition. Now they are finding it by staying here, and they’re certainly finding 
it by coming back to the province of Saskatchewan. 



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3476 
 

Secondly, the dinner for Saskatchewan’s Olympic competitors. A group of athletes and officials from our 
province who had represented Canada at the recent Summer and Winter Olympics were honoured by 
members of this Assembly and many other representative citizens. 
 
International visitors to the province are another area. In keeping with this government’s desire to display the 
strengths of Saskatchewan to the world during the 1984-85 fiscal year, the protocol office handled and 
helped me host a wide range of visitors to the province. Senior diplomats came to Saskatchewan from 
Austria, from Belgium, Britain, China, Germany, Japan, Kenya, Mexico, New Zealand, Tanzania, and the 
United States. In addition to visits and hospitality and official functions, our protocol office handles a wide 
range of policy, administrative, and consulting duties. 
 
The hospitality grant program, Mr. Chairman. This grant program provides grants to non-profit, 
non-governmental organizations hosting international, national, and interprovincial events in the province of 
Saskatchewan. In 1984 . . . pardon me, ’85, we awarded grants to 57 organizations for a total of $116,000 — 
over a quarter of the office’s budget. All kinds of worthwhile organizations benefit from these grants. The 
spin-off for Saskatchewan economy is worth many times this modest outlay, and the program is above 
reproach; it’s strictly fair, objective, and non-political. 
 
Government gift policy. In 1983 I instructed the office, in consultation with the Saskatchewan Arts Board, to 
make major improvements in the central gift bank used by the Lieutenant Governor, the Speaker, and 
cabinet. The purpose of gifts is not only to show hospitality and make our guest feel welcome, although this 
is very worthwhile, it is also to provide a show-case for Saskatchewan artists and crafts people and writers 
and publishers. 
 
I’m pleased to say that the protocol office gift bank now displays a significant role as a patron of artists and 
writers for the Saskatchewan Awards of Merit. 
 
Last October on the occasion of the Governor General’s visit and the dinner for Saskatchewan achievers, I 
was able to announce the Saskatchewan Award of Merit to recognize excellence, achievement, and good 
citizenship by residents of our province. An independent advisory committee will receive nominations from 
the general public and recommend recipients of this award. I am sure that all members will agree that the 
award program is timely in 1985 because it’s Saskatchewan’s Heritage year. 
 
Many visitors tell us the Saskatchewan protocol office literally has a world-class reputation. We’re proud of 
that and we’ll continue our efforts to provide the best possible service to the government, the members of the 
Assembly, and the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
A fourth dimension of Executive Council, Mr. Chairman, is the new cabinet secretariat. As a further means 
of enhancing government efficiency and accountability of expanding policy-making circles, increasing 
public input into government decisions, I am pleased to announce the cabinet secretariat will be undertaking 
new duties. In this regard, the government-wide concerns and specific management principles referred to 
earlier by me, were in large part responsible for this decision. 
 
In concert with my fellow ministers, I have appointed four line department staff members under the direction 
of the clerk of the Executive Council to provide support to cabinet and committees of cabinet. We found that 
the previous government had neglected this important support mechanism for cabinet, but we found through 
our experience that it was necessary to correct this oversight. We have found that full and informed 
discussion is necessary to ensure that decisions of cabinet are made with a clear understanding of the interest 
and the concerns of those individuals and groups who will be directly affected. 
 
We live in a world of rapid change and increasing interdependence. Government does not serve  



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3477 
 

isolated and independent interests. Rather, it serves the people of Saskatchewan and their varied and complex 
priorities and concerns. It is this interdependence and this need for consultation and co-ordination that 
outlines the cabinet’s decision to assign new responsibilities to the cabinet secretariat. 
 
In supporting the cabinet decision process, the secretariat will now serve the people of Saskatchewan by 
ensuring that the cabinet has the most accurate, up-to-date and complete information as possible. The cabinet 
secretariat has no specific operational or program delivery capabilities but acts as a process facilitator. It 
ensures that the cabinet’s submissions are accurate and complete and are moved through the system as 
efficiently as possible and returned to the initiating department for implementation. 
 
In assembling the staff for the position of secretariat officer, Executive Council consulted with all 
departments. The individuals selected have extensive experience in the public service, and bring with them 
professional credibility and objectivity. The responsibilities of the cabinet secretariat officers demand the 
confidence of ministers, senior officials, and the staff of departments and agencies of government. It is this 
confidence which has enabled the staff of the cabinet secretariat to meet the challenges of improving 
communications, co-ordination, and accountability in the administration of submissions to cabinet. 
 
The establishment of the cabinet secretariat is a first for the province of Saskatchewan. I am confident the 
secretariat will continue to provide support to cabinet and thereby contribute to a more responsible and open 
decision-making process for the people of this province. 
 
The fifth area I want to comment on, Mr. Chairman, is the policy secretariat. In keeping with the new 
management principles that I have initiated with respect to the way in which the planning bureau of the 
department of Executive Council participates in the government of policy, I would like to announce today 
the planning bureau shall henceforth be known as the policy secretariat. 
 
The present operation of the policy secretariat, under the direction of the associate deputy minister 
responsible for the policy secretariat and the bureau of statistics, differs greatly from the role it had under the 
previous administration. The development of government policy, Mr. Chairman, is not something done for 
people or to people, rather in this administration it is something to be done with people and by people. 
 
The present role of the policy secretariat reflects my commitment to respond to the major concerns and 
priorities of the people of the province and to work co-operatively with the departments of government and 
the public in the creation of appropriate solutions and policies. 
 
Mr. Chairman, leadership in government means ability to devise policy-making processes which adapt to and 
respond quickly to this changing environment. To my way of thinking this means that how you go about 
making policy and who you involve in the policy process is very, very important. People want to participate. 
 
It is essential to listen to people, and finally, Mr. Chairman, to actively and regularly involve people in the 
policy-making process. A central concern of mine has been to expand policy-making circles in and outside of 
government. Within government the flip side of this coin has been to try to encourage departments to 
contribute to the generation of innovative and creative ideas, responding always to the central concerns of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
The recent Saskatchewan budget highlights education, it highlights jobs, agriculture, health, and small 
business. It provided an outstanding example of how a government can listen to people and respond to these 
concerns and to the community priorities. 
 
What the public perhaps does not see are those processes within government which contribute to the creation 
of a consensus which permits ministers who represent different people and their  



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3478 
 

separate concerns to agree upon the desirable courses of action needed to respond to all these diverse 
concerns. 
 
A key process in ascribing for consensus is the annual government priorities exercise. The primary purpose 
of the government priorities exercise is to enable departments and their ministers to contribute initially to 
their overall formulation of government policy and direction. The process that we have in place to do this 
was designed at my request by the policy secretariat. it performs precisely to that purpose. 
 
The general strategic planning function of the government is embodied in the government priorities exercise 
and is supplemented by the regular participation by the policy secretariat staff, on government private sector 
committees such as the Saskatchewan Development Advisory Committee, and on intergovernmental 
committees dealing with policy development. This regular publication is an essential component of my 
attempt to expand the policy-making circle as far as possible. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I started this process some years ago, along with occasional meetings with senior officials of 
government, and I am constantly working towards its continuous refinement. I referred above to the central 
concerns of the people of Saskatchewan. These concerns include things like water-related issues; or two, 
employment development issues; or three, rural development in general. The policy secretariat we’ve 
developed was specifically involved in the creation and the development of particular response to these 
issues. Let me give you an example in water. 
 
Nothing is more fundamental to the people of Saskatchewan to both employment development and to rural 
development in this province than the assurance of adequate supply of fresh, clean water. Someone has said 
that water will be the resource issue of the 21st centre, and it may be true. In fact, in Saskatchewan, water 
may already be the critical resource issue. We in Saskatchewan, as a result of our recent experience with 
drought, know only too well the importance to our towns and our villages and our cities. And assured supply 
of clean, fresh water is needed for these communities to grow, to attract new industry, and to attract 
employment, and to prosper. 
 
When this government came to power, water was a high priority item on the government’s mind, and on my 
own personal agenda. Today Saskatchewan, I’m proud to say, has a brand-new water corporation which 
provides the framework for the implementation and administration of water policy necessary for 
Saskatchewan to organize the use of its water resources. When it was clear after the Muirhead report that the 
province-wide consultations were necessary, the policy secretariat continued to be involved in supporting 
functions to the Saskatchewan water project team, leading to cabinet approval and the creation of the 
brand-new water corporation in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me turn to rural development. Concerning rural development and the agricultural economy, the policy 
secretariat prepared a strategic plan to assist the newly established Department of Rural Development, to 
look at how we can keep what is positive about our rural lives in rural Saskatchewan, and identify key areas 
in which it can be improved. To this end the policy secretariat designed and advised on the establishment of a 
rural development task force in the province of Saskatchewan. This task force is ready to make a full report 
to me, and I will enlist the aid of the policy secretariat again, in preparation of the next step in this area. 
 
Employment policy. With respect to the critical problem of employment development, under my direction 
the policy secretariat helped design and advised on the establishment of the new Employment Development 
Agency. The broad outlines of the agency indicate, again, this government’s commitment to innovative 
thinking and consultations which affect sectors of the  



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3479 
 

provincial population and are keystone to my administration. The agency devised does not duplicate the 
work of other government agencies or departments. It is not designed to administer programs. Rather, the 
agency’s principal reason for existence is to ensure that all government departments which deliver 
complementary employment programs are delivered in the best co-ordinated and organized fashion and so 
people can be aware of them. The agency is mandated to inform the public about the available employment 
opportunities and to act as a catalyst for business and clients in their creation. The record for a new agency, 
Mr. Chairman, has bee n excellent. 
 
These activities — the government priorities exercise, water development, rural development, employment 
development — have set as their goal an unleashing of career potential of the government and the people of 
Saskatchewan. I know that the people of Saskatchewan, if given listened to by this administration, Mr. 
Chairman. Their ideas will be considered — they have in the past, and they will now — and weighed against 
the opinions and attitudes of other people in society. 
 
(1615) 
 
Accordingly, the process that I have developed within Executive Government and the Government of 
Saskatchewan as a whole, is a specific style for the deliberate encouragement of innovative and creative 
thinking by the people of Saskatchewan. We have only ourselves to hold us back from success. This 
sentiment reflects both my own leadership and, I feel, the true values of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
In summary, Mr. Chairman, good leadership does not seek to control for control’s sake, nor does it plan to 
simply provide an ordered world in which everything seems to be in for its proper pre-assigned place. 
Intelligent leadership seeks to match the will of the people with the resources available to them. This I’ve 
attempted to do, using the government priorities exercise. 
 
Sound leadership focuses its attention on the most critical of priorities and the policy instruments needed to 
handle and respond to those priorities. We have done this by enlisting the aid of the policy secretariat on 
world development, on employment, development issues such as water-related ideas, instructing them to 
develop particular initiatives designed to prepare Saskatchewan for the future. 
 
The process, Mr. Chairman, is no different in other significant areas of our society such as health, education, 
resources, youth, and seniors. It’s a complete open, integrated, personal approach that builds on the strengths 
of the individuals in the system. And always, Mr. Chairman, always, responsible leadership seeks to facilitate 
and not control, consult and not to impose, co-operate and not subordinate. 
 
These are exciting times for Saskatchewan people, and I’m happy to be in a position, Mr. Chairman, to serve 
the residents of this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
Item 1 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve listened . . . I won’t go so far as to say I’ve listened with 
intense interest, but with some interest. I listened for the first half-hour with some interest, and thereafter it 
flagged a bit. But non the less I think I do report that I listened with fair interest to a number of items that the 
Premier had mentioned. 
 
It was I think fairly characterized as — what shall we say? — a blizzard of buzz words. It had almost all of 
them: the innovation and the creation and the creativity and co-operation and  



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3480 
 

open and integrated and consult and facilitated and reform and excitement, and all of the ones that we have 
come to expect from the Premier. 
 
I think however that the members opposite should be aware of the fact that they have been in office for 
something over three years, and the public are interested in what’s going to happen in the future with respect 
to exciting, innovating projects built with the co-operation of the people and in accordance with their will 
and involving open, integrated, decentralized government which he has indicated here today just how all of 
these things can happen. We will presumably at some future time may see, and then again may not. 
 
I think that the public will judge not by what is promised but by what has happened. And let’s look at the last 
three years, three years of what you assert to be accomplishment and what we assert to be mismanagement. 
And that’s going to be the test, not what is said about what is going to happen at some future and unspecified 
time. 
 
Let’s pick just a few things which the Premier indicates are going so well. Let’s take that measure of 
economic activity which is used by economists generally to indicate whether things are going well or not 
well — gross domestic product. 
 
The members opposite suggest that some number-fudging is going on. I would like I think to refer to the 
numbers that have been given to us by the Minister of Finance, and I hope that they will not be alleged to be 
number-fudging. 
 
There is no question that with respect to gross domestic product things have not gone well for Saskatchewan. 
The gross domestic product for Saskatchewan when corrected for inflation has simply not gone up in the last 
three years. And I will refer the Premier to the material gained from the Minister of Finance, and I trust he 
will regard that as being accurate. And I will refer him to the Minister of Finance’s budget speech and to 
page 38, and we will just look at what the Minister of Finance says about what’s happened about gross 
domestic product. And carried forward in constant dollars it was in 1980, 5.2 billion; in 1981, 5.5 billion; in 
1983, 5.3 billion . . . Sorry, 1980, 5.2; 1981, 5.5; 1982, 5.3; 1983, 5.3; 1984, 5.0. 
 
Now that is not exactly a startling increase in the gross domestic product. If in fact our population is 
increasing, and I’ll concede it is, then the gross domestic product per capita is gong down, and going down 
just as significantly as you say the populations’ increasing. If you’re going to have it increasing 5 or 10 per 
cent a year — which isn’t true, but occasionally in your exuberance you suggest that — then the gross 
domestic product is going down 5 or 10 per cent a year. 
 
In fact we know that things have not gone well. We’ll come in a moment to all of these jobs that are alleged 
to have been created. Right now we’ll deal with gross domestic product; we’ll deal with this in terms that the 
Minister of Finance gives us in his recent Budget Address on page 38, and we will reach the conclusion that 
gross domestic product has not gone up. And certainly on a per capita basis it has gone down. 
 
We will take the value of manufacturing shipments, another little indicator, how the Minister of Finance does 
not put that in his budget speech corrected for inflation. But certainly when you correct for inflation, there 
has been no increase since 1981. In 1981 the value of manufacturing shipments was 2.5 billion, and by 1984 
it was 2.7 billion, and that would be far more than accounted for by inflation. 
 
So we see no increase in the value of manufacturing shipments in this boom time that we have been told 
about. 
 
Public and private investment. And these once again, Mr. Premier, are taken from the Minister of Finance’s 
budget speech, again at page 38. We have 1981, public and private investment, $5.1  



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3481 
 

billion; 1984, $5.1 billion; and ’82 and ’83 are in the 4.6 and 4.9 billion range. 
 
So even in current dollars, even with inflation assisting you to make your figures look good, 1982 was worse 
than 1981; 1983 was worse than 1981; and 1984 was just over 1981 — oh, just barely — 5.15 billion. 
Corrected for inflation, that represents a decrease in investment. 
 
So we have in gross domestic product, value of our manufacturing investment, we have seen it decline in the 
three years since 1981. 
 
I could give other indicators. Retail sales — I hope that no one will suggest that retail sales did very well last 
year in Saskatchewan. We ranked number 10 among the provinces in increase in retail sales. 
 
Well I concede with the Premier at the outset that 1984 wasn’t a great year for Saskatchewan because we had 
poor crop conditions. But leaving 1984 aside, we have not done well in retail sales. Indeed, I point out that in 
1984 there were no more dollars spent than in 1983 in retail sales, so we lost the entire amount of inflation, 4 
to 5 per cent. 
 
And it’s not doing very well in 1985. In 1985, for the first two months — and that’s all I have figures for; 
more recent figures are not available — Saskatchewan had retail sales growth of 7.5 per cent; Alberta, 9.8 
per cent; Manitoba, 14 per cent. 
 
Again the Premier will attempt no doubt to attribute that to last year’s drought. The facts are very clear that 
drought happened in some other provinces, as well, although clearly it was more serious in Saskatchewan. 
But we are not seeing very much increase in retail sales. And I don’t need to quote the figures for that. Go 
around and talk to any small-business man you like and he will say that he’s hanging in there, but his sales 
are not increasing — he’s hanging in there but his sales are not increasing. 
 
I give you bankruptcies. I give you bankruptcies. And here we have business bankruptcies, and I will tell you 
how many happened in 1981 — 74; how many happened I 1982 — 111; how many happened In 1983 — 
119; how many in 1984 — 136; 1985 — 139. That does not sound exactly like roaring prosperity. Very, very 
nearly twice as many bankruptcies in 1985 as in 1981 — very nearly twice as many bankruptcies. 
 
Mr. Chairman, it’s pretty clear that this prosperity of which the Premier spoke bypassed a good number of 
Saskatchewan people. And we are, Mr. Chairman, talking about facts, not about what the Premier says is 
going to happen in the near future, but what has happened in under three years of his administration. 
 
The Premier puts forward the view that there has been a rapid increase I population in Saskatchewan. There 
has, in fact, been an increase at about the same rate for the last three years as for the proceeding three years. 
And if members doubt that, I know they will enter the debate and put their figures on the table. Mr. Deputy 
Chairman, I don’t know whether or not people are coming into Saskatchewan who previously lived here. I 
know that about the same number are coming here as came here in the previous years. But I don’t, frankly 
. . . Mr. Deputy Chairman, I don’t know where they’re living. I don’t know where they’re living. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chairman, I wonder if members opposite have looked at the figures for housing starts. They are 
absolutely abysmal. We have not had housing starts as low as in 1984 for a good 10 years or more. World 
class drop in housing starts would be one way to say it. Let’s look at these figures, and let’s stack those up 
against the people who say that there are tens of thousands of people coming to this province. It’s false. The 
figures, of course, make it clear that it’s false, but the housing starts underline it. Where would they be 
living? Where would they be living if they were coming here in their tens of thousands? Where are they 
living? 



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3482 
 

Well, I’ll give you the housing-start figures. In 1985 there were 5,200 units. I haven’t checked back but 
there’s nothing as low as that back in 1974. Certainly I have to go back for 10 years or more to get anything 
approaching that. In 1983 it was 7,200; in 1982, 6,800; in 1981, 5,900 — not a good year; 1980, 6,200; 1979, 
11,700; 1978, 9.500; 1977, 12,800; 1976, 13,100 — all those years of alleged stagnation having housing 
starts, which in some cases, of two and two and a half times what this government has been able to achieve 
in 1984. 
 
(1630) 
 
They assert that people are coming back to the province, but do you believe that? Do you believe there are 
tens of thousands of people coming back to the province and lining in non-houses? Are they living in tents? 
Of course they’re not . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 5,200 units in 1984; 7,200 in 1983. Compare that with 
’79 of 11,700. In a year like 1976 it was more than the 1983 and 1984 combined. These were the days when 
things were supposedly going very badly. But I’ll tell you, Mr. Chairman, it is not possible to assert that 
things are going very well, that the population is booming, that things are going great, but nobody is building 
houses. 
 
Nobody will believe that. They’re not building houses, and that tells the story more effectively than any other 
rhetoric that could be launched from members opposite or indeed from any members of their party. There is 
simply not very much house-building going on. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I turn now to jobs, and we’ll have an opportunity to examine a good number of these figures 
in depth. Bu this unemployment rate which they’re so proud of would have been a cause for very 
considerable disgrace in any year during the 1970s — a cause for very considerable disgrace. 
 
In the last three years between 1979 and 1981, those three years immediately prior to this government 
coming to office, and I want to compare those three years with your first three years in office: the average 
unemployment rate in the preceding three years was four and a half per cent; your average for three years 
was 7.2 per cent — a very substantial increase in unemployment since 1982. 
 
I hope members opposite don’t deny this, and I hope that they will, if they deny it, enter the debate and put 
their figures on the table. There is no question, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and in any case I don’t 
need to give the figures. Everybody in Saskatchewan knows it’s tougher to get a job now than it was three 
years ago. Everybody knows that. 
 
If you doubt that, go out and ask some of your teacher graduates whether they’re finding it easier or harder. 
If you doubt that, go out and ask some of the nursing graduates whether they’re finding it easier or harder. If 
you doubt that, go out and ask the law graduates whether they’re finding it easier or harder to find a place to 
article. And I tell you that it is very definitely clear that it’s harder to find a job now than it was three years 
ago. And if members opposite deny that, then they are indeed out of touch. They are indeed out of touch. 
 
Let’s talk about new jobs. Let’s talk about new jobs. I’ll take the three years of your administration and the 
three preceding years, and how many new jobs a year, on the average, how many new jobs a year. Mr. 
Chairman, in the three years preceding the coming to office of the present administration, job creation in 
Saskatchewan was at the rate of approximately 9,000 a year, just a little over 9,000 a year. For the period 
from 1982 to ’84, job creation has been 4,667 a year — 4,700. 
 
And those are the hard facts from StatsCan, from Statistics Canada. They cannot be gainsaid; they cannot be 
argued against, except by other figures. And what we are hearing are shouts but no figures. What we’re 
hearing are shouts but no figures because the members opposite will not be able to mount figures to 
contradict what are the hard facts that in the three years preceding their coming to office there were 9,000 
new jobs a year; in the three years of their term in office  



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3483 
 

there’ve been 4,700 new jobs a year. That, Mr. Chairman, is the hard facts. 
 
Members opposite frequently assert that it’s because our labour force is growing so fast. It’s all those people 
coming back and wanting jobs, and that’s why unemployment is soaring. Mr. Chairman, no so — not so. 
 
The growth in the labour force in the three years prior to their coming to office was 10,600 a year, average. 
The growth in the labour force since they came to office is 10,300 a year, average. For all practical purposes, 
about the same thing. The only difference, Mr. Chairman, is that of the 10,600 who came onto the labour 
force in the three years prior to their coming to office, jobs were found for over 9,000 of them; and of the 
10,300 or so who were coming into the labour force while they’re in office, jobs are found for 4,700; and as a 
result, unemployment is going up and up and up. 
 
Let’s talk about the rate of increase in unemployment. And these again, Mr. Deputy Chairman, are the 
figures from StatsCanada. These are the figures given by StatsCanada which you and I, I hope, agree are 
reasonably accurate: 1979, 18,000 unemployed in this province; 1980, 19,000; 1981, 21,000; 19982, 28,000; 
1983, 35,000; 1984, 38,000. Those are impressive figures. Doesn’t look like it’s getting much better. The 
May 1985 figure was at about 40,000. 
 
But let’s give them the full benefit of the doubt. We’ll take the year 1984 — they were in office for that full 
period of 1984 — and the unemployment rate 38,000, just a little over twice what it was in 1979, just a little 
over twice. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, those are not impressive figures. They show a government which has not been able to 
create jobs for the people who are coming into the labour market. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chairman, no one denies that there are troubles out there in the economy. No one denies that it’s 
difficult for governments to generate the circumstances which create jobs. But what I say is this: when you 
are seeing unemployment double from 18,000 to 38,000 between 1979 and 1984, when you see it go up from 
21,000 to 38,000 between 1981 to 1984, in the three years when they are in office, it is not good enough for 
them to say, we’re doing great. We’re doing fine. We’ve created jobs for everybody. 
 
Nobody can solve a problem if they don’t admit it’s there, and this government is pretending that that 
problem isn’t there when tens of thousands of Saskatchewan people haven’t got jobs and a great number of 
young people don’t have jobs who very much hoped to have jobs. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the problem of youth unemployment has got worse and worse. Not only, Mr. Chairman, are 
the numbers of young people who are unemployed soaring, but the number of young people who don’t have 
work is high in relation to those who have work. Let me put that another way. What we are seeing is an 
increase — increase — in the number who are unemployed and a decrease in the number who are employed. 
 
Now, that one needs some explaining from members opposite. They may well be able to blame the fact of 
the rising unemployment on the economic circumstances across Canada, but on what do they blame the fact 
that there are far fewer young people working in Saskatchewan than there were three years ago or four years 
ago or five years ago? To what do they attribute those facts? 
 
Let me give you some figures, Mr. Chairman. In 1979 the number of young people between the ages 15 and 
24 who were working in this province was 113,000; in 1980 it was 113,000; in 1981 it was 110,000; in 1982 
it was 107,000; 1983, 105,000; 1984, 101,000. Let’s go over those again. It went down from 113,000 in ’79, 
to 107,000 in ’82, to 101,000 in ’84. 
 
Well let’s take the difference between ’82 and ’84. Those are their years. They claim to have done a great 
deal to create employment for young people. From 107 to 101 — 6,000 dropped —  



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3484 
 

a more than 5 per cent drop in the actual number of young people who are working. And that, Mr. Chairman, 
again can’t be gainsay. It cannot be argued against because these figures are hard; these figures are real. 
Once again, Mr. Chairman, I don’t need to give the figures . . . I do. But the person no the street knows that 
it’s tougher to get a job if you’re a young person now than it was two or three or four or five or six or seven 
years ago. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I have a young son — two young sons — one who is approaching 30 and one who is just over 
20. And I know that the older son never had any difficulty getting summer employment or any other kind of 
employment. The younger son has had to scratch and scrabble and be without summer employment on 
occasion. He has got some, but he has certainly been without employment during periods. And this just 
wasn’t true before. It just wasn’t true before. 
 
If members opposite have sons or daughters of whom are 18 or 19 now, and some of whom are 24 or 25 
now, ask them which one had the toughest time getting the job. Ask that. And I tell you there’s . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Perhaps I shouldn’t be directing it to members opposite; they may have some special 
preference, but I’m not asserting that. I am saying that it is tougher to get a job now or if you’re a young 
person than it was three or four years ago. And the figures make it clear in any case, but I dot’ need to rely on 
the figures because my constituents tell me that in no uncertain terms. So it is very, very difficult for young 
people. 
 
Once again, Mr. Chairman, I am not laying all of this at the door of the government opposite, but I think it 
ought to be acknowledged by the government opposite so that they can address the problem and not pretend 
it isn’t there. There is an assertion, and I heard the Premier make it again and again and again, that somehow 
Saskatchewan has done better at job creation than any other province. Well he may well believe that. And 
obviously, if you hunt around and find a month, that may well be true. 
 
But looking at 1984, Saskatchewan ranked — and take the year the last year that we have figures for — 
Saskatchewan ranked seventh in Canada in the rate of new job creation. Six other provinces had a better 
record of job creation than Saskatchewan. And the way that’s worked out is that you take the number of jobs 
you have, the number of new jobs added, calculate the percentage and who is doing best. And on that basis 
we did better than three provinces and worse than six. We were seventh. 
 
(1645) 
 
And that, Mr. Deputy Chairman, is not a very impressive record, not a very impressive record. Again, Mr. 
Chairman, we ought to be saying that’s a tough problem. We ought to be doing something about it. We ought 
to give it something more than razzle-dazzle and press release. We ought to get out there and see if we could 
get our youth employment figure, for example, up to where it was in 1982. If we could get it up to where it 
was in 1982, we’d have another 6,000 young people working, and that would take the edge off the youth 
unemployment. It would take the edge off that. 
 
But we’re a long way from where we were in 1982, and a long, long way from where we were in 1979. That 
would need 12,000 new jobs, and somehow I don’t think they’re gong to come to pass. 
 
Mr. Chairman, do you ask yourself, if there is all of this burgeoning prosperity because of open for business 
and because everybody is confident and they’re moving forward in the new and dynamic Saskatchewan, do 
you ask your self why social aid case-loads are soaring? Do you ask your self why so many more people are 
on welfare if this Saskatchewan is booming? If you do that, if you ask yourself that question, you will have 
an answer by surely knowing that if many, many more people are on social assistance things are not great. 
And the facts are that many, many more people are on social assistance. 



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3485 
 

In total beneficiaries, the number of people who rely on welfare, ’81 . . . and I’m using the March figures 
because those are the ones that I have for 1985. Mr. Chairman, people talk about interprovincial 
comparisons. I would be very happy to make interprovincial comparisons in some of these areas — not an 
absolute basis because when this government assumed office things were very good in this province. But the 
issue is not whether they are very good now, although they’re not, but what have you done? In what direction 
are you moving? 
 
And I want to tell you a little bit about what direction you’re moving in with respect to social assistance. And 
the number of people who were relying on social assistance in March of ’81 was 43,000; by March of ’82 it 
was 48,000; by March of ’83 it was 59,000; March of ’84 it was 63,000; and March of ’85 it was 64,000. 
 
Now this is a great record for a government which claims to have brought prosperity and hope and 
confidence to this province. If all this is true, how is it possible that we have 20,000 more people on welfare 
than we had four years ago? 
 
And those are facts. And I trust members opposite once again don’t deny them. Those are very, very hard 
facts. They are not doing well. Some people are doing well in this society, as we well know. Bu this isn’t 
who they are. 
 
But there’s more revealing statistics about welfare, Mr. Chairman. There are always people who are getting 
social assistance in this province. And we’ve had the senior citizens who needed some supplement. We have 
had persons who were disabled. We have had persons whose spouse and breadwinner was incarcerated. We 
have had people who for some other reason were not really part of the work-force. And we have had . . . and 
that’s sort of the base load of social assistance. 
 
And there is another group which for the purposes of statistics are called “lack of earning capacity,” but in 
plain English means they don’t have a job. And this is the group which has spiralled. These are the numbers 
which have soared. 
 
In 1979 the number of these that don’t have a job and therefore need social assistance, that number in ’79 
was 6,000; in 1981 it was 8,000; 1982, 12; ’83, 16; ’84, 18,000. Just about three times as many people 
getting social assistance because they can’t get a job as was true five or six years ago — very, very 
substantially increased. 
 
Three years you’ve been in office. Three years you’ve had opportunities to do whatever is necessary to bring 
prosperity — jobs, training, all of these things you say are going to answer these questions. And three years 
later the number who are on welfare because they can’t get a job is very much increased 
 
In 1979 that number made up about 30 per cent of the total welfare load. It now makes up over 60 per cent. 
And those figures tell the story as dramatically as would possibly be able to be told. 
 
There are many other indicators. I use the Saskatoon food bank. We didn’t use to have food banks around 
here in 1982, but we certainly have them now. And we have many, many dozens of families who rely on 
food banks. These are families who are not going there simply to pick up groceries but are going there 
having been screened by responsible agencies and found to be wanting. And there is no question that their 
number continues to rise. 
 
I looked up some figures the other day, looked up some figures the other day from the Salvation Army, who 
do a pretty tough screen. The Salvation Army are very, very good people, but they know when they’re being 
conned, if I may put it that way. They’ve been in this business a long time, when they’re not easily conned. 
And when they say somebody needs some food, you can bet they do. The Salvation Army will tell you that 
the people who they are approving for food banks are certifying that the need of food from food banks is 
going up and going up impressively. 



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3486 
 

So I think, Mr. Chairman, the hard facts of Saskatchewan do not support the glowing picture which the 
Premier gave — the picture which was, as I say, replete with: consulting and facilitating and innovative and 
creative and co-operation and will-of-the-people and reform and excitement and participation and open and 
innovative — great stuff. 
 
Great stuff, but how much better it would be if the Premier devoted his attention not to cheerleading but to 
tackling some of the real problems which are there. And I say again, Mr. Chairman, we’re not laying all 
these at the door of the Premier. We’re not laying them all at the door of his government. But he should 
acknowledge that things are very much tougher than they were when he came to office — that jobs are not 
out there, that the open for business policy has not worked. 
 
There are not a great many more factories. There are not a great many more businesses. There are certainly 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Chairman, we’re having . . . 
 
Members opposite are suggesting, and many, many of them are suggesting that there are lots of new 
businesses around. Of course there are new businesses around and there are old businesses closing, and that’s 
always true. But with respect to new businesses who are out there hiring, new businesses here because of the 
open for business policy, we’d be very much delighted to know where they are, and match them against the 
ones that have closed. 
 
Match them against the ones that have closed and tell us where all of the new jobs are. We are aware, of 
course, of the fact that there are some new jobs. But how is it that in this time of new businesses which you 
assert are coming about, the great urge in the activity in the oil patch, you’re still only creating 4,700 new 
jobs a year when the previous average was over 9,000. 
 
What is wrong with your policy that it isn’t working? What is wrong with a policy which only creates about 
half the number of jobs in your three years of office that were created in the previous three years? 
 
Mr. Chairman, there’s one other indicator of just how well we’re doing, and that has to do with how the 
provincial treasury is doing. Every government knows that when business is booming, revenues increase, and 
when business isn’t booming, revenues go down; and when business is going well, then we will have 
budgetary surpluses, and when business isn’t going well, we will have budgetary deficits. 
 
Let’s look very briefly at how well this open for business policy has resulted in . . . Mr. Chairman, I want to 
interject in my remarks to say this with respect to Manitoba. Every citizen in Saskatchewan should wish that 
budgetary deficits in Saskatchewan had only increased as much as they had in Manitoba. We would be 
hundreds of millions of dollars ahead if that had happened. Hundreds of millions of dollars ahead. That, 
unfortunately, Mr. Chairman, . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. We will need co-operation from both sides of the House to maintain order so 
the Leader of the Opposition can complete his question. Order! Do the members of the opposition wish to 
come to order so their leader can speak? Please proceed. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Forgive me for saying so, but with respect to the 
interruptions, I didn’t find them coming overwhelmingly from the opposition side. 
 
And I want to come at this deficit again. It’s all very well for members to say how well we’re doing and how 
open for business is a resounding success. But if this is so, Mr. Chairman, what are they doing with the 
money? If business is booming, why aren’t they taking a little bit to pay their bills? 



 
June 17, 1985 

 

3487 
 

We will hear yet another speech from the Premier about how the people want balance, and they want their 
government to protect them in times of stress. But, Mr. Chairman, this isn’t supposed to be times of stress. 
These are boom times. We don’t need to do all of these things. We don’t need to run big deficits if these are 
boom times. 
 
But maybe, Mr. Chairman, these aren’t boom times. Maybe the Premier’s rhetoric has nothing to do with the 
facts. Maybe he likes to talk about how prosperous things are, cannot collect taxes because there isn’t 
prosperity out there, and he has opted to run huge deficits. He certainly opted to run huge deficits. No one 
can deny that. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the figures with respect to the financial management of this province are there for all to see; 
they’re all audited by the Provincial Auditor. If the pre-1982 figures were inaccurate, the quarrel of hon. 
members is with the Provincial Auditor. But none of them will dare say that, because they know they can’t 
sustain these rather fanciful stories. 
 
And I say to members opposite: if you can manage, as you assert our government did, to hoodwink the 
Provincial Auditor for 11 years and then show 11 straight surpluses — you’ll never have the chance, but try 
just one or two surpluses — and you will never do it because you are unable to manage the affairs of this 
province, because you persist in believing that there is a level of prosperity out there which isn’t there. You 
would like to believe it was there. It isn’t there. It isn’t there, as revealed by the facts that there are no jobs; 
that it’s not there, as revealed by the fact that your taxes are not coming in, and you are having massive 
deficits. 
 
And that, Mr. Premier, are the hard facts, and I suggest to you that your role is to acknowledge those facts, to 
say that we have some problems, not to assert that everything is booming, but to say that some things are 
booming and some aren’t booming, and we are taking concrete steps to see that we can provide jobs, put our 
finances in order, help farmers, do all the sorts of things which Saskatchewan people are calling upon to be 
done. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


	ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS
	ORAL QUESTIONS
	Disposal of Contaminated Wastes
	Cost of Out-of-Province Trips
	Re-seeding Winter Wheat
	GOVERNMENT ORDERS
	COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE
	Clause 1
	Clause 20
	Clause 28
	Clause 30
	Clause 5
	Clause 11
	THIRD READINGS
	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	YEAS — 24
	NAYS — 6


	COMMITTEE OF FINANCE
	Item 1

