



















































Hansard: December 05, 1985


 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

December 5, 1985 

3923 

 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Suspension of Employee from Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the minister responsible for 
the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. It deals with the bizarre series of events surrounding your decision to 
fire a female employee of that public company. 
 
Yesterday your employee was told she had been fired because she placed a union sticker on a portrait of you in 
her office and because she had written a rude note to her supervisor, even though that note was only discovered 
after the supervisor rummaged through her brief-case and her personal mail. 
 
Since yesterday, Mr. Minister, you’ve backed down slightly and have suspended the employee for two weeks 
without pay. Can the minister explain to this House, and to the employee, why any disciplinary action should 
have been taken, considering the circumstances? 
 
HON. MR. DUTCHAK: — Mr. Speaker, I have some difficulty dealing with the question since it’s 
hypothetical. Number one, I did not fire any employee at Sask Housing; number two, there was no employee at 
Sask Housing fired. There was an employee that was suspended for two weeks, and I was briefed this morning 
on the reasons for the suspension. There is some difficulty between the employee and management. It’s been an 
ongoing difficulty since July of 1985. 
 
Unfortunately, the member is reading from a press release issued from one Larry Brown, and it’s unfortunate he 
didn’t look beyond the contents of the press release to research his question. 
 
However, in saying that, Mr. Speaker, I will explain further that management originally was going to fire the 
employee; however, met with the union representatives in the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, and upon 
discussing the issue, decided that a suspension would be fair. At that point, Mr. Speaker, the union 
representative also believed that a suspension would be fair. However, upon the intervention of one Larry 
Brown, it was deemed to be unfair, resulting in the press release which the member read from. 
 
I do not intend to get involved in that particular dispute between that employee and management. The issue, I 
hope, is in no way related to the present difficulties Mr. Brown is having with his union negotiations. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question, Mr. Speaker. I guess I’ve missed something. I thought the Premier 
had appointed that member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake as a minister of the Crown to answer questions in 
this Assembly with respect to the activities of that Crown corporation. It’s a new day, Mr. Speaker, in 
parliamentary practice when a minister can say he doesn’t answer for the Crown corporation. 
 
Mr. Minister, from that question, are we to assume that you are condoning the actions of a supervisor who goes 
rummaging through his employee’s personal belongings, including personal mail? Does the minister not 
recognize this kind of action is an unjustified invasion of privacy and could well result in legal action. Are you 
and your political management at SHC so paranoid that you will stand here and support that kind of activity, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
HON. MR. DUTCHAK: — Well, Mr. Speaker, my information again is contrary to the information  



 

December 5, 1985 

3924 

 

just provided to the House by the member. The information is that certain information was found on the front 
desk of the corporation, not in the personal area occupied by the employee. However, other than that I have in 
my possession a letter which was written to the employee indicating various reasons why this suspension would 
be necessary, including falsification of sick leave; secondly, tardiness; lack of respect for her superiors in the 
housing corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are mechanisms to deal with disputes of this type. It’s unfortunate that Mr. Brown and the 
member wish to bring this to the legislature. We have a grievance procedure in place meant to resolve issues 
such as this in the work place, and I am very satisfied with that procedure, and I hope that that procedure will 
settle the issue satisfactorily. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, supplementary. Are you denying in this House that a supervisor at 
SHC went through that employee’s personal brief-case and found a note uncomplimentary to himself? Are you 
denying that in this Assembly? 
 
HON. MR. DUTCHAK: — Mr. Speaker, I do not intend in this Assembly to get into an argument with the 
member opposite about who did what. Mr. Speaker, the member may not realize it, but I have a responsibility to 
the employee who may have been aggrieved as well as a management. And in saying that, Mr. Speaker, I am 
relying on the grievance procedure that’s available to the employee to find out what happened. 
 
I don’t intend to assume that information read by the member opposite, provided to him by Mr. Larry Brown, is 
accurate. And I don’t intend to do that. And I intend to allow the procedures in place to deal with the issue 
satisfactorily. 
 
I am more concerned, Mr. Speaker, with the work that has to be done by the housing corporation. I am more 
concerned with interruptions in services to seniors, for example, that happen when we have issues such as this. 
And that’s why I’m anxious to have the matter cleared up. And I’ve advised management that that is my wish, 
this morning. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I am not relying on any press release 
issued by anyone. Members of my staff took the time to interview this woman, something I assume members of 
your staff have not, Mr. Minister. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, is again: are you denying that a supervisor at SHC rifled through this woman’s 
personal brief-case and found a note which he found offensive, and thereafter proceeded to tell her she was 
fired? Are you denying that? 
 
HON. MR. DUTCHAK: — Mr. Speaker, I do not know what really happened. And I don’t intend to 
personally investigate to find out what happened between the two parties, namely the management personnel 
and the employee. There is a procedure in place to issue a grievance. That procedure determines who was right 
in this matter, and it will determine who was right. 
 
I have before me the copy of the letter issued to the employee indicating certain things such as falsification. To 
me that looks very serious, but I don’t intend to take personal action against the employee because there is a 
procedure in place for this sort of thing. I therefore will leave it at that, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure it will be 
dealt with quite promptly. 
 
I also note the union representative originally agreed with management that a two-week suspension was fair. It 
was only until Mr. Brown became involved that suddenly it’s deemed to be unfair, and obviously now the 
opposition is involved, and they’re interviewing people involved in a dispute of this sort. I think, Mr. Speaker, 
that is extremely appalling behaviour on the part of the members opposite to get personally involved in a 
dispute between an employee and a manager in the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. I’m extremely 
surprised that they would do so. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question, Mr. Speaker. We are talking about basic human rights in what is 
supposed to be a western democracy. Mr. Speaker, we do not live behind the iron curtain.  



 

December 5, 1985 

3925 

 

This is supposed to be a western democracy. 

 

Mr. Minister, since you have not denied that the supervisor rifled through this woman’s personal brief-case, 

since you haven’t denied that, I take it to be an admission that, in fact, that happened, because if it hadn’t 

happened you would have denied it. 

 

Mr. Minister, have you considered disciplinary action against the supervisor in question, since he went through 

the personal brief-case of this employee? Surely the minister is not so arrogant and so egotistical that you’ll try 

to get someone fired for slapping a union sticker on his official portrait. Is that the kind of penalties which your 

government now stoops to? Are you that paranoid? 

 

Mr. Minister, why don’t you spend more time worrying about the housing policy in this province which is in a 

shambles and a disgrace, and less time worrying about whether or not somebody has put a sticker over top of 

the official portrait of the minister?  

 

HON. MR. DUTCHAK: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the question is silly; however, I will deal with it. I did not 

make the decision for any suspension of that employee, Mr. Speaker. That was done by management, and 

there’s a process to deal with it. However, the member raised a number of serious allegations, and I will now go 

into the letter which is provided to the individual, which I believe answers his allegations to the satisfaction of 

this House. 

 

The letter dated December 4th to the employee indicates that at 8:30 . . . and this letter is from the director of 

organizational development at the Housing Corporation, namely, management: 

 

At 8:30 this morning I met with you in the presence of union representatives and your supervisor about a 

number of incidents admitted by you. The most serious of these was a blatant, insubordinate, and 

obscene note towards your immediate supervisor. This note was the culminating incident of your 

continuing negative attitude and disrespect for management. 

 

I spoke to you on September 18th, 1985 and issued you a verbal warning regarding your negative 

attitude towards management and the corporation. I clearly indicated to you the importance of 

displaying a positive, pleasant image on the front desk, and I expected you to do so. 

 

On at least two separate occasions, Mr. Besler, your immediate supervisor, issued verbal warnings to 

you, once on July 9, 1985 for your falsifying of sick leave; and secondly, on November 1, 1985 for your 

continued tardiness in attendance to work. 

 

The letter goes on, Mr. Speaker, to indicate the problems that management had with attitude. I had wished that 

this issue would be dealt with in the grievance procedure which is properly designed to deal with disputes of 

this nature. 

 

I think it’s unfortunate that we have to debate who was right or who was wrong in this legislature because there 

are individuals that, I’m sure, would like to do good work for the corporation that are involved in this dispute. 

It’s unfortunate that this issue seems to be becoming a political issue, where it shouldn’t be. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question, Mr. Speaker, in the view of many people you fired the wrong person. 

 

Mr. Minister, have you considered — since you now admit, Mr. Minister, since you now admit 12 minutes into 

the question period that in fact the supervisor did rifle through her personal brief-case and find the note — since 

you now have that admission, Mr. Minister, which you earlier refused to give us, will you now tell us whether 

or not you condone the actions of that supervisor in invading this employee’s privacy? 



 

December 5, 1985 

3926 

 

HON. MR. DUTCHAK: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the opposition really hasn’t changed after being in 

opposition for awhile. They still just take all of this information from Mr. Brown and assume that no one else 

could be right except Mr. Brown. What’s been quoted to this House is really from the press release of Larry 

Brown. 

 

Now I have not taken a side in this issue, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know if management is providing all the intricate 

detail to me, and I also don’t know for sure what the employee’s position is. And I’m sure there are arguments 

on both sides. 

 

I know, Mr. Speaker, that as minister I will support the procedure in place, namely the grievance procedure, to 

determine who was wronged in what happened in the last few days. We have an allegation, a falsification of 

sick leave, and so on, and that’s serious, as well as the allegations made by the employee. 

 

I look forward to allowing the grievance procedure to take its course. The member opposite mentions legal 

action, and that’s another procedure that may be available. I’m not sure how it could be, under the 

circumstances, but if that’s what either party chooses, that’s their right. But, Mr. Speaker, I will not personally 

interfere and condemn either management or the employee for causing the conflict which apparently has been 

brought to us by Larry Brown and the member opposite. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I’m simply going to repeat the question I asked and 

see if you have the courage to deal with it, Mr. Minister. The question is: since you now admit that the 

supervisor in question rifled through a brief-case of the employee, do you condone a supervisor rifling through 

the personal brief-case of any employee? Do you condone that action, Mr. Minister? 

 

HON. MR. DUTCHAK: — Mr. Speaker, obviously, as I indicated before in answer to a silly question, I don’t 

condone anyone rifling through personal property of anyone else. However, the details that are provided to me 

tell me the other side of the coin, Mr. Speaker. I don’t intend to be a judge on this issue. I’m surprised that the 

member opposite is suggesting that I should be. 

 

I would also suggest that the opposition should stop interviewing people in relation to this incident. That’s 

clearly not in keeping with our situation in Saskatchewan, our grievance procedures, and so on. I think it’s a sad 

day when the opposition becomes involved in a labour dispute and starts interviewing people. 

 

Status of Oil Upgrader at Lloydminster 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Deputy Premier, in the absence of the Premier, 

and it’s regarding the status of the oil upgrader at Lloydminster. The minister will know that the Mulroney 

government has had this important industrial project under review for a number of months. 

 

My question to the minister is: have you met personally with any of the federal ministers or federal people to 

see where and when this project will be announced? 

 

HON. MR. BERNTSON: — I have not met personally with federal ministers since considerable time ago. 

However, my colleague, the Minister of Energy, may be more enlightened than I am, so I’ll turn the question 

over to him. 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, we are in relatively constant communications with our federal 

counterparts in the federal Department of Energy and Mines. We do not have specific dates. I would anticipate 

that the two governments, Husky, and the federal people will get together. If I were venturing a guess, I’d say 

within the next two weeks. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Minister, I will address it to the Minister of Energy and Mines, a  



 

December 5, 1985 

3927 

 

supplementary, seeing it’s been handed off to him. The question that I would have is: in the agreement that is 

being arranged, what guarantees are you getting that Saskatchewan content, in terms of employment and 

contracting, will be involved, and what percentage are you shooting for in those agreements? 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Part of the agreement that is being worked on has to do with non-fiscal issues. 

Those types of things are well under way. As soon as that is completed, we’ll release that information. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well the minister skirts around the issue, and I have here a quote from the Premier 

of the province in June of ’84 where he says, ‘The single largest job creation project in Saskatchewan’s history,’ 

referring to the Lloydminster project. What I would like to know from you, sir, is: what content, what 

percentage of Saskatchewan participation will there be when this project is announced? In the negotiations that 

you’re doing at the present time, what are you insisting on Saskatchewan content to be in terms of workers and 

contracts being let? 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, obviously that’s a complex issue. We will be maximizing 

Saskatchewan content in terms of labour, and in terms of acquiring materials, engineering, and whatever, and 

that, as I indicated, when those agreements are worked out, they’ll be released, and I’m sure that everyone in the 

province will be well satisfied with the measures we’ve taken. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — A supplement to the minister. The ‘trust us’ slogan that you have tried to live on 

for three years is wearing thin. I’ll ask you one more time: what percentage of Saskatchewan content are you 

trying to get? What are you negotiating for? Are you trying to get 100 per cent, 50 per cent, 25 per cent? 

Because that would seem to be fairly important. And let us know now what percentage do you think or are you 

trying to achieve in that area? 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, we are attempting to maximize Saskatchewan 

content. We will do that. It’s difficult to pick a percentage in some specific trade. We won’t have enough people 

in Saskatchewan to fill it. We are working, we are negotiating with the Government of Alberta and the federal 

people, and we will have an agreement in pace that I believe will satisfy everyone in Saskatchewan, and we 

will, in fact, work very hard to maximize Saskatchewan content. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — New question to the minister. I have here an internal document, a study that was 

done for the Department of Economic Trade and Development, the major project division, sated November 19, 

1985. And in this document, which outlines the percentage that will in fact accrue to the people of 

Saskatchewan, and I quote: 

 

The contract for the primary upgrading process technology: Saskatchewan content, zero. The contract 

for the design of the primary upgrading plant: Saskatchewan content, zero. The contract for the design of 

the secondary upgrader: Saskatchewan content, zero. The contract for the design of the hydrogen plant: 

Saskatchewan content, zero. 

 

Now you, Mr. Minister, have stood here and said that you are trying to get the utmost Saskatchewan content. In 

light of this document — this internal document — can you stand here and explain how you keep your job as a 

minister when we’re talking about zero per cent Saskatchewan content in four major areas? 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, if we take that a step further in the NewGrade project, for 

instance, the major vessels have been ordered. They can’t be made in Canada. Canadian content, zero. They 

have to come from either Japan or Italy. We have contracted for them in Japan. There will be elements in the 

engineering components, which is what he has referred to, where there is no opportunity for Saskatchewan 

content at that stage. There will be many other areas where there will be, and they will be packaged in such a 

way as to allow Saskatchewan content. 



 

December 5, 1985 

3928 

 

The reason that it’s difficult provide the percentage numbers he wants is because in those specific areas there is 
no Saskatchewan capacity to carry them out, so maybe we’ll take a larger portion of the labour. And as I 
indicated, we’re involved in negotiations of that type, and we will maximize Saskatchewan content on this 
project. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — well finally I would ask the minister: you have now agreed that in four major 
areas, based on your internal study, that there will be zero Saskatchewan content. Can you give us some idea 
overall what percentage of Saskatchewan content there will be, and how many jobs will actually come to 
Saskatchewan and not to other parts of the world, since you’re guaranteeing many of the loans that are going to 
be involved if this upgrader goes ahead? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, once again, one of the advantages which has not been accrued to 
is that we will acquire technology in the province that we will have, and then it can be exported and can be 
used. That’s a side benefit. 
 
In terms of providing an exact percentage of this portion or that portion, obviously I’m not in a position to do 
that. We will negotiate and we are negotiating to maximize Saskatchewan content, Saskatchewan jobs, be they 
labour, be they in some of the other engineering areas, and we are doing that and will continue to do that to 
represent the people of this province. Thank you. 
 

Changes in Staff of the Department of Finance 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to address a question to the Minister of Finance. Mr. 
Minister, it deals with the large number of changes that you have made in senior staff in your department since 
the disastrous April 10th provincial budget. On November 26th, the associate deputy minister of Finance, 
Lawrie McFarlane was moved to another department. Back in September, the former deputy minister of 
Finance, Michael Costello, was moved out of the department. 
 
But I ask you, Mr. Minister, were these changes your choice, or did you, in fact, sit down and have a cup of 
coffee with the Premier and the changes, in fact, were made by the Premier of this province in light of your 
disastrous budget? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, with regard to those two senior positions, I, in fact, am very 
encouraged by the work that both Mr. Costello and Mr. McFarlane will do. As the members opposite will know, 
both of those employees have served this government for a fair period of time and, I suggest, have served this 
government and previous governments very, very well. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Dealing first with McFarlane, Mr. Speaker. He has been promoted as deputy 
minister of Advanced Education and Manpower, which we believe to be a very, very important department of 
this government and very, very important to the people of Saskatchewan. That was a promotion for that 
particular individual. 
 
With regard to Mike Costello: Mike Costello has been moved, as have many deputy ministers of Finance to 
Crown corporations. Mike Costello is charged with the function of arranging the financing for the NewGrade 
upgrader, as well as working on the financing for the Husky upgrader, as and when that project comes on board. 
That is dealing, Mr. Speaker, with a great deal of money — a great deal of money, Mr. Speaker, and we have 
tremendous faith — myself, the Premier, and all members of this side of the House, in both of those individuals. 
 
With regard to their replacements, Mr. Speaker, Mr. David Heron has been brought on as the new deputy 
minister of Finance, an individual who has served in an accounting profession, and in his profession, very well, 
and very professionally for the last 20 years in this province. I, the Premier, and the members of this side of the 
House have a great deal of confidence in Mr. David Heron as well. 



 

December 5, 1985 

3929 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — I’d like to ask a supplement. There’s no doubt, on this side, we have respect for the senior 

civil servants that worked for the previous government for some 11 years, but what I want to ask you: are these 

changes of senior staff really an attempt to scapegoat them for the disastrous provincial budget, which your 

cabinet put together and burdened the people of Saskatchewan? Is it not, in fact, an attempt to save your own 

skin by an appearance of changing the inner circles of the bureaucracy of Finance and, in fact, the change 

should come by changing the minister, not the deputy? 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — The answer to that question, Mr. Speaker, is no. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Supplement. Few will believe you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to indicate, Mr. Minister, that your 

department, as you indicated, has gone through a massive change — the new deputy minister, a new assistant 

deputy minister, and a couple of new associate deputy ministers — four new senior staff. Can the Finance 

minister tell us which of these four appointments were his own personal choices, or were they, in fact, dictated 

by the Premier of Saskatchewan who has lost confidence in his Minister of Finance? 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in the case of both my department or the department that I hold 

responsibility for, ad in the case of every other minister, when you are dealing with the appointment of deputy 

ministers or senior staff, the way this government functions is for the premier and the members of cabinet that 

are directly affected to sit down and discuss it. That’s, in fact, what happened here. 

 

I fully support and endorse the changes made with regard to the senior levels in the Department of Finance, and 

I suggest many of the senior people that I have talked to, that were here before, say that it’s at least nice now 

that the Premier brings the cabinet minister in and consults with him. That was not the case before. It was ruled 

from on top by the previous premier of the province, and that minister had no input into it whatsoever. They 

support that change, and we support that change. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 131 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act (No. 2) 
 

HON. MR. EMBURY: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The Income Tax Act (No. 2). 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 132 — An Act to Provide Heritage Grants to Certain Senior Citizens 

 

HON. MR. EMBURY: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to Provide Heritage Grants to Certain 

Senior Citizens. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 133 — An Act to amend The Vehicles Act, 1983 (No. 3) 
 

HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The Vehicles Act, 1983 (No. 3). 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Before orders of the day, I would like to respond to a point of order raised by the member 

for Shaunavon with regard to remarks made by the member for prince Albert. I was in the  



 

December 5, 1985 

3930 

 

House at the time that the member was speaking, and I did hear the speech. I reviewed the record, and after 

reading the record, I find that the point of order is not well taken. 

 

CONDOLENCE 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take the opportunity to 

advise the House of some unfortunate news which reached us today with respect to the death of Mr. Auburn 

Pepper, the member of this legislature from 1964-1982, a member for the constituency of Weyburn. He will be 

known to many people. He was Deputy Speaker and served in many other capacities in this legislature. I know 

there will be another opportunity to state our sympathy with the untimely passing of Mr. Pepper. 

 

HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, just to join from this side of the House with the Leader of the 

Opposition in an expression of condolences to the bereaved family and to indicate to the House that it is our 

intention to, on Monday, deal with the formal motion of condolences. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

MRS. CASWELL: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask for leave to introduce guests because I think the highlight 

of any session is if you get students from your constituency in. Saskatoon is 163 miles away and sometimes it 

seems like 2,000. So I would certainly like to welcome the 45 students from St. Gerard School, in my 

constituency of Westmount. This is grade 7 and 8 students. Their teachers are Don Vogt, Greg Seipp, Kevin 

Yano. I will be meeting with you for pictures and discussion at 3, and I hope you will have some questions for 

me. I understand you are a French immersion school, and the questions and answers will be in English. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Because of a previous brief association with St. Gerard, I would also like to ask 

leave to welcome the students, if I may. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure in also welcoming the students from St. Gerard. My association with St. Gerard 

was a brief one. I was a practice teacher at that school between 1964 and 1965. It was a great school with great 

students, and I’m sure that that tradition still continues. I hope that their stay here is a beneficial one and a 

happy one. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 

 

HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I could have leave of the Assembly to convert items 

number 1 through 26 inclusive to motions for return, debatable. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The House Leader has moved that motions for returns (not debatable) debate. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 123 — An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act 



 

December 5, 1985 

3931 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to move second reading of Bill 123, An Act to amend 

The Provincial Court Act. 

 

The Bill makes a number of changes to the existing provincial court Act. Some of those changes are of a 

housekeeping nature, some are charter-related, and the balance related to the pension plan for provincial court 

judges. 

 

The housekeeping changes consist mainly of clarification, where the existing legislation has given rise to 

difficulties in interpretation. Several sections, as well, are amended to stipulate that they will not apply to future 

appointments. This is necessary because they were not intended to continue or to be of general application. 

 

The charter-related amendments are designed to remove provisions which may be considered discriminatory on 

the basis of sex, marital status, or age. This initiative is in keeping with this government’s policy of identifying 

and rectifying provisions which are not consistent with the charter of rights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill makes provisions for the vesting of pension rights, which is provided at the request of the 

provincial court judges’ association. Presently there is no vesting of such rights unless the judge has attained the 

age of 55 years. In future, his age will not have a bearing on whatever his pension rights are vested. 

 

These amendments will also implement the concept of voluntary early retirement for provincial court judges 

who have served a minimum of 10 years on the bench. Currently provincial court judges cannot retire until, at 

the earliest, the age of 65 years, or in the case of judges who were appointed under the Magistrates’ Court Act, 

70 years of age. Payments will, of course, be actuarially reduced where the early retirement option is chosen. In 

addition, the one-time supplementary monthly allowance is being offered at this time. This will have the effect 

of providing a supplementary monthly allowance for judges who exercise the early retirement option before 

January 31st, 1986. Mr. Speaker, the early retirement option was at the request of the provincial court judges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to move second reading of The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 1985. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, we would like the opportunity to review the Bill in more detail and to review 

the comments made by the minister. Accordingly, I would beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 122 — An Act to amend The Heritage Fund (Saskatchewan) Act (No. 3) 
 

HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Speaker, speaking on second reading of this Act, I won’t be a long time. I 

will just say simply that this Act or the amendment to this Act allows for a mechanism for making payments 

under The Farmer’s Oil Royalty refund Act out of the agriculture division of the Heritage Fund. For example, 

other payments from the Heritage Fund go to the interest rate rebate program today has something in the order 

of 5,000 farmers enjoying benefits from that. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, as well, is consistent with this government’s approach to expenditures from moneys gained 

from non-renewable resources. Our approach has been, as they become depleted, some of those revenues are set 

aside for the future when, in fact, those resources will no longer be there. As well, Mr. Speaker, moneys are set 

aside for the future — for those rainy days in the future that always come. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, our farmers today in Saskatchewan are going through a downturn. The rainy days, if you 

like, have come. The tougher times are here and just as we were not about to see the family  



 

December 5, 1985 

3932 

 

farm jeopardized by high interest rates, high interest rates and high land prices jeopardizing the 
intergenerational transfer of the family farm, and just as we sued the agricultural division of the Heritage Fund 
to provide low interest rate money for Saskatchewan farmers, today we are using the agricultural division of the 
Heritage Fund to tackle the number two farm input cost and that’s high fuel costs. 
 
The heritage in this province, Mr. Speaker, is the farmer — your parents, I suspect, as many other members in 
this Assembly. Our parents and our grandparents built this country and we are not about to let them down nor 
are we about to see those family farms that were established by our parent pioneers and the heritage that we owe 
to them that we today enjoy, we are not going to see them let down. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it is with great pleasure that I move second reading of Bill 122, An Act to amend The 
Heritage Fund (Saskatchewan) Act (No. 3). 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to say initially that this Bill marks an 
unprecedented decline in the prestige of the Minister of Finance. Earlier in this House, Mr. Speaker, we passed 
the Saskoil Bill, which affects this province’s assets and revenue to the extent of 4500 million. This government 
is not interested in trifling sums like 5 million but one would have thought 500 million would have got the 
Minister of Finance’s attention. He did not speak. Not only how is he not speaking on these Bills, he’s not even 
bothering to move Bills that are assigned to his ministry. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. The question before the Assembly is second reading of a Bill. It’s not an 
open debate and I would ask the member to stay on the subject. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, we have the Minister of Agriculture moving a Bill which has the most 
profound effect upon the finances of the province, which ought properly to be moved by the Minister of 
Finance, and for which we have not heard from the Minister of Finance. I accept your ruling, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 
been a member too long to show disrespect for the Chair, but I may say tat I would have thought the question as 
to who moved the Bill would have been a proper subject for discussion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having made those comments with respect to the Minister of Agriculture’s involvement — in my 
view he should not be involved in this Bill at all, moving this Bill — having made those comments, Mr. 
Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn debate to give members on this side and, I hope, the Minister of Finance, an 
opportunity to take part in the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 124 — An Act to establish a Dental Plan for certain Teachers 
 
HON. MRS. SMITH: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to move second reading of a Bill, Bill No. 124, 
an Act to establish The Teachers’ Dental Plan Act. 
 
The teachers’ dental plan is very much a part of the recently concluded two-year agreement for 1985 and 1986 
— provincial collective bargaining agreement between our Saskatchewan teachers, our school boards, and the 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over recent years teachers have made some significant gains in working benefits, the most recent 
one being the 30 year and out retirement clause. And I say it was a major gain, Mr. Speaker, for it was the first 
one in Canada for the organization of teachers. Today, Mr. Speaker, we see another gain. Changing structures 
and economic times, as we all know, do not always dictate increases, but in recognition of the important role 
that teachers play in the education of our youth, approximately 11,000 teachers in this province will benefit 
from this plan. And I’m sure my new colleague and my new critic for education, the hon. member from Regina 
North East, who I welcome to this House as a past teacher, a former counsellor with the STF federation, and 
also as the  



 

December 5, 1985 

3933 

 

former minister of education, will agree that benefits for teachers do, in fact, deserve some recognition. 

 

The Teachers’ Dental Plan Act will establish a dental plan already in place for out-of-scope employees of the 

Government of Saskatchewan. And while the plan will be handled by an insurance company which will be 

selected by tender, I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, to announce that the administration and management of the plan 

will in fact be administered by teachers through the very capable Teachers’ Superannuation Commission. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Speaker, we, as government, are pleased today to present this Bill, and I respectfully move second reading 

of bill No. 24, an Act to establish The Teachers’ Dental Plan Act. 

 

MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to indicate that I am aware, and the opposition is 

aware, that this Bill is a result of the agreement which has recently been signed and agreed to by teachers, 

trustees, and the government. It’s an agreement that took a record time to settle — the first time in history that 

an agreement was not settled before the end of the school year. I think that there is a message in that and I will 

want to make some comments on this Bill eventually, as well as the process through which it was brought 

about. 

 

The minister, in her comments, indicated that this is a major gain. Well, let me say that I agree. A dental plan is 

a laudable idea and something which teachers have been asking for some time, and certainly welcome that 

provision. But the minister failed to mention that in this agreement there is also a major loss — no increase for 

the fiscal year or the school year 1985. And I will have something to say about that when I continue the debate. 

 

I want to take the opportunity, and I’ve already begun, to discuss this Bill and the dental plan with teachers and 

school trustees’ association. I have made the contact. We will want to consider the Bill carefully in light of 

those consultations. At that time I will want to speak on it at greater length and ask some questions further to 

that in committee. But for the time being, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 127 — An Act to amend The Cancer Foundation Act 

 

HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to explain this amendment to The Cancer Foundation Act. 

 

The Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation is established under the Act as a corporate body with its own board of 

governors. The foundation has broad statutory duties to operate facilities and programs for the diagnosis, 

prevention, and treatment of cancer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is normal for bodies such as the Cancer Foundation to have the authority to borrow funds for the 

purpose of undertaking capital projects in a rational and effective way. For example, both the University 

Hospital board and the South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre board have this authority under their respective 

statutes. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, the borrowing powers of the foundation are currently limited to borrowing for the 

purpose of interim financing only. The foundation brought this limitation to our attention and requested that it 

be modified. The proposed amendment will simply bring the foundation’s borrowing powers into line with 

those of similar organizations in the health care field and in other areas. 

 

The amendment will be helpful to the foundation at this time in relation to the development of a new cancer 

clinic, which will shortly begin construction in Saskatoon. 



 

December 5, 1985 

3934 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to move second reading of this Bill. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, it has become a hallmark of this government that ministers do not take 
the time or the trouble to listen to the public, and that includes the professional medical staff who have to work 
with these Bills. We saw that earlier in question period, Mr. Speaker. I don’t intend to review those events. 
Suffice it to say that — and the Speaker is encouraging me along that path — the minister came without 
discussing it with his staff. 
 
I have no confidence, Mr. Speaker, at all that the minister has turned over a new leaf and is finally starting to 
listen to doctors and nurses who are vehement in their complaints about the way this government is running our 
health system. The nurses have concerns about staffing and equipment, none of which, Mr. Speaker, are being 
listened to by this government. It is as arrogant in dealing with them as it is with dealing with anyone else. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, I believe that this minister has not taken the time to discuss it with the professional staff 
in the cancer clinics who will be involved, I beg leave to adjourn the debate so that the opposition can perform 
that function which ought properly to have been performed by the minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 119 — An Act respecting Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Corporation 
 

Clause 1 (continued) 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Good afternoon. The first item of business is item number 1, Bill No. 119, An Act 
respecting Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Corporation. This is a continuation of yesterday’s debate. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much. Mr. Minister, yesterday afternoon we asked you, if my 
memory serves me correct, four different times how you were going to calculate the number of shares the 
Crown investments corporation would receive. By my calculation, those four questions elicited five responses. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Only five? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well I only counted five. In the confusion, I might have missed one. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder since last evening if you have taken the time to read the Bill. The Bill is, I think, quite 
clear about what sum of money is being used to calculate the shares. The Bill says with considerable clarity that 
the loan of $145.5 million is being converted into shares. I ask you, Mr. Minister: will you now admit that your 
comments at five to 5 last night were patent nonsense and that in fact it is the sum of $145.5 million which is 
the sum that is used to calculate the common shares? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, the answer is no. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well I think the answer to that is the minister hasn’t read the Bill and doesn’t know. 
Mr. Minister, are you prepared to read the Bill and tell us how you’re going to calculate the number of shares 
that CIC is going to get? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, the government shares will be the fair market interest of the 
government’s interest in the company divided by nine. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you attach any significance . . . I may say I’ve seen some 
arrogant, confused performances in my time but this really takes the cake. Mr. Minister, I  



 

December 5, 1985 

3935 

 

wonder if you’ve taken the time to read on page 7, section 3(7)(a): 
 

(b) the Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan may agree with Saskoil to convert the loan of 
$145,499,100 mentioned in clause (a) into fully paid common shares of Saskoil on those terms and 
conditions that are approved by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you can forgive us for attaching some significance to that clause of the Bill. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, that clause in the Bill is completely consistent with what I’ve 
been telling you. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — All right. Mr. Minister, what part does the fair market value of the oil fields, of the 
reserves, play then in calculating the number of common shares CIC is going to get? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, once again it’s the fair market value of the government’s 
interest in the corporation. That has nothing to do with the assets of the corporation. And that is the message 
that throughout this whole piece we have had a great deal of problem getting across to the opposition, that assets 
and equity are not identical. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I take it the, Mr. Minister, that the loan of $145.5 million, rounded off roughly, do I 
take it that plays no direct role in determining the number of shares which CIC will get? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, the number that appears here and we round off to $145 million 
is the book value. The fair market value has yet to be determined and will be slightly higher. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Can the minister take a wild shot at what the fair market value might be so that we 
can determine what the interest of the Crown will be in this company? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — The interest of the Crown will be the fair market value which will be slightly 
more than the number indicated in the Act, 145 million plus. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, it is simply not credible for you to suggest in this House, four days 
before these shares go on sale, that you don’t know what the fair market value is. That’s just not credible, Mr. 
Minister. You must have an estimate. I ask you: what’s the figure? What is the figure which you place on the 
fair market value of the Crown’s interest in this company? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, one more time, the date is a target. We have no guarantee that 
the shares will in fact . . . that the final prospectus will be filed on Monday or Tuesday or when they will go on 
sale, as we have indicated. As well, the fair market value will be determined by the conditions in the market, 
which change on a daily basis, and can only be done at the last moment prior to filing. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — That, Mr. Minister, is unmitigated nonsense. That is unmitigated nonsense, Mr. 
Minister, and I’m amazed you don’t know it. For someone who’s preening himself to take over the Department 
of Finance, you’re a fair fool when it comes to dealing with figures, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, you had planned to have these shares on sale on December 9th. Mr. Minister, you must have a 
figure which you put on the fair market value of the assets which you say is going to be used to determine the 
number of shares the Crown has. What’s your figure? Mr. Minister, you must have it. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, it almost causes me to ask the question whether my learned 
colleague, in his legal background, if this is the first time he’s ever dealt with a securities commission 
prospectus. The point is, the day before — the day before — the final prospectus is filed, the pricing meeting 
will take place, and those determinations will be made. It’s not done before. It will be done the day before it’s 
filed. If we meet the target of next Monday, it will take place on  



 

December 5, 1985 

3936 

 

Sunday. If it’s later, it will take place later. 
 
(1500) 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, that is not the way it is done, and I’m amazed that Mr. Minister hasn’t 
figured that out before this. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just ask you to think about a prospective investor who has not blind confidence in this 
government’s management abilities. I think they can be forgiven for that, given the record of the department 
which you are apparently about to take over. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, suppose the shareholder . . . Suppose a prospective shareholder does not have blind 
confidence in your management ability. He wants to know what the share is worth. That’s a key question. What 
is the share worth? What’s the company worth, and what percentage of those company’s assets do I own? There 
is no way in the world you can figure that out from this prospectus. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a number of prospectuses with me. I would hold my personal files and just pull the number 
out at random. A float of Placer Development about two years ago; Western Pulp and Paper; Coenerco, this 
year’s prospectus; Orbit Gas and Energy; Coenerco, the final prospectus; Seinna. 
 
All of them, Mr. Minister, tell me two things: one, what the share structure looks like before the share float; the 
second thing it tells me is what it’s going to look like afterwards. With that information, I cannot make any 
possible determination as to what share of the company’s assets I’ll own, Mr. Minister. You must have that 
information. It is just simply bizarre for you to suggest you don’t know what the Crown’s share in this is going 
to be. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, a couple of points. The numbers will all be in the final 
prospectus. The final prospectus will be filed, and no one will be purchasing shares until he has had the 
opportunity to review that to any degree he wants. 
 
If there are people who wish to discuss Saskoil and its position and its value, as I indicated yesterday, we have 
here a number of Canadian oil companies of the same size, and you can do the calculations within that. 
 
There are numerous ways that an investor can determine information. The point however, is — and I assume 
that the prospectuses that you have in front of you are finals — and Saskoil will have a final that will be filed. 
The pricing will take place the day before, and it will all be filed with the securities commission, and everyone 
who is interested will have the opportunity to study those when it’s filed. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, Mr. Minister, let me try and approach this from a different fashion then. We’re 
dealing with a minimum of $510 million worth of assets that the Crown owns here. 
 
Mr. Minister, I took nothing other than the fields, which are relatively liquid assets and easily sold. I took the 
current assets and subtracted the current liabilities, and that figure came to around $510 million, so that’s about 
what we’re dealing with in the most liquid of assets. It doesn’t count the trucks and all the other stuff above the 
ground that Saskoil will own. It’s still a fair chunk of money. You’re asking us to vote on a Bill which will 
result in the disposition of those assets. 
 
Do you not think, Mr. Minister, you owe it to this Assembly to let us know what we’re voting on? Do you not 
think as a matter of courtesy you ought to tell us how many shares the Crown expects to own after this vote is 
through? 
 
Let me ask you another question, Mr. Minister. Let me ask it in a different way. What is the maximum number 
of shares which the Crown could own after this takes place? 



 

December 5, 1985 

3937 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — There are two possible methods to answer the question, Mr. Chairman, both 
of which have been given before. The Crown will own approximately 60 per cent of the shares of the 
corporation after the offering, if we can word it that way, or the Crown will own a number of shares that is 
equal to the fair market value of the Crown’s interest in the corporation, divided by nine, which will be 
somewhere slightly over $145 million 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — How are you going to determine . . . By fair market value — do I take it we’re 
speaking the same language — what you mean is: the value of the company’s assets on break-up? If you sold 
the assets, asset by asset, is that what we’re talking about? We’re talking about fair market value. I want to 
know, Mr. Minister, because you and Mr. Nikiforuk have something startling . . . the different views on what 
the fair market value of this company’s worth. Mr. Nikiforuk seems to be accurate. The liquid assets count for 
another 3 million. Now, Mr. Minister, how do you calculate the fair market value, as I don’t take it to be 
anywhere near, anywhere near, $500 million — I’m sorry, anywhere near $145 million. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, once again, fair market value is determined on equity, not on 
assets of the company. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — So this is answer number eight by my count. We’re now dealing with, not the fair 
market value of the assets, but with the Crown’s equity in the corporation. Mr. Minister, will you give me the 
formula by which you determine the sum, which you say is somewhat in excess of $145 million? Will you just 
give me the formula, Mr. Minister, and stop trying to explain it? Surely you can read the formula off the 
documents from some of your briefing papers? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, I am a little hesitant to be totally repetitive, but I will read into 
the record, again, exactly what I read into the record yesterday for the benefit of the member from Regina 
Centre. When a public offer of shares is made to the public, it is appropriate to use certain market investment 
criteria when determining the market value of the company. Three possibilities: price cash flow multiples; a 
price earnings multiple; or price net asset value ratios. 
 
The multiples assigned to Saskoil’s financial ratios are fair from the government’s (company’s) and investor’s 
point of view. And I will give you some examples. In terms of price cash flow applied to Saskoil, 3.75 times to 
four times (not the term exactly) — the industry averages 3.9 times; price earnings applied to Saskoil, 6 to 6.5 
times — industry average, 10.6 times; price net asset value, 55 per cent to 60 per cent in the case of Saskoil, and 
the industry average is 60 per cent. 
 
I trust that adds some further information for the member, although as I indicated is an exact repeat of the 
information that I gave in this yesterday. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Nor do I know at this point in time within $100,000 how many shares the Crown is 
going to have. Mr. Minister, I just can’t believe that CIC doesn’t have a figure of the number of shares you 
expect to own on December 10th if this Bill passes when you hope it does. You must have that figure, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, once more the Crown will own approximately 60 per cent of 
the fair market value of the corporation, fair market value to be determined the day before the filing of the final. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Do I take it, Mr. Minister, that the price at which the shares are being sold will result 
in a price earnings ratio of 6.5? Is that what I understood the minister to say? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — That is certainly ballpark, Mr. Chairman, in that vicinity. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, Mr. Minister, 6.5 is indeed fairly low. I’ve just asked the page to get me a 
copy of today’s Globe and Mail. I would be surprised in this market if there are very many oil companies where 
the price earnings ratio is that low. Mr. Minister, why not sell them somewhere  



 

December 5, 1985 

3938 

 

more close to what they’re worth? Why not sell them at a price which would have resulted, to use your figures, 

in a price earnings ratio of 10? Why sell them so cheap? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, once again, in responding to the member I indicated three 
methods that are often used to determine valuation. The fact is that in the case of oil and gas corporations, price 
cash flow and price net asset value are more appropriate then price earnings. And, as you will know from the 
figures I gave you, those are right on industry averages. In terms if this particular industry, those are the more 
appropriate mechanisms. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, for the moment I, for my part, am abandoning an attempt to get the 
picture of the share structure after this Bill is passed and after the float’s completed. I have come to the painful 
conclusion, Mr. Minister, that you don’t know. I can’t think of any reason why you wouldn’t give it to us. I 
don’t suppose you’re ashamed of it. I have come to the painful conclusion you don’t know, and if you don’t 
know, I don’t suppose I’m going to find out by asking you. 
 
Mr. Minister, dealing for the moment with the value of $9, you say — and I have to take your word for it — 
that a $9 share will result in a price earnings ratio of 6. That is really quite low. I wonder, Mr. Minister, why 
you didn’t sell the shares at a price which would have been closer to their real worth. That is somewhere around 
$10, or 10, I’m sorry; somewhere around a price earnings ratio of 10. I’ll take your word that that’s the industry 
average. Why sell them for 6 if the industry average is 10? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, once again the market, when considering oil and gas 
corporations as I indicated, primarily uses the price cash flow and the price net asset value. There are some 
reasons why the other price earnings is not the best method to use, and while we admit that that is slightly low 
in some ways, it does indicate the strong position of the corporation, but the other two mechanisms are more 
appropriate in discussing oil and gas companies. 
 
(1515) 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, will you admit the truth, that you priced these shares at an abnormally 
low value in an attempt to ensure that this brain-child of yours wouldn’t fail and that they would sell? Isn’t that 
the real reason why these shares are so low, Mr. Minister? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, the answer to that is no, but if you wish to spend a lot of time 
advocating that throughout Saskatchewan, you might take sales to an even higher level than they are now, if 
that’s possible. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, I and my colleagues have no interest whatsoever in seeing this 
corporation, I suppose, succeed or fail. It’s not our function here. Our function is to represent the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan and to determine as best we can — and that’s an exceedingly difficult chore, given the nature of 
the answers we’ve been getting — our function is to determine whether or not the taxpayers are getting a fair 
price for their shares. A price earnings ratio of six, unless there is something unusual, suggests that the taxpayer 
isn’t getting a fair value for the assets, and that it ought to be considerably higher. 
 
I ask you again, Mr. Minister, why you have priced these shares so far below the market average, which you 
admitted was an average? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, one more time. I think the member has asked this question 
somewhere in the area of 15 times. Once again, the reason, or one of the reasons that price earnings ratios are 
not used predominantly in pricing oil and gas companies is because, in the case of oil and gas companies, the 
levels of depletion and other write-offs that are part of the industry are so dependent on company-specific 
factors that it’s often an unreliable indicator. As I have indicated several times — possibly more than several — 
the more realistic and the more used mechanisms are price cash flow and net asset value, and in the case of the 
ones applied to Saskoil those are right on. 



 

December 5, 1985 

3939 

 

I would simply repeat, Mr. Chairman, that it is the opinion of this side of the House, the opinion of Saskoil, that 
these shares are accurately priced and I suppose the only way . . . We can argue about this all day. The only way 
we will ever know is to watch their performance after they have been sold in the market and determine what 
happens. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, whatever formula your company, Saskoil, may use, and you’re 
certainly successful in keeping it from us in determining this, whatever formula they may use, investors — and I 
do know a bit about investment — investors do use a price earnings ratio. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have the Financial Post from December 7th, ’85. I’ve looked at a number, and I’ll read them to 
you if you like. I looked at a number of mid-sized oil companies . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What date is it? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — It is December 7th, ’85. Yes, that’s the date of the paper, today’s paper. It’s the 
December 7th edition that comes out a couple of days early. If the minister had any familiarity with the 
Financial Post you’d know that, like a magazine, it’s usually dated a couple of days, sent out a couple of days 
in advance of the date of the paper. 
 
Mr. Minister, I haven’t found any oil companies with a price earnings ratio, which are mid-sized, with a price 
earnings ratio of that nature. Indeed, oil companies of a size of Saskoil, such as Bow Valley and so on — I pick 
a few which are approximately the same size — have a price earnings ratio several times six. Bow Valley 
happens to be 27, as a matter of interest. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, the price earnings ratio which you just admitted suggests an abnormally low value on the 
shares. That, Mr. Minister, has been the gravamen of our charge against this government. It’s not that you’re 
getting rid of Saskoil. You may say you have a mandate to do that but, Mr. Minister, the gravamen of our 
charge against this government is that you’re selling these assets at fire sale prices. The price earnings ratio 
which you just gave me, to my mind, Mr. Minister, proves just that — that you’re giving away at absurdly low 
prices these assets. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, a couple of points. First of all Bow Valley is not a comparable 
company. I will give you a number if you wish that are comparable, and you can check them in the Financial 
Times. They’d be the ones that we gave yesterday. I would suggest to you Aberford, Alberta Energy, Bonanza, 
BP Canada, Canadian Occi or Canadian Roxy, Canterra, Chieftain, Dome Canada, Merland, Murphy, Norcen, 
Numac, Oakwood, Omega, PanCanadian, Precambrian, Sceptre. Those would be comparable. 
 
You indicate that price earnings ratios, in your opinion, are reasonable and the proper mechanism to use in 
pricing corporation. My advisors suggest to me that that is not the case, that is not what happens with oil and 
gas companies. They suggest that price cash flow or multiples of price net asset value are, in fact, more 
common and are more reasonable. And I would suggest, once again, that you get the Financial Post out and 
check these companies, check those ratios, and see how the pricing that we’ve indicated compares. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, how did you arrive with the figure of $9 then? Let me start back at the 
basics then. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, there are a number of market factors that go into determining 
what price we are going to charge for the shares. Or financial advisors went through the exercise and 
determined that a reasonable price, and I emphasize the word reasonable, was $29 for the units. We, as the 
shareholders, determined that we wanted to sell this percentage of the corporation in units to convertible 
preferred shares and a common. The assessment was then done, and the price arrived at. The determination, as I 
indicated, is a combination of a lot of market factors which they have successfully provided to many other 
corporations. They were hired on the basis of their expertise and experience, and the pricing took place in that 
manner. 



 

December 5, 1985 

3940 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, that is a complicated, convoluted way of saying you priced them at 
$29 because that is what Wood Gundy recommended you do. That’s all you said in five minutes of stumbling 
around your desk. Mr. Minister, the last time that I looked around this Assembly, no employee of Wood Gundy 
had a seat in the legislature. There is no way that I can ask anyone from Wood Gundy to accept, in a 
parliamentary sense, any responsibility for this Bill. So I ask you, Mr. Minister, why did Wood Gundy 
recommend a figure of $29 to you? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, the financial advisors to Saskoil did their market analysis, 
used the many factors I’ve indicated, and then they took the instructions of the shareholders — and they were 
very specific. We wanted to market a product that was available to the small investor of Saskatchewan. We 
wanted to give the Saskatchewan investor an opportunity to invest in Saskoil, to become involved for the first 
time ever, directly involved in the ownership of a Crown corporation. The intent was wide distribution in the 
province. Consequently we made sure that they were available through a number of outlets. We did the 
marketing program as indicated. And the price that was recommended was one that was (1) fair and reasonable; 
and (2) met the objectives of the corporation and the shareholder. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I turn for a moment to page 31 of the prospectus and one of the 
issues that a number of our speakers had concerns about, the issue of share options. I wonder if you could 
outline briefly for us the logic behind offering a share option to the, as you say here, the five senior officers, 
who will be allowed an option at $9 per share up to February 28th, 1986, and that option would be a maximum 
of 50,000 shares. 
 
As we mentioned in our speeches, our opposition to this is obviously that if the shares, as we believe, are 
underpriced, that they can buy them for 9, and the increase to what we believe they’re really worth — 15. $17, 
some would believe 20 — these individuals would be able to wait until February 28th, not risk any money, 
would have an option to go out and buy those shares at $9, and sell them on March 1st for 17 or $20, and, in the 
process, making a fairly significant amount of money with no risk, I say. If the price happened to go down, if 
we’re wrong and the price of the shares goes down, they don’t have to exercise their option; they lose no 
money. 
 
I just want to get clear, for the people who are selling these shares, the people of the province who will be 
giving this away, in essence, why you’re doing it, and what’s the logic behind it? 
 
(1530) 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, a number of points here. I hope they satisfy the member 
opposite’s concerns. 
 
Saskoil, after this Bill is passed, will, in essence, become a private sector corporation. The provision that we 
have in the prospectus is very common amongst private sector corporations. In fact, in the most recent situation 
where a government provided investment opportunities for citizens in the PWA issue, there was a similar stock 
option included in it. 
 
As a matter of fact, the stock option that we have in this prospectus is very modest, a very short term, relative to 
what is common in the private sector. And I think it’s important to note that the officers of the corporation, who 
will have the opportunity to exercise that option, had no role, played no role at all in pricing of the shares. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — The point I think that many Saskatchewan residents will not grasp is why these 
five senior officers would stand to gain a windfall profit if the price of the shares does go up to, let’s say, 15 or 
$18. And let’s use an example just for the record. 
 
If you were to double the price of the share, let’s take for example — and I use it only as an example — $9 a 
share increase, and they exercised their option and bought the 50,000 shares and sold them a day later for $18, 
having bought them for $9, which the prospectus and you, sir, have agreed they  



 

December 5, 1985 

3941 

 

should and will be able to do, they would stand to gain almost half a million dollars, $450,000 — not taken any 

risk. And I would say to you that purchasing an oil company that they already work for using the taxpayers’ 

dollar to have built that company, I think is a great deal different than someone who’s out in the public market 

working for a private company and putting plays together or putting companies together. 

 

As you will see, these people have worked for Saskoil, for a public company, and have got, I would think, a 

reasonable income over the last number of years. And as part of their job they put together this deal which you 

asked them to. They’re getting paid their salary. They have, I would imagine, expense accounts. I don’t know 

and I won’t go into that. 

 

But here on top of that you’re saying their salary isn’t enough. And we can go into what their salary is. But 

you’re saying that salary isn’t enough and we have to give them more incentive, an incentive to sell off 

one-third of a Crown corporation, one that the people of Saskatchewan already own. 

 

They’re not going out on the market and finding an oil company bidding against other oil companies in a 

competitive market. They’re taking a Crown corporation where there is no direct competition in purchase of this 

company, because no one else has any chance to get in and buy it as a unit. They’re not taking any risk. They 

stand to lose no money. 

 

The other thing in most private sector companies . . . The minister seems to take this all very lightly and he sits 

with his officials and they laugh about this offer. But I say to you, this is not funny, and it’s one of the reasons 

you people are in the trouble you are politically, is that when people raise legitimate concerns with you, you and 

your officials laugh as if it’s a little party. Well I can say that if you’re going to be making that kind of money, 

then there should be a better explanation than you’ve given, because these people stand to make a great deal of 

money. They’ve taken no risk with any of their capital. 

 

And I say to you again, in most private sector deals when they’re given options they’re also putting money into 

the deal at the other end. I don’t believe there’s any money being put into this deal by those people. They’re 

getting a big salary; they’ve an expense account. You’ve guaranteed their job for a number of years, previous 

government possibly. What is the risk? Why are they being allowed to possibly make in this area — on the 

maximum side, I agree — in the area of half a million dollars with no risk being taken? And I say to you that 

the explanation you give simply isn’t going to wash with the public. 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, prior, as he introduced that long monologue, the comment was 

something to the effect that the public who invested in the corporation would not accept the fact that the 

executives had the opportunity of some windfall profit. I would remind the member that the people who invest 

will realize exactly the same windfall profit, if in fact there is a windfall profit, which I very much doubt. I think 

you will find these are reasonably priced and will respond reasonably in the market. 

 

The point, however, that seems to completely evade you, the point is that the people who determine whether 

they want to invest in this corporation or not, for the first time in the history of this province will have a choice 

whether they’re going to invest or not. 

 

The fact of the matter is that you have exactly the same attitude you always had. You spent three years trying to 

convince people in this province that you’ve learned to listen, that you’ve somehow made this miraculous 

change, and the fact of the matter is every time you stand up and open your mouth everybody in the province 

knows there’s been no change. 

 

It’s the same old party; it’s the same old attitude; it’s the same old control of people’s lives. And for once 

people are going to have an opportunity to make a choice, and that choice is laid out in that prospectus and they 

can assess it and they will make those decisions. And I will suggest to you that the public will be well pleased 

with this offer. 



 

December 5, 1985 

3942 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — The minister is very comfortable in the House, surrounded by 55 of his members, 
and we’ve seen this for three and a half years. For three and a half years we’ve seen the minister and other 
ministers get up and do their cheerleading in the House, like they are today. But I can tell you that Regina North 
East, where you get out with the . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! The item we are discussing is not Regina North East, and I would ask the 
member to stick to Bill No. 119. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — The chairman has allowed the minister to talk about the previous government and 
the last . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! I believe members on both sides of the House at times have wavered from 
the Bill at hand. I’m asking the member from Shaunavon and all members to stick to the item of business, Bill 
No. 119. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — We will keep it in mind. And I would ask the minister, because the Chair has 
allowed him great freedom to rove and talk about many other issues and obviously doesn’t allow us that same 
privilege, I would say to the minister that he need only look at what people are saying in the past three years 
about these kinds of Bills, where you bring them into the House with a great deal of arrogance, shove them 
through without proper debate. 
 
And I say to you, when people ask legitimate questions, you laugh about it. I say that’s not a proper way to 
debate a Bill. But you can carry on because the success rate that you’ve had in doing that I think is in our favour 
and will continue on, fumbling along as we have for the past three years. 
 
But I want to get back to the issue at hand. The issue at hand is a share offering, an option on some share, 
50,000 of them, being given to the five senior officers of the corporation. I want to go through it again, because 
you are saying if the shares go up, everyone will be happy, and there’s nothing wrong with these people who 
have taken no risk in getting a windfall profit. Well, if the people who paid $29 for their shares get a windfall 
profit, they’ve taken a risk. That makes sense. 
 
The people I’m talking about and you’re talking about, the five senior officers in this 50,000 share option, are 
not talking the same risk, because as I say, if the shares go up by February 28th, they can that day buy the shares 
ad sell them the next day without any risk at all. And I’d ask you if you don’t see a difference between someone 
buying them before they go up, and this offering which is being made, option that is being given, which gives 
them until February 28th to buy and then resell them. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, once more the point that we are establishing Saskoil as a 
private sector corporation. The provision that the member is alluding to is a very common provision in private 
sector corporations. The specifics of this share option are in fact very conservative. They are short term, relative 
to others, but they are consistent with what happens with what happens in other corporations. 
 
The member would argue that the executives have not put any of their own money into the thing. Well once 
again, possibly the reason they haven’t is because they didn’t have the opportunity to put their own money into 
it. 
 
We come back to the question of choice, which I have referred to several times in this House. The fact of the 
matter is, it is a common practice. This one is very short, modest terms, if you will, and I think reasonable. And 
as I indicated, investors will have the prospectus, will have the opportunity to consider that. If they feel it’s 
unfair, there’s nobody forcing them to invest. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I wonder, referring to the options to senior 
staff, whether the shortness of the option isn’t itself a matter to raise some . . . at least questions. The norm with 
respect to executive options are longer term options which give the chief executive or  



 

December 5, 1985 

3943 

 

senior executives an opportunity to make a substantial profit if the value of the shares goes up, and a sufficient 

period time is normally provided so that the efforts of the senior executives can influence the value of the 

shares. And that’s why directors do it, because they want the shares to go up in value, and they want to give that 

kind of an incentive to senior officers, to have the shares go up in value, and they know that the efforts of the 

senior officers will contribute to the performance of the company. 

 

Now would you mind explaining for the benefit of the committee what you expect the senior officers to do 

between now and February 28th, the term of the option, which is going to materially affect the value of these 

shares. 

 

If it had been a five-year option, I would know what you were talking about. But you are talking about a very, 

very short-term option, which is clearly not here as an incentive to the senior officers to act so that the value of 

the corporation increases, but is here as some other kind of incentive, some other kind of benefit. 

 

Would you again explain to the committee what you expect the senior officers to do between now and February 

28th which may materially affect the value of these shares and the value of the company? 

 

(1545) 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, I suppose in the process of putting this prospectus together it 

was the determination that we wanted the executive share option. Considering the environment that we exist in 

here, we anticipated the questions that the member of Shaunavon has raised. Consequently, we chose the rather 

modest and conservative period of time. What we expect the executive members to do in that two- or three- 

month period is continue to run the corporation in the very efficient and excellent manner that they have run it 

since the corporation received its new mandate in mid-1982, and we would anticipate that that would continue 

that way. 

 

I could mention, as well, that the new board of directors, once they have had their annual general meeting and 

the other investors have had an opportunity to place their members on the board, may choose to extend the share 

option element to the executive, and may in fact choose to extend it to a longer period, as you have indicated is 

not uncommon practice. 

 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Do I understand then that you feel the executive have performed their function, 
the senior executives have performed their function in a commendable way since at least 1982, and that you 
expect them to continue that, and that in order to induce them to continue that — what they have done for three 
years — for a further three months, you’re going to give them this potential benefit flowing from an option that 
could be worth a great deal of money? 
 
Did I pick up your meaning — that they have performed will for three years, that you ant to induce them to 
continue to perform for three months, and in order to do that you’re giving them this option? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — I think that the comments from the Leader of the Opposition are not 
inconsistent. I suppose the proof of the pudding, if you will, in the performance of the executives, will in fact be 
the performance of the shares once they begin to trade in the market. So consequently, apart from what I may 
think about their performance, we will find out what the people think of their performance. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, that is not the case. The performance of the 
shares will depend upon the initial pricing. I used to chuckle when people talked about a successful offering of 
bonds when the bonds went up two or three points the day after you had your underwriting. That was evidence, 
not of a successful offering, but of an unsuccessful offering. You obviously priced them too low. Any time you 
want to sell something at too low a price, you can expect the price to rise. If you then take credit on the grounds 
that the price is rising, then you are  



 

December 5, 1985 

3944 

 

taking credit for the wrong thing. 

 

I will come back to this question of option. But I want to turn to another issue you are raising. Yesterday . . . 

and I want to quote a little bit of what you said because I wasn’t clear just what you were talking about. And 

now we’re again talking about what I think is the key issue, is the value of the assets, the value of the shares, 

and whether or not the Crown is getting enough for this essentially 40 per cent of the undertaking which is 

being sold. You know our view that the price for the 40 per cent of the undertaking is too low. Your answer 

was: 

 

There is a difference between sale of assets and sale of equity. We have tried to make that clear. I 

believe your Leader (referring to me) is beginning to grasp that. You can take industry average, if you 

will. I can go through some companies and what they are valued at, or trading at. Saskoil will be sold . . . 

they will be valued, I should say, at . . . 60 per cent of the price net asset value. 

 
Now that was the phrase you used — price net asset value. And it is this phrase, price net asset value, which I 
want to explore a bit because I am not clear what you are talking about. And you are saying: ‘All right, to go 
through some other very similar corporations just for comparison,’ and you went through Aberford, 51 per cent; 
Alberta Energy, 60 per cent; Bonanza, 54 per cent. You went through a similar list today, and you included in 
your list, PanCanadian. 
 
I would like to pick up on PanCanadian because I am not an acquaintance with that corporation but have some 
knowledge o fit. You will recall that I mentioned PanCanadian in my remarks on second reading. Now would 
you take me through the pricing, the current pricing, of PanCanadian stocks based upon this concept to which 
you referred of a price net asset value? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, on the PanCanadian item, what I gave you yesterday, the table 
is simply a fact of the market. We were giving you the effects. Possibly I can try once more to separate the 
difference, and maybe in note form, technically, the equity is being offered in Saskoil on the basis of 50 to 60 
per cent of net asset value — assuming a 20 per cent discount rate which is the discount rate applied under 
current market conditions. Equity offerings of Canadian oil and gas companies have always traded at some 
discount to net asset value. 
 
Purchasers of assets are prepared to pay more than investors in equity because (a) a purchaser of assets can 
write-off annually 10 per cent of the purchase price of the assets on a declining balance; (b) the investor’s share 
of a company do not have direct access to the cash flow of a company. Investors only have access to the cash 
flow to the extent that the board of directors declares dividends. Purchasers of assets are prepared to pay more 
for direct access to the cash flows. And thirdly, purchasers of assets can generally select the assets that they’re 
prepared to buy. Investors in shares invest in the entire range of assets and to the extent that the mix is not 
optimal the investors are not prepared to pay the full price. 
 
In addition, it is not appropriate to infer that the reserve table indicate the fair market value of the company’s 
reserves. On page 8 of the preliminary prospectus, the following quote appears: 
 

The following tables summarize Coles’ evaluations of Saskoil’s reserves. All evaluations of future net 
production revenue set forth in the tables are stated prior to provisions for income taxes and indirect 
costs and do not necessarily represent the fair market value of the reserves. 

 
That’s page 8 of the prospectus. The fair market value of the company’s reserves would be determined in the 
market. And if I can try for the sake of anybody who is following this debate to put this thing in some type of 
perspective, I believe that the Leader of the Opposition is not attempting to make an economic argument. He is 
making a political argument. He wants to be able to say that Saskoil is being sold for less than it is worth. In 
fact, this is simply not the fact.  
 
If you look at the various ways that something can be divested, if it was the intention of the 



 

December 5, 1985 

3945 

 

government to simply take Saskoil and get it out of the Crown sector, to have no more control over it, if we 
were not concerned who purchased it, if we were not concerned whether the corporation continued in its present 
form, whether it stayed in the province, we would tie the whole thing up in a bow and we would sell the assets. 
And what you are recommending in terms of pricing would be that type of a transaction and we would have to 
sell it to an Esso or some major who had money to purchase it. That would realize the largest return, if that were 
the type of divestiture we’re interested in. 
 

We are obviously not interested in that procedure. If it were the objective of this government to strip Saskoil 

and sell it off and simply acquire as much money as we could, and at the same time maintain some presence 

with a stripped-down version of the corporation, we would pare off the various assets and sell them 

individually. In that case we would not realize as much return as we would if we sold it all, but we would 

realize some substantial return. 

 

What we want, however, is to have Saskoil to continue in its present form, to continue to grow, to continue to 

be centred in the province, to continue to be active, and to continue to have government involvement. What we 

want to do is provide an opportunity for the people of the province to invest in the corporation and become 

actively involved. It’s basically a financing mechanism. When you sell equity then, which is the idea, you are 

selling shares in the corporation, as I indicated in what I just read, the entire corporation, and you may not 

realize quite as much. 

 

But the assets and the equity, as you clearly know, are different items, and if the intention is to get something on 

the record that allows you to go out and say, they sold it for less than it was worth, I think we’ve been through 

that and you’ll have to continue to say that. But obviously, we’re talking about two different things. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I will ask the question which I asked before and 

which, in spite of the length of your answer, you didn’t answer. What is this concept that you refer to as price 

net asset value? 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, the price net asset value is the market value of the equity of a 

company in the stock-market to the net asset value. And the numbers I gave you the other day were prices as of 

October 29th, the actual prices in the market. Does that answer the question? I hope. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, it answers the question and I assume that’s 

what you meant, but I’ll just pick PanCanadian because it’s one that you mentioned. Who can give you any idea 

of what the net asset value of PanCanadian is? You are quoting a ratio, and I know what the price of 

PanCanadian is. I’d like you to tell me how you know what the asset value of PanCanadian is? 

 

(1600) 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, our financial advisors in this case, and it could be any 

investment dealers, any financial advisors, have research analysts who do in-depth detailed work, and whose 

companies are prepared to make information on reserves and any other information they need available, and 

consequently they arrive at the figures that we’ve indicated. I think that members of this House, and certainly, 

ourselves, can feel very comfortable with those numbers as we’ve provided. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I think that’s in part straight hocus-pocus. A 

price earnings ratio I can calculate from a balance sheet or from an operating statement; a price cash flow ratio I 

can calculate. I say to you that a price net asset ratio is calculated — it cannot be calculated from any public 

data and that investment houses do not do, cannot do, analysis of assets to the extent that will allow them to 

state the asset value of a corporation. This would have them doing a Coles Nikiforuk report on every oil 

company every year, and that’s simply  



 

December 5, 1985 

3946 

 

not the case and the minister knows it. 

 

And I ask you, coming back to PanCanadian, would you agree that PanCanadian is selling on a price earnings 

ratio of at least 12 times? And would you agree that PanCanadian is selling on a cash flow ratio of nine and a 

half times? And since it’s one of the companies which you mentioned, would you agree that those types of 

ratios for earnings, price earnings ratio and a price cash flow ratio of 12 times the earnings and nine and a half 

for the cash flow, are reasonable? And do you agree that on that basis that you have grossly underpriced the 

value of the Saskoil shares? 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, the answer to that question is no, we do not agree with the 

statement of the Leader of the Opposition. He cannot simply take one company out and do a comparison. You 

could have chosen Merland, where it’s 2.6 times cash flow; or Sceptre, 3.8. 

 

What you have to do, and I think he realizes that, is use the industry average. We have indicated that Saskoil 

will be 3.75 to 4, and the industry average is four times. And I think, as I indicated, taking one particular 

company is obviously not a fair comparison. 

 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I picked this PanCanadian: (a) because it’s one 
you mentioned; and (b) because it’s a CPR company that presumably will be well managed as will Saskoil be 
well managed, and which hasn’t had a pack of legal problems like Merland has had and some of the others have 
had. 
 
So you are still sticking to your theory that while it is fair for PanCanadian to be selling at 12 times earnings, 
there’s no way that Saskoil would be worth 12 times earnings. That’s what you’re telling us. Am I right in 
saying that? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, once again, as I indicated before, it is not reasonable to pick ‘a 
‘ company. You must, in fact, look at industry averages. In the case of PanCanadian, PanCanadian for instance 
is 20 times as large as Saskoil. PanCanadian produces an inordinately large amount of its production from 
freehold land, which obviously puts it at an advantage. You have to look at the industry as a whole. Basically, 
what you’re asking us to do is prognosticate, if you will, at what will happen in the market-place when Saskoil 
shares are in there. I don’t think that’s a reasonable expectation. We have indicated what our financial advisers 
have indicated after looking at the industry, looking at Saskoil in depth, and we have confidence that the shares 
are, in fact, properly priced. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, we’re not asking what you have confidence in, 
but the basis of your confidence. I don’t want to argue the merits or otherwise of PanCanadian with you. I noted 
that of their 10 million acres, 8 million are in Alberta, and there’s precious little freehold over there, but it may 
well be. I haven’t checked out where their production comes from. 
 
Now, I’ll go back to your theory of a price net assets ratio, and you say that 60 . . . Bonanza is 60; Dome is 62; 
Chieftain is 70; Canterra is 65 and so on. Do you feel that you are getting 60? And if so I want you to take me 
through the mathematics of your 60. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, once again I’ll have to deal in ranges since this has not been 
established in final form, but we’re talking about the 3.75 to 4 times cash flow. Cash flow estimated at 60 to 65 
million for 1985 gets you 240 to 250 million, which is 60 per cent of net asset value — and if you’re confused, 
I’ll try to go through it again — which gives you a net asset value somewhere between 375 and 400 million. 
Once more? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I understood you were telling me that you were going to calculate the net asset 
value of the corporation with all of the advice you’re getting from all of these investment dealers as to what 
every well is worth. I’m sure they all will know what every well is worth and they all do as much work as Coles 
Nikiforuk; that’s what you’re telling me. 



 

December 5, 1985 

3947 

 

Suppose that to be true. Take 60 per cent of it, put it in the balance sheet, and are you getting that much even? 

And I say you’re not. Are you saying you are? 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Yes, we’re saying we will. 

 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Well just before we leave this point — and I’m coming back to this very point — 
we’re talking about price earnings ratio. And with all the infirmities of price earnings ratio as a basis for pricing 
shares, they may well have some price earnings infirmities. But you have left the impression that somehow 
seven or eight times . . . price earnings ratio of . . . a price of eight times earnings is a good price. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I’ve just looked it up. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Well I’ve got a few. My colleague has looked up a few in the Financial Post, and 
we looked up the ones you were mentioning, and British Petroleum is 18.6; Alberta Energy Corporation is 12.6; 
PanCanadian, I just calculated at 12 — 14.5 in the last one; Chieftain at 38.2; Dome at 18.5. Are you even 
getting 10 times price earnings ratio? 
 
You’re getting 6.5, and you’re saying it’s a great price. These are not things I’m pulling out of the air; these, 
I’m pulling them out of the Toronto Stock Exchange closing figures. And they are, as I repeat again: 18.6, 12.6, 
14, 38.2, 18.5. How do you justify a price earnings ratio of 6 as an appropriate basis for pricing these shares? 
 
(1615) 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Possibly you could check that. There’s some opinion that those might be 
based on quarterly earnings rather than annual estimates? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — My calculation of PanCanadian at 12 point something was on the basis of the 
annual estimate, but because I pulled that out of the annual report, which I have before me — and there’s not 
much doubt about that one — and I have no reason to believe that BP, Alberta Energy, and Chieftain, and 
Dome would vary that much on a quarterly basis. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that that would not really be possible because 
annual reports will not give you cash flow. They’ll give you working capital, and there’s a difference. 
Consequently, when we’re dealing in these type of numbers, we may have some inconsistencies, if you will. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, now the minister is jacking me around. We can 
talk on three bases. We can talk on price earnings; we can talk on price cash flow; or we can talk on price net 
asset value. 
 
I said specifically, price earnings, and he’s telling me price cash flow isn’t in an annual report. I won’t argue 
with that about him, but are you telling me that earnings aren’t in the annual report? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, I would indicate that when the Leader of the Opposition 
suggests that he’s being jacked around, that he is repeating information that we already provided a number of 
times to the member for Regina Centre. 
 
We indicated three ways, as you said, in which we can evaluate. We suggested that price earnings in the case of 
the oil and gas industry is the least relied on and, in fact, the other two are the ones that investment people use, 
and I have repeated that several times to the member for Regina Centre. And we would suggest that the other 
two methods, price cash flow and the price net asset value, are more reasonably the ones that are used 
consistently in evaluating oil and gas corporations. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I heard you say that and I understand your 
saying that, when we launch into a discussion with respect to price earnings ratio, I would  



 

December 5, 1985 

3948 

 

appreciate it if you wouldn’t answer me in terms of price cash flow or price asset, because we have to carry on 
some sort of an intelligent discussion here. 
 
Now I ask you again, sir, looking at the asset figure on the financial statement, the assets and liabilities 
statement, the balance sheet, on page 34. What value are you putting on the figure of $211,658,000, which is the 
book value of property and equipment less appreciation and depletion? What value are you putting on that 
figure in the balance sheet? 
 
You are presumably going to arrive at an asset figure and you are going to discount that by some amount. Do I 
understand you to say, sir, that you are not accepting the Coles Nikiforuk figures on page 10 which discounted 
it at 15 per cent, but you are going to say that you are going to discount it at 20 per cent, and having discounted 
it at 20 per cent, what you have left you‘re going to discount it at 260 per cent in order to get a value of the 
equity? At that rate, you will very soon have nothing left. If you want to take the value of the reserves, discount 
them at an annualized rate of 20 per cent, which is a very high figure, I suggest to you, and a 15 per cent figure 
is more likely. And then you’re telling me that, having arrived at this relatively low figure because of 
discounting it by 20 per cent, you are then going to take only 60 per cent of that as an asset for equity purposes. 
Is that the calculation you’re attempting to say is the appropriate way of valuing these shares? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, I repeat once more. Equity is being offered on the basis of 55 
to 60 per cent of net asset value, assuming a 20 per cent discount rate which is the discount rate applied under 
current market conditions. And then I would repeat again, and this is in bold print in the prospectus so the 
investor understands, in addition — well this is not the quote; I’ll come to the quote in a minute — but in 
addition it is not entirely appropriate to infer that the reserve tables indicate the fair market value of the 
company’s reserves. On page 8 of the preliminary prospectus the following quote appears, and as I indicated, in 
bold print: 
 

The . . . tables summarize Coles’ evaluations of Saskoil’s reserves. All evaluations of future net 
production revenue set forth in the tables are stated prior to provisions for income taxes and indirect 
costs and do not necessarily represent the fair market value of the reserves. 

 
The fair market value of the company’s reserves would be determined in the market. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I ask you again then, since you are telling me what you’re not 
using, and you are telling me what values you’re not using, would you kindly state — and I ask you to refer to 
page 34 of the prospectus and the balance sheet — kindly tell me what figure you are supplying in substitution 
for $211,658,000, and tell me then at what rate you’re discounting it for this theory you had that the equity is 
only worth 60 per cent of the assets. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, once more I am informed that the concept I am relating was 
one very similar to one that you introduced in your second reading speech. But the fact is that book value is not 
relevant to market value in an oil and gas corporation. Book values are historical costs. Market value is based 
primarily on some estimated future cash slows, and it would be, I think, misleading or inappropriate to 
substitute one number for the other, since we are basically dealing with an apple and oranges situation, and the 
comparison you asked for is not reasonable. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Well Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I regard that answer as one which is just 
unfair to the committee. Let’s take it one by one. Assets, cash including short term deposits. That’s not 
relevant? That’s only a historic value and would have nothing to do with today’s value? Nonsense. That is a 
perfectly good . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I will go through this, one by one. 
 
The cash as an asset is as relevant today as it was yesterday and it could be transferred to a this-day’s-value 
balance sheet; ditto for accounts receivable; almost certainly the same for inventories. Unamortized discount is 
a non-relevant item; it’s too small. The other issues are equipment at 65 million and reserves at 145 million. 



 

December 5, 1985 

3949 

 

Now it is quite likely that the equipment is worth about its book value. It’s unlikely to be worth less. And if you 

say that the equipment has a vastly different value than its book value, tell me that. I won’t believe you, but you 

can tell me that — its market value will be vastly different. It may be somewhat higher, in which case you make 

my argument. 

 

The only thing which is not sensible is give its book value in calculating today’s market value is the reserves. 

That’s why you went to Coles Nikiforuk; that’s why you got a today’s value for that; and that’s why you came 

up with what I say the right value of $484 million. 

 

(1630) 

 

You say that’s too high. You say it should be discounted at 20 per cent and then it’s only $369 million. Even if I 

give you that, even if I concede that — even if I concede that, which I don’t think is right — and insert the 369 

in the place of the 145, we then will get a figure of 515 million as the today’s current assets — today’s value. 

And if there’s anything wrong with that calculation, tell me what it is, give or take 5 million. 

 

Now you say that I should discount that to 60 per cent. I say for some of those things, for cash and that sort of 

thing, I think that’s a deep discount. I know you say that that cash isn’t available to the equity shareholders; I 

know that argument. 

 
But if I give you full concessions that the shares in the company are only worth 60 per cent of its basic assets — 
which I don’t concede — but even if I accepted that the asset for equity purposes would be worth about $290 
million or thereabouts, anyway you slice it using all of your figures and giving you every benefit of all of these 
deep discounts, 20 per cent discount of the reserves, saying that the shares are only worth 60 per cent of their 
base assets the 40 per cent you’re selling is worth more than you’re getting for it. And if you can illustrate that 
that isn’t true, using all of your assumptions, then I wish you’d illustrate it for the committee. The only thing 
you’ve got to rely upon is saying, well, Nikiforuk says, well of course you can’t be sure that the reserves are 
worth my valuation because there are tax considerations and all the rest. 
 
I suggest to you that all of those uncertainties which Nikiforuk may be alluding to in his reports are fully 
covered — are fully covered — by a discount of 40 per cent when you say that the equity is only worth 60 per 
cent of the basic assets represented in the corporation. 
 
Are you telling me that when you value reserves, but with using a discount rate of 20 per cent — and then 
having arrived at an asset value, a very cautious asset value that way, then you discount that asset by saying that 
it’s only worth 60 per cent for the purpose of calculating the value of the equity — that you have not accounted 
for almost every conceivable, almost every conceivable basis for discounting the value of the assets calculated 
as I have done? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t want to be obtuse. Could we ask you to go through 
your numbers once more without all the statements. Just run down the numbers and let us have another look at 
it. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — We’re operating on the basis of the balance sheet, and we’re taking just the asset 
columns and we’re ignoring the current assets because they are as surely . . . 
 
My first calculation is to calculate the total assets, the figure represented by $291 million. I’m including all of 
the assets at their book value except the reserves, which are worth more than their book value. I suspect some 
other things. I suspect the equipment may be worth more than its book value, but I won’t pursue that point. I am 
saying of the reserves, which stand on that balance sheet at 145 million as you will note from looking at note 3, 
I am inserting a figure, and what I say is the most cautious figure that has been put forward of 369 million, 
which is Coles Nikiforuk on page 10, discounted at 20 per cent, which I say is simply too big a discount. 



 

December 5, 1985 

3950 

 

The effect then will be to add the difference between 369 million and 145 million, or 224 million by my 
scratches here before me, to the total assets. And the assets will then be 291 plus 224, or 515 — 515 million. 
And as I take 60 per cent of 515 million, I have $309 million. 
 
Now that, you tell me, is the value of the corporation for equity purposes. Here admittedly I am really engaging 
at this point in over-summarization. 
 
But if you want to take the 309 and take off the current liabilities of 62, you get a figure. I say to you that when 
all those calculations are done, the figure you have set for the shares, for the 40 per cent of the value of the 
shares, is still too low. The $100 million or thereabouts that you’re getting for 40 per cent is still too low. I 
cannot make all of these calculations now because I don’t have a calculator with me, but since I am not . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Look. Mr. Chairman, I know the member for Moosomin but wants to get into this discussion and I know that 
this will give us the benefit of his knowledge on this area, but I’d like him to take his turn. 
 
Since I am not supposed to be answering the questions but asking them, would you tell me how you are setting 
up your balance sheet by which you are . . . because obviously you have to do that if you’re calculating a price 
based upon asset ratio. You have to have a calculation of assets. That goes without saying. You cannot make a 
price assets ratio without a figure for assets. Now would you tell me what asset figure you are using for the 
purpose of calculating a price assets ratio, which you say is the basis upon which you arrived at the value of 
those shares. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, I’m relying very heavily on my advisers here, but what we get 
when we total the production equipment and the reserves, which appears on page 38, and then return to page 10 
and, in fact, the total values . . . We estimate that the net asset value is in the range that’s indicated, in the 
discount between 15 ad 20. In other words somewhere between the 369 and 484. The final calculations, as 
we’ve indicated, will have not taken place, but in that range. The net asset value, 375 to 400. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. And if we used a figure of 400 million — 
which I think is again too low because I think 484 is a reasonable figure — but let’s take your 400, which is 
obviously, as you can see, 250 million more than their book value which is 150 million in round figures. So if 
we say 396,145,000, an extra $250 million. 
 
I suggest to you that if you factor that into the balance sheet, an extra $250 million on a write-up with the value 
of the reserves, I suggest to you that you do that and then take 60 per cent of the value of the company, so 
calculated as you say for asset purposes, that the 40 per cent of what you have left is going to be worth more 
than $100 million. 
 
I think that those conclusions are inescapable and I don’t think you can take anything else off because a 
discount . . . Saying that the shares are only worth 60 per cent of their base assets is already a very deep 
discount. We have to face the fact that some of these assets are straight cash. And the minister may be able to 
argue that if a company has nothing but $10 million in the bank the shares are only worth $6 million. The total 
of the shares outstanding are only worth $6 million. That’s what he asks us to believe on the grounds that it’s 
shares and not assets, and they must be discounted to 60 per cent. I have a difficulty believing that and I think a 
lot of other people will have difficulty believing that. I know there is a discount factor with many companies 
because I know there is a difference between owning the shares and owning the assets. But to suggest that it 
represents 40 per cent is a very, very large discount. 
 
(1645) 
 
When you say that all the issued and outstanding shares of Saskoil are only going to have a market value of 60 
per cent of the asset value of Saskoil, made up as some o fit is of cash and some of it of accounts receivable, 
then I am not accepting that. But even if I did accept it, your price is too low. Will you not concede that on the 
simple figures? 



 

December 5, 1985 

3951 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, we have been trying to follow in the calculations, and I won’t 

attempt to go through them, but the following, I think, are the pertinent figures. We’ve come up with a net asset 

value of somewhere around $400 million, and 60 per cent of that figure will give us at least a range of the 

market value of the equity which we would put somewhere between $240-$250 million, in that area. We 

believe, in fact, that we will realize, by selling 40 per cent, we will realize 40 per cent of that. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — What do you calculate the cash flow from Saskoil will be before and after this float? 

Mr. Minister, would you give us your calculation of the cash flow. The last annual report we have is 1984. 

Would you give us the calculation of the cash flow for . . . The fiscal year is the calendar year? Okay. Give us 

the cash flow then, your latest estimation of your cash flow. 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — The latest estimation is 60 to $65 million, in that range. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — That produces, Mr. Minister, a cash flow per share of $2.40, a profit per share of 

$1.60. The best you’ll give us is this chase you’ve been leading us with respect to the number of shares. I 

calculate it to be 27 million shares. I have had no assistance from you in figuring out the number of shares we 

have, so I’m using 27 million. If you’ve got a better figure, I’d be delighted to get it from you. 

 

I take the total number of shares to be 27.5 million. That produces a cash flow per share of $2.43, and a profit 

per share of $1.60. Am I right? That happens to reflect, purely by accident, we’re very close to Alberta Energy. 

In their ’84 annual report their cash flow was $4.08 per common share; the profit was $1.22. The difference, I 

suspect, is the difference between the fact that Alberta Energy pays taxes and this company hasn’t. 

 

I’m using these figures, Mr. Minister, because you felt that cash flow was a better measure of the value of an oil 

company than profit. So I’m using cash flow with all I have available, which is a couple of annual reports. 

 

Mr. Minister, by cash flow, and comparing it with Alberta Energy, these shares are grossly undervalued, Mr. 

Minister. The profit share and cash flow per share is very close to Alberta Energy’s. And the price, need I not 

say, is nowhere near close. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister: if you want to use cash flow, by cash flow aren’t these shares grossly undervalued? 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, member for Regina Centre, I repeat once more that the 

number of shares will be determined the day before the filing of the final prospectus . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . That’s not there. 

 

Secondly, my understanding is that cash flow per share is not the same thing as price to cash flow multiples. 

You’ve got two different entities. My learned colleague, the Deputy Premier, has indicated, for example, to try 

to make it so simple that even you would understand it, if you had a dollar share with a cash flow of a dollar, 

that’s a good deal. If you had a $1,000 share with a cash flow of a dollar, that’s not quite so good a deal 

obviously. So the comparison is not appropriate. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, the learned authors of the Alberta Energy Corporation . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — He’s getting his advice from the Deputy Premier now, too. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Oh, I understand the problem. You’re receiving advice from the member for 

Cannington. I thought this stupidity and confusion was something that you and your officials were getting 

between yourselves. I now see that we have the advice of the member of Cannington. Oh, oh, he’s mad. He 

walked out. 



 

December 5, 1985 

3952 

 

Mr. Minister, I’m looking at Alberta Energy Corporation’s annual report. They give a figure in the same 

paragraph, as a matter of interest, of the earnings per share and the cash flow per share. Purely by coincidence, 

they’re fairly close to what Saskoil is making, and that’s purely by coincidence. So if the cash flow is a 

determinate of a price of a share, and I agree it’s very relevant with an oil company — these companies are 

building assets, not making money in most cases, and I hope the holders of the shares understand that — then, 

Mr. Minister, these shares are grossly undervalued, grossly undervalued, worth half of what Alberta Energy are 

so stratospherically high given their profits and the cash flow? 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, the information on Alberta Energy is that the price cash flow 

multiple is 3 to 3.4. As we’ve indicated we are applying a 3.75 to 4 range to Saskoil, so a higher multiple, in 

fact, than Alberta Energy. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’m sorry. Would you say that again, Mr. Minister? 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, once more I would indicate that we are dealing with the 

projections from ’85, ’86, not historical numbers which in fact are what the future projections would be, what 

the market would consider, and that price cash flow multiples for Alberta Energy Corporation is 3 to 3.4. For 

Saskoil we are saying 3.75 to 4. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Apparently, the learned authors of this report — I assume to have been the corporate 

treasurer; I assume his signature’s here somewhere although I can’t lay my finger on it right at the moment. Mr. 

Minister, these figures have to be accurate. This company is listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange. If the 

figures aren’t accurate, it is delisted. But the private world, Mr. Minister, doesn’t tolerate the sort of circuses 

which we have to tolerate. Use inaccurate figures in the Toronto Stock Exchange and you get delisted from the 

exchange. 

 

These figures, Mr. Minister, must be accurate. They contain the signature of the auditors, whose name I can’t 

find quickly. Price Waterhouse. Price Waterhouse have put their name to these figures, and a cash flow of $4 

per common share produces a price of $18. Cash flow of $2.50 a share, let’s say very roughly — it’s rounded 

off to the nearest 10 cents — produces a price, in your view, of $6. I say, Mr. Minister, if you want to use cash 

flow you are grossly undervaluing those shares. 

 

I want to use your figures, Mr. Minister. You give me the price earnings ratio; I used that. Now that’s not fair. 

You tell me cash flow’s fair. Well I used cash flow. Suddenly it’s not fair. 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll . . . Excuse me, Mr. Chairman. To the hon. member — 

nobody has indicated that the numbers in the annual report are not accurate. We’re saying they’re not 

appropriate. The market-place does not use historic data in establishing price. It looks at future projections. 

What I have given you is the multiples based on future projections. And that’s all I’m saying. I’m in no way 

criticizing Price Waterhouse . . . 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! It being 5 o’clock I do now recess the House until 7 o’clock. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


