



















































Hansard: April 19, 1985


1155 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

April 19, 1985 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

HON. MR. DIRKS: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you, and to the members of the Assembly, 

42 grade 8 students from two schools in my constituency who are here with us today, seated in the west gallery — 

17 students from St. Francis elementary school, accompanied by Mr. Gerald Small, and 25 students from St. 

Patrick elementary school, accompanied by Mr. Clarence Demchuk. I will have the pleasure of meeting with these 

particular students shortly after question period for pictures and drinks, and would invite all members of the 

Assembly to join with me in welcoming them to our Assembly today. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. MR. DOMOTOR: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, a 

group of grade 8 students, numbering 25 in total, situated in the Speaker’s gallery. They’re accompanied by their 

teachers and chaperons, Jake Jmaeff and Syl Solar. I will be meeting with them at 10:30 for pictures and drinks, 

and I would like the Assembly to welcome them here. I’m sure they’ll find the session interesting and 

informative, and we hope they have a good stay in Regina. I’d like to welcome them. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Cabinet Ministers’ Travel Expenses 
 

MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to address a question to the Premier, and it deals, Mr. 

Premier, with fairness and the proper expenditure of tax dollars. 

 

As you will be aware, there has been a large increase in the tax burden on the people of Saskatchewan, yet we see 

the provincial cabinet continue to run up very high travel expenses, Mr. Premier. The Public Accounts shows that 

two years ago the Minister of Highways ran up nearly $63,000 in travel expenses. The total for the last year hasn’t 

been published yet. 

 

My question to you, Mr. Premier, is: have you had an opportunity to discuss with the Minister of Highways this 

exorbitant amount that he has spent on airplane travel at the expense of the taxpayer? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, two or three observations with regard to the question that the hon. 

member has asked. First, we have examined all the travel expenditures, and from my recollection, Mr. Speaker, 

the former administration spent more in 1981-82 than we did in ’83 and ’84 in any kind of constant dollars that 

you want to look at. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at the travel expenditures with respect to the cabinet ministers, we are much more 

open with the expenditures because we have allocated to every single department the expenditures that are made 

by the ministers, and not in a consolidated group as it used to be, and the hon. members know that. 

 

Third, when you have a cabinet minister that lives in his riding, lives in his riding, and works in Regina, he’s 

entitled by the rules and the regulations with respect to travel to go back to this  



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1156 

 

riding, because that’s his home, and come back in here. Obviously the transportation expenditures for me going 

back into the riding of Estevan are more than a premier that might be living in the city of Regina, and that isn’t 

surprising. 

 

Similarly with respect to a member that lives in his riding, like the riding of Wilkie, and goes back and forth to 

home, that doesn’t have a home in the city of Regina. He may have an apartment, but he has to go back home and 

be with his family, be with his constituents. Now, I’ve told cabinet ministers (every one of them) to spend as 

much time with their constituents as they can. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — And their families. 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — And their families. So that they can be there talking with individuals about agriculture, 

about roads, about seniors, about hospitals, about nursing homes, and so forth. And I don’t make any excuses for 

individual cabinet ministers going back to their ridings to be with their people, to be with their families, to be with 

their children. 

 

In the case of the member — and the member raised it — with respect to the minister and the member from 

Wilkie, he lives on a farm there. He lives there, Mr. Speaker, and he’s entitled to go home and see his families, 

whether it’s at the end of the week or on the weekend, and then come back in here to work. And I have discussed 

it. I’ve looked at it. And it seems to me that we have been much more open because we allocated to the 

department and, Mr. Speaker, we are being fair to the families, and to the individuals, and the constituents with 

this program. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Premier, I believe you will know that you’re indicating in your answer that you want to be 

so fair to all of your members. Are you aware that you cut a $250,000 a year fresh food transportation subsidy to 

northern communities because you said you didn’t have any money — families in the North; poor people in the 

North — and at the same time, you and your cabinet have spent over half a million dollars — cabinet ministers — 

on hotel, entertainment, and airline tickets. My question to you is: do you think that’s a fair allocation of 

taxpayers’ dollars? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, when we decide to bring northern Saskatchewan into all of Saskatchewan, 

that’s a significant policy decision that we do to make sure that the people in this province have an equal 

opportunity with . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Order, please. The member’s asked questions, and I believe it’s only fair that 

you give the minister an opportunity to answer. If you don’t want an answer to this one, then we’ll move to the 

next question. 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, when we want to spend, and the taxpayers want to see their money go to 

economic development, they don’t want to see it go to truckers. They don’t want to see it go to wholesalers or 

retailers. They want it to go into the hands of people. Now part of the problem . . . And the minister knows much 

more of the details, many more of the details than I do with respect to this particular subsidy. 

 

Part of the problem is that the subsidy wasn’t getting into the hands of the people that need it. And there’s no 

point in spending taxpayers’ money if it isn’t going to where it’s needed — that is, into the homes and to the 

families that it should be. 

 

Now, you can’t compare that at all with respect to us deciding whether we’re going to bring northern 

Saskatchewan into the complete part of the province of Saskatchewan. We have done that. The Department of 

Health covers the entire province of Saskatchewan today. It didn’t use to; it does now. The Department of Social 

Services does. The Department of Agriculture does. 

 



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1157 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I will compare the communities, and the life-style, and the success, and the education, and the 

expenditures in the province of Saskatchewan with that in Manitoba or Alberta or Ontario, or any place else 

across this country. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with respect to incorporating northern Saskatchewan into all of Saskatchewan, it was overdone, 

and it was the right thing to do. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Premier, I just asked the page to bring in the Public Accounts for the year ‘81-82 

and for the current year because I was certain that the information you gave is wrong, and it is quite wrong. 

 

Mr. Minister, the total travel spent by the former administration in the last full year in office was 287,000. Total 

amount spent by travel by your administration was 552,000 virtually a 100 per cent increase. 

 

In an era in which you are asking northern Saskatchewan people to go without fresh food, do you think that is an 

appropriate expenditure? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows that if he wants to look at the entire expenditures 

of 1981-82 and compare them to 1983-1984, including the Crown corporations . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Order, please. I have asked for order while the question is being answered, 

and I’m going to insist on it. 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I will be glad to sit down with my hon. friend and go through all the 

numbers with respect to the former department of northern Saskatchewan, all the Crown corporations, all the 

expenditures, how they were allocated, where they were allocated, and compare them — from ‘81-82 to ‘83-84. 

We’ll add them up, and we’ll look at them. 

 

The travel expenditures of 1981-82 were very, very large in the province of Saskatchewan, and the hon. members 

know that they were large. All right, Mr. Speaker, there’s no comparison at all, and it is not accurate at all. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. I’m going to caution the two members that are continuing to shout, because 

we’re going to have order here. 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, there is no justification for the hon. member saying that there was 100 per 

cent increase in ‘83-84 over ‘81-82. If you look at fairly, look at honestly how they were allocated, what 

departments, what Crown corporations, and the way that we allocate them on terms of the accounting system, and 

they’re familiar with it. We’ll add them up; we’ll look at them; we’ll compare them. So if they want to make those 

comparisons, I’ll be glad to make those comparisons, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — I don’t know, Mr. Premier, if you’re saying that the Public Accounts prepared and 

filed by the Minister of Finance are inaccurate, or what you’re saying about it. I’m reading from them. 

 

Let me give you the same figures in a different fashion. The amount spent per minister by your administration is a 

60 per cent increase in travel over what was spent by the former administration. Do you think a 60 per cent 

increase is appropriate in a day when you say that you can’t afford to give people in northern Saskatchewan fresh 

food? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve just made my point. The last few minutes ago it was a  



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1158 

 

100 per cent increase. Now it’s down to 60 per cent. Mr. Speaker, if I asked the Minister of Supply and Services 

to outline the accounting procedures and how we allocate those expenditures — I mean, if you want to compare 

’81, ’82 and ’83 and ’84, then you’ve got to compare apples with apples, oranges with oranges, department by 

department, and how it was allocated with respect to central agencies versus departments, and lay that out. 

 

And if they can drop from 100 per cent increase to 60 per cent increase in 60 seconds, I can darn soon take it 

down to zero and show that they spent as much or more than we did under similar circumstances. 

 

Allocation of Government Business to North West Travel 
 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, since the Premier seems to be unable to deal with figures, I’ll turn to the 

mathematical wizard of the cabinet, the minister in charge of the SGI. 

 

My question, Mr. Minister, concerns another example of your government’s generosity to yourselves. And it 

follows a disclosure that the former PC MLA for Regina North East arranged $355,000 worth of travel for various 

government departments and Crown corporations when he was an MLA. 

 

Documents filed with the Legislative Assembly Office show that the former PC MLA, through his travel agency, 

arranged more than $77,000 worth of travel for SGI during 1983; another $46,000 worth of travel in 1984; nearly 

$6,000 in just the first two months of 1985. That’s $128,000 worth of travel booked through one agency in just 21 

months. 

 

My question, Mr. Minister, is: can you tell this Assembly why one travel agency got such a disproportionate share 

of SGI’s travel business? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t have the figures with me as to the expenditures of SGI. The 

appropriate forum for asking questions on Crown corporations would be during those committee meetings, and I 

will have all of the information available at that time. The travel agency business was divided amongst more than 

one agency. Unfortunately, as I say, this is not Crown Corporations Committee and I don’t have the information 

with me, but I’d be happy to discuss it with them at that time. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question, and by way of introduction let me remind the minister that the 

appropriate forum for discussing the behaviour of members of the caucus and cabinet is this, not Crown 

Corporations, I am not discussing SGI’s behaviour at the moment, but yours. 

 

Mr. Minister, my question . . . It is patently obvious from the figures that one travel agency got a disproportionate 

share of the business. If I count it up in the telephone book, there are 45 travel agencies in Regina. If they shared 

the business equally, then SGI did $6 million worth of travel, and I don’t think even this government ran up that 

much travel. Obviously one travel agency got a disproportionate share of the business. 

 

My question again to you, Mr. Minister, is: how did you come to choose this particular travel agency to do such a 

disproportionate share of the business? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Premier, there are some 20 Crown corporations; there are some 25 departments 

in this government. Unlike the former administration, this government attempted as much as possible to spread 

the business around amongst all of the agents. 

 

SGI, in this case, chose one of the names of the agencies to distribute business amongst, and that was North West 

Travel — a business that was bought in 1982, a business that was in existence before, a business that had done 

business with the previous administration. 

 



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1159 

 

What this government has attempted to do is to spread the business as much as possible amongst all of the 

agencies rather than choosing a few favourite friends, as they did when they were the government. That is what it 

was. So by attempting to divide it amongst what we think, it is far more, far more reasonable, Mr. Speaker,. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, I would like to know how SGI went about choosing this particular 

agency. Did it happen by chance? Did you throw a dart at the wall? Were tenders called? How did you come to 

choose this particular agency, which I may add came into existence shortly before your administration took 

office? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — No, Mr. Speaker, this business did not come into existence shortly before we 

became the government. It had been there before. As I indicated, we deal with other businesses. I can, for 

example, name four or five that we do business with. Goliger’s Travel agency in the south, Reidy’s travel agency, 

Goliger’s Travel agency in the down-town core. 

 

And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, the distribution of . . . or the business that we did with North West Travel was 

totally above-board. It was cleared with the legislative . . . It was filed with the legislature. It declared any . . . Any 

conflict that might have been there was checked and declared. And everything was done before any business was 

given to North West Travel, and it was quite above-board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member asks if we had tendered. I would ask the member opposite: did they ever, every tender 

any travel business when they were the government? It’s always done because you’re buying it from one airline, 

which is Air Canada. And I don’t think that members opposite have ever tendered travel business in the past. 

 

MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the Deputy Premier, who’s also the minister in charge or 

responsible for Agdevco. I have a cabinet document here, Mr. Speaker, that indicates the appointment of a Russell 

Allan Sutor as Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Economic Development and Trade from July 15, 1983 on. 

 

Mr. Minister, did you consider it a conflict of interest or a breach of your responsibility, and of this member’s 

responsibility as a member of the legislature, to do business with his travel agency? 

 

HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t even consider it. I have a very competent CEO at Agdevco, 

and he buys his travel wherever he feels like it. 

 

MR. ENGEL: — A supplementary question to the Deputy Premier. You are the minister that’s responsible for 

Agdevco. Agdevco did work with North West Travel, or didn’t, is the question I’m asking you. And do you not 

consider it a breach of responsibility that you are responsible for the actions of Agdevco, and when they’re doing 

business with you, or your Legislative Secretary, do you not consider that a breach of Executive Council 

privilege? 

 

HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll take notice of the question, I’ll review the period of time 

that Mr. Sutor was my Legislative Secretary, and I’ll review when Agdevco was, if they ever were in fact, dealing 

with North West. And you’re right. I am the minister responsible for Agdevco, and Agdevco does quite a bit of 

travelling around the world. 

 

One of the places we go quite often is to Bulgaria. In 1982 we sold 247 head of bred yearling polled Herefords, 

and we sold 10 head of yearling Holstein-Friesian bulls for a total of 257 . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. 

 

Senior Citizens’ Home Repair Program in the North 
 

MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my question this morning to the minister  



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1160 

 

in charge of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, and in particular the Senior Citizens’ Home Repair Program. 

My question deals specifically with the application of this program to seniors in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Can the minister tell the House how many senior citizens in northern Saskatchewan are eligible for the program, 

how many actually applied, and how many were approved? 

 

HON. MR. DUTCHAK: — I’ll acquire that information and provide it to the House. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. By way of information, it wasn’t too long ago that the 

minister gave these figures to the CBC on a radio program, of how many seniors we have in northern 

Saskatchewan, and I see no reason why you can’t answer that question this morning. 

 

I want to add a new question, Mr. Speaker. I have some reports here of senior citizens in my hand, and I had an 

individual do a study for me in northern Saskatchewan on senior citizens. I have the results here of that report, of 

individuals who we studied. We find out that, as you indicated on the CBC radio, that it was a successful program 

and everybody has taken advantage of it. You will notice that there are six senior citizens who have been 

approved . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. The member is giving information rather than seeking information. If you 

have a question, get directly to it. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Okay, a new question. Would the minister not agree that out of 

the 45 applications that we checked, six were approved, 39 never were approved or were never approached? 

 

Do you think it is not fair on your part to not have your officials, who you indicated were in northern 

Saskatchewan, to help the seniors fill out these forms? In checking this we find that 39 were never, never 

interviewed and have never made application. Six of them had applications and were approved. Do you feel that 

that is a fair program to the seniors in that area? 

 

HON. MR. DUTCHAK: — Well, first thing, Mr. Speaker, I won’t accept the number provided by my friend 

across, and I will check the numbers and bring the answers here. I really question, if the matter is so urgent, why 

the member hasn’t called me before this day. So I will bring the information to the House as to how many were 

approved. My officials are in the area, Mr. Speaker. There’s people in the Buffalo Narrows are that are 

consistently speaking to the seniors. I thank the member for bringing the question to the House, and I will provide 

the information to him. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — New question, Mr. Speaker. The minister is questioning the authenticity of this program. 

I want to say to the minister that I will table these, and I will provide you with the information. Most of these 

come from the Buffalo Narrows region and the town of Buffalo Narrows. The six that have been approved, 

there’d be only two out of Buffalo Narrows. 

 

Now, you indicate that you do not trust me, and you say that the information I bring in is false. I ask you, if I table 

this information for you, will you act on this and make sure that your officials go to these senior citizens, and 

make sure that they have an opportunity to take advantage of this program? And also, could you also indicate, do 

they have five years in order to take advantage of the program? 

 

HON. MR. DUTCHAK: — Mr. Speaker, I will get whatever information is necessary. My only point was, Mr. 

Speaker, that I consider the seniors of Saskatchewan, which includes northern Saskatchewan, as a top priority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if there are any further legitimate concerns by the members opposite I would invite  



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1161 

 

them to please telephone me earlier. Let me know if these things aren’t working, because I want to know earlier. I 

will provide the information because it is a serious concern. And the concerns raised today are serious. 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Final supplementary. As the minister is aware, I made the concerns available to you in 

October. And that was done publicly. Will you give your assurance today that your officials will take the 

applications that I have here, who have never been touched, and see that they are completed? And the other 

question that I did ask, that you forgot about fairly quickly is: is the program five years? Do they have five years 

to take advantage of this program? 

 

HON. MR. DUTCHAK: — Mr. Speaker, I will get all the information that the member has just asked for. 

However, I do confirm that I will check out the authenticity of what the member has stated, because he mentions 

last October. He indicated there was such a chronic need for seniors’ housing; there were civil servants living in 

two of the suites that couldn’t be rented out. Afterwards we found out that this need simply wasn’t there, and what 

the member had indicated simply was not accurate. So I hope today that he is accurate. 

 

Sales Tax on Used Vehicles 
 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question of the Minister of Finance, and it has to do with the 

newly announced sales tax on used automobiles. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would like to ask you a question, and to use an example in the question: it’s my understanding that 

a person who buys, let’s say, a Lincoln or a Cadillac, and trades his car every year, will pay only on the 

difference, let’s say if it’s 5,000. He used to pay on 30,000; he will now pay on 5,000. On the other hand, a young 

teenager who is getting his driver’s licence and buying his first used car will pay on the total amount if he has no 

trade-in. 

 

And what we see is a major shift of taxes from those who are buying new cars on a regular basis, big cars, saving 

$1,000 or $1,500 a year, and transferring that down to first time car buyers — many of them young people who 

are 16 or 17 years old. 

 

I want you to tell me two things. Is that accurate, and can you explain why you are shifting from the upper income 

people to those who are buying automobiles for the first time? 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, to follow the logic of the question from the member from Shaunavon, if 

a person traded in a one-year-old Lincoln or a one-year-old Mercedes or other high-priced automobiles, my 

question is: is it equally fair to allow the person buying that almost brand-new, perhaps a 40 or $35,000 

automobile and pay no tax on it at all? The system was put into place, Mr. Speaker, consistent with other 

jurisdictions across this country — Manitoba, Ontario, and B.C. They will tax, Mr. Speaker, on the difference, 

whatever it will be — high, or whether it be low. That was the rationale and the purpose of it. 

 

The other thing, Mr. Speaker, that is sometimes not known, and was certainly brought forward by the member 

from Rosthern, is that very many automobiles, used automobiles in this province, are in fact imported in from 

other provinces and sold here. When that is in fact done, the sales people that sell it must collect a sales tax, a 5 

per cent sales tax. That does not show when the person in fact goes and buys it, but it’s added into the price, Mr. 

Speaker, that people pay for that car, and then indirectly sent in to the government. 

 

So the hon. member should know that many, many, many used cars sold in the province of Saskatchewan have 

been having a sales tax on them for some time. It’s been under the counter. Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s out front for 

everybody to see. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1162 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 49 — An Act respecting Interest prior to Judgment 
 

HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill, An Act respecting Interest prior to Judgment. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act 
 

HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill, An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 
 

At 10:35 a.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave 

Royal Assent to the following Bill: 

 

Bill No. 48 — An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 

Year ending on March 31, 1986 

 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:37 a.m. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 8 

Item 1 
 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister introduce her officials. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am pleased today to be able to introduce, to you and the 

House, the officials. 

 

To my immediate right I have Dr. Rod Wickstrom, our deputy minister of education. Immediately behind Dr. 

Wickstrom is Mr. Steven Pillar, the associate deputy minister of finance and administration. Next to Mr. Pillar, I 

have Mr. Brian Ward, the associate deputy minister of program development. And to my far right I have Mr. Peter 

Dyck, the executive director of regional services division. 

 

At the same time, Mr. Chairman, this morning I am pleased to introduce the financial estimates for Saskatchewan 

Education for the ‘85-86 fiscal year. I welcome the opportunity to review the highlights in education last year as a 

background to consideration for the estimates that we will be going through this morning. It allows us the 

opportunity to look at some past achievements and accomplishments in perspective with the initiatives that we 

have planned for next year and into the future. 

 



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1163 

 

It also, Mr. Chairman, allows this Assembly, and the members opposite, to focus on a resource that has often in 

the past been paid only lip service and, of course, the resource that I refer to this morning is that of our children, 

our youth, and the leaders of tomorrow. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, let me begin with the review of 1984-85. Last year this Progressive Conservative government 

released a blueprint for educational improvements for the 1980s, 1990s, and beyond. The release of the report 

entitled, Directions, ended what was a very extensive review of the curriculum and instructional practices in this 

province. 

 

Following the release of the report directions, there were 16 action recommendations contained in it, 

recommendations for change. And those were taken to the public and the various educational organizations that 

deal with our school system. 

 

The first time was shortly after the report’s release, and we appointed a steering group of members of the key 

educational organizations, along with myself and two colleagues of this Assembly, the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview, and the member from Melville. This set of meetings, through April, May, and early June of 1984, was 

designed to get public input on the report’s recommendations. 

 

The meetings helped define the purposes of a symposium on Directions that was held last summer. It was with an 

indication of public views that our objectives became very clear. 

 

Firstly, Mr. Chairman, we wanted to arrived at a consensus on any modifications to the goals of education 

contained in the Directions report. Goals of education are common to school systems around the world, and often 

the objectives for these statements are the same, to set a philosophical base for what we believe our schools 

should be doing for our children. 

 

Secondly, we wanted to get input on the concept of a core curriculum for all Saskatchewan students. This was one 

of the recommendations on which we received much public comment. While there was general agreement that a 

common set of learning experiences for all students was desirable, most agreed that there must be further 

consultation on the structure of the definition of core curriculum, or what was going to be taught in our schools. 

 

And thirdly, Mr. Chairman, we wanted to use the public input that we had received throughout the consultation 

process as a guide for decision making. Much of the public that we consulted with were parents, and we firmly 

believe that parents must have a voice in education. 

 

By the time the two-day event concluded, modifications to the goals of education were made, and agreement was 

reached that these goals could be endorsed by all, with some minor fine tuning and wording. 

 

There were other highlights, Mr. Chairman, from the symposium: adoption of the concept of core learning skills; 

and the intent to establish a co-ordinating body to oversee implementation of Directions in Saskatchewan. 

 

The most important result of that symposium last June in my view, Mr. Chairman, was the fact that all 

participants returned home knowing that a consensus and a commitment for educational improvements had been 

achieved. And they were ready to work for the changes that were to take place. 

 

This morning I want to share with members of this House how we’ve progressed since that time. 

 

And looking in that past year, Mr. Chairman, another key area of activity was our efforts to improve education for 

Indian and Metis students. During part of the time that Directions was being developed, there was another 

advisory committee at work, and it was a most important advisory committee for this province. This was the 

Indian and Metis curriculum review committee. 

 



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1164 

 

In March of 1984 this government and myself, as minister, adopted a five-year action plan for Indian and Metis 

curriculum development. It was a blueprint for action on Indian and Metis curriculum, and it was geared to 

achieving two main objectives: number one, to ensure that school curriculum and educational institutions transmit 

positive and accurate information to assist the Indian and Metis students; and secondly, to educate all students, all 

students, Mr. Chairman, about Indian and Metis people. 

 

To achieve the objectives, the plan identifies three priorities: revising the core curriculum to include Indian 

content; developing specific curriculum, such as Indian and Metis study courses; and to develop course materials 

to support a provincial core curriculum. 

 

(1045) 

 

Action on the committee’s report has been substantial during the past year. Firstly, as I said, there was an Indian 

and Metis curriculum advisory committee appointed, and they were to oversee the implementation of the action 

plan. This committee makes up 19 members. The majority, 13 of those 19, are the Indian and Metis people 

themselves. Three members, Mr. Chairman, are from Northern Education, and they provide valuable input from 

the northern perspective. 

 

Other highlights include, over the last year, the release of a report on the community schools programming; the 

distribution of a pamphlet and slide tape presentation on how to screen school materials for biases and 

stereotyping; plus there were many other initiatives. 

 

One particular initiative that was of interest to the public, Mr. Chairman, was the consultation process that was set 

up to seek even further input on native education. As opposed to dealing only with the professional educators, the 

MLA, my legislative secretary from Last Mountain-Touchwood constituency, proceeded on a consultation 

process with the local communities, particularly rural and northern Saskatchewan. He met with parents; he met 

with the Indian bands; and he talked to students about what the school system was doing for them and how they 

were coping with the school system from their own perspective. 

 

Over 140 meetings took place across the province in a relatively short period of time. It was designed, very 

simply, for grass-root input. We went to the field to consult directly with the people that it has the greatest impact 

on. 

 

One other program that was launched this last year was the Indian and Metis education development program. 

And, Mr. Chairman, it was designed to encourage school divisions, mostly rural school divisions, to develop, at 

the local level, programs for the Indian and Metis. 

 

For instance, during 1984-85, we had nine school divisions that were receiving funding for projects such as 

language development for the native people, and liaison programs between the home and school, and curriculum 

development. 

 

For example, the Indian Head School Division took on the task of language development, with a grant of $16,000. 

Blaine Lake School Division was another one that was very pro-active. They put their emphasis on the native 

curriculum development with $10,000 out of that fund. Sturgis School Division, with a high population of native 

students, had $20,000, and they chose to put their emphasis on better communications and liaison between the 

school and the community. Tiger Lily School division was another one, with $14,000; the Lloydminster School 

division, $10,000; and Kamsack School Division, $13,000, for a program to do with home and school liaison. 

 

Another initiative I’d like to mention, Mr. Chairman, under the Indian and Metis education, is the 

awareness-in-service package. And this is basically for teachers. To date, we have 90 teacher-leaders who have 

been trained to provide in-service to their colleagues to increase their  



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1165 

 

awareness about the Indian and Metis and their educational needs. 

 

Now, how do these initiatives translate into service and programs designed to meet the special needs of the North? 

Well, Mr. Chairman, our Indian and Metis development team is working to ensure that the North is represented in 

areas like core curriculum. As well, the support has been maintained and increased last year to NORTEP, the 

northern teacher education program. At the same time we have its southern counterpart, SUNTEP (Saskatchewan 

Urban Native Teacher Education Program). That, too, was an increase of 5 per cent last year. 

 

As you can see, Mr. Chairman, the initiatives have been fairly extensive in Indian and native education over this 

last year. And it’s interesting to note that, while school divisions and school teachers in the province of 

Saskatchewan are very much aware of these initiatives, the initiatives have been seen as important outside of this 

province. For instance, I have a letter from the Department of Education in New Brunswick who says that: 

 

What your province is doing to raise the level of awareness about native education is excellent. Your 

booklet on the five-year action plan for native curriculum development indicates the firmness of your 

intention to make the public school system more responsive to the particular education needs of native 

children and youth. 

 

That’s from New Brunswick, Mr. Chairman, The Yukon, with its high native population, was particularly 

interested in what the Department of Education was doing in Saskatchewan, and the Yukon says: 

 

It is encouraging to see that other jurisdictions are developing materials of this type, the materials on 

native language development. 

 

They say that we have been making steady progress in the teaching of native languages, in developing more 

relevant curriculum material, especially in the area of social studies. And they simply say, congratulations to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Alberta, our neighbour to the west, is extremely interested in the initiatives that Saskatchewan is into. They say: 

 

These materials on the native awareness are excellent examples of action which can be taken to improve 

the image of our native people. 

 

And, last but not least, Mr. Chairman, closer to home, the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. She says: 

 

Thank you very much for the materials on the child division, the native awareness program. It is 

gratifying to know of the high priority your government is placing on native people and, in particular, 

native education. 

 

Other ongoing projects in dealing with the educational needs of the North, Mr. Chairman, has been the collection 

and evaluation and field testing of curriculum materials. Interestingly enough, up until recently, we have had no 

mechanism in place to be able to draw the materials together, assess them, and inform other people where they 

can go to find the various materials that are there. We have also been developing a catalogue of materials for the 

North and about the North. This catalogue will provide information of content, grade levels, skill development, 

and how northern materials can be incorporated into the existing curriculum. 

 

Over the past year, Mr. Chairman, besides native education, there has been an emphasis on an area that had very 

little emphasis in the past, and that is the area of gifted education. Since 1982 this government has taken 

substantial steps in support of gifted education. An in-service  



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1166 

 

package for teachers has been established. A minister’s advisory committee was formed and has presented a 

report to me, and efforts have been taken to ensure that the staff is up to date on the philosophy and practical 

needs of the gifted. 

 

The report of the advisory committee was received in June of 1984, Mr. Chairman, I met with the committee 

again this year to share my response to their document, and as a result, a reference group has been established to 

provide input and feedback during the implementation period. 

 

We have also looked at credit policies for alternate high school courses for the gifted. To facilitate dialogue we 

also held a mini-symposium of high school education in February in dealing with the gifted. I would also like to 

say, Mr. Chairman, later on when I speak to the new Educational Development Fund, you will see another manner 

in which our government is supporting gifted education. 

 

Education for the hearing impaired was also examined during the past year. Subsequently, an information base for 

future use in developing new ways of delivering educational services to our hearing impaired children in 

Saskatchewan was devised. We have an assessment clinic for the hearing impaired, and it has completed its first 

full year of service to our various school divisions. The national task force on services to deaf-blind persons 

commended Saskatchewan for developing a first-rate facility in programs for the hearing impaired. As a side note, 

Mr. Chairman, we now have the second largest program in that area in the whole of Canada. 

 

Another area of interest, Mr. Chairman. the bilingual nature of our country places an added responsibility on 

provincial jurisdictions to provide educational services in French. In Saskatchewan, any parent or guardian who 

so requests has the right of access to education in French for their children. 

 

The interest in French education programs is on the upswing in this province. Enrolment in core French programs 

increased by 7.4 per cent over ‘83-84 figures, while French immersion and French language schools have seen 

their enrolments increase by 20 per cent in each of the last three years. To help meet the demand for this type of 

educational service, this government has been able to negotiate significant increases in funding made available by 

the federal government for programs in French. In 1983-84 a 23.2 per cent increases in federal support was 

negotiated, and for 1984-85 a 25 per cent increase was realized. 

 

Ongoing activities in support of French education include developing and adapting curriculum in the instructional 

resources, assisting in the professional development and recruitment of French teachers, and liaison services to 

boards of education, also supporting French parents. 

 

From a financial perspective, Mr. Chairman, Saskatchewan over the last year provided the highest increase of any 

jurisdiction for school division operating grants at 5 per cent. And while I say that was the highest across Canada, 

I also recognize that one other province matched that, and that was the province of Ontario. 

 

At the same time that we increased our operating budget by $16 million last year, we also approved building 

projects that were estimated at a total cost of $38.9 million. Some of the major projects that were on the go in this 

province during the last year included such areas as a new school at Paddockwood, the provincial commitment of 

almost $1.2 million; we had the Brownell elementary in Saskatoon, $3.5 million; and we had Lakewood 

elementary in Regina, with a provincial commitment of $2.6 million — all for last year. 

 

Mr. Chairman, that’s a backdrop, 1984-85. Obviously, we are into 1985-86, and estimates for this year’s budget. 

 

One of the challenges this year, in preparation for budget, was to define and analyze the pressure points in the 

system. And that’s more easily said than done. Obviously each of us in this  



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1167 

 

Assembly have our own opinions on how those pressures can be addressed. Some of us might even differ on what 

those pressures are. 

 

From my perspective, our government faced four issues in dealing with education this year, and the issues are: 

finance, quality, change, and challenge. And let me begin with finance. 

 

Finance is not an easy issue. It’s not an issue of simply more money, too much money, not enough. When we talk 

of finance in education, we also talk of other topics, such as the property tax, the level of the mill rate, the 

assessments, the reassessments. We talk about per pupil rates. We talk about the management of our resources. 

We even discuss the provincial share versus the local share. We talk of capital versus operating, the funding 

formula and, of course, the discussion on trying to ensure equity. 

 

(1100) 

 

Each one of these topics raise their own question, and some that I had: is the pressure on property tax real or 

perceived? Is the funding formula equitable? Where is the most logical place to invest money, how much, and 

why? And how do I ensure that the public knows where its money is being spent? 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I looked at the last decade, the last decade and a half, and I have a look at what has happened to 

education, there are various factors that come into play on the issue of finance. 

 

Let us look at what has happened to mill rates. We have two local government bodies that share that local tax 

base. We have the urban and the rural municipalities that receive provincial funding through their revenue 

sharing, and we have the school-board that receives its money through the Department of Education. 

 

The local governments of urban and rural municipalities have fared relatively well in comparison to school-boards 

and to education, and one only has to look at the mill rate and the computational mill rate to know that indeed that 

is true. For instance, Mr. Chairman, if I take the year 1980, 1981, and 1982, I see an increased percentage on the 

mill rate of almost 11 per cent, 13 per cent, and 17 per cent in those three years. Now, that increase on the mill 

rate is to the local level, the local taxpayer. Correspondingly, the government’s share that was going into 

education went down. The local taxpayer paid more. 

 

At the same time, boards were being pressured to put more programs in, and often many times those programs 

came through the initiative or the pressure of a government, and some of them were very much needed. But when 

they were put in, the financial resources were not put in to ensure that their support structure was there to meet the 

program. So once again you saw the mill rate go up. 

 

The second issue, along with finance, was quality, and we both know that many factors contribute to quality 

education in Saskatchewan. We know where our strengths are, and we’ve been told where the weaknesses are. We 

are told by the parents, teachers, students, the opposition, and the media. They tell us of where the weaknesses are 

in the school system. 

 

Well, the report entitled Directions raised some important questions on quality. Are we prepared, as a society, to 

look at all aspects of quality in an orderly fashion, and on a continual basis? Are we prepared to recognize that 

quality improvement needs not a quick fix, but rather a long-term solution? 

 

Thirdly, the topic of change, the most difficult process of all. We see the changes taking place around us, and we 

hear of them through many sources. We have researchers, economists, the futurists. They give us a relatively clear 

picture of what is taking place, and what will take place — changing economic structures, world markets, slower 

economic growth, technical advances.  



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1168 

 

We have shifts in the age structure of populations, adjustments in employment patterns. And, Mr. Chairman, we 

have massive social and cultural changes. 

 

All of this has led to a re-examination of many of the assumptions that we hold, and that we continues to hold 

dear. What effects do these changes hold for our students, our teachers, and our future? Do these changes impact 

on the school? If they do, are we prepared to deal with the impact, and how do we deal with it? By the traditional 

processes, or will it require different and new mechanisms? 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, an analysis of the issues only served to reaffirm that the importance of education has not 

decreased, but rather increased. But the conditions under which the educational system operates presents new 

questions and new challenges for all of us. 

 

Several factors will shape the course of education in Saskatchewan during the remainder of this decade and 

beyond. And that brings me to the issue of challenge. 

 

Future economic growth will depend to a very considerable extent on the quality of education that we provide to 

our youth. There’s no doubt about it. The changing economic environment is creating a setting in which the 

highly skilled and highly educated are at a distinct advantage. 

 

Frequently, Mr. Chairman, it is those with superior skills who find it most easy to gain employment and to adapt 

as the nature of the world around them changes. To compete effectively, the Saskatchewan economy and 

work-force will require, for the immediate future, a more highly educated labour force than ever before. And 

demands will be placed on our educational system to provide students with, number one, a high level of basis 

skills that include the ability to read, write, reason, and compute. They will require specific marketable skills — 

programs that respond to the needs of the individual learner. 

 

These requirements raise a number of questions. What should be taught in our schools and universities, and how 

should it be taught? What should be added to and what should be discarded from our curriculums? 

 

We face a demographic challenge, Mr. Chairman. Although enrolments in the K to 12 system have declined by 

almost 10 per cent since the mid-1960s, the trend is slowly reversing itself, and enrolments are expected to 

increase modestly through the end of this decade. This reversal, however, will have little impact on most rural 

areas where school authorities will continue to confront the problem of providing equal educational opportunity as 

compared to the urban student. 

 

So the challenge, particularly for Saskatchewan in this decade, Mr. Chairman, is rural education and the accessing 

of programs for our rural students. It’s also interesting to note, Mr. Chairman, that while student enrolment 

decline has been the trend over the last several years, I am happy to note that we had a student enrolment increase 

in this province last year of approximately 660 students. So for us, the trend is definitely reversed, but that also is 

creating some problems, particularly with the urban boards. 

 

The next challenge we face, Mr. Chairman, is one of living in a very scientific world where the technology 

changes day to day, sometimes week to week. In the long run, any of the advances made in technology will 

provide benefits to this province as a whole, but in the short run they are going to challenge our educational 

institutions to remain competitive not only in the class-room, but in the management of their systems. For 

example, in the class-room, basic computer literacy will be essential for all students. Our ability to adapt to 

advancements in this area is paramount to ensure quality education for our province’s young people. 

 

And next we have the fiscal challenge. While we recognize the key role of education in our province’s future 

economic and social development, we must also recognize the need to  



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1169 

 

provide quality education more efficiently and effectively. Incentives for efficiencies must therefore be developed 

and implemented wherever possible. The quality of our educational system must be measured not only by the 

amount of resources flowing into it, Mr. Chairman, but rather by the educational achievements of the students 

coming out of the system. While additional funds are required, there is more to providing quality education than 

dollars alone. We must ensure that we are adapting quickly and using our resources to meet the challenges that we 

face. 

 

If our educational institutions are to rise to these challenges, they must be flexible and adaptable. They are capable 

of making the necessary changes, but I emphasize, Mr. Chairman, they cannot do it alone. They need support. 

 

In order to assist our educational system in preparing for the future, a long-term framework is required. This 

long-term framework must take a number of considerations into account. Through efforts to monitor and assess 

the quality of the education system, we know, Mr. Chairman, that teacher competence is improving and their 

numbers are increasing. The latest figures show 93 per cent of secondary teachers in Saskatchewan hold one or 

more degree, Mr. Chairman, that is 1 per cent above the national average. 

 

Our people have a high level of respect for and confidence in their schools. Improvements are regarded as a way 

to make the system ever better for the youth in the future. A majority of people believe schools today provide a 

better education than what the school did when they were in school. Pupil-teacher ratios are also beginning to 

decline in some areas. And I might add, we have one of the lowest pupil-teacher ratios in the whole of Canada. 

It’s also interesting to note, Mr. Chairman, that the percentage of Saskatchewan students enrolled in universities is 

also slightly above the national average. 

 

So there are many good things about our educational system, and there are things that we can do to make it even 

better. Consequently, this year’s budget contains an educational Development Fund for a five-year period —275 

million new dollars, Mr. Chairman, over five years. Thirty-five million dollars has been allocated for each of 

those years. 

 

In 1985-86, Mr. Chairman, 25 million will be allocated to the continuing operating costs of school divisions. Of 

this amount, 8 million will be applied to the cost of debt retirement. The Government of Saskatchewan will now 

assume 100 per cent of this load, the total debt retirement amount. And it is being placed in the subvote entitled, 

grants to schools — construction, to more clearly separate these costs from the other operating costs of the school 

divisions. 

 

Seventeen million dollars, Mr. Chairman, will be distributed to school divisions on an equitable basis in 

accordance with the existing educational finance formula. While variations in grants received by individual school 

divisions will be affected by enrolment changes and the ability to raise local revenues, we anticipate for the first 

time in many years this increase should more than meet the increasing costs at the local level. Mr. Chairman, most 

local authorities will also be able to avoid mill rate increases, while maintaining their programs. 

 

In addition to this, we have developed an Educational Development Fund, and we trust that it will address the 

issue of quality. In the current year, the educational fund will contain $10 million, with projected fund balances of 

35 million in subsequent years. Expenditures from the fund are expected to focus on three areas, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Learning resources, number one. Approximately 25 per cent of the fund, or for this year $2.3 million, will be 

allocated to school divisions for financing approved plans for improving learning resources: deficiencies in school 

libraries, learning resource centres, concern for better application of computer and the other technologies that 

school systems have. Within this broad category, opportunities will be provided for school divisions to be able to 

set local priorities. 

 



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1170 

 

(1115) 

 

The second category is the efficiency grants. Fifteen to 20 per cent of the development fund will be allocated to 

this, Mr. Chairman, in dollar terms for this year, that translates into $1.85 million. Grants will be available to 

school divisions to support approved plans which have the potential for sharing of services, energy conservation, 

transportation, program cost reduction, or perhaps simply building maintenance improvements. 

 

And I come to the last category, Mr. Chairman, but perhaps the most important: program improvement initiatives. 

Fifty-five per cent of the fund, or for this year $5 million, will support efforts to improve educational program 

quality in several areas. For instance, we will be implementing school effectiveness: the development of basic 

skills; career counseling; assuming preparation for adult responsibilities. Consumer education and life skills are 

two other components that could be into that category. Mr. Chairman, in this category is where we see the onus 

for gifted students. The boards will be able to use the money out of the program improvement area to develop 

more programming or improve any programming they have at the present time for the gifted. 

 

We have also, through the department, budgeted for $31,000 for some pilot projects, mostly rural areas, in order 

to be able to monitor and develop some research for further use in the area of gifted. Parents particularly 

interested in the gifted area, and the teachers that work with them, will be more than happy to hear the news this 

year. Also out of the program improvement area, I expect that a major component of this whole area will be 

teacher in-service, and in some cases could include professional development for our teaching force in this 

province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, overall in this year’s budget, that is approximately a 10 per cent increase — 10 per cent. If I 

compare that to the other provinces in Canada for this fiscal year, it is more than double what the others have 

budgeted. 

 

On the operating grants, if you were just to take it alone on operating without the development fund, Mr. 

Chairman, we are looking at a 5.7 per cent increase. If we include the debt retirement, it is a 7 per cent increase. 

And I guess the good news on the operating grants this year was the change in the formula and removing the debt 

retirement out of operating, that was slowly eating up the operating grants. And as I said earlier, for the first time 

in many years, the computational mill rate will not be adjusted. Not at all. 

 

I guess if I had to summarize the impact of the budget, and what it does to school-boards, I would have to agree 

with what a school-board chairman said in the Star-Phoenix, not too long ago. He described the 1985 budget this 

way. He said: 

 

For people who don’t have children enrolled in school, it means no increase in the mill rate. For people 

who have children in school (Mr. Chairman) it means support, hope and vision. 

 

And that’s exactly what it is, not only for the parents that have children in school, but for this province as a whole. 

 

So what now of the future, Mr. Chairman? Well, we must embark on a process of renewal and in improvement. 

That requires money, and the government has recognized that this year. It requires commitment, but more than 

that, Mr. Chairman, it requires a willingness to consult, to reach consensus, to collaborate, to communicate, and to 

agree to put effort into something called education, that has long taken second priority over other resource 

development in this province, whether it be uranium mines or potash mines. 

 

Mr. Chairman, before getting into specific questions from the opposition, I would like to  



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1171 

 

conclude with a couple of closing remarks on this portion. 

 

Number one, I would like to repeat this government’s commitment to the pursuit of excellence in education. We 

are engaged in many new challenges and activities which will place demands, not only on society as a whole, on 

the resources, but also in terms of time to be spent with the youth of this province. We are committed to meeting 

that challenge, and I’m confident that we can do so in co-operation. 

 

With that in mind, I look forward to any questions or comments that the opposition may have, all in the spirit of 

collaboration and co-operation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Well, I presume that the ground rules, Mr. Chairman, have been laid. That if the minister, in 

estimates, which is not customary, can come forward in a prepared text of one hour, then I presume that the same 

position applies to the opposition in the presentation of their case and that, accordingly, we will have the same 

leeway to make our presentation of a prepared speech in respect to our position. And therefore, what I would like 

at this time, Mr. Speaker, a clear indication as to what are the rules which we are following. 

 

I have been in this House for 10 years, and never before have I seen a minister come forward with a prepared text 

and give what is, essentially, the budget speech. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — It didn’t fly the first time. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — It didn’t fly the first time, and now what she has done is come in with a prepared speech. And 

that’s fair enough. But what I want to know, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, at this time, is your ruling in respect to 

what rules we will follow in the future. Could I have that? 

 

HON. MR. BERNTSON: — If I can speak briefly to the point the member raises, I think the tradition in this 

House, and in all Houses in Canada, when it comes to dealing with estimates, the minister may set out the 

guide-lines, etc., as it relates to his or her department, and the opposition may in fact take as much time to 

advance their case as they wish to take. I would only hope, Mr. Chairman, that the opposition education critic, in 

however much time he takes, makes as much sense as the Minister of Education in presenting her case. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. The rules haven’t changed in committee. They are on page 171 of Beauchesne’s, 

rule 494. 

 

The whole management of a department may be discussed in a general way when the committee is 

considering the first item of the estimates of that department which reads as follows: ‘Vote 1 — 

Administration’; but the discussion must not be extended to any particular item mentioned in the 

estimates of that department. 

 

Sot he whole management of the department may be discussed in a general way. So there is no time limits. The 

member from Quill Lakes. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Just so that I’m clear, Mr. Chairman, in respect to your ruling. In other words if we come to 

the estimates in Health on the first subvote, you are saying that a lengthy . . . Every member can in fact go into a 

major general discussion in respect to the overview of the department. Am I interpreting you right? 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Yes, you are. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — I want to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That will be your problem or has been your problem 

because that’s why they haven’t put you in cabinet. 

 



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1172 

 

I want to turn to one matter before I get into my lengthy address to the Chamber, and that is in respect to the 

report, the Directions report. And I want to ask the Minister of Education in respect to this repro which was, as 

you know, commissioned under the former administration, Mr. Doug McArthur. I want to ask you, in respect to 

the allegations that much of the report has been copied from another report from United States, and I want to ask 

the minister: have you had an opportunity to review with your senior high-paid officials of your department to 

determine the nature of how this matter was, how in fact the plagiarization took place, who indeed was 

responsible, whether in fact your deputy checked the report? I want you to indicate what investigation you have 

carried out to date, and, if so, what are your findings, and are you in fact prepared to indicate who you intend to 

hold responsible for this deception? 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Chairman, let me make it clear right at the beginning, there is no plagiarism 

involved in this particular report. Let me also make it clear that the allegation was not on the entire report, as the 

member from Quill Lake is leading this House to believe. The allegation was on the writing of a goal statement 

out of the recommended directions goals, not the final approved goals. So in short, to summarize that, no, there is 

no truth to the allegation and, yes, we looked at it and investigated it. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Have you had an opportunity to check the degree of comparison between the repro by the 

committee and the report from United States, and have you found any degree of similarity in respect to the 

reports? 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Chairman, I looked at three areas: number one, I looked at the alleged goals that I, 

by the way, have only read in the media. The gentleman in question that has brought the allegation forward from 

the university of Saskatoon has not had any contact with my office, myself or my department officials, to lay out 

exactly what his concern was. 

 

In looking at what was stated in the Leader-Post yesterday, the recommended goals in Directions and the final 

approved goals that went out in this province, yes, there are some similar wording and goals. I don’t find that 

unusual, not at all. 

 

In fact, last Thursday night when I was in Saskatoon I had a reporter stop me and ask me if I was aware of this 

particular repro that this professor was talking about, and I had to say quite frankly, no, I’d never heard of it. And 

so the repro ran by some of this, and said, well, what do you think? You know, this says this, and your goals say 

this. They are pretty much the same. And my reply to her was at that time, “I’m not surprised. We are dealing 

with goals. I don’t think it would matter if you were in France, England, Canada, or the United States, when it 

comes to the kindergarten to grade 12 system, the goals are pretty much the same.” I might also add they probably 

haven’t changed much since the days of Socrates and Plato, if you were to go back and read some of the 

philosophy at that time. 

 

So in terms of the words being similar, I’m not surprised at that, I would not be surprised if you find some goals, 

whether it’s Alberta’s report in reviewing and updating or changing their goals of education, you would probably 

find several that would say the same. 

 

I want to inform the member from Quill Lake, in fact I encourage him to read the approved goals that went out, 

because from the approved goal statement and the report out of Directions, there have been at least 20 changes. 

So I encourage you to read them. 

 

Other than that, I suppose while some wording is similar, I can say reading, writing, and arithmetic, and I’m not 

too sure how many times I will be able to find different words to say the same thing. 

 

I would also suggest that the content and intent in various goal statements for education right across Canada, you 

will find similar, very much similar, as what this gentleman is saying. 

 



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1173 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — I wonder if the minister would agree that, as we understand, that many of the members of the 

committee were very shocked by the revelation that there was so much taken from the Virginia report. 

 

Is that not of concern to you, that leading members of the committee were, indeed, very surprised, and in fact that 

officials within your department had a lot to do with the making up of the report, writing it up, on behalf of the 

committee? 

 

And do you not think that it was unfair that a situation would present itself where the members of the board were 

not at least informed that they were indeed preparing a report which did indeed compare and, in fact, totally take 

the substance out of the United States report and insert it into the report for Saskatchewan? 

 

Do you think that somewhere along the line the process broke down? Do you think that the committee itself 

would have, if they were advised, possibly acknowledge the degree to which it was depending upon it? 

 

My concern is that somehow, somewhere, someone inserted into the . . . when the report was drafted up, the 

committee held all of its hearings throughout Saskatchewan. And I guess I ask the minister: were there any of her 

officials involved in the drafting up of the report to be presented to the committee, which indeed they presented to 

you? Were there other personnel in your department which played a role in the drafting up of the report? 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member from Quill Lakes right at the very beginning laid 

out to this House that the committee had been set up by the former administration. Right? Right. We agree. Then 

he also knows that department officials were on the committee. The make-up of the committee didn’t change. The 

committee’s work didn’t change from that administration to this. The same professional people in the Department 

of Education that were appointed to the committee under the past administration were still on this committee 

under this administration, did the drafting, the writing of the report in conjunction, Mr. Chairman, with an 

appointed full-time chairman, principal from Saskatoon, under Mr. . . . the past minister of education at that time. 

 

So the member from Quill Lake, he knows all this, and yet he stands up and he asks that question. There is not, to 

my knowledge, any member on that committee that has not seen or did not see the material as it was going 

through. That was a very close-working committee. And they wrote up the report, and all members had access to 

informations used. 

 

If we are going to have the member from Quill Lake standing up and putting an idea out to the public that, yes, in 

fact this part true, let’s put it to rest now. It isn’t true. I said, very clearly, that the allegation of plagiarism is not 

true. We looked into it. 

 

Mr. Chairman, that committee, in doing its work . . . First of all, I might add that the committee is representative 

of the various groups around the province — teachers, trustees, universities, parents, and department people. Not 

only did they represent the various educational organizations, but it was also based on geography, so that we did 

not have all urban people and no rural people. There was a good make-up that way. And they tried to 

acknowledge, the best they could, the male-female representation on the committee also. 

 

This committee, in sitting down to do its review on curriculum and instruction process back at the end of 1981, 

beginning of 1982, obviously had a very large task set out to do, particularly if you were going to write down a set 

of goals for a province that is so diverse in its culture and interest and geography as what Saskatchewan is. 

 

Now, they went searching for research material. They didn’t want to reinvent the wheel if they  



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1174 

 

didn’t have to, but they also wanted it to be Saskatchewan, particularly Saskatchewan public. They had 

documents from all across Canada. They had documents from the United States, from various organizations like 

the one in question, ASCD, which I might add is the American . . . is the Association for Supervision and 

Curriculum Development. They had over 40 documents from Saskatchewan, dating back to 1918. And they went 

through some of these documents, including the one from south of the border. There was no one document that 

was used as one source. 

 

Now on top of collecting various materials, plus briefs from the public in Saskatchewan, they had consultation 

meetings. When they were finished with that they compiled all of the information and they put it into a report 

entitled Directions. Now we took that consultation process one step further, and when Direction was completed, a 

committee of government, STF, and SSTA went to nine regions around the province. And we said, okay, what do 

you think of the goals as recommended? And somebody said, well, I have a concern, perhaps on the spiritual 

development. Maybe you could look at the wording. Maybe it needs some changes. 

 

Another area that was addressed was special education. And we agreed that perhaps we should have a look at it to 

make it relevant to Saskatchewan students and parents. So that process took place. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, from the time that that was completed and the final approved goals came out, there were 20 

changes made that Saskatchewan people had asked for — parents, teachers, administrators — 20 changes at a 

minimum, on the goals. 

 

For the benefit of the member from Quill Lakes, the allegation in the Leader-Post yesterday about this being an 

American document, or whatever, was referring to the association that I have just named, the Association for 

Supervision and Curriculum Development. 

 

Now that’s like a research firm, a consulting firm. It’s not a school division. It’s not a school-board, or a 

university. Here’s what their director of this organization says. He says: 

 

We do not wish to prescribe each school’s destination. That is a decision best left to the particular school 

and community. We do believe, however, that we have provided a guide to the process of goal setting by 

listing and specifying a wide variety of educational goals. Any particular school and community can use 

this list as a resource in setting priorities and choosing from alternatives. 

 

I don’t have great difficulty with that. But I do emphasize in here that that particular document was one of many 

documents that were pulled in not only from this province but other provinces, other states in the United States, 

including a lot of documents from Saskatchewan people only. That document was intended as a resource and it 

followed its intent. 

 

The member from Quill Lakes is simply to keep on his usual path, planting a seed to discredit what a group of 23 

trustees and educators went through for three years — two and a half years — on that committee, in compiling 

this work. One was a principal in the Catholic system out of Saskatoon, the deans of education out of the two 

universities . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member from Quill lake says, “Who wrote the story — the 

universities?” I suggest to him that one professor has laid this out as an allegation, and that the member from Quill 

Lake do his homework. I would be more than pleased to give him the phone number and addresses of the people 

on the committee that made up the entire committee. He can phone them. He can talk to them how the report was 

drafted. But don’t stand here and discredit three years of work by 23 educators of this province. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Well, I just want to indicate to the minister I am not in any way discrediting the work of the 

committee. The very evidence of the committee having been founded under our government indicates the support 

and the need for it. 

 



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1175 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — What I want to know is, under this administration, whether the responsibilities within your 

department, and the officials of the department, will carry it out in a meaningful way or whether or not those from 

the department, or those above the representatives from the department — your senior bureaucrats, your high-paid 

staff — whether they fulfilled their responsibilities to you and to the committee. 

 

I want to clearly indicate to you, Madam Minister, that this story was not broke by the opposition. This story was 

released by the press, and it was of concern to an educator in the province, of the degree in which it seems so 

similar to the United States report. 

 

And you indicated, Madam Minister, that many other documents and studies were used, and what I would ask 

you, whether you have checked the full report to determine whether there is any other extractions from other 

documents which were used to the extent of the one which was raised in the article in the Leader-Post. Can you 

indicate whether or not you have checked to see whether any further material was taken from any other 

documents to sort of compile jointly a document which applies to Saskatchewan? 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Chairman, I have just laid out that the process that had gone through, particularly 

the consultation, because somebody seems to be missing that point. I am satisfied, I am totally satisfied that this 

document of directions, that this document entitled Directions, is an indication of what the public said to the 

review committee on its consultation meetings. One only has to go through the survey forms that were sent back, 

read the comments, read the next books that were out, Mr. Member from Quill Lake, following Directions, for an 

indication of what Directions is all about. 

 

(1145) 

 

Saskatchewan people were very clear in their desires of what they wanted in the education system, and they set it 

at those public consultation meetings. That was taken and translated into Directions. 

 

I told you before that I am satisfied that there was no plagiarism involved in the Directions goals, the 

recommended goals that the Direction report sent forth to me as minister. I am totally satisfied on that point. 

 

I think it is extremely unfortunate that one professor from the University of Saskatchewan with his big concern on 

education — it is extremely unfortunate that he has not take the time to contact myself or the department, but 

rather has chosen to go through what can only be considered controversial methods. I didn’t for a moment think 

that the member might raise it, because I didn’t for a moment think that you had really studied the Directions 

report. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — You said you satisfied yourself that there was no plagiarism, and indeed there was none. Can 

you indicate to the House what steps you took to satisfy yourself? Obviously, you indicated that you did, and I’d 

like you to point out what steps you did in fact take. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Well, number one, Mr. Chairman, I, myself, was involved in the public consultations 

after the report was completed. I took that report, and I set up nine public meetings around the province with STF, 

SSTA, with the members from Melville and Saskatoon Fairview. That was the committee. And we went around to 

nine areas of the province. The people had had an opportunity to read Directions by that time, and from what they 

said to me, their reaction to Directions by that time, and from what they said to me, their reaction to Directions, 

and any changes that were made I am totally satisfied were made in what the public was suggesting for education. 

That’s number one. 

 

Number two, the Directions process and the goals we were very involved with over the last  



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1176 

 

year. It’s difficult. I mean, they had not been reviewed, changed, I don’t even think anybody over there knew 

about them, since 1963. That’s 20 years, two decades, where nothing had been done to bring them up to date. It’s 

a major undertaking. 

 

As I stated, hundreds of briefs from Saskatchewan people, several dozen specific documents outside of briefs 

from the public were reviewed, to do with goals, just from Saskatchewan alone. Plus the other documents that you 

pull in from the Department of Education in Alberta, the Canadian Education Association, which each department 

of education is a member of. 

 

I have no difficulty with a committee doing its homework, getting all the possible material that it can. I have read 

to the member across the House what the association in question is all about. It’s a research element; its material 

is intended for use. And at any time if some of that material was taken and used in consultation and discussions in 

writing up our own Saskatchewan goals, I don’t see any problem with that. 

 

Thirdly, the drafts of Directions. The member makes an allegation that members of the committee were surprised. 

They didn’t know this happened. Well, I suggest that’s not true. Drafts of Directions reviewed by the committee 

— by the committee itself . . . There was a draft, first of all, in November 21, 22, 1983, and the committee met in 

Regina, and they reviewed it. December 7 and 9 of the same year they reviewed them again — the writing and the 

drafting and the changes that had to take place; that meting was in Saskatoon, December 13, another one in 

Regina, and then on January 24, 1984, they met again in Regina, which would have been one of their last 

meetings in giving approval to the document as it is written. 

 

And I can only add, once again, they had a full-time chairman, a very capable principal from the Saskatoon 

Catholic School Division who was appointed by the previous administration and the minister of the day at that 

time. 

 

And I can only state that it is simply to undermine what was a very difficult task, an initiative that was done by 

these 23 people making up the committee. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to follow along those lines. The minister says that the 

opposition, or the member from Quill Lakes is attempting to undermine a process the minister has set in place. 

But I think that we are not the people to raise the issue. 

 

The issue is being carried in every media, and the Leader-Post is talking about the copying of an American report. 

There are many people in Canada today who are talking about the Tories and their consultation process, whether 

it’s on education in Saskatchewan or native rights in Ottawa, where we seem to talk a lot about consultation, 

whether we are the Minister of Education in Saskatchewan or the Minister of Indian Affairs in Ottawa, where you 

go through the expensive process of pretending to be consulting with someone, and then there’s leaked reports, as 

we see this morning in Ottawa, that the funding to native groups is going to be cut off. 

 

What people are saying is that your consultation processes are a sham. We’re not saying that. We are asking on 

behalf of others in our society who are paying the bills what this process really means. What people are accusing 

you of, Madam Minister, is railroading a committee that believed it was doing an excellent job, that went out and 

did the report, the report that cost $350,000, a report that could have been, and should have been, based on the 

Saskatchewan experience. 

 

But what seems to have happened, and what the allegation is, not from us — I will remind you again — but from 

educators at the university level, is that once the review and the consultation process was done you said good, 

we’ve got the politics covered off. We’ve set up the smoke-screen that we’ve consulted with everyone. You took 

that pile of reports that people in this province gave to you; you set aside; you got someone in your department to 

pick up a report from Virginia and copy it out. And I say that’s unfortunate and unfair, and, Madam  



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1177 

 

Minister, I would ask you to explain why you are satisfied with that process? 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Chairman, if the member from Shaunavon had have been here earlier, he would 

have heard the full explanation. Maybe if I give you the latter points of why I am totally satisfied with the process, 

and do some bypassing all the snide comments and allegations that you make towards the government and this 

minister in setting this up. 

 

The review committee has been contacted and asked for their view of the process and the allegation that was laid 

out. And I might also remind the member from Shaunavon that this allegation is not towards the minister. It talks 

about the committee. The committee is satisfied with the process. I mean, who else knows the hard work, and the 

amount of reading, and the amount of discussion and debate that these people went through for two years, other 

than the committee? — the member from Shaunavon? I doubt it. 

 

They were contacted, and they are satisfied with the process, and that the final document reflects their discussions 

and the discussions of the public meetings. And to say anything else that it doesn’t, is just simply not true. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, Madam Minister, what I’m not concerned about is the process of consultation 

up to the point of when the material was turned over to you and your department officials. 

 

In the article of April the 18th in Leader-Post, the final paragraph says: “All the committee’s material was turned 

over to education department officials and they wrote the final report.” 

 

Now get that: “All the material was turned over to the education department officials and they wrote the report.” 

The report, which included about two-thirds plagiarism, out of a Virginia report. 

 

What I would like to know is whether or not you’re satisfied with that part of the process? 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — The department officials . . . The department was represented on the committee, and 

that’s where the writing took place. It was not outside of the committee. 

 

The writing took place. The material is put into the department. There is a full-time co-ordinator appointed, and 

there was a full-time chairman appointed, who were still, at that time, full-time on the committee’s work. The 

committee has its deliberation, gathers its material, and it’s in the department for the officials to do the writing, 

based on the work of the committee. 

 

Then, after the writing was completed, it went back to the committee, back to the committee for final approval. 

The committee did not simply hand the material over to me, or to the department, and then finish its work. That 

was not the process. This was the final report to me from the committee — this. Not all the material, and not the 

documents and the issues of debate, but this — with full approval of the committee. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, Madam Minister, I understand how the process works. The consultation — 

which you call consultation — then into the department where the material that was done by listening to 

Saskatchewan people was compiled and given to you. And I understand that process, and I agree with it up to that 

point. 

 

What I don’t agree with is the point where that material was set aside and a report written based on a report done 

in Virginia. And then that report went back to the committee. That’s what you’re saying. It went back to the 

committee. Was there instructions, when it went back to the committee, that the report they were reviewing was 

based on the Virginia report? Did your department tell them that? 

 



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1178 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Chairman, the report was not based on a Virginia report. That’s the information 

that he missed at the beginning. No, it wasn’t. They compiled various . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, it isn’t 

word for word. I’m sorry to disappoint you, but it simply isn’t. 

 

As I explained to the hon. member from Quill Lake, before you arrived, that various documents were collected — 

one from the Association of Supervision and Curriculum Development. It was one of many. Now that’s a research 

firm that puts materials together for organizations, departments, educators, school boards, teachers to use. That’s 

what it’s there for. So all these documents come in. 

 

The allegation that I have seen in the Leader-Post is specifically at some goals in Directions, and, I might add, 

well chosen in where they cut the sentences off, because some of it isn’t even completed. 

 

The other thing I told the member from Quill Lake, the final approved goals have a minimum of 20 changes from 

the goals that seem to be in controversy through the media reports. So there’s a very large difference. If the 

member from Shaunavon would like, I can go over them one by one, if that’s what he chooses. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, the minister says there is no copying from one report to the other, I have here, 

not from the Leader-Post, but from the two reports, one, the Goals of Education in Saskatchewan — 1984, and 

one, goals of education, Measuring and Attaining the Goals of Education, Alexandria of Virginia, and I would 

just like to take a moment to compare a couple of the lines. And I would like to . . . I would like to give a couple 

of examples out of the Saskatchewan report: point 2, on page 26: 

 

Acquires information and meaning through observing, listening, reading, and experiencing. 

 

The Virginia report: 

 

Acquires information and meaning through observing, listening, and reading. 

 

Another point: 

 

Applies (this is out of the Saskatchewan report) — applies basic principles, concepts, problem-solving 

strategies and processes of sciences, arts, humanities, to understand, interpret, and function in the world. 

 

Out of the Virginia report: 

 

Applies basic principles and concepts of science, arts, and humanities in interpret personal experiences. 

 

(1200) 

 

Now, Madam Minister, if you’re attempting to tell the Saskatchewan people that there was no copying, and no 

plagiarism, I wonder where your credibility is. And I’ll ask you one more time if there was not, within your 

department, plagiarism taking place, and that your report in large part was not based on the Virginia report. It 

seems to me impossible to deny that a large part of it was taken out of the one report and put into yours, and that 

your report was not based on the Saskatchewan material that was bought and paid for by the taxpayers of the 

province. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Well, Mr. Chairman, my answer once again is, no. there is no plagiarism involved. The 

member from Shaunavon can go right across Canada and the United States, go to the British Isles, go to France, 

probably any place but Saskatchewan. You will not see great  



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1179 

 

differences in goals of education. The intent, or content, and some of the wording, some of the wording . . . Like, I 

don’t find it unusual at all. I guess maybe the point of debate on the goal statement should be: do you agree with 

them or not? That’s what should be the debatable for a government, because the goals are fundamentally, 

fundamentally society’s indication of what they’re all about, but we’re not even debating that. We’re going to 

debate the wording on them. 

 

I have stated clearly, and once again, there was no plagiarism involved. You may very well find some of the 

words similar, you might find some that are the same. 

 

Let me give the member from Shaunavon an example. Let me give him a question. If he had looked into this 20 

years ago, the goals of education, does he think if one of the goals was to read, write, and arithmetic, that that 

would have not been the same in 10 provinces and two territories right across this country? I doubt it. 

 

As I said, the goals of education, particularly kindergarten to grade 12, are just not very different from one 

country to another. I am totally satisfied that the people involved in my department, the people involved on this 

committee, plus all the people that took part in the public consultation, have given a Saskatchewan view of their 

desires for the education system. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — The whole point of this discussion, Madam Minister, is that I believe your so-called 

report that you did within your department is merely a smoke-screen on your part to try to make people believe 

that you have consulted. 

 

And you have admitted here now that you believe all the reports that are done across United States and Canada 

are the same. You’ve just said that. You just said that you could pick up any report, whether from France or the 

United States or Saskatchewan, and they would be the same. 

 

So what you’re admitting is that in your mind this whole process was a sham. You’re admitting that you believe 

that if you had picked up this report from Virginia before the process started, you could have written the report 

without consulting with the public. 

 

That is what you have just said. And I find that to be a very critical analysis of what you have just carried out. 

You’ve spent $350,000 on the report. And now you rise and say we could have done it simply by picking up any 

other report because they’re exactly the same. And I would like you to explain to us why you went through the 

process if you believe that. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Well, in terms of credibility, let’s be clear what the member from Shaunavon is saying. 

You’re dealing with goals. I said you will not find goals, goal statements for kindergarten to grade 12, right across 

the country, very much different in their intent and sometimes their wording. 

 

The member from Shaunavon is now saying we said the entire report. The entire report, Mr. Chairman, is on 

curriculum and instruction. Today we are debating the wording of some goals, which was the first 

recommendation out of Directions and the report. so perhaps the member from Shaunavon, with all his ill-found 

credibility, should be reminded that here is a truth, a half a truth, and something that is not totally true. 

 

As I stated to you earlier, the process that this committee went through, that was appointed in 1981, was excellent. 

And it was unique in Canada — the public consultation. Now you want me to stand up and say this public 

consultation was a farce . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I didn’t. 

 

The goals. Did I not say that? The goals, okay? The goals. The goals for education for schools will not be much 

different in Canada, in Saskatchewan, or in France, or Scotland. You might find some minor differences, or you 

might find one or two areas that have a major difference. 

 

Let me give you two examples. Spiritual development. That was not copied, as you say. In fact,  



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1180 

 

you will not find that in every goals statement, in every goals statement. 

 

What about the goal as the professor from Saskatoon has talked about — the autonomous learner? Now if the 

member from Shaunavon would go back and read the final approved goals he would realize that the word 

“autonomous” has been taken out, and for a very specific reason, the reason being that the school system in this 

province has a mandate for special education, and it is recognition that some of our special ed students are not 

autonomous in their learning. 

 

Now that concern came through the public consultation by people involved with special ed, including parents with 

mentally handicapped children. So that’s a unique one in here for Saskatchewan in terms of the reasons why, and 

the removal of a word that you would find in other goal statements. 

 

So Mr. Chairman, be clear. When I say that things are not much different across Canada, it is in terms of the goals 

for schools. Just the goals. There might be some other factors that are the same, but at no point did I say that this 

report, Directions, was not needed and is an indication of things being the same world-wide. That simply is a false 

statement. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, Madam Minister, I’m not going to dwell on this much longer, but I think it 

leads us to the point of why the public of Canada is becoming very cynical in recent years about politicians who 

talk about consultation. And I mention the federal example of the native conference, or the conference on the 

charter of rights that talked about the rights of native people and aboriginal people in this country. And then today 

we have a leaked document by the federal government saying that funding is going to be cut off. 

 

And in Saskatchewan we have your report that is very much up in the air now, based on the fact that the people 

who believed they were being consulted now don’t know for sure whether they were or not, or whether you took a 

report from Virginia and copied two-thirds of it. 

 

And I say this is why the people of the country are becoming cynical, particularly with Conservative politicians. 

And I think it’s the principle of the thing where you attempt to carry out a process, a legitimate process, and then 

do something else. It’s the principle that is at stake here, and when people say they don’t believe it, when the next 

minister in Saskatchewan announces a consulting process, or a study, they will have good reason to, because I 

think you have put another nail in the coffin, if you might say, of the consultation process that people in this 

country would like to believe they could carry out. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Chairman, if there’s any reason why the public have a great deal of cynicism 

towards politicians and the public consultation process, I would suggest two factors prevail for that kind of 

attitude, particularly in this province after going through 40 years of a centralized government and not having the 

opportunity for honest public consultation. 

 

And secondly, when the public consultation is done, from the critics, whoever those critics may be, there is never 

an honest picture given on the matter either. I can only simply add and state that the member opposite . . . The 

committee is satisfied that that report is an indication of Saskatchewan parents, teachers, and students, and their 

desires for their school systems. And I would also suggest that he is impugning the committee with his allegations 

today. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — I don’t think that there’s any doubt that the credibility of the minister is at stake in respect to 

this issue. And I don’t believe she has been able to clear it up for the general public. And that’s not unusual for 

ministers of this government. 

 

I want to, prior to getting into my prepared text, comparable to the minister, on a general review of education, Mr. 

Chairman, I want to turn to a couple of other items which are of a concern to educators, to parents, and to young 

people across the province of Saskatchewan. And I have received letters to respect to it, and since it affects the 

lives of young people a great deal, and that is in respect to the liquor advertising. 

 



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1181 

 

I want to ask the minister whether she also has been receiving representation from school-boards, trustees, home 

and school clubs, parents, and young people indicating their displeasure at the amount of advertising of alcoholic 

beverages that is taking place in the province of Saskatchewan. I wonder if the minister could indicate what her 

experience has been in respect to it, and what indeed is her position as it relates to affecting young people’s lives 

and the nature of the advertising. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Chairman, I believe we talked about this a year ago in estimates also. Over this past 

year, I have received what I would consider to be two resolutions on liquor, students, advertising, driving and 

drinking — one coming from STF last year, and one from SSTA. The majority of letters that I get from parents, 

school boards, and community people on students and liquor, have more to do with Safe Grad than anything else. 

 

I guess if I had to put it into another category, the second one would be on the necessity of our youth in requiring 

information in order to develop responsible habits. And as education minister, I guess my opinion is one of 

students needing guidance not only from the school, but from the home, the community, and the church, and 

perhaps from the leaders that they see around them. Maybe the old adage of “monkey see, monkey do,” is true 

when it comes on a one-on-one relationship between a child and a parent, or somebody that they look up to within 

that community. 

 

I would like to see an incorporation to a greater degree, particularly in the area of, if you want to call it life skills 

preparation, perhaps even in science, in the younger grades, where the effects based on sound research are very 

well-known, very evident. Our students need that information at a younger age than what they presently get it. So 

I am in favour of seeing greater awareness within our school students on this. But I also am in favour of seeing the 

community taking greater responsibility and, I believe, that the Safe Grad committee has given that opportunity. 

 

(1215) 

 

There’s another committee that has even enhanced that opportunity for students to be able to take responsibility 

for their own behaviour, and that is the liaison committee that has been set up in Saskatoon. And I believe it’s 

now moving into rural areas where you have school people, your RCMP, other community people, parents, your 

students, get together and they look at the areas of community activity that their young people can take part in. 

 

And if I’m not wrong, I believe Shaunavon was an area, a rural area, one of the first ones in looking at students 

becoming actively involved in their community, and setting up this kind of committee that not only looks at 

alcohol, but other factors in the community that have a negative impact on them as a student, but also the 

community. So that is probably a good sign. I would also suggest you will see more of that for the future. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — I can agree with you, Madam Minister, in respect to the need for a greater awareness and 

community responsibility as it relates to the use or abuse of alcohol. 

 

But the problem that I see is that there is a contradiction in that it seems to me that in the field of education, what 

we should be doing as a province . . . And I think it’s incumbent upon you as Minister of Education to take a 

leading role so that the awareness can be more easily taught to the students, and that community people become 

involved. 

 

But the problem is that what you have . . . In the one hand you are preaching that there should be more awareness 

against the use of alcoholism. You are saying that the community should get more involved and take on more 

responsibility — the parents, teachers, and so on. And I agree with that. 

 

But what you have is a contradiction in that the government is, or has in fact allowed such an  



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1182 

 

amount of increase in the use of alcoholism. All of those ads are associated, or many of them, with young people 

as though that’s the thing to do. 

 

Now I don’t know why you can stand up in here and say that, yes, you are concerned, and yes, you want 

awareness, and yes, you want community involvement and participation, yes, you want the family to do more; and 

at the same time your very government takes a counter-active position of increasing the amount of alcohol 

advertising. 

 

And so I want to ask the minister: are you prepared to indicate to the interested bodies that I have mentioned — 

the home and school associations, the parents across the province, the STF — as you have indicated? You have 

received two resolutions from educational bodies. Are you prepared to take a public stand against this increase of 

liquor advertising? And if not, why not? 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Chairman, my concerns on liquor advertising are well known in the educational 

community and within this caucus in terms of monitoring of what kind of ads go on there in terms of life-styles, 

what we show to our students. 

 

But more importantly than what’s on TV is my concern, and it too is well-known, that students must begin to 

have responsibility within their community. And it isn’t that students don’t want responsibility. They do. 

 

The problem has been that as adults we have often perhaps taken that responsibility on ourselves. What we are 

saying now in education is that students must become more of self-reliant learner, independent, and begin to take 

responsibility for their own actions. 

 

Now obviously many things come into play: the kinds of information that one receives or the lack of information; 

the kinds of role models that one has in the community. The member from Assiniboia would probably say that, 

don’t forget the church. That too is a role model and comes into play. And he’s absolutely right. That also, I might 

add, has to do with the whole area of values and spiritual development, as we were talking about in the goals. 

 

So while my concerns are well-known on the liquor advertising, I believe you stick your head in the sand, or 

you’ve never pulled it out, when you say TV is the only problem. TV is the only problem. 

 

Mr. Chairman, TV is not the only problem that our students have. They have difficulty sometimes in getting good 

information. Sometimes they even have difficulty in getting the truth, the information, particularly out of 

politicians. So it becomes very difficult for our students to make a kind of decision. Obviously the decision to be 

made is their decision, but they don’t do that by themselves. And that’s why we say that the total community — 

the home, the church, the school, and the student together — have to begin to address some of these problems. 

 

MR. ENGEL: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, I want to, before I ask you a question, say thank 

you to the Department of Education for the delicious meal that I and my wife enjoyed down in Assiniboia just 

recently. In fact (what day is today, Friday?), it was this week. And the Department of education funded a dinner 

where they invited, oh, four or five dozen people, and it was DWI program. 

 

And I appreciated the comments of some of your staff people, and a judge, and a medical doctor, and different 

ones that were involved there. But that group that was involved and that was there have just a little different view 

on the role of the media in advertising as far as the effects are concerned in young people. 

 

And have you some statistics that you’d like to share with us, or can you through your staff get us some numbers 

on, say, how many young people — I mean early in their first two or three years of a driver’s licence — are 

having problems with impaired driving? Have you numbers on that? 

 



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1183 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — No, Mr. Chairman, I don’t have the numbers with me, but I can take notice, and when 

we get them together, send them to the member. 

 

MR. ENGEL: — Thank you. I’d appreciate that because I’m sure if you look at the numbers, you’ll find that 

since your term in office the percentage of young people that are getting involved and are being charged through 

our court system, with impaired driving, as compared to what it was before your advertising took place, will make 

you sit up and take note that maybe you should change your idea. 

 

You say that it’s difficult to get good information, and it’s difficult to get truth out of politicians. And I would like 

to say that that is the case. Now maybe I should stop and wait for you to get some information from the minister 

in charge of highway traffic safety, but the Driving Without Impairment Program is a good one. I appreciate the 

role the Department of Education has in helping fund that. 

 

But I’d like the minister to make herself aware of the effects of advertising as far as the subtly that’s in those ads, 

and how wonderful it is, and how you need liquor to have a good time. If they’d have spent the money on fixing 

that old red truck in those ads instead of pushing it up to a bar to have a drink, they’d have got some effects out of 

it, and they might have gotten some value for their buck. 

 

So maybe you have some comments, seeing you’ve been lectured by the minister in charge of highway safety. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Well I still don’t have the statistic on the number on impaired driving. The good 

Minister of Highways informs me that for instance in the areas of accidents, injuries, and deaths, fatalities, in 

1981, accidents were at 38,285. As of July 1984, it was 16,599. 

 

The injuries are also down, I might add, from 8,660 to 4,256. And fatalities are down from 262 to 123. And those 

are within the space of our government taking office. 

 

MR. ENGEL: — The numbers that you have just given me, I’m not quarrelling with. I don’t know what basis 

you are, of what grouping they are. I believe that the concentration on highway safety, and the concentration on 

enforcing in the use of seat-belts . . . There was a young girl walked to my door at 7 o’clock on Sunday morning, 

that walked away from a car that was totaled because she had her seat-belt on. I’m not arguing that that kind of 

education isn’t effective, and isn’t working, and isn’t saving lives. 

 

But the point I’m making, and the number I wanted from you, Madam Minister is: what effect, and when, do you 

expect the crucial effect of liquor advertising to have? Little kids, before they go to school, and before they go to 

kindergarten, spend a big, big percentage of their time watching TV — a large percentage of their time, much 

more than the time that was spent when I and you were children under six years of age. Because when I was six 

years of age we didn’t have a TV set in our house . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon? We had a radio, my 

good friend. 

 

The point I’m making is that when I see kids, I see small children that know the jingles and know the songs that, 

“This Bud is for you.” Or they are watching a hockey game and they’ll say to their dad, let’s go have a beer. Let’s 

say that . . . and those kinds of expressions. That effect of advertising on those children isn’t going to be affected 

for another eight or ten years till they get a driver’s licence. 

 

And the point I’m making is that the teenage use of alcohol rate, and some of the numbers that are heard from 

your staff at this DWI informational meeting that was — or dinner meeting that was held down at Assiniboia — 

was quite a surprising thing to me, and the effect that television advertising has on the young people. And there 

are young people that are making their choices  



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1184 

 

how popular it is to use liquor with everything. 

 

In fact nothing goes better with liquor, Madam Minister, nothing. Not driving, not flying, not fun of any kind. 

You can have it without using liquor. And why would you say that your stand is well-known and you are going to 

monitor these ads and you are going to make sure that they comply by your little regulations you set up? 

 

Madam Minister, I think you should change your mind. I think you should change your mind and you should get 

serious about liquor advertising, and what it’s really going to do to you, because the young fellow that’s going to 

be nominated next Wednesday night is going to take your place in this Assembly, because he doesn’t believe in 

liquor advertising. He doesn’t believe in liquor advertising. He lets people down daily because of the effects of 

excessive use of alcohol. He knows how many people die from that. He’s the last one to let ‘em down. And let me 

tell you, Madam Minister, you better get serious about this one and you’d better get on side on this one before it’s 

too late for you. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Well I appreciate the advice from the member from Assiniboia. The crucial effect is the 

question that he has asked. He makes reference to the gentleman that will be running for the NDP probably in 

Swift Current. That gentleman also knows that the crucial effect . . . because he is a past teacher for years and 

years and years and years. The crucial effect, Mr. Speaker, and to the member from Assiniboia, which he knows 

deep in his heart, if you put a child in front of that TV it doesn’t matter what’s on and you leave that child there 

all day long there’s going to be a negative effect. There’s no doubt about it. The communications becomes 

between the TV screen and the child. The crucial effect is the access that the child has for discussion on what they 

are seeing on that TV screen. 

 

(1230) 

 

And that’s why I say that kids — kids, students, children, whatever group you want, age group you put them in 

from one-year-old to 19 to 50 years old, perhaps yourself — you need the access to discuss with another human 

being. And that’s why we say that there has to be first of all some responsibility, in total, through community. 

Students need to know that the community cares about them, and they need to be able to discuss what they are 

seeing on TV. 

 

The member from Assiniboia also knows when it comes to research on these types of things, that the research is 

here, and it’s here. You will get research, it’s probably split right down the middle, that shows an effect. And this 

one says there is not that kind of an effect. The member from Assiniboia also full well knows that the 

consumption is down in this province, and yet he stands there and he talks about increased consumption. 

 

The Minister of Highways has assured me that he will send me some information on the statistics that I related to 

you. I believe he said they are with the accident information, along with the other statistics that I do not have in 

here but will give to you. 

 

MR. ENGEL: — Madam Minister, I would like from you one more piece of information, at least one researcher 

that will agree with you and say that the TV advertising of liquor doesn’t affect a young person’s choice. I’d like 

one researcher that will condone . . . In your DWI program, in your highway safety program, in your accident 

prevention program, anyplace you want, you tell me one person that will condone the fancy, first-class advertising 

that’s on TV and that’s bombarding our young people’s heads daily. During sporting events — sporting events are 

better with liquor — during recreation events, during leisure, any time, you tell me one researcher that will say 

that will not have an effect, and in fact will have a negative effect on a young person. I’d like to know the name of 

that one person, because I’d love to talk to him. I’ve never been able to talk to a researcher that’s made this kind 

of a study that agrees with you and says it has a negative effect. 

 



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1185 

 

There’s not such a person around, Madam Minister, and if you still think there are, I’d like to know who they are. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — I would be more than willing to send you the research. I will get you some. It isn’t 

research that condones. Like, don’t get carried away in your suspicions and your assumptions. The research is 

based on the effects of advertising, how it affects, five years later, consumptions up or down, the buying of 

brands, that type of thing — what they call scientific research or as scientific that research can possibly get. I will 

find every copy that I have ever had access to, and you may take it home for the summer reading while you’re on 

your combine. 

 

MR. ENGEL: — One more value judgement on your behalf. You say the total consumption, Madam Minister, of 

alcoholic beverages . . . I’ll wait till you’re through talking to the member from Morse and then I’ll ask the 

question, because I want your attention and your serious consideration of this question. 

 

You say the total consumption of alcohol is down. How would you compare the down trend in the consumption of 

alcohol compared to the sales of farm machinery, for example. The down in farm equipment, not a per cent . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

Now listen to me, listen to me very carefully, members of the Conservative Party. You’re trying to argue that 

because the economy has gone into a tail-spin and a recession like we haven’t known for 55 years, and now you 

all of a sudden got a member saying that the liquor sales are down. Well, Madam Minister, the people don’t have 

any money. Don’t you realize that? In spite of sales of milk, any figure, any commodity you want, are down, and 

they’re down a lot more than the sale of liquor, for some reason. 

 

And by the way, when you isolate beer, where the most ads are beer, when you isolate beer out of the sales of 

liquor, Madam Minister, what are they? What are the sales of beer in relationship to last year’s beer sales? 

They’re up. They’re up. And 99 per cent of the ads are beer ads. And you’re trying to tell me that the advertising 

that’s taking place isn’t affecting our young people. 

 

The purchases of every other commodity — I don’t care if you take farm equipment, you take furniture, you take 

food, you could take anything you want — the sales are down. Any store anywhere in Canada will tell you the 

sales are down, except the people that are selling beer. How come beer held its own? 

 

Now maybe the member from Morse thinks the liquor ads are great. Maybe he does. I don’t agree with him. How 

do you compare when you say the sale of liquor is down? Do you consider it down when you look at the overall 

economy and the down trend in the sale of equipment, the sale of new cars, the sale of any other commodity, and 

measure that graph on how those sales are down, and then compare the sale of beer which is up? 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Chairman, first of all, we’re not into estimates on economics here, but I would be 

more than willing to gather up the statistics on consumption over the last year, in fact, over the last several years. 

And I will send them to the member — not opinions, but statistics that are open to the public. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Because this is a very important issue in respect to the lives of young people, Mr. Chairman, 

what I want to ask the minister, as being the leading educator and Minister of Education in Saskatchewan, and 

has, as she indicated, a considerable amount of concern in respect to the effects on young people, I would like to 

ask her whether, within her department, the Department of Education, have you set up any monitoring system in 

respect to the nature of the ads? Have you, in fact, done a survey to determine whether there’s any particular ads 

that you have found which are particularly offensive? Have you, as Minister of Education in protecting our young 

people in Saskatchewan, taken any action in respect as a result of any monitoring? 

 



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1186 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as everyone full well knows, and now we will inform the member 

from Quill Lake, the Department of Education is not a monitoring agency when it comes to Liquor Board 

regulations or the gathering of statistical information, etc. That would best be with the minister responsible for the 

Liquor Board. We are not a monitoring agency. 

 

We are dealing with education, kindergarten to grade 12, curriculum, instruction, school days, and educational 

finance. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Basically, the minister has answered the question. She has joined with those that support the 

large brewery companies and has indicated and supported them in their position of wholesale advertising. 

 

I want to turn to another area. I’ve had constituents phoning in and other interested citizens. And that has to do 

with effects on young people, again. And that is the area of pornography and the amount of pornography that is 

throughout allowed to be displayed and available to the young people of Saskatchewan. 

 

My concern here, Madam Minister, is that what your government has done here, I suppose, in a way has made it a 

revenue sharing or revenue bearing industry. They are capitalizing on pornography. I’m wondering whether the 

minister can, in fact, indicate whether she has received any representation and concern by home and school clubs, 

or the STF, or the trustees’ association, ministerial associations, churches in respect to the wide availability and 

display of pornographic materials in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I want to ask whether she sees this as a concern and whether she supports the position of the government to 

join in on the exploitation as a revenue bearing source by taxing pornographic material. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — To the best of my memory, Mr. Chairman, I do not believe that I have had any 

representation made as Minister of Education. As minister responsible for the status of women, I have. But we are 

dealing with education today. 

 

You know, I think the government’s role, and my role as Minister of Education and minister — particularly 

minister responsible for the status of women — is fairly well-known, and that this government, being the first one 

in Canada to put forth a very comprehensive brief that touched on several departments, like the status of women, 

Department of Social Services, the Department of Justice. And that was with the submission of a brief entitled, 

“With Human Dignity.” And it was a well accepted brief, and it is our hope that as government, particularly mine 

in dealing with some of the issues, not only with women, but certainly young children — and at a age where their 

minds are ever curious and ever growing — that some of those issues will be dealt with, and some of the 

suggestions that we put forth to the fed government as a province. But I cannot say that I have had representation 

as Minister of Education. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — I’m wondering whether the minister has looked into other areas, other provinces in respect to 

any steps that may be taken in other provinces in respect to the control of pornography, and whether she would 

support any action more meaningful than revenue, which in fact would, I think, assist substantially if we could 

restrict pornographic materials. 

 

I understand in Ontario — I don’t know how far they have proceeded with it — but that they were introducing a 

Bill in respect to the control of pornography. I raise this here, Madam Minister, because, as I said, as Minister of 

Education, I certainly would appreciate your indication of your concern, and your commitment, to take such steps 

as is possible which would help to improve the environment in the overall education of our young people. 

 

So could you comment whether you have had the opportunity, or whether you’re concerned  



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1187 

 

sufficiently enough as an educator, to have looked at any other provinces or states, whether other action has been 

taken in respect to the control of this as it relates particularly to our young people? 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Chairman, I would be more than pleased to share with the members opposite some 

of the materials that we have gathered, have read — an indication of what other provinces are doing — and while 

I am more than pleased to do that, I would suggest that the p roper time to do that is when we get to my estimates 

where I am responsible for the status of women, and we will deal with that portion through estimates. I have not 

dealt with it through the Department of Education, and as minister responsible for education. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I certainly can do that, but this is so relevant and so important in the 

scheme of things, and as Minister of Education also, and I guess we can deal with it in that particular department, 

but I would just like to ask the minister: does she as Minister of Education share the concern of those who have 

communicated with me, that this pornographic material has a very substantial influence on young people? 

 

Yesterday, I can share with you, I have had two or three phone calls complaining in respect to the taxation on 

pornography rather than a more effective addressing of the problem. And so I can leave it at that, Madam 

Minister, and deal with it at another time. All I would like to hear from you is basically your position, and 

whether or not you have any major concern as it relates to the education of our young people or the influence that 

it has on the education of our young people. 

 

(1245) 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I share the member’s concern opposite about the impact of 

pornographic material on our students in this province. I share that concern with him. I share, I hope, other 

concerns with him, one of those concerns being that no government in this province ever had the courage to say 

boo on a sound position on pornography and prostitution until this government came in. That’s a concern I have, 

that it was left to drag on that long, particularly when you look at the impact on all human beings, not only 

students but women and men, I might add. So yes, I share some concerns with him but I also have some other 

concerns that I hope he share with me. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, I have received a number of inquiries from a group called, a group 

who go under the umbrella of those who support accelerated Christian education. They, as I think Madam 

Minister knows because you’ve been courteous enough to respond to a number of letters I have written you, they 

want their children raised and educated within a Christian atmosphere, and they want their educational system 

conducted in that framework, and in my view society and government ought to respect their religion and their 

views and do so. 

 

It is their view that the existing educational system is geared to public education, discriminates against their 

private schools, and does not recognize the education which they give their students. I wonder, Madam Minister, 

why our educational system does not recognize their educational system, doesn’t give them the same recognition 

that we do the public system. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Chairman, I am aware of some of the views as stated. I believe the member from 

Regina Centre had also written me a letter some time ago, asking for a response into the inquiry. The concern 

from the group in question, or the people, has been around for some time. And I share some of their frustrations. 

 

First of all, I firmly believe that parents ultimately have that right to determine the kind of education that their 

child is going to receive. I think that’s a fundamental right that people have in this country, and hopefully it’s a 

right that stays for a long time to come. 

 



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1188 

 

We have, over this past year . . . There was no mechanism set in place to be able to deal with the particular 

problem. And obviously, if one goes through the media in the last few years, not only in this province but other 

provinces, it’s a growing concern in that mechanisms haven’t been put into place to give recognition to those 

parents. 

 

Departments have not had anything in place to deal with some of the specific problems that come out, whether it’s 

because of the jurisdiction that the provincial level has in the delivery of the school system, or the jurisdiction that 

a school-board has. 

 

However, we have been meeting with the Saskatchewan Association of the Independent Church Schools, various 

members of that group, and discussions will continue. They have raised some specific concerns. They are also a 

group that are not without their frustrations, and that’s understandably so. 

 

And we will continue discussions, hopefully to come to a resolve in recognizing the rights of those parents, and at 

the same time ensuring that there is a standard of education there that society has accepted. So those discussions 

will carry on this year. 

 

Obviously there’s legal implications involved also. And I believe if you go back through the media over the last 

couple of years, you will see various media reports out of provinces. I think the one common thread that comes 

through in terms of legalities, in any legal decisions that have been made through the judicial system, is the fact 

that parents do have that right to decide what kind of an education their child is going to have. 

 

And now it is up to the . . . whether it be the departments of education or the local boards, to ensure that that right 

is carried out and nothing infringes upon it. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, in the statements I have seen from the department and from Madam 

Minister, your commitment to meeting their request is something less than unequivocal. Madam Minister said that 

the discussion are ongoing. I think that is the very substance of their complaint — the discussions go on and on 

and on and on, with no resolution. 

 

And I am wondering when Madam Minister sees the discussions coming to an end and some action taking place. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t have a time line on that. I wouldn’t like to see it drag on 

for three, four, or five years, you know. Ideally, the best solution would be that there is a solution that satisfies all 

the requirements of both sides tomorrow, or perhaps yesterday. But realistically, it isn’t going to happen 

tomorrow. But I do not want to see it continually drag on. 

 

I also am well aware, as I said earlier, of the frustrations of some of the people involved in coming to a solution. 

In order to alleviate that, the member from Regina Centre has my assurance that the seriousness of the discussions 

with them will continue, with a commitment to ensure that we do it in the shortest time possible. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, I must say I don’t understand why it is so dreadfully difficult to 

meet what I think is a relatively straightforward request. I don’t understand why Madam Minister’s having such 

dreadful difficulty in getting to the position that these people are at. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — I’m not aware if the member had a specific question or not. Anything different that I 

can say is only in regards to one area. The member from Regina Centre, being a past minister of education for a 

very short period of time . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . He says, too short. That isn’t the indication out of the 

educational organizations. It wasn’t soon enough. 

 



 

April 19, 1985 

 

1189 

 

The divisional boards have responsibility for students within their jurisdictional boundaries. The member from 

Regina Centre knows that. Anything to be done also has to keep in mind the local governments issue and the 

boundaries that it falls within. 

 

I would like the member to know that there are some options, alternatives, and solutions at the local level, and at 

least one school board in this province has found an alternative in co-operation or collaboration with the church 

people, and that is the Saskatchewan Valley Board of Education. They came to an agreement and, instead of those 

people taking the children out of the system to set up their own school, they brought the school into the system, 

where it’s administered and certain standards are followed. But there is still a degree of autonomy and input from 

the people that wanted that religious aspect built into its curriculum. 

 

So that’s a good sign. And I would suggest that, you know, over the short time you may very well see that kind of 

a thrust take place with other boards of education. 

 

If it can be done at the local level, and I have full confidence that it can, particularly when it’s Saskatchewan 

people, in coming to an agreeable solution in a local community, if it can be done, I would suggest — and the 

member from Regina Centre I’m sure would agree — that that is the best way to do it because the decision 

making is then closest to the people that it affects the most. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Okay, one more question and then let it go. Madam Minister, I heard many of these 

same arguments when we recognized separate schools in, I think, 1962. Many of these same arguments were 

made — it will splinter the school system, it should all be done under one monolithic local board. 

 

Madam Minister, I would be surprised if it would be satisfactory to these people to be under the control and 

jurisdiction of a local board. I think what they want is autonomy so they can meet the standards — meet the same 

educational standards — but be free to conduct their schools in their own way. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Well, Mr. Chairman, what I just laid out is an option, has happened, is taking place now 

to the satisfaction of both parties. It’s already taking place. I gave the member the name of the division — Sask 

Valley Board of Education. 

 

Now the church group, when they first approached the board, was with the view of obtaining some financial 

support. And it involved a fairly large number of students for that particular division. Well they put their heads 

together in order to meet some of these needs and wishes of the parents and came up with an option. 

 

And the option is that the church community has the responsibility to build and equip the school for start-up 

purposes. But from that point on, it’s operated in a similar fashion to the other schools in the division. In other 

words, there’s recognition for the purpose of operating grants. 

 

That church community selects an advisory board. And of course, the advisory board has input into the 

relationship of the programs, the staffing. They have the say in who is going to be hired in their school. 

 

Now that is already taking place. That is not something that is merely an option on paper for somebody to 

consider. It is taking place in Saskatchewan, and it’s the first one, and it is satisfactory to both sides. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 


