




















































Hansard: April 23, 1985


 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

April 23, 1985 
 

1263 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Domotor: — I give notice that I shall on Thursday move first reading of a Bill, an act to amend The Tax 

Enforcement Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Thursday move first reading of a Bill, an Act to 

amend The Department of Social Services Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Domotor: — I give notice that I shall on Thursday move first reading of a Bill, an act to amend The 

Municipal Tax Sharing Potash Act. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to welcome, or to introduce to you, and 
through you to the members of the legislature, the French Ambassador to Canada, Monsieur Cabouat, and his wife 
who are sitting in the Speaker’s gallery, and we had a dinner last night. We had an enjoyable time talking about the 
relationship between our province and the country of France. The Ambassador has been in Canada now for one 
year, and this is his first opportunity to come into Saskatchewan — I believe, the first French Ambassador to come 
in here since 1981. 
 
We look forward to him coming back again, and we only wish him the very, very best in the province of 
Saskatchewan and, indeed, in his country. We welcome him here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, may I add my welcome to those of the Premier to His Excellency, 

Ambassador Cabouat and Madam Cabouat. They, as the Premier will be aware, are visiting the province and going 

up to Cluff Lake later as the previous visit of the Ambassador in 1980 involved such a visit. We are glad to 

welcome them to our province and wish that their stay be a pleasant one and an exciting one. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Monsieur le Président, c’est un honneur pour moi de vous présenter, ainsi que tous les 

Membres de cet Assemblé, un personnage trés distingué, son Excellence, l’Ambassadeur de France, Monsieur 

Cabouat. Je sais que c’est votre première visite à Saskatchewan, et j’espère que vous reviendrez souvent pour nous 

visiter. Bienvenue à Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bacon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With pleasure this afternoon, I introduce to you, and through you to the 

members of this Assembly, a group of five students from the native survival school, which is located in the heart of 

Nutana on Broadway Avenue in Saskatoon. I will be meeting with them at 3 o’clock for pictures, and at 3: 15 we 

will go for refreshments. I ask all members to join and welcome them here, please. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

April 23, 1985 

1264 
 

Mr. Weiman: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a very great pleasure and a special treat that I introduce to this Assembly this 

afternoon, probably the greatest group of young adults in all of Saskatchewan, that are seated in the Speaker’s 

gallery. I don’t say that only because they happen to live around the corner from my house and are frequently found 

on my lawn, but I say it with special pride because my daughter is also from that class-room. There are 34 students. 

They are from Father Vachon school. They are accompanied today by their teachers, Mr. Bob Kerr, Mr. Charlie 

Farwell and Mr. Tim Prytula. 

 

I look forward to meeting with them after question period and after your tour where we can chat more informally. 

And I am sure that you find the proceedings of the House most informative. So I will see you later on. 

 

I ask that you join in welcoming them with me. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like today to introduce to this House two leaders that have 

had a great deal of input into the youth of this province, and in particular into the students that are first class out of 

the constituency of Fairview in Saskatoon. 

 

The two leaders we have with us today are in the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Speaker, and that is the president of the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation and the general secretary, Mr. Mel Lofstrom and Mr. Frank Garritty. 

 

I think it is important to note this year, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Frank Garritty, who is completing his term as 

president of the Saskatchewan teachers’ Federation, is going on to the Canadian level to take on a leadership 

position at the Canadian level. We’re going to miss him in this province for the short term, but we know that he’s 

always going to come back to Saskatchewan when his term is completed at the Canadian level. 

 

I would ask all members to welcome them, and in particular that Mr. Garritty and wish him well in his new 

endeavours in Ottawa come July. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bacon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, I have an opportunity to introduce to you, and through you to the 

members of this Assembly, a group of 17 students that attend Bishop Murray elementary school in the constituency 

of Saskatoon Nutana. They are accompanied by teacher Beverley Klein; Tillie Schneider, who is the school 

secretary; Del McLoughlin; and Debra Hunt form Holy Cross High School. 

 

I ask all members to join with me in welcoming them to the Assembly, and I also will be meeting with you at 3 

o’clock for pictures and refreshments. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Construction of PCB Treatment Plant in Regina 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the Minister of the Environment. 

Yesterday, Mr. Minister, in your absence, we addressed a question to the Premier complaining, in part, that last 

week your department took two days to tell the people of Saskatoon about a PCB spill in their city. 



 

April 23, 1985 

1265 
 

Last evening we find your department has secretly approved the construction of a PCB treatment plant in Regina. I 

want the minister to explain why his department gave approval for the construction of this hazardous waste 

treatment plant in the middle of an urban area without holding public hearings or even notifying the public that this 

project was under consideration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In answer to the hon. member’s question that he said about 

secretively permitting a processing plant to be located in Regina, I would like him to know that we’ve been 

working with the city of Regina for the last 6 or 7 months in regards to drawing up the necessary requirements to 

even allow them, or permit them to be located in this city. 

 

This same company come in in 1982, or 1983 rather, and they did a test pilot project for Sask Power Corporation 

with all the news media there, including the city of Regina, the department of Environment Canada, the 

Department of the Environment of Saskatchewan, and it was carried out under those auspices. In 1984 they have 

done 100,000 litres for Sask Power corporation, a very low contaminated oil. It’s 0.05 of 1 per cent PCB content. 

This oil comes from the flushing of transformers after PCBs within it have been taken out, then they’ve put new oil 

in it. When the second round comes around, this oil is used or taken out. It has a low content of PCBs. They 

decontaminate the oil, and we use it again. It’s a re-use of the oil instead of putting it into storage or holding it or 

destroying it. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. It was secret in that your deliberations — and you conducted 

yourself in such a fashion as to carefully exclude any public input. I have here, Mr. Minister, a letter dated March 

12th from your deputy minister, from the director of the land protection branch, Mr. Clark, to PPM Canada Inc., 

the owners of the facility, and it says: 

 

Based on our review of the project information, and on the comments we’ve received from other interested 

parties, we feel that the process can be conducted safely without subjecting the environment, or the public, 

to any undue risks. 

 

Rather than describe the chemistry of what’s happening, I’d ask you, Mr. Minister, to deal with the policy and tell 

us who the interested parties were that your department consulted with prior to giving this hazardous waste 

treatment the green light. Since the plant will require the transportation of hazardous wastes through the streets of 

Regina, in and out of an urban area, do you not think the residents of Regina might have qualified as interested 

parties? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member says, should the residents have been notified of such a 

project? It was taken to City Hall. The city of Regina have been involved constantly with this here proposal for a 

plant in here. This plant has, over the last year in 1984, processed 100,000 litres of SPC sites in the city of Regina. 

They’ve been transporting within the city on a constant basis fully realizing that it’s .05 of 1 per cent contamination 

of PCBs. So it’s a very low contamination, but it can’t be reused again until it’s decontaminated entirely. So that’s 

the reason that they’re using or going through this process. 

 

And in regards to secretive — I had a minister’s order here, that would be issued should the plant be allowed to go 

ahead, that has been worked out with the city of Regina. And I’m not sure that the proponents would even go along 

with this, but this is only a proposal to this point. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister . . . New question, Mr. Speaker. It is bizarre that you would allow a plant 

which is this controversial, and which has chemicals this dangerous, without an environment impact statement. 

And since that seems unnecessary, Mr. Minister, I assume that you will be forthcoming with answers to the 

following questions: what quantities of PCBs are to be treated in this plant each year; what hazardous wastes will 

be created as a result of the treatment plant and in what quantities; and where will those wastes be stored; and how 

will they be shipped? 



 

April 23, 1985 

1266 
 

Since no environmental impact statement seems to have been necessary before you gave the consent, I assume, Mr. 

Minister, that answers to those questions will be readily forthcoming. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Speaker, it would be the maximum — I have to read it here — of 5,000 imperial gallons 

on site at any one time. It would all be contained within a building. There would be no emissions; there would be 

no . . . Any residue left would be collected and stored on site, which would be very little. 

 

Basically, I can read it all to you if you’d like. I mean, I have the entire order if you’d like. But it’s 0.05 of 1 per 

cent contamination of PCBs. There would be 150,000 gallons per year to be treated approximately in the city. On 

site and, as you know, scattered all over the province there’s a lot of it being stored. I could go back to A. L. Cole 

in Saskatoon have about 50,000 gallons they’ve been storing there for a considerable length of time. 

 

Pretty near every storage site by SPC has some on site. They’ve been cleaning it up over a period of years. I guess 

that’s about all I can say to that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. According to press reports, PPM Canada Inc. says that the 

Regina plant will be its Canadian headquarters when construction is finished. That suggests that all the work it 

does in Canada may well be done at the headquarters in north-east Regina. Is north-east Regina then to become the 

dump grounds for the treatment of PC-contaminated material from all across Canada? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the Leader of the Opposition’s question, this minister’s order that 

is proposed and will be presented to them should we decide to go ahead with it, the first, number one on it says: 

“Only PCB liquids originating from sources in Saskatchewan shall be treated at this facility.” PCB liquids mean 

any mineral oil or fluids that heat transfers fluids containing PCBs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the minister aware, or does he deny, that the treatment 

plant is being constructed over the Regina aquifer which supplies about one-third of Regina’s drinking water, and 

is he able to assure us that a PCB treatment plant located over an aquifer represents no danger to Regina’s water or 

its citizens? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well first of all, Mr. Speaker, you must realize that this is 0.05 of 1 per cent contamination of 

PCBs. This oil, that’s all it contains. Second of all, if a spill did occur outside . . . Inside it’s completely controlled, 

completely cement floors. The tanks located in there would be one tank inside of another retaining tank which will 

hold 100 per cent, 110 per cent of the containing fluid. So it will be a double, or I guess a triple security, in fact, on 

storage. 

 

The only area that something could happen is in transportation, as you’re well aware. If it did, then it would be a 

surface type of an accident and would have to be cleaned up accordingly. It’s transported all the time, and it’s a 

very low contamination of PCBs, 0.05 of 1 per cent. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — A further supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister will be aware that PCBs are a highly 

sensitive matter in the minds of the public, not . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 

 

You are aware of that because of recent incidents in north-west Ontario and in Saskatoon. Your department . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please! Order, order, please! The members are making so much noise that it’s impossible 

for a minister to hear the question. I would ask that you give some consideration to the operation of the House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I say to you that PCBs are a matter of sensitivity in 

the minds of the public. You have given a permit conditional upon a 



 

April 23, 1985 

1267 
 

number of things. One of them was the creation of an adequate contingency plan in case there was a serious spill. 

Since you have approved the project, I assume the plan is in place. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, to table the contingency plan, make it available to the House and to the citizens of 

north-east Regina. And would you table all other documents which you used in considering whether or not the 

permit should be issued. Would you make them available to the House as soon as possible, and through the House, 

to the citizens who will have to live with that plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well first of all, Mr. Speaker, it hasn’t approved. The only approval given by the Department 

of Environment has been the process that’s in place today. That is the one where they, on site, decontaminate the 

PCBs from the oil that Sask Power has. That’s the only approval given by the Department of Environment. 

 

Should approval be given — and I can read off all the list of approvals that they’d have, all the things they’d have 

to meet — the one would be that it’d have to be from Saskatchewan only. 

 

The concentration of PCBs in the liquids, which are treated at the facilities shall not exceed 500 parts per 

million. The minister may, upon request, amend any conditions of 1 and 2 if the company can successfully 

demonstrate to the department through controlled exportation in Saskatchewan that the company process is 

capable of treating higher concentrations. Treated fluid shall be sampled after it leaves the PCB 

decontamination unit, and shall not be clarified or upgraded and placed into storage or released from the 

facility until the concentration of PCBs has been determined to be less than below the defective limits. 

Analytical data shall be available to substantiate completed destruction of PCBs. 

 

I could go on and on. They’re all here. And I’d be prepared to send you over a copy of what’s proposed, even 

before we allow the processing of that plant to go ahead. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the minister give us two undertakings: one, that he 

will supply the House with the material he used to give the permission as it extends to date; and will he give an 

undertaking that before he permits processing of PCBs of a higher concentration than now contemplated, he will 

make available to the House, and to the public, the documents upon which he gives the extended permission? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well certainly, Mr. Speaker, before permission to go beyond the 0.05, 1 per cent PCB 

contamination is allowed by the corporation, we will certainly make that available to the House. 

 

As far as what is existing, it is existing under just a general permit to date that says that they can, on site, where it is 

already located, decontaminate the existing oil for Sask Power Corporation. 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my question to the Minister of the Environment, and it’s 

regarding the PCB controversy that we have now. As you’re aware, Mr. Minister, PCBs are not treated, as I’m 

aware, any place in Canada, but they are stored. When you have excess PCBs, they are stored in Alberta. 

 

You have indicated that you are now going to treat PCBs in Regina. And we know that they are treating PCBs in 

Europe and Finland and Sweden at high temperatures with incinerators. And I just wonder, Mr. Minister; could 

you indicate if this is the process that you are taking with the PCBs that you have from Sask Power? And if that is 

the case, is it possible that we will become the province that will be destroying PCBs for the rest of Canada? 



 

April 23, 1985 

1268 
 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — First of all, no, to the last question. It’ll only be from Saskatchewan. And no to the first one. 

It won’t be burning or destroying it through high temperature. We don’t have that facility here. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you state that you have no given permission. You’re obviously a student of the 

Bob Andrew school of public administration since you assume that a written letter means nothing. Mr. Minister, I 

want to read the letter from Mr. Clark to PPM Canon Inc., dated March 12 which says: 

 

You may therefore proceed with the project, subject to your compliance with any requirements by other 

departments or agencies. 

 

That strikes me, Mr. Minister, as being a fairly straightforward consent. And I ask you again, do you not think that 

the public of Regina were interested parties who should have had an opportunity to put input into this very 

controversial plant? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I might as well just read off the rest of the requirements going to be 

needed before . . . And I want to emphasize . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Give the minister the opportunity to answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Okay. I had read the first four points off. I’ll read the next. 

 

Point five, PCB-contaminated liquid shall be treated as soon as practical and shall not at any time remain in 

storage at the site for more than 10 days. No mare than 5,000 imperial gallons of liquid shall be on site. 

 

Storage tanks and process equipment and any other containing PCB liquids or any other . . .where PCBs 

may be stored, shall be provided with and containments works approved by the department to ensure that 

spills which may occur inside will be kept totally isolated form the environment. 

 

All PCB liquids brought to the facility shall be immediately placed in a containment area or transferred to 

the PCB storage tank. 

 

Do you want me to read the rest of it off? I mean there’s about five . . . 

 

I think this is one part of your question here: 

 

Waste generated during the destruction of . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. You know it’s very difficult for a minister to answer a question when you continue 

to speak, and I would ask for order while he answers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — In regards to the storage of the waste: 

 

Waste generated during the destruction of PCB liquid shall be considered hazardous and shall be disposed 

of in a manner acceptable to the Department of the Environment. 

 

All waste generated by the process and any other hazardous waste produced at the facility shall be disposed 

as soon as practical. 

 

At no time shall the materials be kept in storage beyond 30 days. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Minister. In the minister aware of a report entitled 



 

April 23, 1985 

1269 
 

“Destruction Technologies for PCBs,” prepared for the federal government in 1983? It shows that PPM Inc. of 

Overland Park, Kansas, has only one processing unit in operation in 1982, and that its process was still under 

consideration for application in Canada. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, this is a very new technology. It doesn’t have a long track record. In fact, Regina is about to be 

used as an experimental farm in the treatment of these hazardous wastes. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister: isn’t that the real reason why you didn’t make the facts of this public — because you were 

afraid the public of Regina would react adversely to being used as an experimental farm for a very dangerous 

chemical? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, in answer to the member’s question. It isn’t a destruction of PCBs. 

It’s a leaching effect to the PCBs which are contained and stored and will be sent, I understand, down to the United 

States is where the only place that accept them. But they will be stored on site until such time as they can be safely 

transported to a safe location or to be destroyed. 

 

I don’t know what else I could answer the member except that I could read the rest of this whole regulations off, 

but there’s a whole series of them, and I’d be prepared to send them to him if he’d like to read them and review 

them. 

 

Studies re transportation of Hazardous Goods 

 

Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Minister. Another concern that many people in the city of Regina will have 

is the transportation of these hazardous materials. They’re going to be transferred, presumably by truck, through the 

streets of the city of Regina. What studies, Mr. Minister, have been done with respect to the safety of transporting 

these hazardous materials through the streets before your department gave approval of this project on March 12, as 

it so clearly did. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well just before I let the Minister of transportation answer it. Highways and Transportation 

answer it, I’d just like to say that for the last I don’t know how many years — 20, 30 years — it’s been transported 

in the city on a continuous basis because of the very low contamination content. But in regards to the new 

Highways and Transportation Act in regards to hazardous goods, I’ll let the Minister of Highways answer it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Speaker, this is — and I would like to thank the members opposite for raising this valid 

question — as of last Friday the federal minister did pass a protective direction affecting the transportation of 

dangerous goods in Canada. It is part of the regulations that will be adopted by the federal government, and by the 

Government of Saskatchewan when we have the passage of our transportation of dangerous goods legislation in 

this Assembly, and it does read: 

 

Mr. Don Mazankowski, Minister of Transportation, pursuant to section 28 of the Transportation of 

Dangerous goods Act, directed that any person engaged in offering for transport, or transporting, as the case 

may be, of PCBs shall not offer for transport by road or railway vehicle, or shall not transport PCBs unless 

the PCB or any article containing the PCB is enclosed in a rigid, leak-proof container; and any large article 

containing PCBs that cannot be so enclosed shall be drained and shall be provided with a 

weather-protected, leak-proof device to prevent the release of any PCB from the large article. 

 

It is very lengthy, Mr. Speaker. I’d be prepared also to share this with the members opposite as a new directive 

come down by the federal Minister of Transportation on the transportation of any PCBs in Canada. 



 

April 23, 1985 

1270 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Letter Sent to Government Employees 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you,. Mr. Speaker. I direct my question to the Premier, and it deals with the thousands 

of letters he sent last fall, at taxpayer’s expense, to government employees. These letters were a clear attempt by 

the Premier to beg for the support of public servants at taxpayers’ expense. 

 

On December the 10
th

, you agreed to tell this Assembly, and Saskatchewan taxpayers, how many letters were sent, 

the cost of these letters, and why the Conservative Party (as opposed to Saskatchewan taxpayers) shouldn’t be 

paying for these political letters. Since he has had many weeks to prepare that information, can the Premier now 

give that information to the Assembly today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t have the information with me, but I’ll get it as quickly as possible. 

 

Advertising Costs 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Premier as well. It has to do with the bombardment of 

advertising that is presently being done, trying to revive the government after their budget they announced two 

weeks ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after the most intelligent budget was released in this House announcing record tax increases for the 

people, they now have an individual by the name of Spence Bozak, a former PC party candidate, reading the 

60-second clips, trying to convince the people of the province that massive tax increases are a good idea. 

 

I would like to ask the Premier how much these ads are costing the taxpayers who are being convinced that these 

tax increases are a good idea? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I would be glad to take notice of the question with respect to information, or 

funds allocated to promotion of the budget, and I’ll respond to the hon. member when I get the information. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the Premier. I wonder if you can explain to the Assembly, 

and the taxpayers of this province, why you are taking on now a major campaign that is attempting to sell tot he 

taxpayers of this province why it’s a good idea to pay increased taxes on their income, pay increased taxes on used 

automobiles, and to give up the property improvement grant. Can you tell us why taxpayers are now being asked to 

pay for those ads to try to get you out of trouble? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will be only too glad to tell my hon. friend the truth about tax increases in the 

province of Saskatchewan, the truth about tax changes. I’ll tell you the truth. 

 

The truth is, Mr. Speaker, that we have cut more taxes in the province of Saskatchewan in the last three years than 

any other administration in Canada. The second point . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — In fact, Mr. Speaker, it’s between 400 and $500 million that has been cut in taxes in the 

province of Saskatchewan since 1982. 



 

April 23, 1985 

1271 
 

Second, Mr. Speaker, if you want to know the comparison, all you have to do, Mr. Speaker, is look at the tax 

increases from 1971 to 1981 in the province of Saskatchewan. The tax rate, Mr. Speaker, went from 34 per cent to 

58 per cent from 1971 to 1977. Then, Mr. Speaker, it dropped. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I have a final supplement to the Premier, and it has to do with his little speech 

he just gave about massive tax cuts, and I would agree the oil companies, the major oil companies had major tax 

cuts. I would say that . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member is making a speech, and our time has elapsed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 53 — An Act respecting Freedom of Informed Choice concerning Abortions in Saskatchewan 

 

Mrs. Caswell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an Act, Freedom of Informed Choice concerning Abortions in 

Saskatchewan be now introduced and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

CERTIFICATE OF ELECTION AND RETURN 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I wish to inform the Assembly that the Clerk of the Legislative 

Assembly has received from the Chief Electoral Officer a certificate of the following election and return: that is, of 

Richard J. Swenson, Esq., as member for the constituency of Thunder Creek. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 

 

Progress Made in the Business and Agricultural Sectors 

 

Mr. Swenson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. Before I get into my talk, I would just like to run through the motion again to 

remind the members of its content: 

 

That this Assembly congratulates the government for progress made in promoting investment, ensuring 

economic viability and job creation in the business and agricultural sectors — accomplishments that will 

contribute to the long-term stability and strength of Saskatchewan and in particular acknowledges progress 

made in the fields of energy, economic development and trade, agriculture, tourism and small business. 

 

In rising to speak on the motion before the House today, I wish to specifically address the achievements of 

Saskatchewan’s Progressive Conservative government with respect to agriculture. I certainly do believe that this 

House should congratulate the Government of Saskatchewan in the progress it has made in support of the family 

farm. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the MLA for Thunder Creek, I am proud to speak in support of a government that does so much 

for farmers. I am proud of our government’s commitment to agriculture. The backbone of our province is our 

agricultural base. We recognize that Saskatchewan has made, 



 

April 23, 1985 

1272 
 

and will continue to make, a very significant contribution to our economy. 

 

As many members of this legislature, I am from a rural ridings, so naturally I’m cognizant of what this government 

has done for farmers. 

 

Premier Devine and his government have developed a special relationship with rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

Of course there are some good reasons why this Progressive Conservative government has such a close 

relationship with rural Saskatchewan. The reasons are very clear. We believe agriculture is one of the corner-stones 

on which Saskatchewan is built. 

 

Some 200,000 residents of this province are members of farm families. They get their living directly from the land. 

That many again in rural communities get their living directly from the farm communities around them. So as 

anyone can see, half of our population in this province is directly affected by the health of Saskatchewan 

agriculture. So our government is determined to see that our farming community continues to grow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier of this province is an active farmer, and he is very proud of that fact. I look around this 

legislature, and I see many other members who are equally proud to be farmers. Our government is not simply 

made up of politicians who recognize that agriculture is important. No, it is made up of farmers who know and 

work the land. 

 
As a result, since 1982 we have brought about many programs for agriculture in this province. Allow me to take a 
few moments to review some of the positive achievements we have made in the farming community and, after that, 
I will refresh the memory of this legislature about the attitude of the opposition to farming. And then I shall speak 
on some future programs. 
 
When this government came into office in 1982, this province had been subjected to state farming. It was called the 
land bank. And we abolished it. Mr. Speaker, our grandparents and pioneers did not come here because land was 
for rent. They came here to work and own land. As a result, we introduced the family Farm Purchase Program. 
 
For the record, Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at the success of that program. Over 1.2 million acres of farm land 
have been purchased by farmers. There were 3,800 young and starting-out farmers have enrolled in the Farm 
Purchase Program. 
 
What has been the NDP response to all of this? Well, believe it or not, they want to bring back the land bank. And, 
to boot, they want to restrict our farm size. That’s their whole attitude towards the family farm in a nutshell. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative government recognizes the fact that our province’s economy is based 
on the agricultural sector. The Progressive Conservative government’s approach to agriculture is founded in three 
components from which all our programs flow. 
 
1. The establishment of a security net to ensure that viable Saskatchewan farms are not economically 

jeopardized. 
 
2. The creation of innovative development thrust to ensure that the economic potential of the agricultural 

sector is maximized, and that the farming community is equipped to successfully meet the economic, 
technological, and marketing challenges brought about in a changing world. 

 
3. Private ownership of land, and producer control, where possible, of making structures. 

 

I’d like to take a few moments, Mr. Speaker, to talk about the safety net. We recognize that farmers have no control 

over commodity prices. As a province, we have little input in national or international marketing structures. As a 

result, we have designed programs to reduce input cost to the producer. We want to provide a degree of security at 

the family farm level. 



 

April 23, 1985 

1273 
 

For that reason, we have established the Rural Natural Gas Distribution Program. We brought natural gas to farms 

and rural communities for the benefit of the people living there. 

 

Let’s take a look at the hook-up costs, Mr. Speaker. That hook-up cost to farmers is $2,600. And yet the actual cost 

to Sask Power is 10,400. That’s a substantial saving for the members of our agricultural community, Mr. Speaker. 

Farm heating costs alone have been reduced by up to 50 per cent by this very significant measure which we have 

instituted. 

 

Take the counselling and assistance program. This provides financial counselling by a farmer panel. It can 

recommend a government guarantee for loans. The Farm Land Security Act prevents foreclosures on farm land for 

one year. We eliminated the sales tax on farm-used electricity to help reduce operating costs. And when drought hit 

our province last summer, Mr. Speaker, this government took action. We set up a drought assistance program 

which many cattlemen in this province benefited from, Mr. Speaker, that is what I call commitment to the family 

farm. 

 

At the same time, the Minister of Agriculture, the member from Weyburn, has established innovative policy to 

ensure the fullest potential of agriculture in this province. The Agricultural Credit Corporation provides loans up to 

350,000 at interest rates as low as 8 per cent. 

 

The eligibility requirements of former programs prevented many farmers from participating. We changed all that 

when we took power in 1982. When the Minister of Agriculture introduced the Livestock Investment Tax Credit, 

he brought about a very unique tax break, which at the same time helped the cattle industry in this province. 

 

Most importantly, in all the Progressive Conservative policy for agriculture is the belief that farm land should be 

privately owned. As I stated earlier, Mr. Speaker, the abolishing of the land bank and the establishment of the 

family Farm Purchase Program was made so that private ownership of farm land is a reality. We did not want the 

return of the NDP land bank. We do not want to nationalize farms like the NDP did. 

 

(1445) 

 

And the NDP would distort the truth and play on the fears of farmers rather than telling the truth about the 

situation. I can think of a recent advertising campaign where they attacked the Progressive Conservative farm 

security land Bill. And the NDP said, and I quote, “It doesn’t contain one thin dime for Saskatchewan’s family 

farmers.” Well how completely false can a statement be? That’s just in keeping with the negative attitude that 

seems to come out of the members over there. 

 

The difficulty facing many farmers today started with those very high interest rates which this country had in 1980, 

1981, and 1982. And who was in office during those years, Mr. Speaker? It was the NDP. They did nothing to help 

farmers cope with those high interest rates. 

 

When the Progressive Conservative government came into office, we began providing 8 per cent money for 

farmers to buy land. And that program, as I have pointed out, is very successful. People all across this province 

have lined up to take part in that program. And you just can’t take thousands of people, Mr. Speaker, and when 

they’ve applied for something like this, and say that a program is not successful. 

 

Since then the government of Premier Devine has built a solid base for our important agricultural industry. 

 

At the direction of this government millions of dollars have been put into the livestock industry. Farmers are being 

helped to drill wells to provide water. We pay farmers compensation for flood in the north-east. This past year 

alone those programs added up to $160 million for farmers. 



 

April 23, 1985 

1274 
 

Now we have a federal government in Ottawa that understands farmers. Gone are the days of the arrogant prime 

minister telling western Canadians to sell their own wheat. The Mulroney government in Ottawa has taken off the 

tax on diesel fuel, for instance, to help out the western Canadian farmer. 

 

Premier Devine is respected in Ottawa. He has persuaded Ottawa to pay more attention to the needs of our farmers 

in Saskatchewan. If the NDP opposition were genuine they would have supported The Farm Land Security Act 

whole-heartedly. They would have admitted that this legislation gives farmers some breathing room, an 

opportunity to restructure their debts. 

 

Did the NDP do that? No, they didn’t. They played on farmers fears instead. The NDP opposition obviously, Mr. 

Speaker, can only deal in rhetoric. I seriously question if they do indeed have any practical, common sense ideas 

that will help Saskatchewan farmers. I just doubt very much that they do. 

 

The Progressive Conservative government, on the hand, is fortunate to have such a capable Minister of Agriculture 

as the hon. member from Weyburn, Saskatchewan’s Minister of Agriculture has gained a reputation as a straight 

shooter who puts the needs of farmers before that of politics. No matter where you go in the farming communities 

you will always hear reports about how great it is that we have a farmer as a friend in Regina and as Minister of 

Agriculture in this province. He listens. He cares. He’s a man of vision. He knows our magnificent future growth is 

rooted in this province’s fertile soil. 

 

In facing the future with confidence, our Progressive Conservative government has given renewed emphasis to its 

concern for agriculture. The budget introduced by finance minister, the hon. member from Kindersley, is clear 

proof of that, Mr. Speaker, agriculture has been designated as one of the four sectors critical to Saskatchewan’s 

future. There can be no lasting prosperity in this province without a strong farm economy. Agriculture today is $4 

billion industry in this province, and I suppose you could say that farming is the heart and soul of Saskatchewan. 

 

In 1985, the first priority of this Progressive Conservative government is to see that any farmer in a potentially 

viable position who wants to put in a crop is able to do so this spring. With that in mind, there will be three 

initiatives to provide that kinds of assistance. 

 

First, a major expansion of the counselling and assistance program for farmers, and this will provide an additional 

1,500 farmers with loan guarantees on 120 million in loans. Guarantees will be provided on loans up to $200,000. 

 

Second, Agriculture Credit Corporation clients who obtained loans between April 1980 and December of 1983 will 

have their loan rate reduced from 14 per cent to 12 per cent. As a result, Mr. Speaker, 1,000 farmers will receive a 

total of almost $4 million in interest relief. 

 

Third, the Farm Purchase Program will be extended for an additional year. That is very good news, Mr. Speaker. 

The Farm Purchase Program is the most unique agricultural program that helped young and starting farmers, and I 

would dare say there is no program like it anywhere else in North America. 

 

The interest rate subsidies will provide an additional 200 million in loans to 1,800 farmers and this will extend 

total program coverage to 5,800 framers and $640 million in loans. 

 

As I stated earlier, Mr. Speaker, these programs are designed to respond to the immediate financing needs of 

farmers. They will help ensure that the industry as a whole remains viable. 

 

There’s much more that I could say, Mr. Speaker, but at this time, I would like to move a motion again, and this 

will be seconded by the member from Kelvington-Wadena: 



 

April 23, 1985 

1275 
 

That this Assembly congratulate the government for the progress made in promoting investment, ensuring 

economic viability and job creation in the business and the agricultural sectors, accomplishments that will 

contribute to the long-term stability and strength of Saskatchewan, and in particular acknowledges progress 

made in the fields of energy, economic development and trade, agriculture, and tourism and small business. 

 

Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If you will pardon me, I’m a little bit under the weather today. I have a 

bit of a sore throat, so if I’m not my usual vociferous self I’m sure the opposition will appreciate it for a change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member for Thunder Creek has gone into the programs that we’ve developed as a government 

over the years we’ve been in office. He went briefly into the history that led to our government coming into power. 

And I think he reminded the opposition and the people of Saskatchewan that the opposition constantly looks to the 

past, while the government looks to the future. 

 

And on that note, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about the future, and what the budget means to the future of 

Saskatchewan. The Government of Saskatchewan has implemented programs that are far-reaching and long-term. 

 

But we didn’t just sit there and say, well, we’ve done this program and that program. The Farm Purchase Program 

was a good one. Our Ag Credit Corporation programs moved into the right areas. We dealt with problems as they 

arose, day-to-day problems. We didn’t just hang our hat on one big issue and say, well, now we’ve solved all your 

problems, folks. We continued to do our research, and we continued to move forward. 

 

In the area of crop insurance, Mr. Speaker, which is an area that definitely ensures the viability of agriculture in this 

province, we’ve moved in new directions. We’ve moved to ensure unlicensed semi-dwarf wheats, which just last 

week received the acceptance of the wheat board to be marketed in Canada. That was done in conjunction with 

consultation between our province and the federal people. 

 

We’ve moved in the area of insurance for the honey producers. Under the former administration, a honey producer 

was something that sort of existed out there but really didn’t have any economic significance. They couldn’t quite 

figure out what they were. They really didn’t classify them as agriculture. The bees did all the work, too, come to 

think of it. 

 

But it still is an area of agriculture, Mr. Speaker, that has risk involved in it. And that risk exemplified itself last 

year with the drought. We had a number of honey producers who were severely hurt by the drought. We reacted. 

We came out with a program for those honey producers. 

 

But there are small items. Maybe they don’t capture the imaginations of the people of Canada. They certainly don’t 

capture the imaginations of the opposition. I can tell from the looks on their faces. Or maybe it’s just they don’t 

care . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Nothing to capture. 

 

Mr. Petersen: — Nothing to capture, one member said. Maybe he’s right. 

 

Insurance, Mr. Speaker, is an excellent form of making certain that our farmers will be around tomorrow. We have 

the best farmers in North America, bar none. The most advanced technologically. They are the most up to date. 

And one only has to look at the canola growers or the barley growers to see that they are on the cutting edge of the 

technology of agriculture. 



 

April 23, 1985 

1276 
 

But I don’t care how good a farmer you are. I don’t care how much reading you do. I don’t care how much 

technology you use. When nature turns against you, you’re beat. I’m only human. I can’t fight God’s will. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I can perhaps do something to minimize the effects of it. And we get back to crop insurance. 

 

The NDP, in one of their resolutions, however, 1983, say that, “Be it further resolved that the NDP support a limit 

on coverage under the Saskatchewan crop insurance program.” Well, Mr. Speaker, I can’t see how that enhances 

agriculture. And, as a matter of fact, I find it a detriment. 

 

This year we had a severe drought in the South, floods in the north-east, and we had a record number of crop 

insurance claims. The previous record year, I believe, was 1980. 

 

And when I compared our statistics previously in this Assembly to the performance of the Saskatchewan crop 

insurance program at that time and the performance of it today under the leadership of the member for Arm River, I 

find that on January 6th we had processed double the money that they had done under their administration on the 

same date three or four years before. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, they were a month and a week ahead. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they can minimize the effects of crop insurance. They can talk about limiting it and talk about 

supporting a program that would keep a certain group of individuals from enjoying the benefits of it, even though 

they’d be willing to pay the premiums. But let me ask you: where would Saskatchewan be today if, for example, in 

the south-east, $55,471,734 hadn’t been paid out? That’s an average of $9,548 per client. In the south-west, 

$90,480,104. That works out to an average of $11,913 pre contract. 

 

We can keep going and going down the list. And I’d love to read it into the record because it’s impressive. But the 

total, Mr. Speaker, is $258,000,918. Mr. Speaker, if that does not help to ensure the viability of agriculture in 

Saskatchewan during tough times. I don’t know what does. Unless of course, Mr. Speaker, it might be the Western 

Grains Stabilization Fund which the federal government has now moved on. 

 

And may I say, Mr. Speaker, the previous federal government sat on that program and tucked it under its little 

collective wings and said, well, we’re going to hold that off. We’re going to keep that back as an election promise. 

Never mind we’ve got farmers that are hurting. Never mind that we’ve got farmers that are suffering a cost-price 

squeeze. We’re just going to hold that back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members on this side of the House called on the federal minister at that time to act on the Western 

Grains Stabilization Fund and make certain that it was triggered; make certain that that money got out to farmers. 

But he said, no. It wasn’t more than two months after the federal Conservatives got into power, Mr. Speaker, that 

positive change occurred. Interim payments were on their way. 

 

In February, legislation was enacted that allowed that program to be triggered. And just last week, Mr. Speaker, the 

farmers of Saskatchewan who are enrolled in that program received cheques of up to $8,000, Mr. Speaker, to help 

them out when times were tough. And they are tough in places here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s not to say that that was a hand-out from the federal government. That was producer money that they had 

paid in as an insurance premium. Our farmers, Mr. Speaker, don’t live hand to mouth, day to day, program to 

program. They plan ahead. They try to ensure their viability (sticking to the motion) by minimizing the risks, and 

that to me, Mr. Speaker, makes sense. And I find any organization such as the opposition that would try to limit 

that tool totally ludicrous. I cannot comprehend why they would put forward such a resolution, but the did. No two 

ways about it. 



 

April 23, 1985 

1277 
 

Getting back, Mr. Speaker, to how farmers in Saskatchewan have moved onward and upward in the last three 

years, the member for Thunder Creek talked about the Farm Purchase Program. Well, Mr. Speaker, unlike the 

previous administration who saw 10,000 family farms go down the tubes between 1971 and 1981, we’re 

committed to trying to keep those people there. Ten thousand went down the tubes and they let them go. They 

didn’t do anything to try to help them out. They didn’t try and programs except their beloved land bank. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when those farmers went down, the small business sector in Saskatchewan was hurt. Small 

business, Mr. Speaker, abound across the province of Saskatchewan in small towns and cities everywhere. And, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a symbiotic relationship. Farmers need the small-business man to supply them with their supplies, 

their repairs, their fuel, their fertilizer; and in turn, that creates jobs, and jobs is what the opposition has been crying 

about that we needed in this province. And if they’d only take their blinkers off for a moment and look at the 

programs that this government has introduced, they would have to admit that we have created jobs here by the 

thousands. But they insist on sticking to their dogma, Mr. Speaker, their written lines that I’m sure their leader, or 

whoever’s trying to be leader this week, has written for them. I’m sure they stick strictly to those lines because they 

are not allowed to be free-thinking people. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It’s my duty to inform the member that his time has elapsed. 

 

Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I get into this debate, Mr. Speaker, in Rule 16 today, and I must say that 

listening to the member for Thunder Creek, I have a few questions that I find very difficult to understand as to just 

what he was getting at. 

 

And the member talks about the viability of the family farm, ensuring economics, or the economic viability of 

those family farms. And he criticizes land bank as being one of the things that never should have happened; that’s 

the worst thing that ever happened in this province. Well, Mr. Speaker, land bank had some problems, but there 

were a lot of young farmers that got started at land bank that never would have had the opportunity to get into 

farming. 

 

And the member from Thunder Creek should look at where possibly even his family got started years ago, and 

many other ranchers like him that today say that they are very prosperous, and they did it because of their efforts 

and their hard work. Well, Mr. Speaker, very many of those ranchers in the south-west today still have very cheap 

leases. They had leases that cost them virtually nothing for years and years and years. That’s how they prospered, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s how those ranchers prospered. But they say that the grain producers should not have an 

opportunity to get into agriculture, to get into farming, and prosper at all. He shouldn’t prosper on the backs of the 

taxpayers. But it was fine for the ranchers. 

 

Now I say to the members opposite: that is total hypocrisy. I think if we are saying that we are going to help 

agriculture, we should be looking at helping agriculture, and helping everyone that wants to get into agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they talk about all the good things that they have done for agriculture, and that they have done for 

other areas, that they have done in creating jobs. 

 

And we have to look at one other area. When you talk about jobs, look at what is happening within the Department 

of Highways. There’s where many jobs could have been created. But what happened in that department? We see a 

minister of highways that decided to sell the equipment that the department had, to lay off hundreds of people, and 

then reduce the amount of money that he is going to spend on constructing roads in this province. And then they 

have the gall to come to this House and say to the public of Saskatchewan that they are interested in creating jobs, 

that they are going to put more money into this province, and they are going to have more people working, more 

than have ever worked in the past. 



 

April 23, 1985 

1278 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the number of people that are unemployed, I think the government has failed, 

and it has failed in its efforts to create jobs, or to help agriculture, or to do many of the things that they say they 

were successful in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is this government doing for rural Saskatchewan or the viability of farmers or the viability of 

small-business people? They have done very little for either one, because we see many people, many 

small-business people going bankrupt today — going bankrupt. Why? Because many of them, as the member for 

Kelvington suggested, do depend on agriculture. They are going bankrupt because agriculture is not as strong as it 

used to be. 

 

Agriculture is going through some very rough times and what they need is some help from the government, not 

only to save agriculture, but to also assist small business at the same time. And if we can only get agriculture going, 

some of these small businesses might be able to survive. But if we ignore both, we are going to see fewer and 

fewer farmers every year, and we are going to see fewer and fewer small-business people in our communities. And 

that is not only going to hurt the small communities, I think it’s going to hurt the province as a whole because the 

small-business people create jobs. That helps the province; that saves us a lot of money. It saves us money in 

paying out benefits to people that can’t find a job. 

 

Agriculture is the key in this province, and we have seen very little other than this government saying that they are 

going to provide money, 8 per cent money for farmers to buy their own land to own their own land. This is fine, 

Mr. Speaker. There is certainly nothing wrong with that. But how many of those young farmers that really want to 

get into agriculture, that want to farm, have really had the opportunity to do that? How many of those young 

farmers could qualify on the farm credit criteria to be able to buy that land that they would like to own or that they 

would like to farm? There is very few of those, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest, that have been able to take advantage 

of that program. 

 

Every program that this government comes forward with says a program that assists the ones that have a fair 

amount, to gain a little more, and it gives very little in either program to give the opportunity for a beginning 

farmer, a beginning business man, or anyone else in this province, to get a start and to get going. They do very little 

in that department, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They talk about the land security that they have. Well, I suggested the other day that they are not doing what that 

Bill should be doing. The farm land security Bill should be protecting, if they are serious about it, everyone in this 

province, whether it’s land that he had bought through the banks, that the bank can’t foreclose on, or whether it is 

land that he has through leases with the government. Both of those should be under the same kind of regulation and 

guide-lines. 

 

But the government has exempted themselves of that responsibility. They don’t have to abide by those rules or 

regulations. They just continue to take the land that the lease-holders have, because they couldn’t pay the rent. And 

why couldn’t they pay it? In most cases, when they can’t pay it, it’s because they happen to live in the northern part 

of the province. They live in an area that for the last two or three years has had difficult crops, where they have 

been flooded out, where they have had the midge. They had different things that created problems for them, and 

they didn’t get very good crops. So they had some difficulty in paying their lease fees. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what did the Minister of Agriculture do? He didn’t say to his department that you cannot take 

any of that land away for at least a year, because that is our policy, and we will give these people an opportunity to 

try and get a crop out of there, and try and restructure that debt. Because those that are in that situation today cannot 

take advantage of any of the programs that this government has put forward. They cannot take advantage of any of 

them. So those farmers are left at the mercy of this government, and many of them, it appears, are going to have to 

leave that land and move off, because once the government starts to take their leased land away, if they did own a 

quarter or so, then the bank is ready to move in and foreclose on the rest. 



 

April 23, 1985 

1279 
 

And there are some, as I mentioned yesterday, one that has nothing but leased land. He was hoping to get 

established in farming, and he has been doing it for a few years now. The government decided that because he had 

some bad years that they were going to take some of that land away. And he’s going to get left with a smaller unit, 

a non-viable unit, and still expected to pay the back leases that are facing him. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if this government was serious about keeping all of our young farmers on the land, then they 

would look at trying to help some of those, try to help them restructure the debt that they do have, and give them an 

opportunity to get better crops and to continue in agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other things, I think, that this government failed to address when it comes to agriculture, is 

cost of inputs. The minister has introduced, or said that he was going to be looking at farm input costs. They were 

going to have a study made that are going to tell people that there are some bargains. All you have to do is go and 

look for them; that some company has a little bit of discount and this is where you might be able to contact that 

company that gives you a discount. And this is somehow supposed to help reduce the costs of inputs to the farmer. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how that’s going to help very much because I think many of the farmers today 

shop around all they could to find out . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It’s my duty to inform the member his time has elapsed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to enter this debate which congratulates the government on its 

performance. 

 

It was moved by the member for Thunder Creek, and I want to take the opportunity to welcome the member for 

Thunder Creek to the House, congratulate him on his election and congratulate him on the delivery of the speech 

which he gave. I won’t congratulate him on the content; I’m not sure that he’s responsible for the content in any 

case. I do say that he acquitted himself well as a new member of the House. 

 

I want now to turn to the motion and turn, particularly, to those portions which deal with small business. The 

motion talks about the job creation in the business sector and then talks about the accomplishments of the 

government in small business. 

 

I know the government is right when it concentrates attention ion small business. It is wrong when it congratulates 

itself on what it has been able to achieve. Certainly the success of small business is crucial to the success of the 

Saskatchewan economy. We need a strong and diverse small-business sector. 

 

You can’t accomplish long-term prosperity in this province by depending only on government — we’ll concede 

that. And I wish the government members would concede that you can’t get long-term prosperity in this province 

by relying only on big business, which has been their policy for three years. We need, not blind faith in big 

business, not blind faith in out-of-province business which is invited to come in here and somehow give 

Saskatchewan a chance. We need some faith in Saskatchewan people operating through their small business, 

through their co-ops and, yes, through their governments. 

 

That’s our strength; that’s what’s given us success in the past; and that’s what we should be building on in the 

future. If we are to encourage residents of this province and people from outside this province to invest in this 

province, then we have got to be able to show that we, in Saskatchewan, have confidence in ourselves and are not 

waiting, cap in hand, until some large company comes from outside the province and somehow gives us a chance. 

 

When it comes to attracting out-of-province business (and we have no objection to 



 

April 23, 1985 

1280 
 

out-of-province business) it’s going to take more than around-the-world junkets and cocktail parties to get business 

people to come here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — What we have to show them is that they can come here and make a profit. We have to 

show them a pro forma operating statement which shows a profit, and that, we have not been able to do . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . No indeed. We haven’t been able to show them that, and they haven’t been coming. 

They haven’t been coming. 

 

People on the opposite side of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, suggest that somehow prior to their assuming office 

there was nobody coming into this province to invest, and now they’re coming in. It is too bad the figures don’t 

support that proposition. 

 

(1515) 

 

In 1979 and 1980 and 1981, in those three years — the last three years of the previous government — investment 

in our province increased by an average of 19 per cent. Those are the hard figures. And in their three years which 

followed it, investment increased by less than a half of 1 per cent, and those are hard figures. Hard figures. People 

have not been coming in. They have not been attracted by a government which has no confidence in itself, and no 

confidence in the people of Saskatchewan, but is simply sending out pleas for people to come in from outside the 

province to somehow bail us out. Not good enough. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I’m talking is not doom and gloom. I’m talking reality. And we don’t need to 

succumb to pessimism. What we need is a little confidence in ourselves. We have a problem. There is not enough 

investment, and there’s not enough jobs. But that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is an opportunity as well. 

 

Unemployment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the main obstacle to business prosperity in this province. When people are 

unemployed, or when they fear that they may become unemployed, they don’t spend money, and they won’t make 

purchases on a long-term basis. And Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s just what’s happening. They are not spending on 

that car, they are not building that extra house, they are not even spending money in restaurants. They are saving 

for a rainy day, and savings are going up and up, where retail sales are flat. 

 

That shows a people not without money, but without confidence, and that’s what we have in Saskatchewan now — 

a people who have savings, a people who have money, but a people who do not have confidence in their future. 

That kind of unease and uncertainty about employment is eating into the very fibre of our small business. 

 

Far too many people are uncertain about their employment prospects. Far too many people, in fact, are 

unemployed. In 1981 we had 21,000 unemployed in November of ‘81. In November of ‘84 it was 40,000, just 

about double, and it’s up now to 46,000 — 46,000 people, and many more tens of thousands of people fearing that 

they will be next, can you understand why people aren’t taking long-term risks, why they’re not investing, why 

they’re not spending? 

 

Do you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how much money we’re talking about? Forty-six thousand people represents a 

payroll and wealth creation of about $900 million a year. If we could get all of those people working we’d have 

$900 million a year more running through the tills of small business. We don’t have that. We don’t have that. 

 

Just to put it in perspective, we heard about the drought last summer; it was a very serious drought. It probably cost 

us as much as $750 million, perhaps even $900 million. What I’m saying to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is while this 

unemployment sits at more than 45,000, we have the 



 

April 23, 1985 

1281 
 

equivalent of a massive drought each and every year. And can you then wonder why we are not prospering in this 

province? 

 

Can you wonder — can you wonder why, while across Canada retail sales went up 8 per cent, in Saskatchewan 

they went up less than one-half of 1 per cent? Can you wonder why we were number 10 in growth in retail sales? 

Can you wonder, therefore, why small-business people are not exactly excited about this boom, about this so-called 

boom? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are people who are saying that the figures are warped. I wish they were. These are the 

figures put out by Stats Canada and they are hard reality. One doesn’t have to listen to me. Talk to a small-business 

man and ask him how much his sales went up last year. 

 

Or talk about housing starts; I hope they don’t deny that housing starts in 1984 were the lowest in 12 years — the 

lowest back certainly into the early 1970s. And I ask you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, whether or not that doesn’t mean 

that small-business people are losing opportunities? 

 

Every small-business man will tell you that he just gets a good deal of trade out of new houses because people are 

always buying new fencing material and new lawn seed and lawn mowers and all the rest of it. But when housing 

starts are way, way down to the lowest that we’ve seen in 12 years, is there any wonder why retail sales have seen, 

in Saskatchewan, the lowest growth in any province in Canada? And the results are all around us — 306 

Saskatchewan-based, small businesses declared bankruptcy last year. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is very, very clear that the results of these blows to small business are being felt by more 

and more business people, and, as a result, families are not secure. As a result, this insecurity is feeding on itself. 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, that this is an opportunity. If we . . . There are about 35,000 small businesses in 

Saskatchewan. If we could get them to hire even one person . . . 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, I must . . . The member’s time has elapsed. The member from Morse. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was going to take some time to discuss some of the things that relates 

to the development of irrigation in this province, and I was going to deal mainly with that, but I’m going to respond 

to some of the statements that were made by the member from Pelly. 

 

He indicated to us here in this House, just a few minutes ago, that the leases paid in the southern part of 

Saskatchewan were the reasons why they had such vast land resources there, and that the lease land was the reason 

why they had made so much money, and the lease land was the reason why they were a wealthy people down there. 

I’ll have you know that there’s more lease land north of the No. 1 Highway than there is south, and that is . . . 

 

And I’ll tell you another reason why some of those lands, the holdings are so big — and the member from 

Assiniboia will know, and the member from Shaunavon will know — that those people were told that they had to 

take it on as a part of the payment for taxes in 1930 when they were put on there. And that’s some of the reasons 

why they have large land holdings. Those were the things that you misinterpreted when you made your statements 

earlier. 

 

In dealing with another issue, the member, the Leader of the Opposition made some comments about no 

confidence. Well I’ll tell you something about no confidence. The oil industry in the south-west doesn’t have any 

confidence in that part of the people of Saskatchewan ever getting elected again, because the service industry in 

this province was downhill, going downhill. And 



 

April 23, 1985 

1282 
 

who put the opportunity in for this country, this province, to have 250 new companies come into this province? 

That’s development, and the member from Shaunavon is one of them. 

 

Now, there’s another 90 companies from the oil fields services that are already established in this province, 

brand-new ones that came in here because of our oil policy, employing another 2,500 people. That’s something you 

guys don’t know anything about. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Record high unemployment. 

 

Mr. Martens: — All of Canada has a record high unemployment. You want to take economic depression out 

through all the world. That’s part of the problem, and it was your friends over in Ottawa that did it, not the guys 

that were friends of ours. You slept with them, not us. 

 

Dealing with irrigation as it relates to this motion that we have here, Mr. Speaker, I want to deal with some figures 

that were given to me regarding irrigation development in this province. I want to point out some things there, too, 

that the NDP never did anything about. They just stood around and asked questions. I was a developer in those 

NDP years, and I know what it’s all about. They didn’t have any method of getting the water rights for the 

irrigation development. They had 11 different departments that they put that all together with. You had to go to 

every one of them to try and get some water rights. They just were totally inept in dealing with the water problems, 

whether it’s the north-east or whether it’s the south-west. 

 

Since we took office there have been 740 applications for water development in this province. The average acre 

size isn’t a big 250 or 400, it’s 80 acres. Of that, 58,000 acres are under development since we took office. That’s 

where the realism is. 

 

Now let’s deal with some comparisons. We put 72 projects into place in this province since 1982, and the average 

size per project is 102 acres, with a pay-out of $5,720 per application. 

 

I want to tell you something else. When the NDP were in government in this province, all you ever had was a 

$3,500 once-in-a-lifetime grant that provided development opportunity for agriculture. How did you drought-proof 

it? You didn’t. You just let Sask Power put a great big hold on the Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and the Shaunavon 

seats on the water running into the Old Wives Lake. You just sealed it all off. You let them put 14,000 acre feet of 

water under seizure for something that the people there didn’t even want to have. 

 

Now the Sask Water corporation and the PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) have done some 

major developments together. They’re going to continue to that. We’ve had funding from Urban Affairs, from 

Environment, and from the Department of Agriculture to contribute to that, and that’s an extensive part. 

 

Here’s another thing that we can put together. In 10 years or 11 years that you were in office you developed 

135,000 acres of intensive irrigation, and in less intensive there was another 145, for a total of 280,000. Now how 

much did you develop in those — that’s what we got in Saskatchewan — how much did you develop in your 11 

years? Here’s the answer: 35,219 acres, in 10 or 11 years of your party being in power. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s 3,000 acres a year. 

 

Mr. Martens: — That’s 3,000 acres a year. Then in two full years, 1982 — or three full years — ‘83 and 1984. we 

developed 33.664 acres. In three years, we did almost equivalent to what you did in 11 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: — That, to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the reason why the people didn’t want 



 

April 23, 1985 

1283 
 

to have that government in this building any longer. They weren’t intensive. They weren’t . . . They didn’t know 

anything about agriculture because they didn’t have their feet on the ground. 

 

Now I want to go into a little bit more detail as it relates to the number of farmers for irrigation development. How 

many did they have in 10 years? They had 395 — 395 in 10 years for easy figuring — that’s 39.5 a year. How 

many did we have in three years? We had 293 — almost 100 every year that we’ve been here and they haven’t. 

 

Now I think that that’s something significant. We knew where to put the finger on it and how to put the emphasis. 

They didn’t. I can recall coming into this building and seeing people as it related to the water and paying out in 

agriculture, and I had to . . . They didn’t even spend the money that they had allocated for it. As a matter of fact, it 

cost them a dollar for every dollar that they gave out in grants. They were just totally inept in dealing with anything 

that related to any kind of irrigation development. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I met with some people who used to work in Saskatchewan who are now working 

for the St. Mary’s irrigation district in Alberta. And the gentlemen’s name is Jim Brown — he’s the head of the St. 

Mary’s irrigation district. It was probably the largest in Alberta. And he had this to say to me. He said, oh, you’re 

from Saskatchewan? I said, yes. He said, I used to be too. Well, why did you leave? Well, he said, in 1971 I found 

out that the NDP government wasn’t going to do any more in irrigation development to speak of. So he said, I left. 

I went to Alberta and I was given the responsibility of looking for grants from the Alberta government, in 1971. He 

said, I went from St. Mary’s irrigation district and I went to the capital city of Edmonton, Alberta and who should I 

see there? It was the same guy that had been working for the Saskatchewan government, here in Regina, that he 

had been dealing with grants as it related to the Outlook irrigation project. 

 

(1530) 

 

Now that’s the kind of thing — he had to leave because he saw no opportunity. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that we 

have in this province a very definite opportunity. We’re going to continue to work together with the PFRA (Prairie 

Farm Rehabilitation Administration) in long-term development and that’s a very major part of the kind of things 

that we want to do. 

 

Another thing that I feel proud of that we as a government have been able to do is getting some changes to the 

western grain stabilization act as it relates to the federal government and working together with them. The livestock 

drought assistance program, where the cattle were paid on a per cow basis, I believe that was an important feature 

. . . The North-east Saskatchewan Flood compensation. 

 

And the member from Kelvington-Wadena dealt quite extensively with the crop insurance, and I think that’s a 

major feature — and changes in economic philosophy and policy of this government and the people of 

Saskatchewan — looking for a better insurance program for their product. 

 

And what was a special thing for my area as it related to the minister of crop insurance, the member from Arm 

River, was the forage insurance program that the crop insurance is giving. And it was expanded this year to 78 

municipalities, and I think that that’s a real good policy. 

 

Another thing that I think is good is the way the federal government is going to handle the fuel rebates. We had 

fuel rebates given in various ways. The federal government is going to ask the bulk dealers to get a number for 

each farmer, and that’s going to be the way that they collect the rebate, and I think that, Mr. Speaker, is the way it 

should have been done even when the NDP tried to do it. It’s a way better way of doing it, and it’s a lot less 

headache and a lot less work. 

 

Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a great deal of pleasure I take part in debating a 



 

April 23, 1985 

1284 
 

resolution put forward by a government that seeks to pat itself on the back. The motion talks about a government 

that is satisfied with their performance. Today, as we’ve listen to the various speakers already, and particularly the 

members from our side, it seems to me there’s very little that this government should be satisfied with, and there’s 

very little reason why you people should be patting yourselves on the back. 

 

At a time when retail sales growth in Saskatchewan . . . like our leader has already mentioned, Saskatchewan is 

number 10 amongst the provinces, as far as retail sales growth. In the time when 45,000 people are looking for 

work, and this government has the audacity to stand up in this Chamber and to pat themselves on the back and say 

things have never been so good, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s time we debate motions like this-I think it’s time we set 

the record straight. 

 

I was impressed with some of the things that the member for Thunder Creek said in this resolution. The member 

said that half of the population in Saskatchewan is directly affected by the health of agriculture, by the health of our 

farmers. And I’d ask him a question back; is that why, when half of our population is trouble today, is that why 

8,500 farmers in Saskatchewan, according to the Farm Credit Corporation survey, are in serious financial straight ? 

Is that why things are so tough ? Is that why 45,000 people are looking for work ? Is that why Saskatchewan has 

the lowest sales ever ? 

 

Maybe this government should have done something about agriculture. Maybe this government should have done 

something about agriculture. And let me give you a little example. 

 

The member for Morse, that just took his seat, talked about how the oil industry has confidence in this government. 

Well, I underline that. And I’ll say they have good reason,. Mr. Speaker, to have confidence in this government. If I 

were in the oil business, I think I’d like this government, too. 

 

In 1979, Mr. Speaker, in 1979 the sales of oil in Saskatchewan brought about $1.2 billion in sales. The province 

took in about $700 million in revenue. In 1984, the sales doubled, $2.4 billion in sale and oil revenue for the oil 

companies — $2.4 billion total sale. What’s the revenue for the province? Still $700 million. 

 

Oil companies kept, in 1979, you take $1.2 billion in sales, and you take off $700 million in royalty and revenue to 

the province, and you leave the oil companies with $500 million a year. 

 

Well, what about 1984? You take the same $700 million revenue away from $2.4 billion in sales, and you leave the 

oil companies with $1.7 billion — $1.7 billion revenue every year from the oil industry instead of $500 million. 

 

Now no wonder they’re your friends. No wonder they’re your friends. My suggestion is this: take $500 million of 

that revenue and use it in agriculture. You’ll still leave the oil companies with $1.2 billion in revenue, a 30 per cent 

increase since you took office; a 30 per cent increase since you took office. But you’ve got $500 million to shore 

up some success in agriculture. That’s not convincing very many farmers that you’re doing a good thing for them. 

Not too many farmers across my constituency and the people I meet with are happy with what you’re doing for the 

farmers. 

 

You can give the companies a 30 per cent increase and you’d still have $500 million left over to help out in 

agriculture. I think that’s why people in Saskatchewan are beginning to ask questions and say, what are those guys 

doing in Regina? What are those guys doing in Regina? 

 

I stopped and talked to a car salesman or a car dealer in my constituency yesterday morning. I stopped to see this 

car salesman. And by the way, Mr. Speaker, you look up in the record, you’ll find that he used to be one of your 

supporters. This car salesman told me, he said, that line-up of cars you see sitting there is worth $60,000. He said, 

I’m not going to get 1 cent more for those 



 

April 23, 1985 

1285 
 

vehicles before, or after, the budget, but this government is going to get $3,000 out of me out of sales tax on those 

used vehicles. 

 

He told me that if he’d sell a new Cadillac, if he’d sell a new Cadillac, a Gold Wing Cadillac today, Mr. Speaker, is 

worth $46,000. He told me, if I’d sell that Cadillac, the government would have got $2,300 revenue. But under the 

new program, today if you come in, the average guy will only pay $500. 

 

You talk about tax savings. You have tax savings for the rich. You have tax savings for the rich. But what about 

the young fellow that wants to buy a used vehicle? They’re going to get that extra money out of the used vehicles. 

And I think that this government has added taxes on the poor people, has added taxes on people that can least 

afford it, but has given tax breaks, given revenue, given money to the oil companies. One point two million dollars 

more to the oil companies since you’re in office, per year. But what have you got for farmers? What have you got 

for farmers? 

 

He talked and he mentioned a little bit about the land bank. And I’d ask the member for Thunder Creek; if leasing 

land is so bad, how come the Farm Credit Corporation, how come your federal loaning arm is going into leasing 

land? If leasing land is so bad, why would Farm Credit Corporation decide to lease some land? How come they 

know what to do for farmers that are in trouble? 

 

Why did you quit leasing programs? I have more and more farmers coming to me talking about getting a chance to 

lease some land rather than getting sucked in to buy it. He talked about developing the full potential. He talked 

about developing the full potential of this government and brags about lowering the interest rate to 12 per cent in 

the Saskatchewan Agricultural Credit Corporation. It’s great to lower it by 2 per cent, but I mentioned this in my 

speech on the budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Manitoba and the Manitoba Credit Corporation could lower it to 8 per cent. Farmers in Manitoba could get it for 8 

per cent. But in Saskatchewan, 12 per cent is good enough. They’re not oil men. They talk about advantages to 

farmers, tax credits for the wealthy. They talk about the tax credits. 

 

But what about the beef stabilization plan? What about taking away the purple gas on farmers? Purple gas costs 

farmers in Saskatchewan $68 million a year since you’re in office. That’s what we lost in an advantage of gas. 

Alberta still gives them 32 cents a gallon. Alberta still gives them 32 cents a gallon. You haven’t got a penny. You 

haven’t got a penny. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member for Thunder Creek made another line that most farmers in my constituency aren’t going 

to appreciate, especially those in the livestock industry.; And he says, we put millions of dollars into the pockets of 

the livestock industry. 

 

I would like to reiterate on this legislation something that I said in the throne speech; how much money did you 

take out of the pockets of the livestock men and the farmers when you changed the beef stabilization program? 

When you changed the rate of their investment of fixed costs from 55 per cent to 50 per cent the farmers $4.70 an 

animal. When you changed the wean rate you cost him $30 an animal. When you changed the feed input costs 

from 22 pounds of hay to 20 pounds, and you changed the trucking costs, you cost him another $11 per animal. 

 

Sixty-nine dollars a head since you took office — changes to the beef stabilization plan. Two hundred and fifty 

thousand head costs the farmers close to $20 million. And you say you put money into the livestock industry — 

when you took $20 million a year out. 

 

Mr. Speaker,. this government says one thing and does another. They brag about they’re going to talk about their 

performance, Mr. Speaker, this is a record of performance like we’ve never seen 



 

April 23, 1985 

1286 
 

before, a record where Robin Hood couldn’t hold a torch to it. They take from the poor and give it to the rich. 

These people know how to do it. 

 

I talked to one of the leading people in the construction industry, Mr. Speaker, and we had the privilege of visiting 

with this person, and he said, “Less than 1 per cent, less than 1 per cent of my equipment is sold to contractors.” 

Less than 1 per cent of his sales of heavy equipment is going to contractors. 

 

How come the contractors in Saskatchewan aren’t buying any equipment if things are so good? How come the road 

builders aren’t buying any new equipment? I’d like to know that. 

 

The municipalities are buying a few graders. There’s some graders, and there’s some equipment being bought, but 

the contractors in Saskatchewan have been starved by this government and their programs. They have a little 

money, and they do a little business in repair, but they . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It’s my duty to inform the member his time has elapsed. 

 

Mr. Katzman: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to join in the debate on this motion. It’s interesting to note that the 

member that just spoke talked about $20 million, but he didn’t talk about the $37 million that was put into that plan 

by the Government of Saskatchewan in the stabilization plan. 

 
He talked about purple gas and said that they’ve lost some money. Farm fuel never went up, and it was this 
government on this side of the House that demanded the federal government take off the federal tax off farm fuel, 
and it is now off. The member goes, who, who? That’s what the member is — a big who, who. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I sat to the rhetoric coming out of the member from across the side of the House and he talked about 
highways. Let’s talk about highways. He was in the construction industry. I notice he’s not there any more. But he 
was there, and he knows that the private sector is giving the government the best deal you’ve ever seen on road 
constructions in this province. 
 
The cost of building a mile of road has dropped between 20 and 40 per cent per mile of construction. You tell me 
that’s not a good deal, and I’d like to say it is. Any time we can save the people of Saskatchewan the money, that’s 
what’s important. And the private sector building roads in Saskatchewan is giving us a place that we never could 
compete with, and they are an efficient and good group making roads. 
 
You know, I heard the member talk about retail sales growth, both the Leader of the Opposition and the member 
who spoke. What he didn’t say was while retail sales were dropping in all the other parts of Canada, ours stayed up 
there. Therefore, if we stayed up, how can we grow as fast as those that have all fallen backwards. That’s what he 
forgot to say in his comments. A one-sided comment. He doesn’t give you the both sides and the argument — 
one-sided. He wants to mislead with half facts. Lay all the facts on and that way the people will make their 
decision. And that’s why, in 1982, those guys got tossed out of government, down to eight members, and they’re 
going lower than that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we heard about land bank. The Government of Saskatchewan under the NDP had one on nine to 

control every person, and the way that their document of 19 . . . the Manifesto said, was you’ve got to own the land 

and you control the people, and that’s what they tried to do while they were government in ‘71 to ‘82. The biggest 

land speculators in the province of Saskatchewan were the NDP party. 

 

(1545) 

 

You know, you talked about cheap leases over there. Why did they give out leases that were cheap? Because they 

wanted to get everybody getting the land from them. That’s the way they 



 

April 23, 1985 

1287 
 

want it because if they had the land and the economic fortune of the country, they could control you in the palm of 

their hand. That’s the way they preferred to have it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, they talked about the gas and the oil companies. Well, I’ve been around this House for a while, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’ll tell you something. Some of the deals that they gave in deferred taxes and drilling equity royalties 

for future time are unreal, and we had to negotiate them, hundreds of millions of dollars that they had in debts. And 

talking about debts, Mr. Speaker, for every time that we have to pay a dollar for our power bill, 40 cents of that 

goes for interest because of what they did when they were government. Don’t tell me about the cost that put on 

farmers, because you put on more cost than everybody dreamt about. 

 

Sask Tel is another one — 97 per cent debt when you people left, compared to equity. Sask Power, 117 per cent 

debt to equity. That’s the kind of shape you left this government in, and if you want to go through all the rest of the 

Crown corporations where you buried your deficits since 1971, let’s go at it. I know one difference was at least we 

put them up front. You hid them, played games, cooked the books. That’s the way you guys did it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Katzman: — We want to talk about job creation. This government has done more job creation in this private 

sector than you guys ever dreamed of. Your system was they’ve got to be a government employee or don’t have 

them. We create jobs in the private sector, and it’s interesting to note that those people that create jobs, those jobs 

get a grant maybe for 5,000 the first time, but what percentage of those jobs stayed there with no more grant? Over 

80 per cent. That’s job creation, and jobs that stay. Not that, if it isn’t government, it ain’t no good, because that’s 

the way you operated. 

 

You want to talk about the agriculture sector. Let’s talk about the agriculture sector. The first time in history people 

in the agriculture sector say, we can talk to the government; we can sit down with the agriculture caucus and the 

members of the government and lay out our concerns and find an equitable solution. Not a solution where you guys 

used to say, you do it our way or you don’t do it at all. That’s a new attitude, and the farmers of Saskatchewan 

appreciate it. 

 

Energy — the energy industry is flourishing again in Saskatchewan. Why? We don’t pay you for a dry hole. And 

some of your members may know what that’s all about. We pay you for . . . we allow you to get back your 

expenses, if you drill a hole, and then you pay taxes and you pay them heavy . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, it’s 

interesting to listen to the “ho, ho.” It’s interesting to note where the “ho, ho” came from, too, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Economic development in Saskatchewan, as we all know, is going forward. Certainly, the member opposite can 

say the sales aren’t up, the growth isn’t up, but if you haven’t gone backwards, if you haven’t gone backwards, then 

the growth factor, if you’re moving progressively, is always smaller in percentage. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I live along Highway 16, and I get over to watch the cars coming home on the long 

weekends, the Alberta plates constantly coming home. Saskatchewan people were exported, while they were 

government. Today, people are moving back to Saskatchewan, and we have a growth in our industry. We have a 

growth in our industry, and people are coming to those jobs. Certainly the unemployment’s higher, but there’s 

more people here today. There’s more people working today than there ever has been. And that’s part of the 

numbers that we have to look at. 

 

Tourism — tourism is an important business to Saskatchewan. Rather than being in a fight with the tourist 

industry, as the NDP did during the last years of their government, we sit down and discuss with the tourist 

industry the things that can promote tourism in Saskatchewan, to cause people to come here to spend their dollars 

on fishing and hunting and other things that leave 



 

April 23, 1985 

1288 
 

good revenue to Saskatchewan. That’s our second most important industry, behind agriculture. 

 

Our budget this year, Mr. Speaker, dealt with education, the future of Saskatchewan, the brain trust that will make 

this province one of the best provinces in North America and in the world. Why did we put extra dollars in? 

Because we knew the importance of it. We moved from approximately 51 per cent of the educational cost to 54. 

When they were government they continually dropped the percentage that they were paying into education. 

 

Which way is moving the right way? Sure, they may not be happy about the home owner’s grant being gone, but, 

as you are aware, Mr. Speaker, for the first time this year the Liberal government has caused the taxation of that 

grant so people would have lost part of that anyway. And, when you consider the whole system, the people are 

getting a better value in the education for their dollar. In fact, they are not having to pay interest on their money 

waiting to get it back from the government. 

 

The member from Morse made the comment about the gas tax. You get the deduction right at your bulk dealer. 

You don’t have to send out that fancy cheque. That’s called buying votes, and they were pros at it. And that system 

is gone. You give the deduction at the source. It should be the same way on your taxes as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, trade. You know, they condemn our trade policy. The Deputy Premier, former minister of agriculture, 

minister of trade in economic development, has broadened the markets of Saskatchewan, be it with the Hereford 

cattle or with other things that we’re exporting. 

 

I’ve had the pleasure, Mr. Speaker, of being involved in a sale that is just about to be announced. It’s for potash — 

that because of an accidental meeting with a person. And that’s important. 

 

The importance of selling our products to the world: it causes jobs here. And that’s what we have to do. And the 

motion put forward, Mr. Speaker, is: 

 

This Assembly congratulates the government for the progress made in promoting investment, encouraging 

economic viability, and job creation . . . 

 

And we have done it. Look at the records. Look at the records and you’ll see them all. The growth is there. More 

people working. More population in Saskatchewan. 

 

Agriculture. Agriculture’s had a couple of . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It’s my duty to inform the members that the 75 minutes allowed under rule 16 have elapsed. 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 02 — An Act to amend An Act to amend and consolidate An Act respecting Saskatchewan 

Co-operative Credit Society Limited and Saskatchewan Co-operative Financial Services Limited 

 

Mr. Tusa: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 02 — An Act to amend An Act to amend and consolidate An Act 

respecting Saskatchewan Co-operative Credit Society Limited and Saskatchewan Co-operative Financial Services 

Limited be now read a second time and referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 

 

Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 



 

April 23, 1985 

1289 
 

Bill No. 03 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate The House of Jacob (Beth Yakov) of the City of 

Regina 

 

Mr. Rybchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move that Bill No. 03 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate The 

House of Jacob (Beth Yakov) of the City of Regina be now read a second time and referred to the Standing 

Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 

 

Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 

 

Bill No. 05 — An Act to incorporate the Saskatchewan Baptist Association 

 

Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move Bill No. 05 — An Act to incorporate the Saskatchewan Baptist 

Association be now read the second time and referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 

 

Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 3 — Securing An Economic Future for Northerners 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of my speech this afternoon I want to move the following 

motion: 

 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan to implement immediately concrete social and 

economic development measures of Northern Saskatchewan, forestry, and tourism, in order that northern 

residents may participate fully in a secure economic future for themselves and their communities. 

 

I am very pleased to rise today in support of this motion, Mr. Speaker. It is an important one, and I invite all 

members on both sides of the House to join me in supporting it. Mr. Speaker, this motion before us calls on the 

conservative government to do only one thing: to implement at once some concrete and positive social and 

economic development measures for northern Saskatchewan. Why? In order that northern families and northern 

communities will be able to participate fully in the opportunities of the future; in order that northern people may 

have a secure future for themselves and their children, a future of hope and not unemployment; a future of 

productive employment and not welfare; a future of dignity and not neglect. 

 

Conservatives have claimed in the House, Mr. Speaker, that northern Saskatchewan, while they don’t say that it is 

unique, they say that it has to be an equal partner in Saskatchewan, and we fully agree in northern Saskatchewan 

that we want to be equal partners, and we feel that in order for us to be equal partners that we should enjoy the 

same type of a social life and economic life that the citizens in southern Saskatchewan do. 

 

When we talk about the high unemployment in northern Saskatchewan running up into some communities, taking 

out professional people, as high as 85 and 90 per cent, and we take a look at the unemployment rate in southern 

Saskatchewan where it’s running close to 10 per cent, we feel, in order to become equal partners, that we should be 

also entitled to that 10 per cent unemployment that the South has right now, not the 85 and 90 per cent that we are 

suffering with in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

But it’s quite easy, Mr. Speaker, when you have this high unemployment rate and high reliance on social services, 

to lose generations very fast. It doesn’t take long to lose a generation. And I 



 

April 23, 1985 

1290 
 

say to the Conservative government that they are going to have to act and to have to act very fast, or we will not 

lose one generation or two generations, but we will lose many generations in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

It is unfortunate that a motion of this sort has to be brought before the legislature. But it must be brought up 

because of this Conservative government’s consistent and harmful neglect in northern Saskatchewan, betrayal of 

northern people. 

 

First of all, they started off this winter by cancelling a $250,000-a-year food transportation subsidy that had been in 

effect for a number of years to supply fresh fruit and vegetables and produce to communities such s Fond-du-Lac, 

and Stony Rapids, and Black Lake, and Wollaston; a program that I might add, Mr. Speaker, when I was up in 

Stony Rapids about a month to six weeks ago, I found out from mothers and fathers, I found out from teachers and 

school students that it was a program that was working well, costing the government $250,000 a year. And I say to 

you, Mr. Speaker, that when that transportation subsidy was removed, immediately you saw the shelves completely 

bare of fresh fruit and vegetables and produce. 

 

And there has been studies taken in the schools up there, and I will soon have access to that study as to just what 

has happened to the families. And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, it is very serious is what has happened. 

 

(1600) 

 

A program that was successful, a program that was providing the fresh fruit, the fresh vegetables and meat, eggs, 

cheese to those northern residents has now been cut off with one sweep of the pen. And this is the type of programs 

that are beneficial and should never be touched, especially when they’re working. 

 

And some of the excuses was, not that it was costing too much money, but the wrong people were taking 

advantage of the program. Indications were that they cut the $250,000 off because tourist operators were taking 

advantage of the program. Checking with tourist operators — and I can tell you this that there is no tourist 

operators in the Fond-du-Lac area, and very few tourist operators in the Stony Lake and Black Lake area — and 

they indicate that this is not true, that they don’t take advantage of it, that that haul in most of their fresh produce as 

they have aircrafts coming in with the tourists. 

 

Some of the other excuses were that they were going to try new schemes such as gardening and the growing of the 

vegetables. Well, one just has to live in stony Rapids, in Black Lake, in Fond-du-Lac to realize that this is just a 

fallacy, because we know that the soil is sandy and heavy rock, we know that the growing seasons are very short. 

We also know that the citizens up in that area are out into their fish camps and their trapping camps during the 

summer. We know that ravens and dogs are running loose, and that it just doesn’t make sense to replace a good 

program like this by trying to produce gardens up in that area. 

 

Grants to local governments were frozen. Grants for northern economic development, and that was frozen. You 

take a look at the economic development activities in northern Saskatchewan in the last three years, and let me tell 

you, Mr. Speaker, there are very few, and the ones that we have are very small and are not producing a great deal of 

jobs. 

 

Northern housing is another major problem in northern Saskatchewan. Housing has virtually been frozen. The 

department Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, is now constructing a number of apartments up in northern 

Saskatchewan. they will be rented out, but the individuals in northern Saskatchewan are just not going to be able to 

take advantage of that because the rent is just going to be too high, especially for young people who are 

unemployed or who are working on part-time jobs and small-paying jobs. And the list goes on, Mr. Speaker. 



 

April 23, 1985 

1291 
 

The only news the recent Conservative budget brought to the North was bad new. Jobs — they talk about creating 

jobs, and you can go into the North, or you can go to any place in Saskatchewan, and you’ll find that the type of 

statistics that are being used by the Conservative government in Saskatchewan are statistics that include short-term 

jobs, three months in duration, four and a quarter an hour. 

 

And I think the most cruel statistic that is being used today in Saskatchewan is the part-time jobs. You can go into 

the city of Saskatoon, and let me tell you, there are hundreds and hundreds of individuals who are working part 

time, but yet they go down as a statistic as working, and it’s used to keep the level down. But there are so many 

individuals in this province, young and old alike, who are working for four and a quarter an hour at short-term jobs, 

or they are working at part-time jobs and at a low wage. 

 

The biggest tax increase in Saskatchewan’s history — no income tax, no sales tax on used vehicles, loss of 

property tax rebate, more taxes for ordinary people, but not higher taxation of the corporations or the rich. 

 

Now let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, as I go around the province now and I get phone calls, and I’m getting letters 

from individuals who are saying, is that right that I am not going to get a rebate on my property taxes? Let me tell 

you, Mr. Speaker, that’s not really going to hit home until July when the urban centres in this province have to pay 

their taxes and they find out that they’re not going to get that rebate. That’s when it’s really going to sink hone. 

And that’s when the Conservative government are going to find themselves in real hot water. 

 

So I suggest, Mr. Speaker, and I suggest to the other members over there, that maybe to solve that problem you 

would call an election and get that out of the way before these tax assessments come out, because that’s when 

you’re going to get in trouble. 

 

There are a lot of people out there yet that don’t really believe they’re going to lose this tax. It’s important to them. 

There are a lot of individuals who use that to go on a small vacation every summer. But it’s not going to be there 

this summer. And that’s when it’s going to hit you hard. 

 

Roads and highways, municipal services — all are needed in northern development. Mr. Speaker, when we talk 

about municipal services — and we see where the local government structure in northern Saskatchewan has come 

a long ways in the last 12 years. And now all of a sudden we don’t know for sure what’s going to happen. They see 

that there’s an $800,000 cut in the moneys that will be going to them towns in order to operate. And let me tell you, 

some of the towns up in northern Saskatchewan have already asked their employees to take a 9 per cent cut — a 9 

per cent cut. 

 

Trapping and fishing and hunting, they are on hard times. If you go into northern Saskatchewan right now and you 

take a look at the money that was returned to the trapper this year, you’ll find it was very small. Not only did we 

have an extremely tough winter in northern Saskatchewan, but we had a massive timber-wolf problem up in 

northern Saskatchewan. And I indicated to the minister in charge of Parks and Renewable Resources that the 

problem was there. 

 

The problem had been brought to me by trappers and fishermen, who tell me that they’re running in packs of 30 

and 32. I have seen the kills, Mr. Speaker. I have seen many, many kills where animals were just totally cleaned out 

by the timber-wolves. It’s destructful. You see a timber-wolf who goes out, and he hunts 24 hours a day. There are 

no boundaries. He hunts 365 days of the year, and he kills, and he leaves it. And you can go down any river or lake 

or through the bush and will see a pile of ravens hollering and screaming. You just have to walk in there and you’ll 

find a dead cow moose or a dead calf or a dead deer or a dead caribou. And this is what they’re doing. It’s wasteful. 

 

Not only that, they are hitting the trappers. Trappers are telling me that they go to their traps and 



 

April 23, 1985 

1292 
 

all they find is the head left of a lynx — lynx that were bringing this year up to $450 to the trappers. And that’s 

pretty tough medicine for a trapper to take when he goes out and he finds that the timber-wolves, who are hungry 

and are roaming in packs, have come along and taken out of his trap a lynx worth $1,000 or more, or a cross fox 

that’s worth up 3, $400. This is what’s happening. Trappers have had a tough year. 

 

Fishing has been tough. It’s been cold, and we just have to have some security up there that the fish transportation 

subsidy is not going to be taken away so that fishermen can get back some of the losses this summer when we get 

open water and times get better. 

 

We have to have new opportunities, and we have to make sure that the environment is safe up in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I say in all sincerity, Mr. Speaker, that if you want to thin out the forest, I say you should not do it with 

chemicals. I say it should be done by individuals in this province who are looking for work. Let them go in there, 

set up a camp. Let them go in there and clean out the forest that you don’t want, and stockpile it, sell it for 

firewood, whatever it may be, but don’t use chemicals in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

I have seen what has happened to chemicals that have been used on the farms in southern Saskatchewan. and I 

grew up in Big River on a farm, and it was no problem for me to go out on any day in the fall and hunt chicken and 

rabbits. They were all over the fields. I go into them communities, into Big River, Shell Lake, and in that area now, 

and let me tell you — and I talked to the farmers — and I don’t see these chickens any more, and I don’t see the 

rabbits. And they tell me it’s because there’s just been too many chemicals used on the land, and as a result the 

animals and the birds, they are eating that and they’re not reproducing like they used to. 

 

And the same thing is going to happen in northern Saskatchewan. They’re not just going to have the timber-wolf to 

deal with; they’re going to have to deal with chemicals. And that is something that we can’t let happen, especially 

in a province where we have so many young people, especially in the summer — university students, grade 12 

students — who are looking for jobs. Let’s clean out them forests by using labour. Let’s not use chemicals in 

northern Saskatchewan and take the chance of polluting our streams, polluting the animal. 

 

You know what’s going to happen up in northern Saskatchewan? If a bird eats the berries that are poisoned, they’re 

going to do it in August when the berries are out — the young calf moose, the young deer, they’re all eating the 

foliage. And they’re going to go away from that area. They’re going to die. Some other animal is going to feed on 

it, and it’s just going to be a never-ending problem up there, and it’ll just spread. And I say we cannot let this 

happen. 

 

The wild rice. The Minister of Agriculture indicates that wild rice will solve a lot of our problems in northern 

Saskatchewan. And I say, yes, it’s a cash crop, but let me tell you it’s not a crop that one individual or any family 

can make a living on. It’s a type of an industry, Mr. Minister of Agriculture, it’s a type of an industry that 

complements fishing, trapping, and tourism. 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Agriculture, that you have to make sure that you don’t hold back on the 

wild rice, but you have to also build up the tourism, the commercial fishing, and the trapping, because every one 

complements the other. Most wild rice producers in northern Saskatchewan are commercial fishermen, or are 

trappers, or have tourist operations. And I say to you, just get up there and make sure that all parts of it work, not 

just the wild rice or the agriculture part of it, but get the tourism and fishing and everything going. 

 

Mining. There’s no two ways about that, Mr. Speaker, mining is vitally important to northern Saskatchewan. I can 

tell you, if we were to close down or to take out the northern content from Cluff Lake today, and Key Lake, and 

Wollaston Lake, then we would have a massive unemployment rate in northern Saskatchewan. 



 

April 23, 1985 

1293 
 

It’s vitally important that surface leases that are in place are honoured. And I ask the minister in charge of SMDC 

to get up there and make sure that these surface leases are honoured, because it is so important to give Northerners 

that opportunity to take advantage. And we’re only asking for 50 per cent of the jobs. And that’s not bad, Mr. 

Speaker, because we’re dealing strictly with the mines in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Southerners are not coming down and asking for jobs in the potash mines or any other mines that you have in 

southern Saskatchewan, the coal mines. All they’re asking for is a fair share up there. And I ask this government, 

the Conservative government and the minister in charge of SMDC, to get up there and make sure that these surface 

leases are carried out, and that we get our 50 per cent share of the jobs not only in Amok, but in Key Lake and 

Wollaston Lake also. 

 

The North has many opportunities. What is needed is the commitment on the part of the government to enable 

northern people to seize those opportunities, not to be put down. Not to be put down, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Last summer was a good example in northern Saskatchewan when we had an outbreak of fires — one of the worst 

rash of forest fires that we’ve ever had in northern Saskatchewan. And what did they do? They didn’t want to hire 

Northerners. They were unemployed in the communities, but they didn’t want to hire them, because somebody 

suggested that the Northerners were lighting the fires. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there were hundreds of young men waiting to go to fight fire, and there was just no way that 

they could go. I saw them standing there. Then all of a sudden we see more aircrafts and more aircrafts coming in, 

and they were trying to fight these fires. When the smoke would clear, they would go in. But most of the time, they 

really couldn’t fight the fire. They couldn’t fight the fire with water bombers at night, when fires should be fought, 

and they should be fought by hand. 

 

That wasn’t so bad, Mr. Speaker, but then all of a sudden there was a fleet of water bombers that were brought in 

from Ontario — brought in from Ontario to fight fires in northern Saskatchewan at a cost of millions of dollars. 

And I say that, at a cost of millions of dollars, and yet we had unemployed northern Saskatchewan residents 

waiting and wanting to go to work, but could not. And we will get the figures. We will get the figures. 

 

(1615) 

 

The Minister of Highways, he doesn’t believe this. He’s laughing when I say billions of dollars. But these figures 

will come out as just how much was spent on aircraft, how much was spent on individuals working in northern 

Saskatchewan. And you’re going to see that there is a tremendous disproportionate amount of funds that were 

spent on aircraft to fight these fires, and a very small amount on individuals. 

 

Not until I wrote the Premier a letter indicating what was taking place did we get some hiring in northern 

Saskatchewan and then it was getting late in the season. 

 

The Conservative government has its priorities all wrong. They cut $250,000 from a program to help provide a 

fresh food subsidy for northern families, to help ensure that children have fresh milk and food. But in this budget, 

they have increased the social assistance budget by $30 million — $30 million, but yet they cut off a program for 

250,000 that was beneficial to the residents of northern Saskatchewan. Cuts in fresh food subsidies, funding for 

economic development frozen, but a huge increase in the welfare budget because they anticipate a further big 

increase in the welfare case-loads. 

 

Needs for northern housing. Needs for expansion of the West Side Community College. Once 



 

April 23, 1985 

1294 
 

again community college is very important to train northerners so that they can take part in the jobs, not just jobs in 

northern Saskatchewan, but jobs any place in the nation where they can get them. 

 

I therefore urge the government opposite to take immediate and concrete and positive steps for the social and 

economic development of northern Saskatchewan, and I invite all members to join me in support of this motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of northern Saskatchewan do not ask for much. They want jobs, not welfare; and they 

want security, not short-term, four and a quarter on our jobs. They want good long-term jobs where they can have 

some security, that their families can have some security. They want the opportunity to raise their families in 

dignity and hope, not frustration and despair. 

 

When you take a look at the families up there who have been working for many years and then all of a sudden they 

lost that job, then you see the problems that take place. For the first time in many years there was families who had 

a home that had three or four bedrooms in; their young daughters had a room of their own. They never had that 

before. Now all of a sudden they are on the verge of losing that. Mother and father had a job. They had securities. 

They had televisions and cars. Now they are on the verge of losing that plus losing their homes. This is not what 

they want. This is not what they want, even though we live in a unique region of the province. 

 

If you live in La Loche and yet a toothache and you want to get a tooth filled you have to drive 210 miles one way 

just to get that done. And I ask you and other members to put yourself in that position and you would realize that 

things are unique in northern Saskatchewan, and that’s only way half up the constituency when you get to La 

Loche. 

 

Just imagine what it’s like when you live in Stony Rapids and Fond-du-Lac and Black Lake, Camsell Portage, 40 

miles south of the North-West Territories. Then let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, and I tell the other members here, 

northern Saskatchewan is a unique area. It has to be treated that way, and I would sincerely hope that you will all 

give the support for what I have just said. 

 

They don’t want charity or gifts from the Conservative government. All they want is a fair deal and an honest 

break. They want an end to the double standard policies of this government — one standard for Saskatchewan 

families, another standard for big oil companies; tax increases for Saskatchewan families, tax breaks for the big oil 

companies. My colleague from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg explained that quite eloquently here prior to my speech. 

And above all they want an end to the Conservative government’s consistent policy of neglect and betrayal of the 

North. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I so move my motion. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to second my colleague’s motion, the member 

from Athabasca, who has very straightforwardly laid out his concerns about northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that all members of this Assembly agree with me when I say that that member has done an 

excellent job in his years here in the Assembly of bringing forward that concerns, both to the previous NDP 

government and to the Conservative government, concerns that he had in northern Saskatchewan. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that all would agree, as well, that since 1982 his concerns have basically fallen on deaf ears. 

 

Mr. Speaker, of the 64,000 people who now I find themselves on welfare in province, a large number of them 

come from the northern district, the constituency of Cumberland and Athabasca, and I want to say that, having 

toured into that area in the past month, I have first-hand knowledge of what 90 per cent unemployment does to 

people from northern Saskatchewan. 



 

April 23, 1985 

1295 
 

We had an opportunity to see what the crime rate, what happens to the crime rate when you have 90 per cent of the 

people, the main bread-winners in that area of the province, without meaningful employment. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we heard from people the day after the budget who were phoning into open-line shows who said the highway 

situation was so bad in northern Saskatchewan on certain sections of the Hanson Lake road that people had to 

detour for 60 or 80 miles to get around the pot-holes that the Minister of Highways had no time and no money to 

fill. 

 

My colleague has talked about the food subsidy of 250,000 for fresh food that has been taken away by this 

government. Now to put that in perspective, the allowance that ministers have, the expense account of four 

ministers, would have covered off that total fresh-food allowance. Four members of the Executive Council with 

expense accounts, like the member for Wilkie, would have covered off that food subsidy. 

 

And I find it interesting, as well, that in the era when we have a government that is allowing liquor advertising on 

all of the outlets that go into the North and other parts of the province, that while the fresh food subsidy was taken 

off of things like lettuce and milk and other vegetables, that the subsidy that they have in place for liquor was not 

removed and was not changed. 

 

Believe it or not, the subsidy that allows you to buy a 26 of Crown Royal, or Three Feathers, or whatever people 

buy in La Ronge, is the same price as it is down town Regina. And I say if you’re looking at subsidizing liquor into 

northern Saskatchewan, as a government, then you should look very clearly at maybe changing the priorities in 

taking it off of alcoholic beverages and putting it on fresh food. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Minister, and, Mr. Speaker, that many of the problems associated with high unemployment 

in the rest of the province, where we find the crime rate, for example, the violent crime rate in Saskatoon and 

Regina going up by 100 per cent last year, tracking very closely with the unemployment rate, that these trends are 

only magnified in northern Saskatchewan. We have an ever-increasing flow of young people coming out of 

northern Saskatchewan to fill the correctional centres in Saskatoon and Prince Albert. 

 

We see the same massive tax increases at the same time on the people of northern Saskatchewan; the removal of 

the property improvement grant, the increased tax on automobiles. And many of the people in the North, when they 

buy automobiles, a much higher percentage will buy used automobiles, will now for the first time be paying a sales 

tax on those vehicles. 

 

And I agree with my colleague from Athabasca when he says the same taxing structure is not applying to those in 

Regina and Saskatoon who have a great deal of money and can afford to trade their automobiles, expensive 

automobiles, every year. The example has been pointed out over and over again — and I don’t think we can 

comment on it too often — of a person who buys a $40,000 vehicles every year will have a tax cut of $1,500, while 

many people in the North will, for the first time, be paying 5 per cent on used automobiles, whether it’s a car or a 

truck. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the 100 per cent increase in unemployment in this province, and when we 

talk about the massive increase in welfare in this province, northern Saskatchewan identifies that clearer than any 

other part of the province. 

 

And when we talk about unemployment in Saskatchewan, ever increasing under this administration, that is not 

what is happening in other parts of the country. In places like Manitoba the unemployment rate has actually 

dropped by 2 or 3 per cent over the last three years, while in Saskatchewan it has increased by a similar amount. 

And I say that when people tell us, members of the Conservative Party tell us that the government has no 

responsibility in creating an atmosphere for employment, Mr. Speaker, they are misleading the people of this 

province. And I say no place else are they misleading the people more than in northern Saskatchewan. 



 

April 23, 1985 

1296 
 

And I say that the unemployment rate of 90 or 95 per cent is a disgrace to this province, and that when they 

sanctimoniously talk about helping the people of Ethiopia, that I would ask the member of Morse, who goes on the 

TV — and I agree with the principle of helping people in other countries — that he would take a tour, that he 

would take a tour to northern Saskatchewan and see the plight of some of his fellow Saskatchewan friends and 

neighbours who are living in desperate situation without food to eat. Because I want to tell you that we who went 

to northern Saskatchewan saw a situation where in La Ronge (and this is in probably one of the better-off areas in 

northern Saskatchewan) where houses are boarded up, where people are living together because they can’t rent 

individual houses any more, and they live without fresh food because of the subsidy being cut. 

 

If the member from Morse is honest in his concern for his fellow human beings, then he should be going to 

northern Saskatchewan, looking at the plight of the people and helping us bring the government to its senses when 

it comes to dealing with the plight of northern Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muller: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure every member of this Assembly can remember the report that 

Justice Noble issued when the NDP were in office. Justice Noble described the NDP department of northern 

Saskatchewan as a bureaucracy run amok. 

 

I’m sure that every member of this Assembly can also remember the Progressive Conservative pledge to clean up 

the mess created by the NDP department of northern Saskatchewan. This government pledged to tackle the tough 

economic problems of the Northern. I’m proud to tell the House that we’ve been true to our words. 

 

I look at the negative motion introduced by the member from Athabasca. He paints a picture of doom and gloom in 

northern Saskatchewan. I can tell the MLA from Athabasca that people of northern Saskatchewan are no longer 

buying the NDP picture of doom and gloom. 

 

The government believes in progress in the North, in the critical industries of fishing, trapping, and tourism. This 

government is making positive effort to ignite the northern economy. The nine and five-eighths per cent loans 

program for small business is an example of a program that’ll help northern Saskatchewan. 

 

The Minister of Tourism and Small Business is going to tour northern Saskatchewan to explain how the loans 

program for small business can apply to northern Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the real signs of economic progress 

in the North — take, for example, the wild rice industry. The wild rice crop was over 1 million pounds last year. 

Outfitters in northern Saskatchewan — yes, the failed. Their answer was big government in northern 

Saskatchewan. Control the lives of all the people in northern Saskatchewan. The department of northern 

Saskatchewan was not the answer to building northern Saskatchewan. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the 1970s the NDP failed to develop the greatness of northern Saskatchewan — yes, they 

failed. Their answer was big government in northern Saskatchewan. Control the lives of all the people in northern 

Saskatchewan. The department of northern Saskatchewan was not the answer to building northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Let me review the record of the NDP in northern Saskatchewan. They spent most of their budget on government in 

the North. They did not invest in the North. The NDP treated the North with talk and no action. 

 

We, as a Progressive Conservative government, have a vision for the North. We have a vision based on positive 

programs and action. We encourage tourism in the North. We encourage 



 

April 23, 1985 

1297 
 

small business in the North. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative government has a proud record in northern Saskatchewan. Let me 

review our record in northern Saskatchewan. We established the Northern Affairs Secretariat, a Northern Affairs 

Secretariat to work hand in hand with the people in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP isolated the people of northern Saskatchewan from the mainstream of government in this 

province. The NDP treated as second-class citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative government believes that the people in the North should receive the 

same government services as the people in any other part of the province, Mr. Speaker, not a department of 

northern Saskatchewan that worked against the people. 

 

Allow me to quote from Dale Eisler’s article in the Regina Leader-Post, May 17, 1984. He’s described the DNS as 

a bureaucratic structure with a checkered history. The same article said that there’s ample evidence of uncontrolled 

rents and mortgage payments by DNS. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, the DNS was no good for northern Saskatchewan. DNS was a monster that threw millions of 

dollars into the wind. It did nothing to encourage economic growth in the North, and that is why this government 

abolished DNS. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative government has developed a comprehensive plan for the North: 

 

1. We established a process for the co-ordination of northern advisory services; 

2. The establishment of a process to bring the people of northern Saskatchewan into mainstream of the 

province; 

3. A comprehensive economic plan for the North; 

4. Working closely with northern people for northern interests. 

 

The NDP, Mr. Speaker, would phase out uranium mining that would spell ruin for people in the North. It would 

put over 10,000 people out of work. That is the doom and gloom of the NDP opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As Saskatchewan is celebrating its 80th year in Canada, I believe that northern Saskatchewan has a great future. 

This Progressive Conservative government has a northern vision. We believe in the people of northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The recent budget introduced by the Minister of Finance confirms our faith in the people of northern 

Saskatchewan. Job creation is a good example. We are investing money to create meaningful jobs for the people in 

the North and all over the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Assembly cannot, and should not, take the motion of the member for Athabasca seriously. After 

all, he knows, as we all do, that the Progressive Conservative government has been, since 1982, implementing 

concrete social and economic development measures for northern Saskatchewan. 

 

We believe in a secure economic future for the North. We believe strongly in our tourism and forest industry. Mr. 

Speaker, this government is optimistic about the future in northern Saskatchewan. Let the word go up to the North 

that we listen and we care. Let the word go forth that it is a Progressive Conservative government that believes in 

the North, and it is a Progressive Conservative government that invests and builds in the North. 

 

Back in 1959, John Diefenbaker talked about northern vision. In 1985, as a Progressive Conservative government, 

are carrying out northern vision with our positive program for the North. 



 

April 23, 1985 

1298 
 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will be amending the motion, seconded by the member from Prince Albert: 

 

That Resolution 3 be amended by deleting the words “urge the Government of Saskatchewan . . . immediately,” 

where they appear in the first and second line, and substituting: 

 

would commend the government for implementing therefor. 

 

The debate continues concurrent on the motion and the amendment. 

 

Mr. Meagher: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I listened with great interest to the member from Athabasca in 

particular, and also that expert on the North, the member for the South, commenting on this motion, and really, to 

me it really clearly demonstrates the basic or fundamental difference between our approach to economic 

development and the approach of the previous administration. They had no faith at all in the people in northern 

Saskatchewan. They decided to relegate that part of the province to a colony of the South and demonstrate their 

paternalistic attitude toward those people, like they were second-class citizens, that they should have special this 

and special that and subsidies and other forms of paternalistic development. 

 

I hear the member from Shaunavon, for an example, suggesting that there’s some kind of subsidy on booze and 

that that should have been taken off and that they should pay a higher price for whisky in Buffalo Narrows than 

they do in Shaunavon. 

 

And that demonstrates exactly what their attitude is toward the people of northern Saskatchewan. They do not want 

them to be part of the general population of this province and to be treated in the same way. Well, we do. We do 

expect them to be part of the province of Saskatchewan and be treated in the same way, and they are responding 

very well. 

 

We have taken a number of initiatives as a government to assist in the economic development of the people of 

northern Saskatchewan without telling them how they must do . . . what they must do, and where they must do it. 

We have faith in the people of the North and they’re responding. 

 

I was born in Emma Lake, in that Emma Lake district of northern Saskatchewan. And I know when I was a young 

fellow, I had to leave my home to find a job, as did most everyone else in that community at the time under the 

régime of the previous CCF/NDP government. Most of us had to go out to that busy, smoky city of Calgary or 

Edmonton to take up a trade. But we took that responsibility upon ourselves. 

 

Emma Lake’s a beautiful area to live in, but if you want to work in the plumbing trade, it just wasn’t the place to 

be. And that’s one of the things that the people of northern Saskatchewan may have to accept, that you may want to 

live alongside of Christie Lake in beautiful northern Saskatchewan, but let’s not at the same time be whining and 

crying about being unemployed, because they may not be compatible. If you want to work at a building 

construction trade for instance, you may have to go where the work is. And the people of northern Saskatchewan 

accept that. The NDP didn’t. They’d rather take a lot of other people’s money and shovel it into the communities 

and attempt to make artificial economic activity there that was doomed to fail. 

 

I can recall the old NDP DNS department in their economic development loan fund, for an example. There was a 

classic example of economic development, socialist style. You lend people money, lend fishermen money to 

finance an operation that may not be viable. They maintained this fund on the books. The member for Athabasca 

knows this is true. This is where many of his constituents are. They maintained these loan funds on the books as 

current, when some of the 



 

April 23, 1985 

1299 
 

loan recipients had been dead for several years, Mr. Speaker, and there was nothing for security at all except the 

fish in the lake that they couldn’t catch. 

 

Speaking of fish, they don’t vote, so they got the same kind of priority with the previous government. We didn’t 

. . . This new government recognized that tourism is an important business, and we did some things with it. We 

started the fish enhancement program, for an example, which does, in fact, stimulate the tourist industry and the 

fishing industry. Rather than lending money to people to see if you can buy their vote, and then subsidizing it 

forever with someone else’s money, we’ve taken the position that we should have economic development up there 

that makes some sense, some business sense. 

 

In the area of tourism, for an example, we’ve taken a number of issues of initiatives that . . . We’ve restructured the 

northern revolving fund and new loans in maintaining 450 person-years of employment in northern Saskatchewan. 

We financed and support the wild rice corporation which is a successful processing plant there in northern 

Saskatchewan. We’ve helped them to develop the apple culture industry up there, and developed an assistance to 

the northern beef jerky production in La Ronge. It’s another successful operation. 

 

We’ve as well . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, the member for Athabasca mentions forestry. Forestry is an 

important industry in northern Saskatchewan. The member for Athabasca joins with the hysterical, emotional 

argument that herbicides should not be used in the forestry industry. He completely avoids the issue that herbicides 

like Roundup were being used all over Saskatchewan. There’s more Roundup taken out of the Canadian Tire store 

in Prince Albert and put right on our gardens than PAPCO proposed to use. It was a small, small area of northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But no, the member doesn’t want to, he doesn’t want to see the forestry industry succeed in northern 

Saskatchewan. He’d rather support the radicals that block roads and bring out old films of B ‘52s spraying Vietnam 

as an argument against the use of herbicides in northern Saskatchewan. That is not a responsible position to take. 

 

We’ve made about 30 or 35 years of bad forest management decisions in this province. If we want forestry to be an 

industry that’s going to fly, we’ve got to start doing something right for a change, and let’s not get on these band 

wagons. I’d like to know where the member for Athabasca stands on that issue. 

 

He makes the suggestion that we could employ people to go in by hand and do all this work. He doesn’t recognize 

at all that the forest industry is competitive, like others. That’s like suggesting to the farmers that they should week 

their fields with forced labour of some kind. It’s an Ethiopian decision toward economic development. I’m 

surprised they don’t suggest that we fly all the people out of northern Saskatchewan with Soviet airplanes, relocate 

them, like they are doing in Ethiopia. 

 

But I’m suggesting to you, Mr. Speaker, that this motion should recognize that those very things that the member 

for Athabasca has placed in the motion are being done by this government in Saskatchewan, but it’s being done 

with the help and support of the people of northern Saskatchewan as opposed to government imposing these 

decisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say in forestry as well, I want to add some of the initiatives that we’ve taken. In 1983 the 

new department initiated a new forest licence management agreement with the view of making some sensible 

forestry decisions. We want to make long-term security of tenure and wood supply. One of the things that the 

previous government didn’t recognize in forestry is that you can’t just mine the forests, you’ve got to farm it. It’s a 

resource that you just can’t go out and mine and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

The member from Athabasca wants to know what we’re doing along the highway to Shellbrook. 



 

April 23, 1985 

1300 
 

There’s a good example of exactly what we’re doing. The forestry along the highway — the Shellbrook highway 

— is diseased and mature. That forestry needs to be harvested in order to avoid a disaster in that forest. Other 

countries, European countries for an example, don’t hide their forestry operations from the general public as the 

past administration has done and try to conceal that they are doing clear-cuts. For an example, in Sweden they do 

clear-cutting right along the highways so the public can see that this a farming operation; that there are trees being 

replanted to replace the clear-cuts. Here we have been trying to hide it as if it’s some kind of a disaster that should 

be kept from the public. it’s not. Farming the forest is the proper approach and one that we’re taking and that the 

previous administration did not take. 

 

(1645) 

 

As well, in forestry, we are making several initiatives that I think are going to provide real jobs in a viable industry. 

Making a political decision to build a mill some place just to buy a few votes has been the past performance of the 

previous government. Another reason we’re facing serious problems in the forestry industry is because decisions 

were made for political reasons as opposed to good, sound business or commercial reasons. 

 

In June of 1984 the province of Saskatchewan and the government of Canada, Mr. Speaker, entered into a 

five-year, $28 million forest development agreement designed to strengthen forest resource management in 

Saskatchewan. One of the areas that we’ve been woefully, woefully neglected for years, and the member for 

Athabasca knows that to be true. 

 

A review of The Forest Act and regulations has been completed as a part of the government’s legislative 

amendment and reform process. Work is now proceeding toward the development and presentation of a modern set 

of streamlined legislation and procedures which are consistent with effective long-term use, and conservation of 

Saskatchewan’s forest resource. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we want to provide work, and jobs, and economic activity in the forest industry in northern 

Saskatchewan, we’ve got to become realistic and make some decisions that are in tune with the real economic 

demands of that industry and be competitive and out in the world — in the market-place. 

 

The relationship between the establishment of productive job creation programs, using funds from social program 

areas, and the enlargement and enhancement of provincial timber resources, have become more clearly identified 

and understood under this government, under this administration. 

 

This situation is reflected in the recent and rapid implementation of a $1 million set of forest resource improvement 

projects designed by DPRR (Department of Parks and Renewable Resources) and administered by the New 

Careers Corporation. We’re employing people, Mr. Speaker, to work in reforestation, which is an area that’s been 

neglected for years in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Over the period of 1982 and ‘84 the department will have contracted the planting of 24.1 million seedlings, as well 

as providing an additional 9.3 million seedlings to the forest industry, Mr. Speaker. Now that’s performance. 

 

In addition, approximately 2.2 million seedlings were provided by the department to several organizations and 

government agencies. In 1984 Saskatchewan’s forest nurseries marked the production of the hundred millionth 

seedling for the reforestation of Saskatchewan’s forests, Mr. Speaker. A hundred million seedlings have been 

planted in this province. 

 

Since 1982 the department has continued its program of expanding the forest inventory information available to the 

industry, another area that was woefully inadequate under the previous government. Not only were the private 

operators excluded from the forest, but the 



 

April 23, 1985 

1301 
 

information that they needed to make intelligent decisions were denied them by the previous government. 

 

As of September 1984 the department has prepared maps for 33,500 square kilometres of forest land and updated 

another 11,000 square kilometres of previously mapped areas now changed by forest fire and harvesting activities. 

So we’re making this information available to the industry so that they can make intelligent decisions relating to 

their operations. 

 

Since April 1, 1982 the department has acquired 40,000 square kilometres of aerial photography in the commercial 

forest zone. All of this activity, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind you, is being done by this government in support of 

a forest industry that will provide real jobs for the people of northern Saskatchewan, and not be subjected to the 

paternalistic welfare attitude of the old DNS. 

 

Since April the 1st the department has established 7,453 volume sample plots in the commercial forest zone. Since 

April the department has introduced a square kilometre update system of the inventory program, thus allowing 

faster and more efficient updating procedures. 

 

In July 1983 the department entered into a memorandum of understanding with the Canadian Forestry Service, 

designed to enhance the contribution of the forest research program of the federal government to the management 

of forest resources in Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in the forestry industry this government has taken a number of initiatives, and we are confident, 

and I am confident as the member for Prince Albert, that the forest industry will provide the greatest opportunity 

for Northerners in the decades ahead. 

 

Mining is another industry that the member for Athabasca touched upon, and he made mention of the fact that a 

Southerner can apply for a job at a potash mine, and that’s very true. But, I mean, a Northerner could apply for a 

job at a potash mine. And that’s very true. There’s no restrictions upon him coming to southern Saskatchewan and 

working in a potash mine if he likes. 
 
But in northern Saskatchewan, if the NDP ever get the opportunity, they will certainly be restricting the activities 
of the people in northern Saskatchewan as it relates to mining. Their suggestion of closing the uranium industry, 
for an example, would put 4,500 people in the province right now, employed in that industry, out of work, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s their approach to economic development in northern Saskatchewan. That industry generates $42.5 
million of revenue right now, Mr. Speaker. The NDP party, if they ever get an opportunity, would love to take that 
revenue away from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the uranium industry alone is t he largest employer in northern Saskatchewan. It employs almost half 
of the residents of that part of the province. That’s a major industry, and a growth industry. Uranium mining will 
provide the energy needs for the rest of the world in the decades ahead, and it’s a safe, clean fuel. It’s been proven 
to be that, in Europe and in other parts of the world. And again, they would rather join the radicals and take the 
position that somehow mining uranium is going to contribute to a war or to nuclear weapons. It’s another 
hysterical, emotional argument that’s not based on fact, and it’s done to the detriment of the people of northern 
Saskatchewan — the very people they claim to be supporting. 
 
I don’t know how they sleep at night with those kinds of arguments. If they really and truly were in support of 
economic development in northern Saskatchewan, they would take the position that the uranium mining industry is 
vital to that part of this province’s economic future and get off that bandwagon and distance themselves from the 
crazies who are out there camping on public property, and try to make the connection between uranium mining and 
nuclear war. 

 

The government has paid attention to the North, Mr. Speaker. This government has invested $3,155,755 in 

job-creation projects in Athabasca and Cumberland constituencies alone since this 



 

April 23, 1985 

1302 
 

administration took office, and that’s a very substantial investment, and the members for those two constituencies 

should be up there heralding that kind of activity instead of trying to suggest that it’s all doom and gloom. 

 

It’s created 580 jobs, Mr. Speaker — this, the government’s investment — and which totalled 13,153 work weeks. 

That’s the government’s investment directly. But we don’t believe the government is going to be the final solution 

to the economic problems of northern Saskatchewan. The government’s efforts up there — they’ve tried and failed. 

After 11 years of DNS shovelling taxpayers’ money out like it was going out of style, the problems of northern 

Saskatchewan were not solved. Alcoholism, the social problems that are there and are recognized, were not solved. 

In fact, they were made much, much worse. 

 

People do not want to be treated like peons or colonialists in their own land. They want the full rights and freedoms 

of citizenship of Saskatchewan. And freedom means responsibility. You don’t have freedom if you’re tied down by 

a welfare government that wants you kept . . . And I believe they want to keep those people in that position. 

 

That’s exactly what they want. Because you can’t manipulate people who have some freedom — some economic 

freedom and some independence. It’s much easier to say to those people you must vote this way or you won’t get 

this hand-out. It’s very difficult to intimidate someone who is making a good living on his own, or running his own 

business and has some degree of independence and integrity. 

 

That’s the real reason . . . That’s the hidden agenda of the NDP — keep the people of northern Saskatchewan 

subjugated to a welfare mentality forever, and we have an unlimited supply of support in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

We’re not going to support that contention. We’re going to free the people of northern Saskatchewan so that they 

can reach their potential, which is, in my view, absolutely unlimited. In fact, the future of Saskatchewan is in the 

North. That’s where our real economic development is going to take place. 

 

And I’m proud to support the amendment to this motion and vote against the motion. And I beg leave to adjourn 

debate. It being near 5 o’clock, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


