



















































Hansard: May 29, 1985


 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 29, 1985 

 

2693 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to introduce to you, and through you, nine individuals that 

we have here as guests today. Eight are in the Speaker’s gallery, and one is on the floor of the legislature. These 

individuals are Saskatchewan people who have received Canada’s national honours. I want to say that it gives me a great 

deal of pleasure to introduce them here today. I’m going to ask each MLA to introduce the particular resident from his or 

her part of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We have five representatives of the Order of Canada. We have four recipients of the national bravery decoration, and one 

recipient of the Order of Military Merit. Mr. Speaker, I ask through you that all members of the Legislative Assembly 

give a warm welcome to these nine individuals. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. TUSA: — Mr. Speaker, it is my distinct pleasure this afternoon to introduce to you, and through you to the 

Assembly, Mr. Hilliard McNab. Mr. NcNab, the former chief of the Gordon Indian Reserve from Punnichy, was awarded 

the Order of Canada in April 1984. 

 

Since his late teens, Mr. McNab has been involved in working for the advancement of his reserve. He was a founder of 

the FSI (Federation of Saskatchewan Indians), organized the Association of Saskatchewan Indian resorts, introduced a 

prefabricated housing project on the reserve, and arranged and signed a tuition agreement to educate children off the 

reserve. 
 

He has been a member of the Treaty Indian Liaison Unit, St. Joseph’s Hospital board, and Carlton Trail Community 

College. He is presently serving as an advisor to the province in the federal Department of Regional and Economic 

Expansion. I present to the Assembly, Mr. Hilliard McNab. 
 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, Emmie 

Oddie of Regina, a member of the Order of Canada, and Laurence Stevenson, of Fort Qu’Appelle, a member of the Order 

of Canada. 
 

Mrs. Oddie lives on a farm near Regina. She was invested with the Order of Canada in April of this year. That award 

recognized her work in home economics associations, the Women’s Institute, the Saskatchewan Advisory Council on the 

Status of Women, and with a variety of agricultural organizations. 
 

Mrs. Oddie is also a member of the Saskatchewan Agricultural Hall of Fame, and she has enriched the lives of many of 

Saskatchewan’s farm women, and still keeps in touch with them through her regular column in the Western Producer. 
 

Mr. Speaker, may I present Mrs. Emmie Oddie. 
 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, Laurence Stevenson of the Pasqua Reserve at Fort Qu’Appelle also received his 

award last month. A former chief of the Pasqua Reserve, Mr. Stevenson has  



 

May 29, 1985 

2694 

 

 

worked diligently to help his people through such organizations as the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians, the Lebret 

School Board, the Fort Qu’Appelle Hospital, Kinookimaw Resort, and the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. And I 

believe Mr. Stevenson was the first native to serve on the board of directors of a Crown corporation in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Stevenson also founded the first credit union on an Indian reserve in Saskatchewan. 

 

I would ask all members to join with me in acknowledging the presence of Lorne Stevenson: Order of Canada. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MRS. BACON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to introduce to you, and through you, and to the members 

of this Assembly, Mr. Ernest Chan, who is seated to my right on the floor of the Legislature. 

 

Mr. Chan received the Order of Canada in October of 1984. Ernie, as he’s fondly known, was born in Canton, China, and 

came to Canada in 1928, where he stayed in Moose Jaw for five years, learning English and saving funds to attend 

university. He did attend university, and in 1937 graduated with a bachelor’s degree in Mechanical Engineering. 

 

Jobs were scarce at that time, Mr. Speaker, but Mr. Chan was able, through the blessings of Dean McKenzie at the 

College of Engineering, to take on a teaching position in the city of Saskatoon. He taught for two years at the university 

and then went on to the Technical Institute Collegiate in Saskatoon, and Ernie was then granted permission to teach in the 

public school system and was the first Chinese immigrant to do so. 

 

At the Tech, as it was known, Mr. Chan became known as a tough and demanding, but fair and caring teacher who 

received the respect of his students. 

 

He went on to teach at Walter Murray Collegiate and was awarded the teacher of the year by both the Saskatchewan 

Industrial Education Association and the American Industrial Arts Association. 

 

In 1974, the students’ representative council at Walter Murray Collegiate established the Ernie Chan trophy to be 

awarded annually to the student for his or her extraordinary service to the student body. 

 

After retiring from teaching he became famous in Saskatoon for his classes in Chinese cooking. Also of great note is the 

fact that Mr. Chan was a long-time and active member of the Rotary Club and was awarded the highest merit for a 

Rotarian by the chapter. 

 

His daughter, at the time, Betty, was also involved with highland dancing. Mr. Chan says that this is indeed an example 

of multiculturalism when you have a Chinese girl that has national highland dancing awards. 

 

Very briefly, his activities in Saskatoon have been on the Centennial Committee for the city of Saskatoon, the 

Saskatchewan Homecoming Committee, the Canadian Winter Games, the national committee Theatre Canada, provincial 

committee for Theatre Saskatchewan, the Western Canada Summer Games, founding committee of the Saskatoon 

FolkFest representing the Chinese, and vice-chairman of Saskatoon Canada Today. He is also a member of the Folk Arts 

Council. 

 

Other awards he has received is from Her Majesty the Queen, the Jubilee Medal; the City of Saskatoon Medal for service 

to the city during its centennial; and a street in Saskatoon has been named, known as Chan Crescent. 

 



 

May 29, 1985 

2695 

 

 

Ernie was married to his wife, Rose, who’s seated with him, in 1943, and they have two children. 

 

It’s an honour to introduce Mr. Chan to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. I am not his MLA, but I am his neighbour across the 

street. He exemplifies all the qualities that we in Saskatchewan take with such pride, and he is a cherished friend. His 

biggest fan in the city of Saskatoon is Mayor Cliff Wright. And I think it’s relevant to note that when the Jilin delegation 

was here from Jilin province I had my own personal interpreter at the table for the civic banquet. 

 

So again, with pleasure, I introduce to you a recipient of the Order of Canada, Mr. Ernie Chan. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. YEW: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege to introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, RCMP 

Special Constable Robert Melvin McAuley: Medal of Bravery. 

 

In the afternoon of January 6, 1983, Constable Robert McAuley of the Cumberland House detachment of the Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police saved a mother and her child from drowning in the Bigstone River near Cumberland House, 

Saskatchewan. Responding to an emergency call, Constable McAuley hurried down to the shore and saw a woman 

frantically clinging to broken ice, struggling against the strong current. Without thought of danger to himself, he crawled 

approximately 10 metres over the thin ice to reach the drowning woman. 

 

As he began to pull her from the icy water, her young son’s head appeared above the surface. Constable McAuley lifted 

the unconscious child onto the ice and helped the woman to safety. He applied cardio-pulmonary resuscitation, and was 

successful in reviving the child. For his courage and determination he was awarded the Medal of Bravery in June of 1984. 

 

Mr. Robert N. McAuley: awarded the Medal of Bravery. I would ask Constable McAuley to stand and be recognized. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HAMPTON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to introduce to you and to the members of the 

Assembly, Mrs. Olga Gulka, Medal of Bravery recipient from the town of Preeceville. 

 

Back on the 18th day of May of 1982, Olga Gulka saved the lives of three elderly residents as fire swept through the east 

wing of the Preeceville Lions housing corporation nursing home. 

 

When told that a fire had broken out, Mrs. Gulka, a nurse’s aide, hurried to the end of the hallway and found a man on the 

floor with his clothes ablaze. Using a blanket, she quickly smothered the flames and dragged him a safe distance away. 

Mrs. Gulka might have then fled the burning building at that moment, but well aware that two helpless residents would 

certainly perish if left in the rooms just across from where the fire had originated, she ran back. Totally unconcerned for 

herself, she reached the two men through dense smoke and coaxed them outside. By then others had arrived, and they 

assisted Mrs. Gulka in helping all residents to safety. For her bravery and spirit of sacrifice she was awarded the Medal of 

Bravery in July of 1984. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mrs. Olga Gulka: Medal of Bravery. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. YOUNG: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you, and to the other members of the Assembly, Terence 

Jasper McBurney and Joel Douglas Teal, recipients of the Medal of Bravery. 

 



 

May 29, 1985 

2696 

 

 

Late on the evening of November 3, 1982, at approximately 9:30 p.m., in spite of the danger to themselves, Terence 

McBurney and Joel Teal, both of Saskatoon, went to the rescue of three boys. The boys had been playing on the newly 

formed ice of Lakeview Lake when they fell through, approximately eight metres from shore. 

 

Their cries reached Mr. McBurney, who ran to a nearby house for help, returning with Mr. Teal. With a rope around his 

waist, Mr. McBurney crawled over thin ice until it gave way. He then swam the remaining distance. He seized one boy 

and, while holding him, was pulled by Mr. Teal and another man onto solid ice. Meanwhile, the other boy, still 

floundering in the icy water, had almost disappeared below the surface. 

 

Mr. Teal quickly appraised the situation and, undaunted by a chronic respiratory problem, jumped in. The water was 

immediately over his head at that point. He struggled for a distance of five metres but, exhausted by his efforts, had to be 

helped out of the water. 

 

Realizing that the two boys were in serious danger of drowning, Mr. McBurney re-entered the water and, though numb 

with cold, again made his way to them. Together, they were assisted ashore by others. In July of 1984, Mr. McBurney 

and Mr. Teal were awarded the Medal of Bravery for their heroic actions. 

 

Mr. Terry McBurney and Joel Teal: the Medal of Bravery award. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PARKER: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege for me to introduce to you and through you to the members 

of the Assembly, Master Warrant Officer M.J. Sherwood of Moose Jaw, a recent member of the Order of Military Merit. 

 

Master Warrant Officer Sherwood, a native of Fredericton, N.B., first enrolled in the Royal Canadian Air Force in April 

of 1966. As an administrative clerk he was first assigned to Canadian Forces Base, North Bay, Ontario. Since his initial 

assignment he’s also been assigned to various administrative positions including Chatham, New Brunswick; Syracuse, 

New York; and at National Defence Headquarters in Ottawa where he received the Canadian Forces Decoration. 

 

Merv has also served with the Canadian contingent of the United Nations Force in Cyprus. Back in July of 1981 he was 

assigned to his present position in the administrative branch at Canadian Forces Base in Moose Jaw, but as of July this 

year he will assume duties of Master Warrant Officer in charge of the base orderly room at CFB, Shearwater, N.S. 

 

Master Warrant Officer Sherwood was appointed to the Order of Military Merit in June of 1984. And I would just once 

again ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in welcoming him here to Regina, and also in recognizing this 

fine achievement. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Today I have the pleasure of introducing to you, and to the members in this House, perhaps the 

future medalists of Saskatchewan and Canada 20 years down the road. We are honoured today to have 22 grade 4 

students from Dickson Elementary School in Swift Current, Saskatchewan, and they are accompanied by their teacher, 

Joanne Dyck; chaperon, Bonny Neufeld; and of course, the bus driver, without whom they would have never gotten here, 

Mr. Del Allison. I would like you to welcome them. I hope you enjoy at least part of question period, and I look forward 

to meeting you after. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

May 29, 1985 

2697 

 

 

HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, and through you to the members of 

the Legislative Assembly, 24 grade 5 students seated in the west gallery, from the Queen Elizabeth Elementary School in 

Weyburn, Saskatchewan. They are accompanied today by their teacher, Barry Putz, and as well, chaperons Sharon Hill 

and Carol Borys. 

 

I had a chance earlier today to have pictures taken with them and answer some questions from them. In fact, some made 

the observations that he questions that they put forward were even better than some the opposition put to us. 

 

I would ask all members of the legislature to join with me in welcoming them here today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great deal of pleasure today to introduce to you, and 

through you to the Assembly, a group of 18 students sitting in the Speaker’s gallery, from the community of 

Fond-du-Lac. They are accompanied by their teachers, Jeff and Anne Orr, Stan Karst, and Judy Mercredi, their guidance 

counsellor. 

 

The students from Fond-du-Lac, some of them, it’s their first trip out South, Mr. Speaker. And I want to indicate that the 

community of Fond-du-Lac is situated on the north shore of Lake Athabasca, just 60 miles south of the border — of the 

Northwest Territories border — and 656 air miles from Fond-du-Lac to Regina. 

 

My hon. friend from Meadow Lake talks about 400 miles. If he were talking about road miles, with the Fond-du-Lac 

group we would be talking in the neighbourhood of 900 miles. 

 

I want to ask all members to welcome the group from Fond-du-Lac — give them a warm welcome. And we all wish you 

well on your trip, and a safe journey home. And I will be meeting you in a few minutes. Thank you very much. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MARTENS: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for me to introduce also, together with the member from 

Swift Current, the school from Dickson. It’s a special school in my family because my family have all gone there. And 

the teacher, Miss Dyck, has taught two or my children, and she’s done a good job with them. And I’d like the Assembly 

to join with me in welcoming them here. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GERICH: — Mr. Speaker, through you and to you I would like to introduce to you 39 students from the town of 

Radisson. They’re seated in the east gallery. They’re accompanied by their teachers, Elaine Tooke, Twila Stott, Jackie 

Meister, and Nancy Tooke. 

 

I hope that their visit here this afternoon is interesting and educational, and I ask the members to please make them 

welcome. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. MR. McLAREN: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a pleasure for me to introduce to you and through you 

to the members of the legislature, 50 students from the Yorkton Regional High School who are taking law, and I believe 

their numbers are such that there are some in both the east and the west galleries. And they’re accompanied today by their 

teacher, Mr. Ed Magas. 

 

And I would like to make the Assembly aware that this particular high school is sponsoring this  



 

May 29, 1985 

2698 

 

 

year the first ever Canadian National Conference of Students from all across Canada, and it will be held in Yorkton in 

mid-September. And I’m just pleased that the Yorkton community and our Progressive Conservative government is 

showing a great deal of support for this particular venture. 

 

And I want to wish them a very informative stay in Regina, as well as the legislature here this afternoon, and I would ask 

that you all join with me in welcoming them here today. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to introduce two special people from my constituency, from the 

town of Ferland: Irene Chabot, the immediate past president of the ACFC, as well as the first lady of the town of Ferland, 

Mrs. Lucien Chabot. If they will rise and be recognized, I’m sure all members will welcome them here to the Assembly 

here today. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Government Advertising 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — I just rise, Mr. Speaker. I took notice of a question with respect to the Estimates. I believe it 

was asked of the costs in the printing and publishing and advertising the budget. And I have an estimate. I don’t have the 

final invoices but I’ll give you the estimate. 

 

The total cost is $321,000. The estimate books themselves are 39,000. The supplementary estimates were 2,800. The 

budget address — and I believe I gave that figure before of 46,000; the Partnership for Progress publication, 60,000; the 

Budget Highlights, 7,900; radio advertising, $45,000; and print, 119 — for a total of 321,527. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Supplementary to the Premier. Can you outline how well you’re doing, how much success 

you’re having in selling the massive tax increases that the Minister of Finance brought in in his last budget? The 

announcement of $321,000 to sell massive tax increases, adding that to the bill of $1.2 billion deficit, how are you 

making out? Are you having any luck selling the tax increases, or have you done enough polling to find out yet? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member asked me how we’re making out, if we’ve done any polling, and 

if people like it. There was a poll on CKCK radio, I believe, two days ago, where the Progressive Conservatives did very 

well. I believe they did 39 for the PCs and 30 for the NDP and two for somebody else. That poll, if it represents any 

indication, says that yes, they’re very happy indeed with the educational budget, very happy with the hospital expansions. 

They’re very happy with the $600 million associated with jobs. They’re very happy with the $200 million in agriculture. 

And the nine and five-eighths for small business is going over terrific in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Supplement to the Premier. I had asked him a question about how the massive tax increases, 

whether you’re having any luck selling them. But believing your CKCK poll or whatever you’ve orchestrated, if you’re 

that confident in it, will you now call a by-election for Regina North East, or a general election? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, the general approach that we have taken to tax reform is being accepted not only 

across western Canada, it is now being accepted and reviewed across  

 



 

May 29, 1985 

2699 

 

 

North America. I believe the President of the United States introduced a tax reform measure yesterday or last night. 

Western premiers from all political persuasions enjoy tax reform. 

 

We led the way and we’re very proud of it. And I believe most of Canada . . . In fact really one of the big pushers of tax 

reform is the NDP premier in Manitoba. In Manitoba, Howard Pawley says yes, tax reform is a good thing; promotes tax 

reform like Saskatchewan has. And yes, it’s well accepted. 

 

Changes to Provincial Budget 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Premier and this deals with the old budget, the one 

that was introduced on April 10th, which is fast being repudiated, notwithstanding the fact that 321,000 was spent in 

publicizing it. 

 

You have now reinstated the senior citizens’ property tax rebate which was dropped on April 10th. Since your colleagues 

have come to their senses and overruled that unfortunate part of the April 10th budget, can we expect some further 

beneficial changes on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan? Can we now expect that the flat tax will be revealed? Can 

we now expect that the tax on used vehicles will be cancelled? Can we expect that other people — farmers, 

small-business men, renters — will get their rebate as senior citizens are now going to get theirs? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I am very glad my hon. colleague raises that point. The senior citizens talked to 

me and they talked to members of our cabinet and they said, we would like to receive the rebate this year as opposed to 

next year. And we listened, Mr. Speaker. We always listen to the seniors. We listened to the farmers; we listened to all 

kinds of people; we listened to students; and we said yes, we will respond. And we responded by providing them the 

money this year and they can begin the process of income tax indexing next year. They are very happy with that. Yes, Mr. 

Speaker, we responded. I suspect the reason that they’re over there and we’re here is that we always listen, and quite 

frankly, they never did. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Premier. You have said that you consulted with the public, through 

computers and otherwise, prior to the budget, but that you didn’t hear the seniors prior to April 10th, and now you hear 

them. And you have changed your budget as a result of that. Will you now listen to what farmers are saying and reinstate 

the home quarter property tax rebate? Because they, I’m sure, can send the message to you. Will you do that? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I can say that we listened to seniors because they said yes, the indexing is fair, we 

want it phased in rather than brought in at once. And we said, that’s fair enough. They said it’s not much point in rebating 

the rich; they agree. But given them time to adjust to this so they can fill out their income tax form, and we said, fair 

enough; let’s do that. And it seemed like a reasonable thing to do. They’re happy that we’re doing it. They said, look it, 

for years and years the NDP rebated the rich, and they don’t like that. They rebated large companies and they didn’t like 

that. They said we should help seniors. Those that are low income get more and those that are very wealthy don’t need a 

rebate. So they said, it’s a good idea, just help us move into it. We listened, we’ve responded, and they are very happy 

with it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. We’re glad to hear that the Premier is now listening. And he 

says he’s hearing senior citizens. Would you, Mr. Premier, listen to the poorest group, or among the poorest groups of 

senior citizens, those people who are renters, and will you now reinstate the renter’s rebate, at least for senior citizens? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, we have examined — we examined all the impacts on seniors and we have 

listened to their concerns. And where we can modify them just to walk them into this new process, they said, that’s fair 

enough. We will continue to listen to them and  

 



 

May 29, 1985 

2700 

 

 

watch them and respond to them. And to date, Mr. Speaker, in my view, they are very happy. 

 

Salary Increase of Minister’s Staff 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to also address a question to the Premier, and once again it deals 

with the issue of fairness, Mr. Premier. 

 

Yesterday, the minister in charge of crop insurance revealed that two of his political assistants have received salary 

increases of 16 per cent effective January 1st of this year. Can the Premier explain how salary increases of the magnitude 

of 16 and 16.2 per cent be justified for cabinet minister’s staff, political hacks, while schoolteachers, nurses and other 

public sector workers are told that they will have no salary increase, that their salary will be frozen? How can you justify 

and maintain that that is fair? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, Mr. Speaker, my colleague in the legislature knows that if you talk to teachers, or you 

talk as I did this morning to the nurses’ union that are meeting here in Regina, from across Canada, they said when you 

are reclassified you should be able to get the money that goes with the new responsibility. A new classification with new 

responsibilities — that’s exactly what it means. And if you’re in the private sector, or the public sector, if you have more 

responsibilities you should get paid more. And if you go from being a teacher to a principal you can get a 16 per cent 

raise. And people like that. They respect that. 

 

The same applies if you’re a nurse and you go to more responsibilities, you get more money. Maybe the NDP are saying 

well maybe you shouldn’t even pay people for reclassification. If you’re suggesting that, then that would be something 

that the public would be really interested in. Maybe, as the former premier of Manitoba said, you squish them all 

together. Maybe that’s what you’re advocating now. We say if you have more responsibility and you’ve earned it, 

therefore you should get more pay because you have the responsibility. That’s only fair. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Supplemental, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, are you aware that the salary increase given by the minister 

responsible for co-op insurance to his chief political hack, one Gerry Williams, was a $7,200 increase — 16 per cent — 

$600 per month increase? Almost equivalent to the general manager in crop insurance. I ask you: are you aware that the 

salary increase alone is almost equal to a year’s salary of someone on minimum wage? Can the Premier explain the 

fairness of a government policy which provides huge salary increase to 50,000-a-year political hacks, but nothing else for 

nurses, teachers, and other public servants? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well Mr. Speaker, we know in the decade of 1971 to 1981 the NDP were in power — NDP 

were in power. If the NDP want to examine . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order please. Order please. I’m going to ask for order. When the member asks a question he should 

at least give time for an answer. 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to fairness in the public service, if the member wants to review the 

record of increases to government members, employees, I can go back and I can get any kind of record from 1971 to 

1981, which includes Koskie’s; and we’ll find out if there’s any record increases beyond 16 per cent, or 15 per cent, or 24 

per cent, or 25 per cent. If the NDP, or the opposition, is saying they never gave increases for reclassification, then I 

would be happy to find that out — and I’m quite prepared to go look at it — if you don’t think that you can reclassify and 

give somebody a raise. That goes with it. If it’s new responsibilities, you get new money. I’m sure the former 

administration did that, and I’m quite prepared to review it. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Premier, you didn’t answer the question because you know it’s unfair. I ask you: how can you 

justify 16 per cent salary hike to political staff, persons who make more than $52,000 a year, while telling a 

$17,000-a-year typist that she has to learn to practise restraint? Where is the fairness, Mr. Premier, in this double standard 

of filling the pockets of your political hacks? 



 

May 29, 1985 

2701 

 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I can find no end of people in the Government of Saskatchewan that have moved 

from typist 1 to some other responsibility and they get a raise — they get a raise. New classification, or reclassification to 

new responsibilities, means you get more money. And that’s fair, and the hon. member know it. And it applies to people 

in scope or out of scope or any place else. If you have new responsibilities you should get paid for new responsibilities. If 

a teacher has one salary and becomes a principal, they get more money. And you’re saying, well, that shouldn’t apply to 

somebody in the minister’s office. It shouldn’t apply to anybody else. It applies equally in scope, out of scope, in the 

government, outside the government; and the hon. member from Quill Lakes knows that. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Supplement to the Premier. Mr. Premier, in your previous answer, you’re defending a chief 

political staff in the minister of crop insurance’s office, Mr. Gerald Williams, who got a 16.2 per cent increase. He is still 

the chief political operator in that office. 

 

I would like you to tell me how his job has changed. You’re defending his position and the increase. Can you tell me how 

it’s changed? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, the minister explained the change in administration and the new responsibilities 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I don’t know the 30,000 employees. I have 30,000 employees. You want me to 

explain each of . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Order. 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — If the members opposite had paid attention yesterday and listened to the minister, they would 

know. Now they want me to recite and talk about each and every employee in the Government of Saskatchewan — which 

is 30,000 members — why this individual, or that individual, has new responsibilities. 

 

All right. Obviously they know that I can’t do that. It’s impossible. It’s impossible . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 

defend the principle that if you have new responsibilities, then you should get new salary. That applies in teachers, that 

applies to nurses, that applies to people all across the board. And that is fair, and you know it. That’s what bothers you 

about it. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the Premier. You will know and the people of the province 

will know, that the minister has raised his employee’s salary, the salary of Gerald Williams, by 16 per cent by 

reclassification, simply to avoid the guide-lines set out to other civil servants. That is what is happening here, and I ask 

you if you concur with doing that. 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, you can have reclassification, and it’s the only way you can have new 

responsibilities. How else do you do it? It’s impossible. You reclassify the individual and say, these are your new 

responsibilities. And with those new responsibilities, and more work, and more responsibility, you get paid more. I don’t 

see that there’s any way that you could do it. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Further supplementary. Mr. Premier, you point out that he has been reclassified, and I note 

in checking the notes that he has been reclassified from a ministerial assistant to a special assistant. And these are the 

classifications which your cabinet uses to designate the duties of the members of the cabinet staff. 

 

Would you outline briefly for us the difference in work and difference of responsibilities of a ministerial assistant and a 

special assistant? 

 



 

May 29, 1985 

2702 

 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I will get the list of the change in responsibilities, and I’ll provide it to the hon. 

members. “Special” is obviously different than normal, so that you can have additional responsibilities, and you can 

allow for more work. It means more responsibility, you deal with more people, therefore you get the corresponding 

increase in salary. It’s the same across the entire public service. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Premier, if you look within the political staff of the minister in charge of crop insurance, he has 

four members. Now in respect to increases, three out of four received massive increases — 16.2, 16, and 8 per cent. And 

one is on merit increase, one in reclassification, and a third one is reclassification. Now do you have any reason to believe 

that if, within the political staff, that you can have three out of four receiving increases, that that same ratio shouldn’t 

apply throughout the public service in a reasonable chance of same application? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — My colleague knows that he could ask all these questions to the minister yesterday when he 

went through it — the minister responsible for his department. And he did, and he explained it and the new classification. 

 

I’m telling you on the basis of principle that if you reclassify an individual because they have more responsibility, they 

can get more money. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Supplemental. What you have said here is that you have . . . Is it not true, Mr. Premier, what you have 

really established is a way of getting around giving a general increase to the whole of the public service on a systematic 

range increase, and what you have done is got a political tool of reclassification for the purposes of increasing your 

political hacks? And that’s all it is. 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, that’s clearly not true, and the hon. member knows it’s not true. 

 

Potential Plague of Grasshoppers 

 

MR. SWENSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, over the last 

week I have received over a dozen calls from my riding concerning the grasshopper plague that is now hatching out there. 

The media and the agriculture department have been reporting on the potential for this plague that is now upon us. 

 

I’m wondering if the minister is aware of the specific areas where this is happening and if he and his department are 

prepared to do anything about it. 

 

HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, have had a number of calls from farmers indicating the 

severity, and in some cases what’s perceived as potential severeness of the grasshopper problem. In fact, some reports 

would suggest that this could be the worst year since 1931. 

 

Similarly, since our department published the survey results last fall, we have . . . the department have been working on 

the problem over winter, looking at putting together contingency plans. Our focus has been largely in two areas: number 

one, co-ordinating the efforts of farmers and the rural municipalities out there and attempting to be sure that there are 

adequate supplies of chemicals to combat the insect pest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To that end, there’s been a number of meetings with departmental staff at ratepayer meetings, for example, grasshopper 

meetings around the country, publications with the latest on chemicals. And further to this strategy, Mr. Speaker, I have 

invited for a meeting — in fact tomorrow in Saskatchewan — officials from the federal government, Alberta, Manitoba, 

North Dakota, Montana, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, and the chemical  

 



 

May 29, 1985 

2703 

 

 

companies, to put together some of our best technical minds to see if, in fact, there is some information that others may 

have that might be of use to us, and look at possible other contingency plans. 

 

So yes, we’re well aware of the problem out there. Largely our efforts have been diverted towards co-ordinating and 

providing information. 

 

MR. SWENSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Will the minister be able to assure the farmers of Saskatchewan that 

there will be an adequate supply of grasshopper spray available to them this spring? 

 

HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — We have ourselves had some supplies of dimethoate in stock. All those are out; all those 

supplies are out in the country. As well, over the winter we have been talking to chemical companies, making sure that 

they’re aware of the problem. I, myself, personally have talked to some of them. 

 

We are now fortunate enough to have in Regina a formulating plant that can make one of the chemicals. I have talked to 

them personally; they’re well aware of it. They’ve got a system in place, if you like, that they’ve got it down to the hours 

in so far as then they get the products, when the chemical can be out on the street. 

 

So in so far as one can possibly predict and put supplies in place, I think we’ve every reason to think that the industry, in 

conjunction with ourselves, are on top of it. There has been some new products come out. Hopper Stopper, for example, 

is one of them. 

 

But having said all that, Mr. Speaker, the bottom line for the farmers out there is the weather still plays a very large role 

in dealing with the grasshopper pest, and I suppose we’ll still look to the skies for much of our relief to that problem. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

(14:45) 

 

MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, his last comment prompted me to do a supplementary question, because that’s exactly . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. 

 

MR. ENGEL: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The last comment that the farmers are looking to the sky prompted a 

supplementary question, Mr. Minister, because you didn’t answer the problem that farmers are facing regarding 

grasshoppers. 

 

All you’ve got to do about grasshoppers is talk. When are you going to get your Department of Agriculture to deliver? 

Farmers want to know: number one, are you going to be providing spray, or yourselves spraying your own property, the 

property that is adjacent to farmers? Who is supposed to control the grasshoppers there? Are you going to insist that the 

railways are going to spray their right of way? Are you going to provide spray at a reduced cost to the R.M.s to spray the 

road allowances? 

 

Mr. Minister, the farmers are concerned about the problem with grasshoppers. You said it’s the most severe sine 1931, is 

when there’s been more grasshoppers. Mr. Speaker, as a point of reference, yesterday . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The member rose on a supplementary and he’s making a speech. I would ask the member, if you 

have a supplementary to get directly to it. Otherwise I’ll take the next question. 

 



 

May 29, 1985 

2704 

 

 

MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, my supplementary question is: in light of the fact that there’s as many as 100 

grasshoppers per square foot hatching in some areas of Saskatchewan, are you going to provide spray where you’re 

subsidizing the cost, like in the past when the grasshoppers weren’t nearly as severe? In the past, when grasshoppers were 

not nearly . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Order, please. 

 

HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. If the question was asked in a serious vein, then I think the member should give the 

opportunity for an answer. Otherwise we’ll move to the next question . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order. 

 

HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member for his new-found interest, and in fact the 

opposition’s new-found interest in some agricultural problems. 

 

In so far as what we have done . . . And I think the point he has raised is a good one relative to what are the railways 

going to do and what happens on Crown lands. As I said in my response to the hon. member from Thunder Creek, our 

department has been busy working with rural municipalities and other jurisdictions over the entire winter because you 

didn’t have to be a genius to know that a threat existed out there, and because as well there seems to always be a lot of 

confusion when you get to dealing with it at the farm level, like who’s responsible for this right of way, and who’s 

responsible for that. 

 

And I tell him what we have got in place. Not only do we have this information, but all the ag reps and all the R.M. 

secretaries have this information in their hands and have had it some good many days now. We have worked out a 

position statement, and in fact have contact persons for every one of these jurisdictions. 

 

CP Rail will pay for work done or arranged by an R.M., and a list of contact persons. CN Rail will co-operate in 

municipalities which have control programs for the entire municipality. Parks and Renewable Resources, irrigation canals 

are covered. PFRA pastures, we have been in touch with. Lands branch community pastures will co-operate with 

municipalities to control grasshoppers on provincial community pastures, and we will incur the costs of authorized 

control. Municipal highways are responsible to the R.M. unless otherwise stated in their by-laws. And I want as well to 

say that we enjoy the co-operation of the Minister of Highways who will provide financial assistance to cover 100 per 

cent of the costs incurred to control grasshoppers on highway right of ways, projects approved by the ag rep before. 

 

So I think the evidence is clear that yes, we have been working on this program over the winter. We are as organized I 

think as one can be with the other jurisdictions that interface in dealing with this problem as one can possibly be, and that 

doesn’t mean to say that problem is a small one. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Tea in Honour of National Award Recipients 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, given the distinguished guests who were introduced here in the House a little 

earlier during the introduction of guests, and I believe there’s a tea going on in room 218 of the Legislative Assembly this 

afternoon, for a period of time, for members from all sides of the House to have an opportunity to more informally 

congratulate these people, I would ask for leave of the Assembly to move the following motion: 

 



 

May 29, 1985 

2705 

 

 

That this Assembly do now recess to greet our distinguished guests, the recipients of national honours, and reconvene 

to the call of the Chair. 

 

I so move, seconded by my seatmate, the hon. member for Kindersley. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

(14:50) 

 

(15:30) 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 86 — An Act respecting Mental Health Services 

 

HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to outline the background and the main features of this major piece 

of legislation for mental health services. 

 

These revisions are being put forward at this time for three main reasons: first, Saskatchewan’s existing Mental Health 

Act has been under review for a number of years. Proposals for change have been put forward by many groups and 

organizations, including the Mental Health Association, the psychiatric association, and other professional groups, the 

Law Reform Commission, consumer interest groups, hospitals, and other service delivery agencies. 

 

Second, the constitutional law branch of the Department of Justice identified the Mental Health Act as one of the statues 

in need of change to bring it into line with the requirements of the new Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

And third, Mr. Speaker, the current Act no longer reflects reality. Some of the provisions are very archaic, unworkable, or 

offensive, in light of current thinking. As well, some of the progressive features of our mental health system do not have a 

clear and sound legal basis in the existing Act. 

 

For all these reasons, Mr. Speaker, the government is putting forward at this time a Bill which represents a thorough 

overhaul of the existing Mental Health Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would now like to highlight some of the significant features of the new Bill. The criteria under which 

involuntary admission, detention, and treatment may occur will be more explicit, understandable, and acceptable to all 

parties concerned. They will provide assurance to patients, direction to admitting physicians, and a useful standard for 

judgement by review panels and by the courts. 

 

Involuntary admissions under medical certificates will also be subject to closer scrutiny by medical colleagues. 

Involuntary treatment will be subject to more sound opinions and peer audits. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, new safeguards will be implemented to protect the rights of people who are involuntarily 

admitted. Involuntary patients will be given more information about their detention. Official representatives will visit, 

advise, and assist involuntary patients in understanding and in exercising their rights and obligations. 

 



 

May 29, 1985 

2706 

 

 

Review panels will conduct automatic reviews of long-stay patients at 21 days and at six-month intervals, and involuntary 

patients will have broader rights of appeal to review panels. 

 

The entire Act, Mr. Speaker, will be more coherent, understandable, and easier to use. Although it is still complex, it is a 

more rational document than the old Act which is essentially a patchwork of provisions provided out of a great variety of 

different circumstances over the last half century. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do not claim that all features of this Bill will be seen as desirable by all groups. The fact is that the field 

of mental health is one in which different groups and organizations hold widely varying and sometimes irreconcilable 

points of view. However, Mr. Speaker, this Bill has been developed after lengthy and extensive consultation with patient 

groups, with service providers, the Mental Health Association, and many others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am confident that the Bill strikes an effective balance among three concerns: number one, the rights of the 

individual; secondly, the protection of society; and the provision of effective mental health services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed Act is not just a way of providing for the committal of people to mental health facilities. It is a 

legal basis for our entire network of mental health services, and that focus is reflected in the new title, Mr. Speaker, 

which will be The Mental Health Services Act. This Act will provide a new trust and direction for mental health service 

sin our province by providing a mandate that reflects existing services and flexibility for future developments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that this is a very progressive, forward-looking Bill that reflects our government’s 

commitment to mental health services in Saskatchewan. I believe, Mr. Speaker, it may well be seen as a model of its type, 

and I’m therefore pleased to move, Mr. Speaker, that The Mental Health Services Act be given second reading. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I won’t be giving a second reading speech today. The Bill that is before us, I 

believe, we received yesterday or the day before, and is some 22 pages long, with 47 sections. And I want to take time to 

peruse it and look at it, and I would therefore beg leave to adjourn the debate at this time. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 64 — An Act respecting the Exploration for and the Development, Conservation and Management of 

Mineral Resources 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister introduce his officials? 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to introduce Bob Reid on my left, the deputy minister of Energy 

and Mines. Behind Mr. Reid is Greg Blue from the Department of Justice, who is our legal adviser with these Bills. And 

behind me is Mr. Peter Leir from the department, who is our adviser in developing this legislation. 

 

Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, it would be my observation that this clause permits you 

to get information and gives you some wider powers than you currently have. Do you agree that the powers here are 

somewhat wider than in the existing legislation?  

 



 

May 29, 1985 

2707 

 

 

That’s question number one. 

 

And question number two with respect to this is: do you agree that the Crown will be liable for the release of 

information? And I’m now trying to couple together section 2(2) and 5 and 4. I am trying to say that what it does is make 

you liable for the release of information with the result that there may be less information made available to the public. 

 

And I ask you to address those two questions: one, do you think your powers of getting information are greater? And 

secondly, will this combination of sections put an additional onus on the Crown which will mean that you will probably 

release less information rather than more, to the industry? 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that the rights that are delineated in this section are in fact 

no broader than the rights that exist in the previous legislation. I believe it was section 8 that these are meant to parallel. 

The difference is the specificity. They have been more clearly defined but are, in our opinion, not any broader than 

existed before. 

 

(15:45) 

 

In terms of the second part of the question: is the Crown liable for release of information and will it affect what is 

released? Again I’m advised that there is no substantial differences between what exists now and what is included in this 

section, or these two sections. 

 

Clause 4 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 5 and 6 agreed to. 

 

Clause 7 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — With respect to number seven, do any guide-lines exist now other than the statutory 

provisions respecting what activities employees of the Department of Mineral Resources might engage in which might be 

thought of as possible conflicts of interest? Are there now guide-lines, or are these set out in number seven the only 

guide-lines? 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, I am advised again that the Public Service Commission has guide-lines 

that would apply to members of our department. These are additional. 

 

Clause 7 agreed to. 

 

Clause 8 agreed to. 

 

Clause 9 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I don’t want to make a point of it, but I think that the 

power set out in nine for a regulation are broader than the previous powers, more general, and authorizing the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council to change at least the application of the Act, if not its basic meaning, by enlarging or restricting the 

meanings of expressions. That’s one point I make. 

 

The second point I make deals with 9(2)(f). And this is the point I’ve made in second reading with respect to conservation 

boards. And conservation boards are dealing frequently with very, very valuable rights. The decisions of conservation 

boards can affect the rights of citizens to a very, very substantial extent. 

 

And I wonder whether, in the opinion of the minister, it is wise to have everything with respect  



 

May 29, 1985 

2708 

 

 

to conservation boards covered by regulations, under such a statutory power as establishing one or more conservation 

boards with respect to any minerals, providing for the composition of the boards, the procedures, and investing the board 

with any duties, powers, and authority not inconsistent with the Act. 

 

This is a very, very broad law-making power given in regulation, which is going to make decisions on which, not 

infrequently, millions and millions and millions of dollars will ride. And I wonder whether you feel it would not be 

appropriate to have at least some of the broad outlines of how conservation boards should operate set out in legislation 

rather than in regulations. 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, it’s our . . . We are totally in agreement on the fact of conservation 

boards, that they are very important, that they play key roles. However, what we have indicated is that the boards, when 

established, would be operating in terms of the three objectives that are outlined at the top of the item 9. We feel that this 

in fact indicates what their roles and responsibilities will be, putting then the right to call and so forth. The specifics in 

regulations, I think, is controlled by the objectives which appear in item 1(a), (b), and (c). And consequently, we don’t 

see any significant change over what has been the case in the past. 

 

Clause 9 agreed to. 

 

Clause 10 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister. I look at clause 10 and I want to refer you to section 10 

and to clauses (g) and (h), and those to me are curious. And I wonder whether they should be in that section, or indeed, in 

the Act. I’m not saying that you shouldn’t have the powers. I’m just wondering what they are doing in this Act. 

 

This is a Mineral Resources Act, and it is dealing respecting the exploration for, and the development and conservation 

and management of mineral resources. It’s not the department Act. It’s not the Department of Energy and Mines. And 

then it says: 

 

The minister may establish and operate facilities for the instruction and training in the art of exploring, developing, and 

operating, or conserving, the mineral resources of Saskatchewan. 

 

And since what we’re doing here is, in this Act, as it seems to me, setting out rules for the management of resources, and 

not going to set up schools or facilities, which strikes me as being . . . should be in the department Act of some other Act. 

That strikes me as incongruous, and number (h) almost equally incongruous. Now this is not dealing with Crown 

minerals, but this is a general Act for the regulation of mineral development. 

 

If I may try for a moment to outline as I see the scheme of things, you’ve got a department Act. You’ve got a Department 

of Energy, and then you’ve got minerals owned by the Crown which you have covered under another piece of legislation 

called Crown minerals. And then you’ve got another Act which deals with the general regulation of mineral development 

in the province, and this is it — the general regulation one. The Exploration (for) and (the) Development, Conservation 

and Management of Mineral Resources, doesn’t deal with the ownership of the Crown minerals or doesn’t deal with 

setting up of a government department. 

 

And then we have this rather curious provision: 

 

. . . with the approval of the Lieutenant Governor in Council, enter into agreements to purchase and sell or otherwise 

dispose of or utilize any primary production from the mineral resources of Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Here we’re in the business of . . . In a regulatory Bill we’re in the business of buying and selling  

 



 

May 29, 1985 

2709 

 

 

uranium; buying and selling potash. I can see that that might be in the Crown minerals Act since that Act at least deals 

with minerals owned by the Crown (and I suppose contemplates buying and selling), or in the department Act, which is 

an Act which deals with the organization of government. And if the department is going to be organized to buy and sell 

minerals, fine. 

 

But this is a curious one to find in here. And I’m asking essentially: why are you putting (g) and (h) in this Act and why 

not in the department Act, or in the Crown minerals Act, or perhaps even in The Crown Corporations Act if you’re in the 

business of buying and selling primary production? 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, on point (g), would acknowledge that which Act it appears in might be a 

debatable point. Since it appeared in the old Act in basically this form, we have deemed it appropriate, I guess, to leave it 

in this Act. The only practical application are prospector schools which are run on occasion under the auspices of the 

department. And consequently I think that that is a decision that could be there justified either way. And we’ve chosen to 

go this way. 

 

The second one is basically a carry-over, again from the previous Act. There are occasions I suppose where it might be 

prudent to receive royalties in kind or whatever. The only difference between this clause and the tentative previous one is 

that this would now require the approval of the LG in C and cannot be done at ministerial approval. Other than that, it’s 

basically a carry-over from the previous Act. 

 

Clause 10 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 11 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

(16:00) 

 

Bill No. 65 — An Act respecting Crown Minerals and Crown Mineral Lands 

 

Clauses 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 6 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I haven’t had an opportunity to check the previous legislation in detail, but 

was there a previous provision for stratum leases, strata leases — leases that cover one or more strata? I’m aware of the 

fact that in practice that was true; you know, you could give people a lease for deep-horizon drilling or just for the first 

few strata. But I can’t remember how it was set up in the Act. My short question is: is this a new statutory provision or 

was it in the old Act? 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — The answer, Mr. Chairman, is yes, this is new. As you indicate, it’s happened in 

practice but this is a new clause in the legislation that makes that legal. 

 

Clause 6 agreed to. 

 

Clause 7 agreed to. 

 

Clause 8 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I raise these clauses 8, 9, and 10 here, dealing with cancellations. Do I 

understand that previously the law was that in order to relieve from cancellation you needed an order in council and now 

you won’t need an order in council and you won’t need a minister’s order? 



 

May 29, 1985 

2710 

 

 

Let me try to get at the issue. In my judgement, I’ve no quarrel with the minister relieving rather than going through all 

the paper of an order in council. I think it should be done in some way that it’s a public record, by a minister’s order or 

something so that it shows up in the Gazette, because these are large rights we’re dealing with. They can be exceedingly 

valuable. 

 

No one is trying to burden them with red tape, and the decision has basically got to be the minister’s, and I don’t care 

whether it’s the minister or the Lieutenant Governor. I don’t think that adds much to it, so long as it is done in a way 

which it creates a public record, so that someone can see who is getting the benefit of this ministerial decision. I may 

phrase it another way, the ministerial preference. 

 

I don’t know whether under these sections that will be true or not. Will it be done by minister’s order that requires to be 

gazetted or will it be a private decision of the minister, not revealed in public, but which could be worth millions to 

somebody? 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — There is one minor change in that the previous Act dealt only with relief from 

cancellation, and I believe there was a two-month time period following which it had to go to cabinet . . . to the LG in C. 

That has been removed now, and relief may be granted. 

 

The other aspect of it, cancellation, previously was simply included in the individual lease, and what we envisage here is 

the exact practice as it’s now carried on, only put it in the legislation, that the practice has been to gazette cancellations 

that would continue. 

 

So basically what we have attempted to do is set up legislation that allows us to continue the practice as it’s been carrying 

on, but make it very clear that that will be the case. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m not concerned about the cancellations, because, as I say, I 

think they would need to be published. It’s the relief from cancellations that I’m worried about, and it is the . . . I’m not 

worried about the relief from cancellations because someone missed a payment because he was three days late or 

something like that, and I think the old arrangement was basically 60 days it was regarded as an administrative problem, 

and after that it was regarded as whether or not he’d forfeited his lease. And now prior to that, if it was over whatever the 

limit was, 60 days, you had to declare that you were giving, that you were not going to forfeit — and you had to do it by 

OC. Now I take it you will . . . It could be two years, and you could do it in the dark of night, if I may put it that way; at 

least without any public record, to reinstate or give relief from forfeiture. And I’m not sure; I see what you’re doing; I’m 

not sure that’s wise. I think no one is wanting to quibble about the three-day or five-day late things; that’s not the 

problem. The problem is whether or not you give relief after a very substantial and obvious basis for forfeiture, and that 

obviously can be a very, very valuable right which you confer on someone to relieve from forfeiture. 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, we certainly agree with the importance of what is being discussed here. 

This relief from forfeiture will have to be done by minister’s order. The practice has been that that will be gazetted. I 

agree that this should be a public procedure, and I would indicate that we will continue to commit to gazette any of these 

that take place. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. As I say, I’m not quarrelling with the decisions being made. 

These are the difficult decisions which have to be made in the administration of government, but when we’re dealing with 

sums like that, I think it should be a matter of public record, and I appreciate that comment. I’ll sit down now and we’ll 

get on with a couple. 

 

Clause 8 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 9 and 10 agreed to. 

 



 

May 29, 1985 

2711 

 

 

Clause 11 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I raise here a point (really a legal point) and perhaps it’s 

not a public policy point but I raise it anyway as a legal point. Do you feel sure that on the basis of 11 and 12, what 

you’re doing with 11 and 12 is saying that existing dispositions are protected? That’s what 11 and 12 says. Are you sure 

that with 11 and 12 in place you can change existing dispositions by regulation? Let me put it this way. Many existing 

dispositions can be changed by subsequent regulation. Do you think that after 11 and 12 are enacted, you have protected 

those old dispositions from being changed by subsequent regulation or not? If you’ve turned your mind to it and your 

lawyers tell you it’s okay, I’m not quarrelling. I’m raising what is essentially a legal point here. 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that existing dispositions will still be subject to change by 

regulation. However, the situation will be for all intents and purposes exactly as it is under the previous Act. We feel 

they’re protected but they are not immune from future change. 

 

Clause 11 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 12 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 16 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I had a little point, just a point of curiosity with respect to clause 16 providing for an 

appeal on matters which might affect the royalty pay-out by the holder: 

 

. . . except to the extent that the determination is in respect of the fair market value of a mineral for the purposes of 

calculating any royalty payable with respect to that mineral . . . 

 

I take it there is no appeal with respect tot hat. As I recall the Cigol case and I recall reading some of the decisions of the 

Supreme Court justices in the case, they hung quite a bit on the fact that the minister could set the fair market value and it 

was not subject to appeal. 

 

Can you offer any comment as to why that particular determination is not subject to appeal when virtually all the other 

ones are? 

 

(16:15) 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, yes this is in some ways a change from what is in place today. We have 

attempted to bring out legislation into line with other royalty legislation which does allow appeal on certain issues. 

 

The question of deemed price, which is what we’re discussing here, in our opinion is something that is very important, 

and we have entered it here since it can be subjective, and sine there are some factors we’ve left it outside the realm of 

appeal. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Just one further point. I note that subsection (4) has a reverse onus in it, and wondered 

whether your legal advises have indicated that they don’t think there’ll be a problem there. 

 

. . . the onus of proof of the allegations of fact and law on which the holder relies to support his objections to the 

determination is on the holder. 

 

That might not strictly be a reverse onus, but have you a concern with that? 

 



 

May 29, 1985 

2712 

 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that that’s the normal arrangement in an appeal situation. 

 

Clause 16 agreed to. 

 

Clause 17 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Will this provide for a more formal system of mineral title (if I may put it that way) than 

we now have, or does it substantially provide for what we now have by way of registrations of leases and other 

dispositions? 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, and hon. member, this is in fact a slightly more formalized arrangement 

than is now in place. That’s correct. 

 

Clause 17 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 18 to 22 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 23 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, this is a lengthy provision. I haven’t checked it against 

what I’d call old Bill 42. But is this essentially an order to preserve a portion of the rights acquired under that particular 

piece of legislation? 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, this essentially preserves to the Crown the mineral rights that were 

acquired under Bill 42, and essentially under the same terms and conditions. 

 

Clause 23 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 24 to 30 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 66 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments resulting from the enactment of The Crown 

Minerals Act and The Minerals Resources Act, 1985 

 

Clauses 1 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, I move that the committee report the Bill, and in so doing maybe I could 

take the opportunity to thank my officials and the Leader of the Opposition for his insightful and rational questions. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 64 — An Act respecting the Exploration for and the Development, Conservation and Management of 

Mineral Resources 
 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill now be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 65 — An Act respecting Crown Minerals and Crown Minerals Lands 



 

May 29, 1985 

2713 

 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill now be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time. 

 

Bill No. 66 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments resulting from the enactment of The Crown 

Minerals Act and The Minerals Resources Act, 1985 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill now be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Bill No. 70 — An Act respecting the Provision of Financial Assistance to Depositors of Pioneer Trust Company 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 70 with amendments be now read a third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division, and Bill read a third time. 

 

YEAS — 36 

 

Muller Birkbeck McLeod 

Andrew Lane Taylor 

Katzman Pickering Hardy 

McLaren Garner Smith (Swift Current) 

Baker Hepworth Schoenhals 

Sandberg Klein Dutchak 

Embury Martens Young 

Domotor Folk Bacon 

Hodgins Smith (Moose Jaw South) Hopfner 

Myers Rybchuk Gerich 

Tusa Meagher Zazelenchuk 

Johnson Weiman Swenson 

 

NAYS — 6 

 

Thompson Lingenfelter Koskie 

Lusney Shillington Yew 

 

(16:30) 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 

 

HIGHWAYS AND TRANSPORTATION 

 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 16 

 

Item 1 (continued) 



 

May 29, 1985 

2714 

 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, yesterday I had asked for some information regarding IMC 

(International Minerals and Chemical Corporation) and the revenue received from them. Would you have that 

information handy today? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — It was $44.81 per tonne and about approximately $410,000. We’ll send you all of that 

complete information. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Okay. Mr. Minister, you mentioned that the approximate figure would be around 400 some-odd 

thousand dollars that you received from there. Mr. Minister, maybe the other question I could ask you then is: what was 

the cost in your `84-85 budget? I guess I don’t have to ask you that; I can tell you what it is. 

 

You had spent some $3.676 million on the highway that these companies used. Do you think that $400,000 is an adequate 

amount of compensation from them for the amount of money that you are spending on that road to keep it in shape? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Yes we do, because there’s a lot of other traffic uses that road as well, Mr. Chairman. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Well Mr. Minister, a lot of other traffic use that road like they use every other road in the province, 

but you don’t go spending $3 million on every other highway in this province every year, and you’ve been doing that for 

about two years in a row now. 

 

Surely, Mr. Minister, you must have some agreement with them that would compensate you a little more than what 

you’re getting from them. If you look back over the years, there hasn’t been all that much spent in a given year to upgrade 

that road. And if it’s falling apart and you have to spend $3 million on it every budget, then there is a problem and I think 

somebody should be paying for it. 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Well Mr. Chairman, we could argue this point a long time, but we believe that the company is 

paying its fair share towards this road. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Minister, could you give me a breakdown then of what percentage it is that they’re paying of the 

cost of that road? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Well Mr. Chairman, we have a letter here dated May 8, 1985 addressed to the member from 

Pelly, and we can send you another copy of this over again if you wanted. I mean, the information is all contained in 

there. I can read through all of it if you want. It’s at your pleasure, whatever the member wants. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Well, Mr. Minister, that’s exactly what I was getting at. I appreciate you sending that information 

over to me. And I am questioning, however, the figures that are in here. When you’re looking at your `83-84 budget with 

$3.2 million spent, when you’re looking at the `84-85 budget with 3.6, close to 3.7 million spent, and you’re getting 

400,000 in return for it . . . The year prior to that, `82-83, there’s 1.1 million. There’s been a lot of money spent on that 

one highway, more than on any other highway in this province. And you are saying that 400,000 is adequate 

compensation for the company that uses that road to haul their potash on. 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, once again that statement made by the member is not correct. We do 

spend a lot more money on a lot of other roads in the province of Saskatchewan, and I guess there is a difference of 

opinion here, Mr. Chairman. I don’t believe the government should be charging that company or any other company the 

full cost to rebuild a road, because it is not only them that use that road. There’s traffic on there, tourist traffic, passenger 

car traffic, many other modes of transportation, the types of individuals that use that road. So we can just, I guess, agree 

to disagree, Mr. Chairman. 



 

May 29, 1985 

2715 

 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s quite apparent that we’re not going to agree on it. I wasn’t necessarily 

suggesting that they should be paying the total amount, but when you’re looking, when you are looking, Mr. Minister, at 

3.3 million and 3.7 million — 3.676, close to 3.7 million — when you’re looking at those kinds of numbers, and when 

you’re looking at some $400,000 in revenue, I’m not sure that the public is using that road as much as IMC is. They are 

on there continuously, 24 hours a day, Mr. Chairman. They are the ones that are using that road with heavy loads, to haul 

the potash into the States. 

 

Well Mr. Chairman, I think some place there we should be looking at someone paying a little bit of the cost of using that 

road. They aren’t paying anything for gasoline any more, no taxes through that to build the highways. It’s no wonder that 

the roads have deteriorated to the point where we have nothing but pot-holes on every highway. And we see the 

companies that are using them and really breaking those roads up more than anyone else are paying the least for it. 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, once again I can only respond, and I guess maybe we should read the 

letter over: `68 to `71 — 504,000; `71 to `82 — three point two three three eight hundred and thirty-nine million; 1982-83 

— 350,263; `83-84 — $408,288; estimated for `84-85 is $450,000. 

 

It has gradually been going up, Mr. Chairman, so the member and I will just disagree. I don’t believe that we should be 

charging one company (as I stated earlier) the total cost for rebuilding that chunk of road. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Again, the minister quoted the figures that he wants to have on the record. True enough, that is what 

IMC had paid; that was the revenues from them. But then we should go down the list a little further and see what the 

expenditures were on that highway. 

 

When you’re look at `76-77 it was 183; and `77-78 at 217; `78-79 at 182; `79-80 — 327; and, `80-81 at 234; `81-82 — 

1.6 million. That would come fairly close to starting to put some money into there and the company has put a fair amount 

into it themselves because they are the ones that use it. 

 

But then we get into `82-83 and down the list. After that we’ve been spending more and more money on that road. Now 

Mr. Minister, if it’s going to cost us that much every year, I would hope that somehow that company is going to 

compensate for the expenditures on that road. There’s been three years of fairly — four years of fairly heavy 

expenditures on that road. Within the last four years we’re looking at 9, $10 million worth. Now it’s going to take us a 

long time at 400,000 to even break even. By then we’ll need to put another 10,000 or 10 million into there. 

 

That, Mr. Minister, is what I’m trying to get at. I think if we’re going to have to spend that much money on that road 

because it is falling apart really under the loads that are being hauled on it, then we should be asking the company to look 

at what’s happening and how their loads are destroying the road. And maybe they should be asked to compensate the 

government a little more for rebuilding that road. 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we’ll try it from another angle for the member. We started rebuilding the 

road — well the previous administration did under Mr. Blakeney; finally decided to start rebuilding the road in `81-82. 

The expenditures go up so that `83-84 we’re spending 3.2 million. This year we’re going to be spending — `84-85 (or last 

year, pardon me) — 3.6 million. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we’re only going to build this road once. We’re not going to rebuild it every year. So that’s why the 

capital costs are a little bit higher than the maintenance cost. You’re not going to build, rebuild a brand-new road there 

every year, Mr. Chairman. 



 

May 29, 1985 

2716 

 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Chairman, or Mr. Minister, are you going to be spending any money on that road this year? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Well Mr. Chairman, to speed it along while we’re waiting for the answer, to give you the 

actual one, we’ll be spending approximately $0.75 million this year to finish the paving of that stretch of road, and the 

life expectancy of this road is 15 years. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — You’ll send some of that information over to me, will you, Mr. Minister? Thank you. 

 

Mr. Minister, another question I’d like to ask you at this point is on the cost of producing the highway maps. I noticed 

that has been increasing. Could you give me the cost of the map for `84-85? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, the cost of the 1985 highway map, it is $107,706.75 for 550,000 maps. Price 

per copy is 19.5 cents per copy. The printer is Modern Press in Saskatoon. Last year it cost 18 cents a copy. This year it’s 

up 1.5 cents per copy more. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Minister, I notice that that map has continually been going up since 1982. It was about 13.9 in 

`82, `83 you were up to 17.5 and now we’re talking about 19. Mr. Minister, what are the reasons for the increase in cost 

of that map? 

 

(16:45) 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, the communications director tells me it’s because of a little special artwork 

that was put in this year because of the Heritage year. That’s why it’s an extra 1.5 cents per copy on the highway maps. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Minister, do you tender out the work for these maps, the printing of it? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Yes. Supply and Services tenders that out. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — How many tenders do you receive, Mr. Minister? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — This year we received three tenders, and it was the lowest tender . . . The lowest tender was 

accepted, Mr. Chairman. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Minister, could you give me the companies that submitted their tenders, and the amount that they 

submitted? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t have that information here, but I will be very pleased to co-operate 

with my member friend opposite and send that information. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Minister, on the sale of equipment, I noticed in your letter here that you have a number of units, 

some 368 units, that you had sold. A total purchase cost, capital purchase cost, of in excess of 3.3 million, and revenue 

from that, from the sale, was $711,000. This was up to `83-84, Mr. Minister. Could you tell me what the revenue was of 

the sale in `84-85, and what the costs were of conducting the sale? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member will have to ask that question of the Minister of Supply and 

Services because they conducted the sale. They will have that information. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Very well, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, did you transfer any other equipment to Supply and Services 

for sale other than the ones that you had last spring in that sale? 



 

May 29, 1985 

2717 

 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t have that list of equipment here, but every year we dispose of some 

equipment through Supply and Services. We will get that list, and prepare that list, and send it to you. 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Chairman, I understand the Lieutenant Governor is waiting, so I would move that the 

committee rise and report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 

 

At 4:52 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal 

Assent to the following Bills: 

 

Bill No. 71 — An Act to amend The Industrial Incentive Program Act 

Bill No. 73 — An Act to amend The Education Act (No. 2) 

Bill No. 74 — An Act to amend The Non-profit Corporations Act 

Bill No. 75 — An Act to amend The Business Corporations Act 

Bill No. 80 — An Act to amend The Land Titles Act (No. 2) 

Bill No. 27 — An Act to amend the Statute Law to permit Guest Passengers to recover Damages for Injuries from 

Owners and Drives of Vehicles 

Bill No. 28 — An Act to provide for Equality of Status of Married Persons and to repeal The Married Persons’ Property 

Act 

Bill No. 29 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments resulting from the enactment of The Equality of Status 

of Married Persons Act 

Bill No. 69 — An Act to amend The Local Government Election Act 

Bill No. 33 — An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act (No. 2) 

Bill No. 52 — An Act to amend The Highways and Transportation Act 

Bill No. 63 — An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act 

Bill No. 64 — An Act respecting the Exploration for and the Development, Conservation and Management of Mineral 

Resources 

Bill No. 65 — An Act respecting Crown Minerals and Crown Mineral Lands 

Bill No. 66 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments resulting from the enactment of The Crown Minerals 

Act, and The Mineral Resources Act, 1985 

Bill No. 70 — An Act respecting the Provision of Financial Assistance to Depositors of Pioneer Trust Company 

 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 4:55 p.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:56 p.m. 

 


