



















































Hansard: December 09, 1985


 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

December 9, 1985 

4067 

 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 119 — An Act respecting Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Corporation 
 

Clause 1 (continued) 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I want to follow up on some points that were sort of left hanging 
before the supper break, and I wonder if the minister could inform us whether or not . . . I believe it was section 
3, subsection 7, we were talking about a certain word being changed, and a word that means literally millions of 
dollars for the taxpayers of the province — whether not you’ve considered that and can give us an answer. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to propose an amendment and I’ll just read what 
it says on the motion. 
 

Moved that clause 3(7)(b) of the printed Bill be amended by striking out, ‘may agree with Saskoil’ and 
substituting, ‘and Saskoil shall agree within 30 days of the coming into force of this Act.’ 
 

I would ask if we wait till we get to that point in the committee, if that is agreeable to the member, and proceed 
that way. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — We will leave it as well to discuss it further till we get to that point because we 
will have other points to raise on it. I want to return to the remuneration of the directors and senior officers as 
well as the share option and the issue of why this share option is being offered. Last Friday I believe it was, and 
Hansard will confirm whether it was Thursday or Friday, but the minister was implying either directly or 
indirectly that this was being done and was standard within the private sector as an incentive to the senior 
officers of the company, and today he is saying that it’s a technical reason; one that this share option has to be 
given out in order for certain tax advantages to come back to the company as a whole. 
 
And I wonder if the minister could just outline clearly now, for the committee and for many people who are 
concerned about this share option, what is the reason and how will it work; how will it work and the 
background behind it. Because in the letter that you were quoting from . . . I agree it was outlined in some 
technical way, but I wonder if you could in layman’s terms just tell us how that is going to work. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: —Mr. Chairman, just a very brief point. It was never my intention to indicate, 
and I don’t believe I did, that this share option was part of the remuneration. I did indicate very clearly that it’s 
fairly standard in the private sector and I pointed out the example of PWA; gave specific details on their share 
option. But it’s always been my clear statement that these options were strictly for tax purposes and were not 
intended as a long-term executive option plan. 
 
However, to go through once more what is taking place — the purpose of course, as I’ve indicated, is to be sure 
that Saskoil is able to bring forward in excess of $300 million worth of tax credits that they have accumulated. 
In order for that to happen Saskoil must be changed from a Crown corporation company to a business 
corporation Act company and of course that is the whole purpose of this Bill that we are discussing. In general 
terms then, the process, step 1, is to continue the corporation from a Crown to a business corporation Act 
company. And since the government still owns 100 per cent of Saskoil at this time, it’s not taxable. Therefore, 
the business corporation Act company must then be amalgamated with a legal for life company to allow pension 
funds to invest and so on. 
 
Before the amalgamation, both the business corporation Act company and the legal for life company must be 
taxable. All right, the legal for life company already is; the business corporation Act  



 

December 9, 1985 

4068 

 

company, Saskoil, must either sell at least 10 per cent to someone or give an option to buy shares. Obviously at 
the time that we wanted to continue it, we have not had the opportunity to sell the shares so we have gone with 
the option to buy shares. We put the plan in place and we have received a tax ruling, which is the document that 
I sent over before the supper break, a tax ruling from federal finance to allow us to bring the $300 million of 
available tax deductions forward to the new Saskoil corporation. 
 
So the end result of it is that we had to make a determination that someone would have the option to purchase 
the shares. You could have looked, as you indicated before, at any number of people. Common business 
practice seemed consistent to put the names of the five top executives in the prospectus and to get the ruling on 
that basis, and that has been the process that has been used. That is the approval that we have received from 
federal finance, but I can only reiterate once again that there will be no windfall profits as a result of this and 
that it simply allows us to bring forward the $300 million of tax credits that the corporation has accrued to this 
point. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could outline whether or not setting up a trust would 
have been in order where the income or capital gains or the increase in value of the shares could have been built 
up and held in trust for the people of the province, as opposed to the five individuals you chose to allow the 
privilege of holding this share option. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — The only way to do it, I’m informed, and to accomplish what we set out to do, 
would have been to have it held in trust for the government. That obviously would not be an arm’s-length 
option and consequently was not something that was possible in order to achieve the results that we wanted. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Could you explain that again, this arm’s-length of it, because what we’re talking 
about here now is a private company and I’m not sure how . . . what you’re referring to when you refer to arm’s 
length. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Okay. The only way that the recommendation that you make could have been 
done would have been to set up a trust in the government’s name in which case you still have a Crown 
corporation. You do not have a taxable company as is the necessity, so you haven’t accomplished what we 
needed to set out in order to bring forward the $300 million. And the whole concept was to get the $300 million 
of tax credits to stay in the corporation. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well I would ask you whether or not the finance minister for example, could have 
such a trust fund set up where the profits, the windfall potential, windfall profits could then flow back into the 
treasury where all the original shareholders in this company would benefit from it. 
 
Because as I keep pointing out to you, this company that we have that is earning $44 million . . . Well you try to 
make it look like it is you and the five chief executive officers who have put this thing together and made it tick. 
In fact it is the shareholders or the people of the province who have invested the money over the past 10 years 
and if it wasn’t for them investing, there wouldn’t be a company and there would be no profits. And you take 
away from what has really happened here by saying that you and five officials are the ones who have put this 
together and have made the money. 
 
And basically, that’s the difference between the private sector, which you’re pretending we are dealing with, 
and a Crown corporation, which in fact is what you’re breaking up. You’re breaking up part of a Crown 
corporation that was built by any number of people along with the investors, that being the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And what I am trying to accomplish is somehow get the profits that would come from this technical need as you 
put it, to flow back to the original investors. And that’s the point that we’re getting hung up on, on this issue. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — I think the member has indicated exactly the problem, exactly what  



 

December 9, 1985 

4069 

 

would not work. 
 
The Minister of Finance could have been named as an individual, but not as the Minister of Finance. It can’t 
remain in the ownership of the government in order to be taxable. We want it taxable so that we can bring 
forward the $300 million of tax credits that have been built up. So it has to be someone in the private sector. 
 
We opted for the five senior executives. Repeat again, that there will be no windfall profit. The whole line of 
argument that you’re pursuing is based on the fact that the shares will escalate. I would suggest that all this 
argument and debate will look rather foolish if, in fact, the shares escalate and the executive people don’t 
exercise their option. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, they would . . . When it’s written in the legislation and in the prospectus that 
they can, you have explained why they should be able to. On Thursday and Friday of last week you were saying 
that they had every right to and would, and this would help add to their income. 
 
You’d have to wonder why they wouldn’t, after you write the legislation. You, with them, with the board of 
directors, set the share price, and I want to say to you that this attitude of ’trust us’ is one that the people of 
Saskatchewan are a little leery about. They’re a little leery about trusting you. 
 
The issue of the increase in shares — I want to go at this from a different way. You’re saying that you can’t do 
it by more broadly basing the share option. I doubt that that’s accurate. I think you could. I think there could be 
a mechanism by which you could not give it to the five individuals, but give it on a broader base to the people 
who are either buying the shares, or the original owners of the Crown corporation, that being the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1915) 
 
But the other way you could do it, I think, and I want to check this with you, is on the number of shares. You’re 
saying 50,000. I would suggest to you that we reduce that number, and that we reduce that number — and I 
would be willing to compromise on my amendment, by changing it from saying ‘any shares,’ to ‘five shares.’ 
From 50,000 shares to five shares. One share for each of them. And I say, would that meet the tax issue? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, to the member opposite, it would be fine to put in the names, 
and preferable probably, to put in the names of the people who will buy the shares. The problem is, as I’ve 
indicated, that at the time that it takes place, those people have not been identified. If we had the shares sold, we 
wouldn’t need this. 
 
The tax ruling is to bring forward $300 million of tax credits. Consequently we have gotten the ruling which I 
have shown you, clearly stating that the mechanism that we have in place is the one that is acceptable and is 
reasonable and is consistent with federal tax laws. That’s why we’ve done it that way. That’s why we have the 
ruling. I am telling you that if in fact the scenario took place, and very well might, in which the shares did in 
fact escalate in value, then the executive members did not exercise this option, as I’ve indicated, this whole 
debate looks a little foolish. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — I want to get one point clear because I think either you missed my question or 
you’re not answering it. And that is, can we change the number of shares from 50,000 to five, and put that into 
the legislation? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — No, Mr. Chairman. The five is not, I don’t think, reasonable, but it is not what 
we have approval for. We have approval for a very specific option and you have the letter and you can read it 
and you can read the numbers. And that is the approval that we have obtained. And I think it’s reasonable and 
sensible and federal tax people have agreed to that, and to change it in any way is to go back to the whole 
approval process. We don’t believe it’s necessary. We don’t propose to do that. 



 

December 9, 1985 

4070 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, where did the idea of 50,000 come from? Who decided that 50,000 or 
10,000 for each of the officials was the right number? Did that come from the tax department? Is that a 
minimum number that you can have? Or where did 50,000 come from? We’re shifting ground here. It’s like 
shooting at a moving target. First of all, Thursday you say it’s to add to the income of the five senior officers. 
Then you move off of that and say, no, it’s not for that, it’s for a technical reason. And now I’m asking: can you 
tell me where the 50,000 came from? Whose idea was that? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, as I’m sure the member opposite and most members of the 
committee are aware, in order for a corporation to be taxable, it must be 10 per cent privately owned. If we 
assume the value in the range of $250 million in terms of the value of the equity and we take 10 per cent of that, 
we have $25 million value. 
 
Consequently, when discussing the issue with our advisers, they indicated that it had to be something that was 
reasonable, that would not appear as a sham. The preferred share issue in Manitoba is an example of how the 
federal government have ferreted out various shams in the past. It had to be a reasonable number and they 
advised that the 50,000 limit was one that the federal Finance people would accept. 
 
Consequently we put it together in that manner. We went for approval from federal Finance. We have received 
that approval, of course, in the letter that I have given you. And I guess that’s the answer to why we chose that 
number. It simply seemed like a reasonable number. 
 
I’m sure that the member opposite and his colleagues will accept that five shares is not reasonable and does in 
fact appear to be a sham. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you this one more time for clarification, and that 
is whether reducing it to some lower number — because this is what people are telling me who I talk to, that the 
50,000 is out of order; it’s out of order. And the minister can say that it isn’t reasonable. But I’ll tell you that 
people aren’t accepting 50,000. 
 
And I want to ask you again to clarify whether or not it’s possible that we could amend my amendment, be 
reasonable about it, and put in five as opposed to 50,000. 
 
And I want to ask you again to clarify whether or not it’s possible that we could amend my amendment, be 
reasonable about it, and put in five as opposed to 50,000. 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — As I just indicated, and I’ll go through it once more. In order for a corporation 
to be taxable which is, in fact, what we are doing here, 10 per cent must be owned by the private sector. What 
we have received from federal finance is approval for the arrangements as we laid out with the 50,000 share 
option. It’s a reasonable number. We were advised by our advisers that that was a reasonable number, federal 
finance accepted that, and we got the approval after some considerable to-ing and fro-ing on that basis. 
 
To reduce it to five, as I indicated, would make it a clear mockery of the intention — 10 per cent being $25 
million, five shares being 45. I mean it simply wouldn’t be reasonable. I’m sure that federal finance would 
reject it as such, and consequently we’re simply not prepared to change the approval that we have already 
received. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, Mr. Minister, in the letter that you tabled — you not only tabled one letter, 
you tabled two letters — and I want to read the second letter you tabled which tells me something quite 
different. It tells you something quite different about the number of shares that can be offered and its effect on 
the taxation of this corporation. 
 
I want to say at the beginning, Mr. Minister, that when I’m completed here I expect an apology on what you’ve 
just said, and I want to read this to you.  
 
This is dated December 6th, 1985; that’s last Friday. It comes by electric mail. It’s not mailed. It comes by 
electric mail, and it deals with this very issue we’re debating in this Assembly. And when I’m finished reading 
it I think it will show how difficult it is to do business with this government. 



 

December 9, 1985 

4071 

 

This letter is from Mr. I.G. Sutherland, Clarkson Gordon, chartered accountants — it is to Mr. I.G. Sutherland, 
Clarkson Gordon, Chartered Accountants, 1300 Iveagh House, 707 7th Avenue S.W., Calgary, Alberta, 
December 6th, 1985. 
 

Dear sirs: Re: Advance income Tax Ruling (3-5277) Sask Oil and Gas Corporation (Saskoil): 

 

This is in reply to your letter dated December 6, 1985, concerning the above noted advance ruling given 

on November 15, 1985. You have asked us to confirm the following: 

 

By virtue only of the fact that the options to be granted by Saskoil to each of its five most senior 

officers, as noted at Proposed Transaction (paragraph 11) of the advance income tax ruling, may be 

reduced in volume from 50,000 shares in aggregate to some lesser number, the advanced income tax 

ruling will not be invalidated, and the rulings noted in the November 15, 1985 advance income tax 

ruling will continue to have effect subject to the general limitations and qualifications set forth in the 

Information Circular 70-6R dated December 18, 1978 and will continue to be binding provided the 

proposed transactions, as amended for the above-noted change in respect of the options to be granted to 

the senior officers of Saskoil, are completed by May 31, 1986. 

 

Confirmation given: We confirm that a reduction in the total volume of shares from 50,000 common 

shares to some lesser number, which will be offered to Saskoil’s senior officers in the manner described 

in paragraph 11 of the ruling, will not in and by itself, affect the ruling previously given. 

 

Now I say to you, sir, having had this letter, having given it over to us I think inadvertently, I think what you 

have told us this evening in this Assembly is not accurate and should be withdrawn and you should start over 

again. 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, that is simply not a correct interpretation of events. As I 

understand it, and I was not aware of that letter, but my officials received it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, 

that’s fine. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. Let the minister answer. 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — My officials received that letter on Friday. I was out of town on the weekend. 

I came back; I was not informed. And the reason, I understand, that they did not . . . Mr. Chairman, the reason 

that they did not make me aware of it was that the reduction is not clear as to what will be accepted. They 

understand it’s a very small number. 

 

I believe that the members of the opposition are aware that there is a certain amount of haste, that the public are 

anxiously awaiting this. We are not interested in delaying this thing any further in going through an approval 

process that could take some time, and consequently they didn’t bring it up. 

 

Now the fact that you have it would demonstrate the openness that we’re prepared to deal with this thing, but I 

indicate to you that I was not aware of that letter. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, I say to you . . . well, I’ll say it. The member for Regina North East says 

you’ve been snowballing for five days, and you ask him to stand and say it. I’ll say it for him, because we’ve 

been dealing with this Bill and I’ll tell you, you’re not giving us correct information. This proves it again. 

 

And you, as the minister in charge of this Crown corporation and this department, are not within your rights to 

stand in this Assembly and say one thing when you have officials sitting around you who have this letter that 

clearly outlines that the changes we’re proposing are in order — for you to  



 

December 9, 1985 

4072 

 

stand here and say that they are not, and that it can’t be done, and that you’re out to save the taxpayers a bundle 

of money. Well now that one is gone as well. 

 

We’ve now had a number of explanations, the last one being that you had to have 50,000 shares in order to save 

the taxpayers money. That one’s disappeared. That one’s disappeared. This tax ruling which you had in your 

hands last Friday, December 6th — had in your hands, handed to me — quoted from the attached letter, says 

clearly: 

 

Confirmation given. We confirm that a reduction in the total volume of shares from 50,000 common 

shares to some lesser number which will be offered to Saskoil’s senior officers in a manner described in 

paragraph 11 of the ruling, will not in and by itself, affect the ruling previously given. 

 

And I say to you, what are you doing? Why do you continue on down this path of defending the share option for 

these five individuals? I say to you that the five officials that sit around you and stand to benefit from this, it’s 

either one of two things. It’s either one of two things: either you should resign — either you should resign — 

having hidden this information from us, or you should fire the people who haven’t given it to you, one or the 

other. There’s no in between, no in between. 

 

Obviously you’re paying these individuals a good sum of money. They stand to benefit from this share option. 

Now you can stand here and make us believe one of two things. I think you knew about it. I think you have read 

this letter, but you say you didn’t. 

 

I think you have one of two options. Either you should apologize and resign for misleading the Assembly and 

the committee, or you should get rid of the people who are advising you and for the last three days didn’t take 

the time, having sat here in this Assembly all afternoon or outside the door waiting to come on, and didn’t 

advise you of this information. Now it’s one of the two. And simply to go on in this committee when we cannot 

get information and when we do get information, we can’t believe it — we can’t function. 

 

Very clearly we’re dealing with half a billion dollars of taxpayers’ money. We’re dealing with half a billion 

dollars of taxpayers’ money and you came in here in a jocular manner on the first day as if we were interrupting 

some business that you had dealing with the private sector, as if you didn’t have time to come to the committee. 

This is a big bother for me; I’m busy; I’m out there with the private sector wheeling and dealing. 

 

Well I say to you that you have misled the House on a very important issue. One of two things are in order. I 

say we should pull this Bill, pull it for a day or two, rearrange the people around you, if that’s what’s necessary, 

or on the other hand, you should resign. And I want to give you that opportunity now. 

 

(1930) 

 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, we will not be pulling the Bill, I will not be resigning, and the 

officials around me will remain where they are. 

 

The letter that you received, as you indicated, arrived after 6 o’clock Friday. As I indicated, I was not in the city 

over the weekend. As I’ve indicated as well, there is concern as to the meaning of the letter as to exactly what 

number would be acceptable. Since it’s irrelevant, and there will be no windfall profit, we have determined to 

proceed with the number that we have in place. It’s that simple, Mr. Chairman. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I think in the light of what has happened here tonight that we 

should adjourn, and I make that motion that we adjourn until the minister informs himself and cleans up this 

mess, because it’s simply impossible to function. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — The motion is out of order because we’re in a committee. Proceed. 



 

December 9, 1985 

4073 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I challenge your ruling because of the simple fact that a motion of 

adjournment is always in order in any committee, or at any meeting for that matter, and I would ask you to 

clarify that because I don’t agree with your ruling. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I move the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The division bells stopped ringing at 9:58 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

YEAS — 51 

 

Devine 

McLeod 

Andrew 

Berntson 

Lane 

Taylor 

Rousseau 

Duncan 

Katzman 

Pickering 

Hardy 

McLaren 

Smith (Swift Current) 

Myers 

Hepworth 

Schoenhals 

Dirks 

Sandberg 

Klein 

Dutchak 

Embury 

Martens 

Maxwell 

Smith (Moose Jaw South) 

Domotor 

Folk 

Petersen 

Hodgins 

Swenson 

Young 

Hopfner 

Weiman 

Rybchuk 

Caswell 

Gerich 

Schmidt 

Muller 

Meagher 

Glauser 

Sauder 

Zazelenchuk 

Johnson 

Baker 

Parker 

Morin 

Tchorzewski 

Engel 

Lingenfelter 

Koskie 

Lusney 

Shillington 

 

NAYS — 0 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:02 p.m. 


