



















































Hansard: June 11, 1985


3223 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

June 11, 1985 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I rise, pursuant to Rule 11, to present a petition signed by . . . and it may 

well be that I’m one step late. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I rise, pursuant to Rule 11, to present a petition signed by several hundred citizens of Regina, respecting 

the construction by the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation of a housing and community centre complex situated at 

Pasqua Street and 5th Avenue in Regina. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Non-Controversial Bills 

 

Bill NO. 107 — An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities Act (No. 2) 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As chairman of the Standing Committee on 

Non-Controversial Bills, I wish to present the 11th report of the said committee, which is as follows: 

 

As chairman of the Non-Controversial Bills Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 107, An Act to amend The Northern 

Municipalities Act, as being non-controversial. 

 

HON. MR. MCLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I move second reading and consideration in committee of the whole on the 

said Bill be waived. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

HON. MR. MCLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 107 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time. 

 

Bill No. 108 — An Act to repeal The Municipal Public Works Act 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the Non-Controversial Bills Committee, I wish to report Bill 

No. 108, An Act to amend The Municipal Public Works Act as being non-controversial. 

 

HON. MR. MCLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading and consideration in committee of the whole on 

Bill No. 108 be waived. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

HON. MR. MCLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 108 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, before moving the next Bill,  



 

June 11, 1984 

 

3224 

 

I suspect this will be the last time the Non-Controversial Bills Committee will meet. I want to take this opportunity to 

thank members of the committee who attended, and the Clerk who assisted us in our deliberations. 

 

I think the committee functioned well this year, saved time of the Assembly for matters of controversy, and I suspect 

many of the Bills that were dealt with in committee were dealt with more thoroughly there than would have been here. 

So I wanted to thank the Clerk and the committee members before I sat down. 

 

Bill No. 110 — An Act to amend The University of Saskatchewan Act 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Having said that, I wish to report Bill No. 110, An Act to amend The University of 

Saskatchewan Act as being non-controversial. 

 

HON. MR. MCLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading and consideration in committee of the whole on 

Bill No. 110 be waived. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

HON. MR. MCLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 110 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time. 

 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At this time I wish to present the seventh report on the Standing 

Committee on Public Accounts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before actually presenting the report I want to address a few comments to the committee and to its report. 

The report this year will be in a slightly different form. We have, in previous years, just tabled minutes, if that. This 

year we’re going to present a report which will be something that members can keep; take home. You’ll be happy to 

know that the pictures of the committee members are in it. It makes it much more attractive. 

 

In addition, I want to thank the committee members and the Clerk. With one exception, the attendance of members at 

the committee was exceptional. The members may judge for themselves whether or not a member who sits alone as 

one member of a caucus can attend everything. But for the members of the government and opposition caucus, the 

attendance was exceptional. Most members attended all but two or three committee meetings. Those absences were 

mostly because of illness. So I do want to commend all members on their attendance. 

 

All members took part in the deliberations of the committee. If you hadn’t have seen their names, one wouldn’t know 

which side of the House they sat on. All members actively questioned witnesses and took an active part in it. Mr. 

Speaker, I also want to thank our Clerk, again, who worked actively and energetically with us. 

 

Just a few comments about the report itself. We did not . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I would say to the member 

from Rosthern that I spoke to the House Leader about the matter, the acting House Leader or someone who felt 

themselves in some authority over there. Who knows these who’s in charge? But I spoke to someone who felt that 

they had some authority over there, and we were advised not to proceed . . . we were advised to proceed with it now. 

 

The committee did not spend a great deal of time this year on comprehensive auditing. As members will know, the 

comprehensive auditing system is a system whereby the staff in the Provincial Auditor’s office also take a 

responsibility for ensuring the economy, effectiveness, and efficiency  



 

June 11, 1985 

 

3225 

 

with which government departments discharge their duties. As it now stands, it is within the ambit of the committee to 

question witnesses with respect to the economy, efficiency, and effectiveness with which the departments spend their 

money. 

 

It is not, however, within the ambit of responsibility of the Provincial Auditor to assist us with that, and there’s very 

little logic to that. We believe that the Provincial Auditor . . . I, at least, believe the Provincial Auditor ought to have 

that responsibility. While governments have not always liked everything that auditors have said when they’re given 

that responsibility, I think the public appreciate that sort of a watchdog. I believe the public feel that the federal 

Auditor General, who has perhaps the clearest mandate with respect to comprehensive auditing, has performed useful 

service. I think the public think they’re getting their money out of him, and more. And I continue to be an advocate of 

comprehensive auditing. 

 

It seems, however, the matter is closed with the government caucus because we did not discuss it, and I have had no 

success in interesting people in pursuing it. 

 

The method of operation which we have used perhaps deserves a comment. We have not always followed this. In the 

first and second year of our . . . In the first two sessions we tended to strike out a good deal on our own. In the last 

year we have adopted, I think, a more systematic approach. We begin with the Provincial Auditor’s report, have 

discussed that, have called departments where there’s no ready explanation involved, and have listened to their 

comments. Then, if there’s time, we call departments which were not mentioned in Provincial Auditor but which 

individual members want to ask questions of. 

 

This year, given the late start in the session and the difficulty in determining when the session’s going to end — and 

this is not an easy guess this year — we did not . . . I think it’s fair to say they’re not calling any departments not 

mentioned by the Provincial Auditor. 

 

I will not go over each and every one of the issues which arose out of the inquiry. A good many were technical. In a 

good many places, no real harm had resulted and no real harm could result from the matters complained about by the 

Provincial Auditor. And in that sense they were technical, and the committee normally extracted a promise from the 

departments to: go forth and sin no more,” and left it at that. 

 

Some issues were substantial — an issue of those with respect to investing for the pension funds. There were two 

issues here: one is whether or not the legislation permits what is done, and on that I think the committee got as many 

opinions as there were experts who had the nerve to venture an opinion. 

 

The view of the committee, therefore, is that clearly when that kind of a situation exists with respect to something as 

important as pension funds, and there’s a great deal of money involved, that should be clarified. And it was the 

recommendation of the committee that that should be clarified. 

 

There is a disagreement with respect to the policy. I and, I believe, my colleague from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg believe 

that the investment of pension funds in some of those developments is not wise and is somewhat speculative. We 

believe that’s not appropriate with respect to pension funds. But that was a policy issue which we think best debated in 

the Legislative Assembly and not in public accounts. 

 

With those comments . . . There is one other matter, Mr. Speaker, which we are referring to yourself for determination. 

I won’t go over it in detail, but it involves the right of the committee members, the responsibility of the committee 

members perhaps, to inquire into the affairs of Crown corporations. 

 

I won’t try to improve upon what the question is as raised in the report. The question simply is  



 

June 11, 1984 

 

3226 

 

whether or not we should be inquiring into the activities arising in the financial year of the last annual report, or 

whether the responsibility of the committee goes further than . . . is farther than that, and includes the balance of the 

government’s fiscal year. We were not able to resolve the matter in committee, and we therefore followed the normal 

accepted procedure and refer it to Mr. Speaker, for determination. Mr. Speaker will find that in the report. 

 

With that I’m going to take my seat. If there’s any questions or issues arise out of comments made by other members 

of the committee, I’ll deal with that in closing debate. 

 

I should, I guess, as well, as a matter of formality, table, I suppose, the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 

Public Accounts. I move its adoption, I gather. And I have, indeed, now that I’ve received sufficient prompts from the 

centre of the floor, I find that I have a motion all typed up . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, I will. I move 

seconded by the member from The Battlefords: 

 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts now be concurred in. 

 

MR. MORIN: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to add a few words in seconding the motion by the 

member from Regina Centre. 

 

I’d like to say that this year the Public Accounts Committee, as in other years, I think functioned in an admirable way, 

and was very much a bit of a shining light in some of the other committees that go on as a result of the legislature’s 

activity. 

 

The chairman touched briefly on the non-partisan way that we approached things. And in fact, in my memory I can 

only remember or recall one discussion that sort of got off on partisan aspects, and that was when a member from the 

opposition and a member from our side argued at quite some length because they didn’t realize that they agreed with 

each other. 

 

The committee handled itself very well, and the chairman conducted things very well. And I’d like to commend him 

for that. 

 

In terms of the operation of the Public Accounts Committee, I think what we found this year was that the departments 

themselves operated in a very, very exemplary manner. When items were pointed out to them by the Provincial 

Auditor, they cleaned them up quickly. 

 

I gather in other years, and in times gone by, there would be a habitual recalling of departments who would fail to 

clean up their activities from one year to the other. I don’t think that that really happened this year. I think the 

departments were well managed, in most cases, and certainly took the comments of the Provincial Auditor to heart. 

 

There’s been a fair amount of concern about the activity of the Public Accounts Committee and the value of the 

post-mortem that we do on government spending, and I’d just like to say that in view of the way the legislature 

operates, the review by members of the legislature, in a non-partisan way, of the spending of government is a critically 

important thing to make sure that we do uncover any problems that may be there, and any administrative problems 

that are there. 

 

My final comment, I think, would be on the comment by the member from Regina Centre regarding the pension funds. 

In the past it’s been a practice of the Department of Finance to be a member of a group who invested pension funds in 

similar operations around Canada. That group was not centred here in the province of Saskatchewan, yet it made 

investments in Toronto or Edmonton or Calgary or wherever, and took pension funds from the province of 

Saskatchewan, invested them in other areas. 

 

Although it’s not clear under the legislation — the legislation is fairly ambiguous on the point as  



 

June 11, 1985 

 

3227 

 

to the exact procedure that should be followed, and I would agree with the member from Regina Centre that we would 

hope that legislation would be cleaned up, and that the vagaries of it would be done away with. 

 

It would be our position, from this side of the House, that a very appropriate use of Saskatchewan peoples’ pension 

funds would be to help get projects — solid, secure projects — off the ground in the province of Saskatchewan. There 

are pension moneys here, should wherever possible be invested here, and that, in fact, we should be looking for more 

and more opportunities to do that. 

 

So having said that, Mr. Speaker, I second the motion by the member for Regina Centre and would like to congratulate 

both the Clerk — our Clerk and Mr. James — the staff of the library, who were a great help to us, and all members of 

the committee who participated and took a great deal of interest in the spending of the public’s money. 

 

MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak on the report of the Public Accounts Committee. As both speakers 

before me have indicated, the committee functioned very well. The attendance was excellent from all members. The 

member from Saskatoon Fairview had a perfect attendance — didn’t miss one of the meetings — and we had one 

member who probably didn’t spend more than over an hour in the total time of the meetings sat. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, through the Public Accounts Committee, all through the different estimates and different 

departments, I was doing some research on one topic. And that topic was the position of the pension plans in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We have nine pension plans, Mr. Speaker — 19, sorry — 19 pension plans in the Government of Saskatchewan that 

are formula pensions. Of those 19, 14 of those pension funds do not have funds to cover their obligations. The amount 

of money short in those pension plans, without taking in the surpluses from the five that do have a surplus, is 

$3,084,854,537. That is the actuary figures, and most of them were arrived in 1982 and ’83. That means, over the next 

30 or so years, that whoever is the Government of Saskatchewan will be required to put substantial funds into the 

treasury to pay out the pensions of those people who have earned them and have retired from the government. 

 

That deficit of 3 billion plus is only the tip of the iceberg as far as the debt left by the NDP government when they left 

power in 1982. That debt will continue to grow because the money was not placed into an account that will grow 

revenue. Fortunately in the last years of the former government, the pension plans were changed to a cash purchase 

formula where both the government and the employees put their money into the account to gain revenue and interest 

and pay for the pensions of those who retire henceforth. But those prior, Mr. Speaker, will be a drain on the treasury of 

Saskatchewan for many, many years. 

 

But if you ask yourself, Mr. Speaker, what happened to that money when it was originally placed in by the person who 

was getting a pension? They put their funds into the account. The former governments did not match. The former 

governments only took the amount of money required to pay out to those receiving pensions and put the rest of the 

money into general revenue of the government and spent it. Basically they spent the pension funds of the citizens who 

were paying in prior to ’82, so prior to the new system, on the daily running of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

It was a horrendous debt, Mr. Speaker. It was a debt that they were not honest and told the people about until a couple 

of years ago when we discovered in public accounts. For an example, Mr. Speaker, the teachers’ pension plan — 

sorry, just a minute — the public service pension plan is $1,612,810,000 short today. And of course, with the way the 

system works, that will go up. The teachers’ plan is 1,347,720,000, and that continues on. 



 

June 11, 1984 

 

3228 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the committee have got all the numbers down. We understand exactly where we are. It was a 

disappointment to get these numbers and to find how much debt they had left the people of Saskatchewan without 

telling us, and that the people of Saskatchewan will of course have to repay this each year to make sure the people get 

their pension. 

 

Other than that, Mr. Speaker, as the two members prior spoke, the committee worked very well. Each member of the 

committee led off on a different topic and, no matter if they were government or opposition, looked at what the report 

called for and dug into and made the comments as required. 

 

I think we should comment, though, that the Provincial Auditor, the comptroller, and the departments, when they were 

named in the auditor’s report, immediately took steps to start to correct the problem they were cited for. And I think 

we must compliment them because they have all, as to the problems that arised last year, when we asked about them 

this year, we were informed by the comptroller that they were looked after and had been solved, or that they had just 

about had all the mechanism in to solve them. That is a compliment to the departments of government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On that note, I suggest that I will be supporting the report because it did cover all the departments. 

 

MR. ENGEL: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, want to add a word regarding the Public Accounts Committee and 

its actions this year, and I think something . . . I wouldn’t have gotten up on my feet today if the government members 

would have made a remark about it, but I just wanted to say that here is one committee that has a chairman that 

worked overtime. He went more than the second mile to do his job. 

 

And I think that’s one reason why the committee functioned as well as it did, Mr. Speaker, because we had a chairman 

that knew what he was doing, led the debate, and supported the auditor, supported the auditor 100 per cent in decisions 

that the auditor made. And I think consequently we have a committee that is functioning properly, in spite of some of 

the notions by some of the members to try and rehash a problem that they lost on in the committee and think they can 

do it on the floor of the House; and I think he wasn’t that successful today, as he wasn’t in the committee. 

 

But otherwise I would want to add a compliment to the chairman of the committee, who did an excellent job, and I 

think it was worth going to the committee and working with the member. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Who was the chairman? 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — It occurred to me, Mr. Speaker, that there might be some of my constituents who might be 

watching this and not know who the chairman is. 

 

I want to make a couple of brief comments. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — As chairman. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — As chairman, I want to make a couple of brief comments. One of the useful things about 

this committee is that it . . . Not only do members serve the public, but it is a good education for members who sit on 

that committee. Members understand the administration of government . . . Members who have sat on the committee 

for a while have a  



 

June 11, 1985 

 

3229 

 

much better understanding of the public administration. 

 

Some members, indeed have taken an interest in a particular subject, and that does describe the members from 

Rosthern, who has taken an interest in pensions. I do disagree with his comments to some extent. There’s no question 

but what the problem is sizeable, and if it’s not immediate it is very large. 

 

I think, however, he may be overly generous in suggesting that the government has solved the problem. I think that’s 

not true. I think the problem is yet to be solved. The problem is growing, and it will continue to grow until 

governments are prepared to bite the bullet. 

 

With respect to past governments, of which the government of which I was a member is only one of three or four, the 

problems with pensions really did not become acute until the 1970s when pensions were hit with both increased 

inflation and increasing salary levels. And the moneys which had been put in in previous years were woefully 

inadequate to cover formula pension plans. So the huge deficits were not so much a question of neglect by previous 

governments, who can hardly be expected to have envisioned the economic conditions of the ’70s, the inflation, and 

the very large salary increases of 15 to 20 per cent a year. 

 

I want to make one other comment. I think the committee is a very useful committee. I sincerely believe that the 

public do not feel government is too large; they don’t feel it’s too small. They don’t want larger or smaller 

government. What they want is more effective government. The want to ensure that their dollars are being efficiently 

spent. 

 

The work of this committee, Mr. Speaker, does go some distance towards ensuring the tax dollars are efficiently and 

effectively spent. It’s work, Mr. Speaker, would be enhanced considerably if we had more support staff. I want to 

make an argument now for more support staff. Members of the committee are busy. Most of us sit on a number of 

different committees, as well as preparing for work in the Assembly. Few of us, Mr. Speaker, have the time to put into 

the work of the committee that it really deserves. Our work would be considerably enhanced if we had some research 

staff. Some of the more enlightened legislatures have done this. The Government of Canada has some research staff. 

We, in effect, really don’t have any, and it does lessen the effectiveness of our work. 

 

I would urge members opposite to consider another year providing some research staff for this committee. One of the 

ideas that was advanced in previous years was to, in a sense, kill two birds with one stone. During the winter months 

we could pay some compensation to a university student who might be able to give us some assistance. 

 

In the scheme of things it would not be expensive and would provide some, I suppose, academically superior 

university students with an opportunity to earn some money while they were at university, and would provide some 

valuable assistance to members of the committee. I thought it was an excellent idea. It has apparently been used in 

Ottawa. For a very small sum of money we could do something significant for outstanding students, and we could 

assist the work of the committee, and I would urge members opposite to consider that for another year. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Speaker, I have the privilege of introducing to this Assembly some students from Judge 

Bryant School here in Regina. There are 21 grade 4 students who are presently seated in the Speaker’s gallery. They 

are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. John von Osinski, and chaperon, Mrs. Sylvia Paluck. 



 

June 11, 1984 

 

3230 

 

I hope that you enjoy your tour of the Legislative Building today. I look forward to meeting with you immediately 

after question period for pictures in the rotunda and later for refreshments. I would ask the members of both sides of 

the House to join with me in extending a welcome to these young people. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to this 

Assembly, Albert Samuette. He’s an exchange student from Zambia, who is participating in the student youth science 

program at Thom Collegiate, which is in my constituency of Regina North. And with him is his host, Barry 

Pittendrigh. They are seated in the west gallery. 

 

I understand, Mr. Speaker, that when Albert is not studying, he has been a tourist and has seen much of our beautiful 

province, and one of the highlights, of course, is this visit to or legislature. I trust that they will find their visit with us 

this afternoon enjoyable and informative, and that they will enjoy the proceedings in our House today. I look forward 

to meeting with them after question period, and I ask all members to welcome them to our Assembly. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Old Age Security Benefits 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Premier, and it deals with the letter his finance 

minister sent to Ottawa yesterday, portions of which he read in the House. The letter says, in part, and I quote: 

 

Perhaps consideration should be given to restructuring old age security benefits based on income, or 

amalgamating old age security and guaranteed income supplement into a plan based on income. 

 

In other words, Mr. Premier, your government has recommended that Ottawa end universality of old age security 

pensions and apply an income test, or a means test, to decide who will, and who will not, get pensions. 

 

Do you agree, Mr. Premier, that this is the clear position which your finance minister has expressed in his letter to the 

Mulroney government? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t suggest at all that seniors be subjected to a means test. What was 

suggested in the letter was, in fact, that we recommend to the federal government that they look at all the options that 

are available to them, particularly with respect to high-income individuals. And I’ve expressed it here many times: that 

in my view high-income individuals should not receive the same benefit as people who are very, very low on fixed 

pensions. 

 

Now we suggested to the federal government: look at all the options; please take everything into consideration when 

you’re looking at a way to offset this or fix this. And we said we don’t believe that low-income seniors should not be 

protected. They should have protection. By all means they should be protected. We have a little bit of difficulty when 

we start protecting high-income seniors. 

 

And we said: look at all the programs, look at the incomes, and take a look at that and see what’s possible to make 

sure that you cover the entire bailiwick, and that you protect low-income individuals, but you don’t spend a great deal 

of money on high-income people — particularly those that are making a very adequate income — and that you’re not 

going to be  



 

June 11, 1985 

 

3231 

 

sacrificing low-income people for high-income people. 

 

And we asked them to take a look at it. And I think other jurisdictions, perhaps Quebec, has asked that they take a 

look at the same thing to make sure that low-income people are protected. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. And I asked you, Mr. Premier, a direct question: do you 

deny that the words in your finance minister’s letter “ based on income” — and that’s the direct quote — suggest that 

some seniors will be getting their old age security pensions and others will not? And you virtually said that. Some 

people, who you described as high-income, will not. 

 

Do you also agree that in the same letter you suggested that these income-based pensions would help Ottawa reduce 

the deficit? Do you then concede that your government is recommending an end to universality, and end to pensions 

going to all Canadians, and introducing a test depending on who has — in your words — a low income and —in your 

words — a high income? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — What I am saying, and the Leader of the Opposition, I’m sure, is aware of this, that if the 

federal government is in a really difficult financial situation, and the country is, why should we continue to provide 

more and more tax dollars to wealthy individuals? I just don’t see that it makes any sense. 

 

I mean, it’s one of the reasons that I’ve endorsed tax reform. And I have the Premier of Manitoba enforcing tax 

reform; the Premier of Alberta, and the Premier of British Columbia saying the tax system is not fair. If high-income 

people are one, not paying their share, and high-income people are getting more and more tax dollars, and 

high-income people are being rebated, and at the same time, low-income people need more, it seems to me a fair 

request that we say to the federal government — and my western colleagues agreed; the premiers of the four western 

provinces — let’s take a look at the whole tax system and make sure that it’s fair. Because most people today believe 

that it is not fair; that very, very high-income people are not paying their tax; very, very high-income people are 

getting rebates or getting tax dollars, and they don’t need it. And they’ll really admit, Mr. Speaker, that they don’t 

need it. 

 

So we’re saying to the federal government: take a look at the whole system. Take a look at how we tax. Who’s taxed? 

Is it fair? Is it simple enough? Is it overcomplicated? And particularly, and as the Minister of Finance pointed out, 

protect the low-income people. But to do that, you don’t necessarily have to give a bunch of money to people that 

have all kinds of money on one hand and two, aren’t even paying any income tax on the other. And I think it’s a fair 

request, Mr. Speaker, to have the federal government look at the entire system to make sure that we’re not just 

rebating the rich. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. You have conceded that you want to do away with 

universality, that you don’t want to pay money to people with high-incomes, in your words. And that, of course, does 

away with universality. 

 

What we’re now anxious to find out is: where will you draw the line? Will you draw it, as you did yesterday in your 

resolution, with $12,000 a year income for single people, and $18,000 a year for families? Are those people who have 

the high incomes who you want to deprive of their full pension benefits so as to provide more support for 

lower-income people? Are those the people? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, Mr. Speaker, a fair income tax system taxes people, and it should tax people, the 

more income they have. And that’s precisely what we’re asking the federal government to look at. Look at a fair tax 

system. 

 

And when you’re allocating benefits to individuals, at least you can consider their income tax  



 

June 11, 1984 

 

3232 

 

that they pay, what kind of income that they’re in. And if people are making all kinds of money, are we going to start 

taxing the middle income to subsidize the rich? I don’t think that’s fair. And we’ve asked them to look at that and say: 

please look at the income tax system; at least give it some consideration when you’re designing your system of 

compensation for low-income people. 

 

Let me make it very clear; we believe that the low-income seniors, particularly, should be protected. And we said that 

and we recommended it. We also recommended that our tax system needs to be reviewed, and I’m on record — the 

western premiers support me — that we have to make sure that the wealthy people pay their fair share, and for heaven 

sakes why should we ask the general taxpayer to subsidize the wealthy? We don’t think that it’s a good idea. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Much as the Premier wants to talk about the income tax 

system, I want to talk about pensions, and that’s what the question was about. 

 

And I ask you again: with respect to your doing away with the universality of old age security pensions, are you 

drawing the line at $12,000 for income for single people, and $18,000 a year for couples, as your resolution did 

yesterday? Is that where you draw the line, saying that those people are wealthy, or where do you draw the line? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, the lines are drawn with the progressive nature of income tax, and you know 

that. Any income tax system, if it’s working fairly, taxes people with more and more income. That’s the way it works. 

 

What we have recommended to the federal government is: please take a look at all your programs. You’ve got a whole 

basket of programs. We suggested one other alternative that they could look at. And then we suggested some other 

things that they could consider to make sure that we are not taking good tax dollars and putting it to people and giving 

it to people that have a great deal of income. And it gradually goes up and up and up, and the wealthier they get, it 

would seem to me, that the less the public has to be concerned about giving them money. 

 

And as you go up and up and up, I think the taxpayers and the seniors of this province would say it’s more important 

that the money go to the low-income people, not to the wealthy. And we’ve said to the federal government, please 

give consideration to that. Okay? 

 

I mean, in our province we gave very, very serious consideration to seniors, and you know that. We gave a 100 per 

cent increase in one year. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. Order, please. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — One supplementary, Mr. Speaker. That’s an interesting argument against the flat tax, 

saying up and up and up goes the income tax. 

 

But I don’t want to talk about income tax or flat tax. There will be an opportunity for all of us to talk about that. I want 

to talk about the old age security pension and your proposal that universality be removed — that the rich do not get in, 

in your words. 

 

And what I am asking you, Mr. Premier, is: who do you call rich? Are the rich today the same people who were the 

rich yesterday, who you were taking away indexing from — those with $12,000 in income who are singles, and 

$18,000 who were couples? That’s who you said were rich yesterday. Are they still the same people today who will 

suffer this income test for their old age security pension? 

 

And what I am asking you, Mr. Premier, is: who do you call rich? Are the rich today the same people who were rich 

yesterday, who you were taking away indexing from — those with $12,000 in income who are singles, and $18,000 

who were couples? That’s who you said were  



 

June 11, 1985 

 

3233 

 

rich yesterday. Are they still the same people today who will suffer this income test for their old age security pension? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, that’s what the Leader of the Opposition says that I said, and I didn’t use those 

figures at all. And when the federal government looks at the entire package and the mechanism that is available for 

seniors, we could find as people become wealthier and wealthier, if they’re got a pension of 75 or $80,000, then why 

should we be subsidizing them? And as it gets up and up and up, well they’ve received less and less and less. 

 

So we’re saying to the federal government, please look at it all. I few look at income in pensions, we obviously have 

to look at the tax system. If we look at reform, maybe we can make it fairer. And Mr. Speaker, in my view the 

Canadian taxpayer wants to see tax reform so that we can have lower average taxes for middle-income people, and to 

make sure that wealthier people pay their fair share, and that low-income people get protected. And that’s exactly 

what we’ve recommended. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 

MR. SVIENSON: — Just a short supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I think the Tories in this country have an interesting 

dichotomy they have to face. Recently Michael Wilson is on record as saying that government investment vehicles 

will be indexed so that investors in this country can receive a fair return on their government investment. 

 

I would like to ask the Premier if he supports that dichotomy of the federal finance minister, and if that will happen in 

this province. 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what I support. I support the full income protection for 

low-income seniors in Saskatchewan and in Canada. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. The member rose on a supplementary. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier, and it has to do with the resolution that was 

passed by your government yesterday that said in essence that a means test should be applied that would restrict any 

individual who is a senior over 12,000 to have de-indexing. 

 

I wonder why, Mr. Premier, you would look at those seniors over $12,000 a year as the place to make those kind of 

cut-backs, and why you wouldn’t look at corporations, for example, in the federal budget, who were given $2 billion. 

Why wouldn’t they be looked at by your government as a legitimate area to raise the needed taxes to solve the deficit 

problem? Why would you try to take away $1.6 billion from the senior citizens and give 2 billion to the oil 

companies? Why would you do that? Why is that the only area you look at? 

 

(1445) 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m delighted that the member raised the issue with respect to taxes on 

companies, particularly oil companies and the revenues that they contribute, and in terms of big oil companies that 

could be taxed. If the federal government follows our view, they’ll never make so much money in the history of the 

country on taxing individuals, or taxing companies, and taxing railroads, and taxing oil companies. 

 

The number one tax contributor today — above income tax, above sales tax, above anything else — is the oil patch; 

25 to 30 per cent of our revenues coming in are from the oil industry. The energy business in this province is the big 

number one contributor — above income tax, sales tax, and the rest of it — and we’re receiving revenue like we 

haven’t received it before from the  



 

June 11, 1984 

 

3234 

 

oil business, which pays for schools and roads and hospitals, Mr. Speaker — all those things. 

 

One other thing, big companies . . . how about railroads? How about railroads in the province of Saskatchewan? Mr. 

Speaker, we are getting 19 to $20 million a year more out of the railroads than the previous administration got. That’s 

what the Government of Saskatchewan is doing. That is a large increase. And do you know what happens, Mr. 

Speaker, that kind of money . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Order, please. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Supplementary to the Premier. In a letter he quoted during question period yesterday, he 

talked about proposals that would be an alternative to the de-indexing, and basically talked about a means test that 

would have said indexing or de-indexing was all right for those over $12,000. Would the Premier now table that letter 

that he was quoting from so that members of the opposition and the public of Saskatchewan would have a copy of that 

letter to debate and to see whether or not the public agree with the concept included in that letter? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I read the letter. It’s in the proceedings of the legislature, and if the hon. 

member realized what went on in here, he’d know he’d have a copy of it already. So he’s got it. I read it, quoted it, 

and I’ll reiterate what we said. We said that the federal government should: one, protect the low-income people, and 

you voted against that; you don’t want to protect them, obviously. And we said, two, that you should look at all kinds 

of mechanisms to make sure it’s protected. And three, make sure that you’re not in a position where you’re going to 

provide more and more tax dollars to very wealthy individuals. 

 

MR. SVIENSON: — The discussion today, Mr. Speaker, has been on indexing, and earlier in the debate I just 

indicated that Michael Wilson is on record in Ottawa indicating that government investment vehicles should be 

indexed to return more money to those investors who are the wealthy in our country, who support these vehicles. We 

have this kind of vehicle in Saskatchewan recently with the Saskoil bonds and the SaskPower bonds. 

 

The Speaker, or the Premier, is on record suggesting that he doesn’t agree with indexing pensioners. I ask him: does 

he agree with indexing the investments that the people of Saskatchewan are making, the wealthy in Saskatchewan are 

making, on SaskPower and Saskoil bonds? I must also indicate that Saskoil bonds are currently indexed, in that the 

profits, some of which are returned to those wealthy investors in Saskatchewan . . . 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad the hon. member asked a question with respect to bonds in 

Saskatchewan. They are, one, very . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . indexing and bonds . . . indexing and bonds. Bonds 

in this province are very, very popular. I believe that the oil bonds are popular for two reasons — probably three 

reasons: one, people really enjoy participating in Crown corporations in Saskatchewan. They’re never had a chance to 

do that, and the facts is that they can do it now. 

 

The bond itself, the first 10 per cent’s guaranteed. And then depending on how the company goes, they can receive 

more. This last year the return was 13.3 per cent on Saskatchewan energy bonds, which was absolutely first class, 

because of the performance of the energy business; performance of the company because of management, good 

personnel, good labour relations — all the rest of it. It returned to the people of Saskatchewan who invested, 13.3 per 

cent. 

 

Now we are going to be offering more bonds to the public. We are soon going to be offering a new power bond. There 

will be other bonds and various kinds of investment instruments offered to the public of Saskatchewan. And from my 

experience, they’re only too ready to participate and to share in it. 

 

MR. SVIENSON: — The simple question is: are you planning to index government vehicles for those who invest in 

them, at the same time not supporting the indexing of old age pensioners’ pensions? 



 

June 11, 1985 

 

3235 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, those bonds are tied to the performance f the corporations. If they do well, the 

people who invest in them do well. So we are . . . they understand what the investment vehicle means; they’ve got a 

minimum, and they know that that’s there; and then if the company does well, they can even do better. And they find 

that a very acceptable sort of investment, and they’re only happy that it happened. I suppose one of their big concerns 

is that some day, down the road 25 or 30 years, the opposition might get back in and take it all from them. 

 

Countervailing Duty on Canadian Hogs 
 

MR. ENGEL: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question to the Minister of Agriculture, and his answer is going to 

depend on when we get back or not, Mr. Premier. 

 

My question is the Minister of Agriculture, and it deals with a decision that was made today by the U.S. commerce 

department that it will uphold the countervailing duty on Canadian hogs. This disastrous decision, Mr. Minister of 

Agriculture, will increase the duty on hogs. It’s not only that they’re going to maintain it, but they’re going to increase 

the duty on Canadian pork from $9 per hog to $11 per hog, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, that disastrous decision will drive prices for Saskatchewan pork producers even lower than it has been in 

the past month, and it will drive many Saskatchewan producers out of business. What action do you propose to take as 

a result of this decision? 

 

HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Speaker, hon. member, certainly this is something we’ve been watching for some 

good long time, and we’re all well aware of the June 10th deadline. I suppose now the issue will become one of what 

will the United States International Trade Commission report within, I think, 45 days is the time frame that they have 

to report back on. 

 

But recognizing that it is a serious problem out there, a very serious on e for our hog producers, I this very morning 

have telexed the Hon. John Wise, indicating to him our dismay at that decision, offering once again any assistance that 

my department or myself can be in terms of putting a strategy in place to deal with this, or in fact any other measures 

that he might deem appropriate. I’ve raised it with him before. I know he has had it on the agenda in the trade talks 

with his counterpart, but I have telexed him again to raise the issue. 

 

Secondly, this very day, officials from my department, as well as other provincial agriculture and trade departments 

across the country, as well as federal officials, are meeting in Regina. That is one of the several issues that are on the 

agenda, and hopefully we can see some resolve and, in fact, have the strategy to deal with the question. I guess what I 

can say to the hon. member is we are well aware of it. We’ve sent a telex to the minister. Officials are, as I said, 

meeting on that issue and others this very day. What the outcome will be, I cannot say at this point in time. 

 

MR. ENGEL: — New question, Mr. Minister. The Premier of Manitoba has met on two different occasions with 

governors of the states affected, trying to lobby there as well. Our Premier is sitting silent on the issue. 

 

But the other question I have, Mr. Minister: the pork producers of Saskatchewan, pork producers across Canada, are 

going down to Washington on June 25th to lobby the federal government in Washington. Will you support this group, 

and will you also be helping these producers to defray some of their expenses to make their case in Washington on 

June 25th? Let the pork producers speak for themselves in this case. Will you stand behind them, and will you help 

them with their travel costs? 

 

HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Speaker, and hon. member, certainly we’re very supportive of our pork producers, 

and in terms of what might be doe financially, that hasn’t been raised with  



 

June 11, 1984 

 

3236 

 

me particularly. But I can report to the hon. member, in fact, that the chairman f the Pork Producers Marketing board 

here in Saskatchewan came with myself and the chairman of the Beef Stabilization Board last week, at our expense, to 

go to Ottawa to talk about tripartite red meat legislation. And by their very presence, I would suggest to you, they 

were lending support, no only to our case, but for ourselves, to their view of how the world should unfold. And they 

made it abundantly clear that markets are their first priorities, so certainly we met with them on numerous occasions; 

we’ve in fact taken them with us to Ottawa, and we’re 100 per cent behind them. 

 

MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the Premier. I don’t know how we’ve gotten into this position. 

The Prime Minister and President Reagan left Quebec City after the blarney summit that all Mulroney had to do is 

pick up the phone. 

 

Would you call him and tell him to pick up the phone to his friend Ronnie Reagan and see it they can correct this 

situation, a situation that is affecting so many pork producers in your province. Would you do that much? — yes or no 

is all you need. 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, over the last few months this administration, with the support of the Premier 

of Manitoba and Alberta and British Columbia, are now lobbying the federal government on a daily continuing basis 

for freer trade and open common market between the United States and Canada. Most of our trade takes place between 

the United States and Canada. We believe that’s a major market for us. We are lobbying the federal government. 

 

I also have individuals in Washington lobbying there. They are advising me on who is the best people to talk to. We 

are doing everything we can to encourage a good, solid attitude between Americans and Canadians. And believe me, 

the American consumer and the American purchaser and the American markets feel much, much better about 

Saskatchewan under this administration than they did the previous administration. 

 

Cut-back of Teachers at Southend, Reindeer Lake 

 

MR. YEW: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the Minister of Education. Yesterday, the elementary 

school at Southend, Reindeer Lake was closed because parents withdrew their children to protest the severe cuts in 

teaching staff planned for their school next fall. The school, Apitowkusisan School, has been instructed to cut its 

teaching staff by 25 per cent next fall. And I’m sure, Mr. Minister, the quality of education delivered will deteriorate. 

 

Can the minister please assure the Assembly and the parents at Southend, Reindeer Lake, that she is attempting to find 

a way to prevent these kinds of drastic teaching staff cut-backs and deterioration of education for the North and for 

this community. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Speaker, I’m aware of the situation as it is at Southend. I am also aware that there has 

been a decline in the student enrolment since last year, which more than likely accounts for the drop in teachers. 

 

I am of the understanding, Mr. Speaker, that the board made a decision — most of it due to declining enrolment — to 

have a look at the entire division and where the declining enrolment was coming from, and the reductions would be 

made accordingly. 

 

I can tell the member from Cumberland that we are in discussions with the board to do with their budgeting and to do 

with their deficit position. But I would also remind him that any decisions to be made with staffing — the hiring and 

dismissal of teachers and where the teachers will be placed — is totally a school board decision. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 



 

June 11, 1985 

 

3237 

 

Additional Funding for Opportunities ’85 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make a brief statement with respect to an employment program, and 

an addition that we’ll be making today. 

 

In my view, Mr. Speaker, a nation’s youth is not only the hope, but the foundation, of its future, and this is no less true 

for a province, and certainly a province like Saskatchewan. Any province that can provide opportunity and challenge 

for its youth today will be able to fulfil its responsibilities and add strength tomorrow, and particularly, to provide 

vision to confederation in the years to come. 

 

No province in this county has a better record that the province of Saskatchewan in opening up the future for its 

younger generation. Nineteen eighty-two, 1983, and 1984, the best employment record of all the provinces in Canada 

was in our province of Saskatchewan. 

 

In Saskatoon and Regina in that same time period, ’82 and ’83, had the best job creation record of all of western 

Canadian cities. In fact, in 1984, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan was the only prairie province to experience a growth in 

population. 

 

(1500) 

 

Well this government is determined to see that this tradition continues. In March we announced a 

Canada-Saskatchewan Opportunities ’85 joint program with the federal government that provided $8 million for 

summer employment, particularly for young people. No joint federal program has been more enthusiastically received 

any place in Canada. By the end of May, some 4,420 applicants had been approved for funding in the Opportunities 

’85 Program, and some 7,850 jobs have been created. The program was a tangible demonstration of the harmony 

between federal and provincial governments, and it was so evident at the first ministers’ conference . . . quite evident 

at the first ministers’ conference held in Regina in February of this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I am pleased to announce that Saskatchewan has provided an additional $3 million for student 

summer job creation in 1985. We regard this as a particularly positive gesture in this, the International Year of the 

Youth. The additional $3 million will help create even more summer jobs for university, technical institute, and high 

school students in the province of Saskatchewan. It will assist more students in gaining career-oriented or practical 

work experience this summer, while at the same time assisting them in financing their future education. 

 

This government believes, Mr. Speaker, that the $3 million in additional provincial funding for Opportunities ’85 will 

help create as many as 3,000 additional summer jobs for students in our province, in addition to the almost 8,000 that 

have already been approved. 

 

This means that with Saskatchewan’s additional 3 million in funding, almost 11,000 summer jobs will be created for 

the province of Saskatchewan and its students. I would rank and compare this with any other province in the country, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

This additional funding will enable us to approve the majority of jobs requested by employee applications when 

Opportunities ’85 was initially unveiled, and on employer applications that were received prior to the May 4th cut-off 

date, and that will be met with departmental approval. 

 

As I noted earlier, the response by both students and employers to the initial $8 million program has been 

overwhelming, and it was the kind of response that deserves a little bit of further comment. I believe the response was 

a real indication of the state of this province and its people today. People in Saskatchewan are moving forward, and 

they like it. 



 

June 11, 1984 

 

3238 

 

It shows that two very large segments of our population, students on one hand, and private industry employers on the 

other, are people of dedication and determination and co-operation. They are people of initiative and innovation. We 

asked them for advice with respect to the kinds of things we believe would be workable in creating jobs for young 

people in the province of Saskatchewan. They gave us good advice, and we listened and followed up, and the jobs 

speak for themselves. These are people worthy of this province, and the Government of Saskatchewan is only too 

pleased to be able to offer this further commitment to enhance those desirable and admirable qualities of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, we welcome the additional funding which this government is putting into 

summer employment. Just as we welcomed in January their winter works program, we now welcome, some six weeks 

after the universities have closed, their summer employment program. 

 

I have no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that the response was overwhelming. Anybody who offers a job in Saskatchewan today 

gets an overwhelming response, and I am sure that members who have been able to put applications in the paper and 

get a call for applications knows this response. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, stripped of its rhetoric, we welcome the proposals by the Premier. We understand why they’re 

coming forward. The recent unemployment statistics showed that Saskatchewan was numbered third in Canada — 

Ontario first, Manitoba second, Saskatchewan third. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in no year for at least 12 years has Saskatchewan been third. I understand that the government is 

responding to this deplorable record, and I am glad they’re putting more money in, and I hope more young people get 

jobs as a result of it. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 111 — An Act to amend The Statute Law to enable Urban, Rural and Northern Municipalities to 

Broadcast Radio and Television Signals 
 

HON. MR. MCLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Hon. Minister of Urban Affairs, I move first reading of a 

Bill, An Act to amend The Statue Law to enable Urban, Rural and Northern Municipalities to Broadcast Radio and 

Television Signals. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 112 — An Act respecting Liens in the Construction Industry 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill, An Act respecting Liens in the Construction 

Industry. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 

 

At 3:08 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal 

Assent to the following Bills: 

 

Bill No. 54 — An Act respecting Apprenticeship and Qualification for Certification in Certain Trades 

Bill No. 9 — An Act respecting the Transportation of Dangerous Goods in Saskatchewan 



 

June 11, 1985 

 

3239 

 

Bill No. 01 — An Act to incorporate The United Community Funds of Saskatoon Foundation 

Bill No. 03 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate The House of Jacob (Beth Yakov) of the City of Regina 

Bill No. 82 — An Act respecting Credit Unions 

Bill No. 44 — An Act to amend The Venture Capital Tax Credit Act 

Bill No. 61 — An Act to amend The Department of Revenue and Financial Services Act 

Bill No. 62 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments resulting from the enactment of The Department of 

Revenue and Financial Services Amendment Act, 1985 

Bill No. 77 — An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act 

Bill No. 78 — An Act to amend The Corporation Capital Tax Act 

Bill No. 84 — An Act to amend The Horse Racing Regulation Act 

Bill No. 88 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments resulting from the enactment of The Department of 

Finance Act, 1983 

Bill No. 89 — An Act to amend The Heritage Fund (Saskatchewan) Act 

Bill No. 90 — An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act 

Bill No. 92 — An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Consequential Amendment Act 

Bill No. 96 — An Act to amend The Agrologists Act 

Bill No. 97 — An Act to amend The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act (No. 2) 

Bill No. 98 — An Act to amend The Management Accountants Act 

Bill No. 99 — An Act to amend The Crop Insurance Act 

Bill No. 101 — An Act respecting the Profession of Optometry 

Bill No. 68 — An Act to amend The Vehicles Act, 1983 (No. 2) 

Bill No. 107 — An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities Act (No. 2) 

Bill No. 108 — An Act to repeal The Municipal Public Works Act 

Bill No. 110 — An Act to amend The University of Saskatchewan Act 

 

His Honour then retired from the Chamber at 3:12 p.m. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday during question period the Premier quoted extensively from a 

letter which he referred to as a letter to the federal finance minister. We were a little surprised that after question 

period that document, that government document, was not tabled, and in asking for it today the Premier refused to 

table the letter. I would wonder, Mr. Speaker, if you would make a ruling now, based on Beauchesne’s, page 115, 

paragraph 327, under “Documents Cited,” section (1). And I will quote from it: 

 

A Minister of the Crown is not at liberty to read or quote from a despatch or other state paper not before the 

House, unless he is prepared to lay it upon the Table. 

 

It seems to be very clear that having quoted from the document he is required to . . . has no option. I would ask you to 

now rule on that, Mr. Speaker, because it’s so clear. I would ask for a ruling at this time. 

 

HON. MR. MCLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, if it will help at all in your ruling, I will assure you and assure the House that 

the Minister of Finance will have no problem in tabling that letter during today’s sitting. It’s in Hansard right now, as 

a matter of fact. In any case, it’s been read by the Premier. But we will have no problem in tabling the letter if that’s 

what his wish is. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Order. In paragraph 327 of Beauchesne’s it does state that there is a requirement if 

you quote from a document that the document be tabled. And the Acting House Leader has offered that the document 

be tabled. So I believe that satisfies the point of order. 

 

MOTIONS 



 

June 11, 1984 

 

3240 

 

Resolution No. 5 — Federal and Provincial Assistance for Family Farms 

 

MR. ENGEL: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The resolution before this Assembly is: 

 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan to implement immediately a major comprehensive 

emergency farm assistance plan providing provincial financial assistance to the most hard-pressed family 

farms which are suffering from low commodity prices, high utility rates, property taxes, and interest charges, 

poor weather conditions, and an unsympathetic federal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the House convened last fall and a major, major portion of Saskatchewan, and in my constituency 

in particular, was suffering from the severe effects of the drought, this resolution was one that should have been 

debated and should have been acted on. 

 

(1515) 

 

But this spring we’re finding ourselves facing conditions that threaten even further the conditions of the family farm. 

Last fall we were calling on the government to establish a drought relief program similar to the one that we had set up 

four years prior to that. As early as March 27, back in 1981, our provincial government acted immediately and 

provided financial assistance to give relief to farmers in towns and villages that were adversely affected by drought 

conditions that spring. 

 

But this government decided that they didn’t need to act on behalf of farmers. The 1981 drought program provided 

financial assistance that depended on the severity of the particular farmer, rather than just on a per-cow figure like 

your government did. 

 

If a farmer was very hard-pressed, he could buy hay at $25-a-tonne subsidy, no matter how much hay he bought. He 

got $10 per tonne to move feed grain. He got 5 cents a mile to ship his cattle. He got financial assistance to improve 

his wells and provide a better water supply. 

 

And yet this government’s action creates headlines like this, Regina Leader-Post: “Cattlemen are furious as the 

government agrees to import more beef.” And another headline from Maple Creek: “Government has ‘no courage.’” 

Let me read this one into the record. The Leader-Post on the 8th of June, headline was: “Government has ‘no 

courage.’” 

 

Maple Creek — The federal government showed “no guts” in its decision to allow an additional eight million 

kilograms of subsidized European beef to enter Canada this year, says the president of the Saskatchewan Stock 

Growers Association. 

 

“This is a mistake,” said Neil Jahnke, a straight-talking rancher from Gouldtown in southwestern 

Saskatchewan. “They showed no courage, no guts” (are his words). 

 

And Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say that things haven’t changed. A Tory’s a Tory’s a Tory. The provincial 

government has no courage, has no backbone, and no wish to help the farmers that are suffering a severe plight this 

spring. And I think it’s time we have some action. 

 

I’m not going to take a long time today discussing this very serious issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I want to reiterate 

that farmers’ net income hits a 14-year low — 14 years since farmers that are suffered as low an income. If people 

aren’t nervous, says an agricultural statistician, they should be. Inventories are a way down — way down, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And just let me cite some figures from this article. In terms of total net income, Saskatchewan was the worst off of the 

three prairie provinces. Alberta saw its total net farm income drop 22 per cent to 259.8 million in 1984, while 

Manitoba’s increased from 54 million in ’83 to $324.5 million  



 

June 11, 1985 

 

3241 

 

last year. Did you notice that? Alberta’s dropped, Saskatchewan’s dropped the most, but what happened in Manitoba? 

Good old Pawley Manitoba, NDP Manitoba, their income on the farms increased from 54.8 million to 324.5 million 

— an increase in farm income. 

 

That’s no accident, Mr. Deputy Speaker — that’s no accident. That’s a government where Herb Pawley and his 

agriculture minister, Sam Uskiw, have programs in place that are working. They had a financial program that works. 

The article goes on to say: 

 

On a national basis, total net income to farmers increased 19 per cent on a national basis, but Saskatchewan’s 

was the worst in 14 years. 

 

A 14-year low under this government and this administration. 

 

The government claims that we have a program in place. We have taken our counselling and assistance, and we’ve got 

our programs in place so no land will be taken . . . a Farm Land Security Act in place. But are those programs 

working, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Are those programs in agriculture working? 

 

Another article on the 11th — that’s today — a very timely article I’ve clipped here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the 

article is entitled “Banks Win Majority of Farm Foreclosure.” The banks win. Isn’t that something. Here is a 

foreclosure legislation that when it was introduced I said, has loopholes big enough to drive the Royal Bank through. 

And what are the results? The banks win the majority of farm foreclosures. 

 

Bank spokesmen say the stats show the board is acting responsibly, but the Leader of the Canadian 

Agricultural Movement says it proves more has to be done to save indebted farmers. 

 

More needs to be done. This board was . . . 

 

Set up in January, the Farm Land Security Board is responsible for investigating farmers that are facing 

foreclosures. It decides if the farm is viable and if the farmer is making a reasonable effort to meet its 

mortgage obligations. 

 

The board then makes a written recommendation to the Court of Queen’s Bench which is hearing the 

foreclosure case and its recommendation is to be the court’s primary consideration. 

 

At the end of May, the board sent 14 recommendations to court favouring the farmer and (Mr. Deputy 

Speaker), 30 reports favouring the lender . . . 

 

Fourteen favour the farmer, and 30 the lender. Boy, isn’t this government behind the farmer. Isn’t this government 

anxious to save the farmer when two-thirds of their recommendations go to the banks, and so consequentially their 

farm land security legislation didn’t work. 

 

In an attempt to improve it we said it should include farm machinery and farm livestock, and it should include his cash 

receipts. But no, you decided not to. 

 

We then urged you to include a write-down provision. Those 30 that the banks had the ruling in their favour, if the 

board would have had the power like they do in Manitoba, if that board would have had the power to look at his 

farmer’s assets and say to the bank, how much are you going to lose if you foreclose on this farmer; and if the board 

would have said, we’re going to lose on this $300,000 deal, we’re going to lose $80,000; and if they then would have 

turned around to the farmer and said, if you get a $80,000 credit, will you be able to make it; will you be able to make 

it; and if the farmer could approve it, that with an $80,000 write-out he could make it, he’d still have his land. 



 

June 11, 1984 

 

3242 

 

But not here in Saskatchewan he doesn’t. There’s no write-down provision. And it wouldn’t have cost anybody any 

money because the banks are going to lose that kind of money on their foreclosures anyhow. And that would have 

protected the price of land, it would have protected the farmers that are farming, and it would have given a chance, 

and the banks wouldn’t have lost a cent. But this government decided they weren’t going to act in favour of the 

farmer. 

 

The only mention of the money that this government had was the cost of administration. And I think the government is 

hard pressed to answer the farmers, why they’re not on the farmers’ side. 

 

There’s many, many other areas that I could mention. Interest on indebtedness alone, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 

Saskatchewan, is $401 million; 17 per cent — 17 percent of a farmer’s expenditures are indebtedness. Fuel and 

lubricants amount to 16 per cent of $366 million. The need for credit is out there. And yet this government set up a 

farm counselling and assistance plan where the counselling and assistance, according to the Minister of Agriculture, 

costs us 5,000-and-some dollars alone last year. 

 

And what results did we get? The farmer got a letter from the board, he took it to his bank, and the bank laughs at it. I 

had farmer after farmer calling me. I’ve had two calls today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from farmers that say, we were 

approved by the farm counselling and assistance plan, and the banks and the credit unions refuse us — were refusing 

us. 

 

So this government was no help for farmers. It has no help for farmers that need money to pay for expensive fertilizers 

and chemicals. It has no help for farmers that are faced with high fuel bills, and the price of fuel has tripled. And yet 

what does this government do to those farmers? If that farmer can’t afford a new vehicle and decides to buy a used 

one, they stick him for the 5 per cent extra. They get their dirty fingers into his bank account to get another 5 per cent 

off their education tax. 

 

The farmer loses $375 a year on his property rebate. He loses another 300 to $325 on the elimination of the home 

quarter tax rebate. He loses the money that he has to pay on the education tax on used vehicles. And on the farm land 

security, 30 per cent of the farmers had a stay of execution; 60 per cent of the farmers lost their land. And you call this 

a government that is anxious to help farmers? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the plight is serious. But why did I introduce this legislation today? On Friday we brought before 

this House an emergency resolution that would deal with the plight that farmers are facing as far as grasshoppers are 

concerned. On Friday we were going to debate it. The Speaker ruled that that problem was in order. But the 

government, with their majority, decided that that problem, that plight facing farmers, isn’t an important one. 

 

So today I raise this issue that this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan to implement immediately a 

major comprehensive emergency farm assistance plan providing provincial financial assistance to the most 

hard-pressed family farmers. And the farmers that I want to talk about are the farmers that are facing a dilemma 

because of losing their crops. This government isn’t willing, this government isn’t willing to put up 50 per cent of the 

cost for chemicals. 

 

Alberta decided that if the farmers needed to spray their grasshoppers they could get 50 per cent of their chemicals 

paid, no questions asked. They save their bills from May 1 to November and submit them at the end of the year, and 

they get 50 per cent of the cost of their chemicals. 

 

I’ve had farmer after farmer call me and say, what can we do? I’ve sprayed my crop twice. Another one today said he 

sprayed a third time, and the grasshoppers are still hatching. What is he going to do? The hatch didn’t all happen at 

once. And this government has decided that  



 

June 11, 1985 

 

3243 

 

those hard-pressed farmers will not get any financial help. 

 

You’ve announced a program, you’ve announced a program for R.M.s, and the R.M.s are in total confusion. There’s 

disarray there. Some R.M.s in my riding have sprayed their grasshoppers on their roads. They’ve hired aircraft to 

come in and spray it. Others are rigging up some truck-mounted sprayers to spray the ditches. But that little 66-foot 

road allowance every mile one way, and every two miles the other way, Mr. Speaker, is a very small percentage of the 

land that needs covering, very small percentage of the land that needs covering. 

 

And I think today we should have the government members stand up in debate of this resolution and tell the farmers in 

my area that I can’t afford to buy them more spray, tell the farmers that couldn’t get a loan from their bank or their 

credit union in spite of being approved by their board, and tell those farmers what they are supposed to do; tell those 

farmers how they’re going to save their crop when the grasshoppers are that thick. 

 

Thousands of grasshoppers per square metre, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I don’t know if you’ve ever seen that many 

grasshoppers in the Shellbrook area or not, but I am sure if you would you’d be anxious to see something done about it 

because it’s serious. 

 

(1530) 

 

You can’t step on a field without killing 100 grasshoppers. There’s that many grasshoppers out there. They’re thick, 

and they’re growing, and Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re only a quarter of an inch long today. How big are they going to 

be in a month from now, or two months? And by the time they are an inch and a half long have you ever figured out 

how far those little guys can fly — and without refuelling? They’ll go all the way up to your country where there is 

some green. And they’ll go out and eat your crops. And they’ll lay their eggs this fall, and next year we’ll have 

grasshoppers all over Saskatchewan because this government isn’t willing to spend a little money on spray to get them 

where they’re at, to get them where they’re at. And I think a stitch in time saves nine. 

 

You’re waiting for us to deal with the problem of grasshoppers in your area because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can assure 

you there’s not going to be one PC elected in rural Saskatchewan where there’s grasshoppers. There’s not going to be 

one PC elected where there’s grasshoppers because they say the government should be helping, the government 

should be helping. 

 

Now there’s another point, there’s another point that needs to be made, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that is on the 

chemical that we use. Back in the time of the wheat midge and in the time of the Bertha army worm, a decisive 

government made some decisions and allowed some chemicals to be used that weren’t licensed, that weren’t licensed. 

And the farmers are telling me that surely we can make an exception to our licensing provision, and use some 

chemicals that work. 

 

Now farmers are spraying every third and fourth day down in our country. They’ll spray, and three days later they’ll 

hatch and they’ve got to spray again, and within two weeks those farmers have sprayed three times. And that costs 

275, 265, just for the chemical — just for the chemical. And the question I pose today is: why not license a chemical 

similar to Dieldrin, or like dialdrin, that would put a one-shot spray down and they’d get them. They’d get the 

grasshoppers. 

 

And the farmers are saying we need something like that to control them. If we don’t look at some new chemicals and 

provisionary spray for an exceptional problem, we’re not going to be able to lick it — we’re not going to be able to 

lick it. And this is a serious problem, and I think action needs to be taken. We’ve done it in the past, and I think it’s 

time we get the jump on the ‘hoppers — we get in there and we decide to spray with chemical that will work. The 

problem is serious and I think that this government should take action. 



 

June 11, 1984 

 

3244 

 

On June the 4th your Tory friends in Alberta announced that they will provide 50 per cent to bona fide ranchers and 

farmers the cost of chemical. They expect to spend $6.6 million to spray the grasshoppers in Alberta. The program 

requires farmers to submit an application form and receipts to their local department of agriculture field men, or 

agricultural service board. Purchases made between May 1 and November 30, 1985 will be eligible to be subsidized. 

And they list a whole list of chemicals that are covered in that province. Even if farmers have to spray two, three, and 

four times, or maybe even more, their entire purchases will be subsidized by 50 per cent. 

 

There’s going to be no limit on the amount of money a farmer will get. Not only cultivated farm land is covered, but 

they’re covering range land, Indian reserves, Hutterite colonies, and also any spraying done by farmers on road 

allowances and highway ditches. The Alberta Department of Agriculture estimates that on average the chemicals will 

cost $3 an acre, and they’re planning on spraying 4 million acres — 4 million acres. 

 

Saskatchewan has an awful lot more land, and I estimate that the cost, if we’re going to subsidize grasshopper spray in 

Saskatchewan, will be anywhere between 12 and $16 million. And I think that is peanuts compared to what the cost 

will be if we don’t get involved in and cover the spray. I’ll make it as serious as I can, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan to implement immediately a major comprehensive 

emergency farm assistance plan providing provincial financial assistance to most hard-pressed family farmers 

. . . 

 

And into this you can read: 

 

. . . those farmers that are suffering so severely from the plight of grasshoppers. 

 

I so move, seconded by my colleague from Shaunavon. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairperson, or Mr. Deputy Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to become 

involved in support of the motion put forward by the minister from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg which deals, I believe, 

very effectively with the problems facing farmers, in particular farmers in south-west Saskatchewan, where our 

constituencies are situated. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not only a problem of the cost-price squeeze that was in place at the beginning of the year, 

but as the year goes on, and we have now two Tory budgets — one provincial and one federal, that we’re having to 

face as farmers — we’re finding that even though income, as my colleague has mentioned, has dropped substantially 

over the past year, that the tax burden on farmers is increasing, and increasing very significantly. 

 

I want to point out just a few areas, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where we believe the government is not only not doing what 

they should in order to help farmers, but is actually acting at a detriment to the farmers. 

 

We see the first proposal of this government, the provincial Government of Saskatchewan, to have the most massive 

tax increase on property that we have ever seen in the history of this province. With the removal of the property 

improvement grant, which effectively takes $375 out of the pocket of every one of the 60,000 farmers in the province, 

we are seeing a major shift of taxation onto the backs of the farmers that is not based on income. 

 

This increase in property and property tax has nothing to do with income. The farmers will have to pay this increased 

tax even though their income is dropping fairly significantly in the past two years. 

 

We see, as well, the removal of the rebate on the hone quarter of the education portion of the  



 

June 11, 1985 

 

3245 

 

property tax, which amounts to in the majority of cases, the average of $200. The area of the flat tax which was 

introduced by this government, another increase for . . . 

 

MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — order. Order, order. The motion specifically says, “property tax.” I would ask the 

member to stay on the motion. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re talking about hard-pressed financially strapped farmers, and 

I would say that tax increases are directly related to the motion. And I’m sure that if you think about it, as a farmer, 

you would understand that in talking about the plight of farmers and the financial crisis they now find themselves in, a 

major portion of the increased burden on them is the result of the federal and provincial budget and the tax increases. 

And if you’re saying this has nothing to do with the farmers’ problem, the farmers of the province don’t understand 

that, when what the government should be doing, in fact, is cutting the property tax that the farmers have to pay. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is clearly what a New Democratic government would do. A New Democratic government 

would remove the education portion of the tax on land in this province right across the board, and would be a tax 

saving of thousands of dollars to the farmers of this province. 

 

They would look at the possibility and, in fact, introduce a fuel rebate program that would allow farmers to have their 

fuel cut by 32 cents a gallon. And what we are seeing the federal government do in fact, Mr. Speaker, and you will be 

well aware of it, is increase the tax on farm fuel by 9 cents a gallon as of September 1st. And you add this on to the 

other taxes, an average farmer who uses 4,000 gallons, that will be a direct tax increase of $360. 

 

Now when you add these up, what the federal and provincial government has done for each of the 60,000 farmers in 

this province. That’s the legacy that the Tory governments, provincially and federally, have given to the farmers of 

this province. 

 

Now if you could say that these millions of dollars that are being taken out of farmers’ pockets would be given back in 

programs, then you could explain it to the farmers, possibly, although they would say it would be much more 

responsible to take the massive profits from the oil companies or form resource companies or from banks or from 

railway companies, and use that to help the farmers. But what they are saying is that even though they are taking 

millions of dollars out of the farmers’ pocket, there is no program for them. 

 

I say to you that in the area of grasshopper spraying program, similar to the one that was introduced in Alberta which 

would pay the farmers 50 per cent of the cost of their spray, that program will cost the treasury of Alberta $6 million 

— $6 million we’re talking about in terms of a program that would help out literally thousands of farmers in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The problem has gotten so bad that there are emergency meetings of the R.M.s in south-west Saskatchewan — 

meetings of the R.M.s in south-west Saskatchewan which are passing resolutions which would go some distance to 

deal with the problem created by the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

And I have here a letter to the minister from the Rural Municipality of Val Marie, dated June 7th which . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Yes, I will be tabling it, and which the minister has received, dated June 7th, 1985. And it’s addressed 

to the Hon. Lorne Hepworth, Minister of Saskatchewan, Room B43, down in the basement, Legislative Building, 

Regina, Saskatchewan. And there’s the reason why he’s in the basement — because that’s the priority they give to 

agriculture in this province. And the letter goes on to say: 

 

Dear Mr. Minister: I am enclosing for your perusal a copy of the minutes of a joint  



 

June 11, 1984 

 

3246 

 

spring ratepayers’ meeting held last evening. As you can no doubt imagine from the resolution on page 2, 

grasshoppers formed a very exciting part of the meeting. 

 

In view of the fact that officials of your department in 1983 urged municipalities to adopt by-laws placing the 

responsibility for spraying of grasshoppers on road allowance to adjacent property holders to minimize the 

cost to municipalities, I refer to a meeting in the research station in Swift Current where Mr. Lloyd Harris, one 

of your department officials, was in attendance, as well as a representative from various chemical companies. 

 

And in view of the fact that many municipalities in this area adopted such by-laws, would it not seem to fly in 

the face of the recommendation of your department to announce a program such as the one you announced last 

week? 

 

This is coming from a joint ratepayers’ meeting of some 150 farmers who are saying to you, Mr. Minister, well you 

don’t have a responsibility to deal with the upper echelons of the R.M., you have a responsibility to deal with the 

farmers at the grass roots level. 

 

And what you are saying, and I go on: 

 

It would seem to us that you ought to have known that many municipalities are in no position to assume any 

cost because of your by-laws. 

 

One lawyer has advised that in his opinion this municipality would be in contravention of its own by-law 

should it assume any responsibility for spraying of the grasshoppers. 

 

And they conclude by: 

 

We urge your government to rethink its position as concerns assistance for grasshopper control and bring it 

into the line with the program in Alberta. 

 

Your attention is drawn to the resolution 2, passed at last night’s meeting. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to take an opportunity to read two of the resolutions that were passed at that 

meeting by the joint ratepayers’ meeting of the two R.M.s. And I will be tabling this as well. The minister would 

already have it, but for his benefit will read it into the record. And it has to do with the outbreak of grasshoppers. 

 

It’s moved by the reeve of the Climax Rural Municipality, and the resolution reads: 

 

Whereas a drastic outbreak of grasshoppers is expected in the area; and whereas the cost of spray for the 

control of grasshoppers is very expensive; and whereas the farmers’ revenues are down; 

 

Therefore, be it resolved that the Government of the province of Saskatchewan, the Dominion of Canada, be 

called on to assist farmers by providing a policy to reimburse the farmers for 50 per cent of the cost of 

chemicals used in the eradication of grasshoppers. 

 

Now this is from two R.M.s. And since that time I have had calls from three other R.M.s in my constituency who are 

asking you to carry out a similar program. 

 

There was one other, I thought, interesting resolution passed that dealt with the removal of the property improvement 

grant, and this too has been sent to the Minister of Agriculture. And it deals with the announcement that the property 

improvement grant would be removed,  



 

June 11, 1985 

 

3247 

 

which adds to the economic plight of hard-pressed farmers. 

 

And this was moved by the resolutions committee and seconded by Arthur James, one of the ratepayers in the R.M. 

Pardon me, it was moved by the resolutions committee and seconded by Barry Brown, who is a councillor on the 

Climax Rural Municipality. 

 

And it says: 

 

Whereas the provincial government in its recent budget announced the removal of the property improvement 

grant and the home tax assistance program rebates which will effectively mean increases of about $500 in the 

1985 property taxes paid by farmers in our municipality; and whereas the taxation of property for education 

purposes rather than income tax is an unfair system; 

 

Therefore, be it resolved that we urge the provincial government to reinstate the property improvement grant 

and the home quarter tax assistance program, and that we encourage the province towards removal of the cost 

of education from property tax. 

 

And that was carried unanimously. 

 

(1545) 

 

And I want to say to the minister that these resolutions with an NDP government would be passed by a New 

Democratic cabinet which would eliminate the education portion of the property taxes . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Well, the minister says that the farmers are asleep. That’s what he says from his seat. He says, we can get away with it 

because the farmers are asleep. He says that from his seat. And I would say to him that he should stand in this 

Assembly, stand in this Assembly, and say that farmers are asleep when they’re passing resolutions like that. 

 

Because I say to you, Mr. Minister, that there’s a reason you’re in the basement, why you’re going to stay there until 

the first chance the farmers have to kick you out as Minister of Agriculture in the Weyburn area — because that’s one 

of the hardest-pressed areas in the province today, and you have done nothing as minister to help out the farmers. 

 

So I say to you, Mr. Minister, that having encouraged the R.M.s to pass by-laws that does not allow them to spray for 

grasshoppers, I say that it is unfortunate that you now take no responsibility for the problem that R.M.s now find 

themselves in. 

 

And there’s a reason why you’re dumping this political hot potato on the backs of the locally elected governments. 

And that’s what you’re doing. The political pressure to help out the farmers who were coming to your office, and you 

know what you did rather than go to cabinet and fight for the farmers of this province? Do you know what you did? 

Do you know what you did, Mr. Minister? You didn’t go to cabinet and fight for money for farmers. You know what 

you did? You made an announcement that dumped the responsibility on the backs of the locally elected R.M. councils. 

That’s the spineless Minister of Agriculture we have. 

 

And I say to you that this will come back to haunt you because R.M.s around the province are passing resolutions 

which are calling on you to do the honourable thing and go to cabinet with a proposal to get some money for farmers. 

You haven’t done it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — In question period we asked you whether or not you had taken a proposal to cabinet, and 

you wouldn’t respond. And that means only one thing: that you  



 

June 11, 1984 

 

3248 

 

haven’t done it. And I would urge you to stand in this Assembly today on this most important issue and outline a 

program that would call on your government to carry out a program to help hard-pressed farmers. 

 

And with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will take my seat and ask the Minister of Agriculture to now rise and announce a 

grasshopper program that would have some meaning for the farmers. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 

MR. PETERSEN: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I listened to comments from the members opposite very 

carefully, and as usual I tend to agree with the comment just made from one of the members in their seats that it was, 

as usual, drivel. 

 

And not only was it drivel, it was negative — completely and totally negative. Members of the opposition completely 

ignore . . . absolutely and completely ignore the things that the provincial government has done for farmers over the 

past three years, and things that the federal government has done for farmers. 

 

When you take a look at one of the first things . . . One of the first things that this government did upon taking office 

was to remove the gas tax. I’m going to have to go right . . . 

 

MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — Order. The only . . . Order. The only tax reflected in the motion is property tax. I 

would ask the members to stay on the motion. 

 

MR. PETERSEN: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When you take a look at the programs that the opposition is being 

critical of by introducing this motion, one should go back to all the positive things that this government has done, and 

among them are the gas tax. I accept your ruling that perhaps it’s a bit out of order, but it did help farmers that got 

caught in the cost-price squeeze. 

 

You take a look at the rural gasification program, helping to cut costs for farmers — that helps farmers. The prairie 

drought assistance program, Mr. Deputy Speaker — that assisted farmers. The opposition has been standing here this 

afternoon trying to imply that the province of Saskatchewan has done nothing for farmers. And that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is an untruth. It’s just not true. The Government of Saskatchewan has been implementing programs. The 

Government of Canada has been implementing programs. 

 

And I’d like to bring your attention to a couple of things that the federal government has done for farmers. They 

brought out a western grain stabilization payment to farmers. That, Mr. Speaker, amounted to millions of dollars. The 

federal government, in its recent budget, announced $500,000 off capital gains, tax free. 

 

Co-operation between the provincial and federal governments, Mr. Speaker, has never been greater. Take a look at our 

crop insurance program, the Saskatchewan-Canada crop insurance program — $258 million went out to farmers last 

year. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if that is not helping farmers, doing things to assist them during tough times, I don’t 

know what is. 

 

When you take a look at a number of positive programs, Mr. Speaker . . . You take a look at our farm purchase 

program, trying to assist young farmers out there who are caught in tough times . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 

I’ll agree there’s low commodity prices out there. The world markets aren’t that great. And I agree with the opposition 

when they say that. It doesn’t take a genius to figure that out. If you’re a farmer, you know it. 

 

We tried to get young farmers started, tried to help them take over the family farm, gave them 8 per cent money — 

5,000 young farmers that we have helped, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The opposition comes out and says, land bank forever. 

Well they didn’t help very many young farmers own their own farms. As a matter of fact, during their administration 

we lost 10,000  



 

June 11, 1985 

 

3249 

 

family farms — 10,000. We’re down to 67,000 farmers. It was almost 80,000 when they took office. That’s the 

trouble, Mr. Speaker. Those people in the opposition tend to play with figures. They tend to try to mislead the public. 

They use scare tactics, the most disreputable tactics possible. And they’re trying to do that again today. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I may take my place, I understand there are some students who my seat-mate would like to 

introduce. Would that be possible? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

HON. MR. MUIRHEAD: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is with pleasure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to introduce 

to you, and the members of the legislature, 40 students from Davidson high . . . of Davidson School. They are grade 6, 

I understand. 

 

They are accompanied with their teachers, Glen Winkler and Sel Norberg. They are also accompanied by their 

chaperons, Mrs. Marion Bessy, Mrs. Marlow Phillips, and Mrs. Donna Walker. 

 

I ask the members to join me in welcoming them to the Assembly, and I thank them for coming. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 5 — Federal and Provincial Assistance for Family Farms (continued) 

 

MR. PETERSEN: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I was saying, there are a number of programs that the 

federal government and the provincial government have implemented to assist farmers. When you take a look at our 

Farm Credit Corporation, federally, trying to get farmers started out on the farm, reducing the interest rates that are 

charged on loans that helps farmers, that’s a $5 million saving. If you take a look at the federal government’s fuel tax 

rebate, 4.8 cents a litre, that’s nearly $40 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The capital gains tax exemption I mentioned 

earlier, that’ll save just about $50 million for farmers. 

 

Reduction in freight rates. We’re going to talk about costs here. Freight rates. We all ship grain. It costs money. We’ve 

got lower freight rates, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a saving of $29 million. We’ve had assistance programs in the province 

funded partially by the federal government. They kicked in $7.5 million into the north-east flood assistance program, 

just about $30 million into the prairie drought assistance program. 

 

And the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg says nothing has been done for those farmers down there. Shame. 

Shame, I say to you. That’s terrible. Read a little bit. Take a look at the numbers. You can’t ignore millions and 

millions of dollars that have been poured into this province. You just can’t. And yet I understand you are. I understand 

you are. 

 

When you take a look, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the positive programs that this provincial government has put into 

place, I don’t think the opposition has got a leg to stand on. We believe that the Saskatchewan farmer is the backbone 

of the country. Agriculture is the backbone of the country. The members opposite can’t disagree with that. Maybe we 

should go through this one sentence at a time and ask them what they agree with and disagree with. 

 

They agree that farming is the backbone of the country. Right. No argument. They also have to agree, Mr. Speaker, 

they also have to agree that we have introduced programs that would assist that agricultural sector. 



 

June 11, 1984 

 

3250 

 

They talk about grasshoppers, and they make fun of those people who come from the north country, up in the North. 

Your own seat was just being derided, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. He 

mentioned wheat midge. Yes, there was a wheat midge problem. The provincial government put funds forward to help 

in research against wheat midge, trying to find out how we could combat it. 

 

But I don’t think, and I don’t think any of the members of this House would think, that the provincial government 

should be totally responsible for spraying every acre that every farmer has. I have wheat midge in my territory. You 

don’t see me asking for a great hand-out from the provincial government to go spray the wheat midge. It’s my 

responsibility to look after myself. 

 

We’ve done that with grasshoppers, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I hear the member from Quill 

Lakes talking about the oil companies. 

 

Earlier today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in question period, the Premier pointed out to the opposition that taxes coming into 

this government that go to assist programs for farmers . . . 

 

MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — Order. Order! I’ve asked members on both sides of the House to keep their comments 

on the motion before them. 

 

MR. PETERSEN: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that being the case, I’d like to move the following I’d like to move 

an amendment, if I may. I’d like to move that this Assembly amend the motion . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Thank 

you. I’d like to move an amendment: 

 

That the motion before the Assembly be amended by striking out all the words after “Assembly” and substituting the 

following: 

 

Commends the Government of Saskatchewan and Canada for their positive actions in implementing programs 

to assist farmers during the present cost-price squeeze. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member from Moosomin. 

 

(1600) 

 

MR. ENGEL: — That motion, I think if you would look at your rules, would be out of order because it changes the 

intent of the motion. The motion talks about hard-pressed farmers, and this motion says you’re commending the 

government, so it completely changes the intent of the motion. 

 

I find the motion out of order. 

 

MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — Order. Order. I find the member’s point of order not well taken. Order. 

 

I’d refer the members to paragraph 773 in Beauchesne’s, Page 233, and amendments like this have been found in 

order previously in this Assembly. 

 

The debate continues. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I find it pleasurable, of course, to rise and speak to this motion as 

amended. 

 

I want to pick up on some of the comments, if I might, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that were made by the member for 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg when he referred to the grasshopper situation and that  



 

June 11, 1985 

 

3251 

 

we hadn’t taken sufficient action in that regard. And he spoke to that as he addressed this motion. 

 

I want to raise some humour, if I might, in the sense that here a couple of days ago, he was referring to these 

grasshoppers as being an inch long, and today they’re only a half an inch long, and they’re now half as big as they 

were before. So it cold be we’re getting control of the problem. 

 

In any event, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it would be fair too to make a comment with regards to the member for 

Shaunavon. When the Minister of Agriculture made a comment from his seat, which is quite often done in the 

Assembly, and he made a comment about the member over across the way being funny, and so on, and laughing, and 

the member for Shaunavon turned that right around to indicate that, you know, the Minister of Agriculture thought the 

farmers were, you know, were laughing over this matter or funny or something, and taking it completely out of 

context. So I take exception to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think that that needs to be corrected. 

 

And I have the opportunity to do that while I’m on my feet. You know, if you want tout it in the context of lying, I 

suppose I can lie on my feet as well as you can . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, well I . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . That’s right, if you want to put it in that context. And you chose not to, so I chose not to. 

 

Now let’s talk, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the grasshopper situation. Let’s talk about the grasshoppers. What have we 

done about grasshoppers? Let’s take, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a quote from the Maidstone Mirror: “Program to battle 

grasshoppers.” 

 

Agriculture minister, Lorne Hepworth, recently announced a program to help Saskatchewan farmers in their 

battle against grasshoppers. “Our government will not let grasshoppers destroy the crop and eat into farmers’ 

incomes. We are understanding a grasshopper control program which is unprecedented in the history of 

Saskatchewan. The grasshopper situation is a major concern which requires action of this magnitude if it is to 

be properly controlled,” Hepworth said, “and the government substantially reduces financial cost to the 

municipal councils.” 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan under the leadership of our Minister of Agriculture, the 

member for Weyburn, has in fact taken this issue . . . He’s taken the bull by the horns, to use that expression, and he 

has a situation that has threatened agriculture in this province under control. 

 

What I find ironic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that the members in the NDP opposition have such little faith in a 

government which they’ve never recognized, and that is local government. They should remind themselves that there 

are three levels of government: federal, provincial, and local governments — local governments. 

 

The local governments are prepared, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to pick up their share of the responsibility and take on the 

fight hand in hand with the provincial government. There is a situation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which is most welcome 

in the province of Saskatchewan where two levels of government join forces to fight a situation — grasshoppers in 

this case. 

 

Now that’s being done, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s being done very effectively. The program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

is all-encompassing to say the least. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — All-encompassing. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Well, the member says, all-encompassing, and I suppose the member for Quill Lakes would 

like to know just, you know, how encompassing the grasshopper program is,  



 

June 11, 1984 

 

3252 

 

and I am more prepared to tell him just how all-encompassing it is. 

 

Arrangements have been made, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and for the information for the member for Quill Lakes, with the 

Canadian Pacific Rail company to pay for work done and arranged by R.M.s. Also an agreement has been struck with 

the CNR and they will co-operate in municipalities which will control programs for the entire municipality. 

 

Parks and Renewable Resources is all under control, and contact people have been established. Irrigation canals, in 

most situations it is not recommended that chemicals be applied closer than 25 metres by ground equipment or 50 

metres with aerial equipment to water bodies not wholly confined within an individual’s property boundaries, so those 

parts of our province in regards to irrigation canals. 

 

PFRA pastures as it respects grasshopper control, is being will managed as well. We will co-operate to the fullest 

extent possible in any grasshopper control program established by a municipality if all the farmers in the affected 

areas participate to obtain maximum control. 

 

Further, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Indian reservations, as well, will be covered under the comprehensive grasshopper 

control program as announced by the Minister of Agriculture, notwithstanding the fact that there is still one further 

program which is part of that comprehensive program, and that is the Department of Highways. 

 

The Minister of Highways has given his assurance that that department will cover 100 per cent of the cost of spraying 

on Department of highways road allowances. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the question as to whether or not this government has adequately addressed the grasshopper 

situation in Saskatchewan, I believe, is well answered, and it’s well answered, and it’s well answered in the 

affirmative. We have . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I don’t know. The member for Athabasca is talking to me 

from his seat, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I don’t know whether they have grasshoppers on the great lakes in the North 

or not, but if they are they should be getting off of there fairly quick. All right. There is . . . That’s right. Now, then . . . 

 

The other thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I want to touch on — this motion as I read it, it was read into the records. 

The member for Assiniboia and Gravelbourg laid it out quite nicely. We have amended it. What is it really talking 

about? 

 

It’s talking about whether or not this government and the federal government are doing anything to assist farmers in 

their economic crisis. And they talk about the crisis being because of bad weather conditions, high interest rates, 

grasshoppers — which I’ve just covered, and surely you don’t want me to go over that again. Those issues are the 

ones that you have identified in your motion. 

 

Well let’s talk about interest rates, and let’s ask the people of Saskatchewan by way of this motion, what did an NDP 

government in 11 years in administration ever do about high interest rates? Absolutely nothing. You did nothing with 

regards to high interest rates. You were not able to address that question in 11 years in office. And yet you have the 

audacity to stand in this House and introduce the motions that you have to condemn this government, and to condemn 

the federal government for their so-called inability to manage the affairs of agriculture I the province of 

Saskatchewan. Now that’s audacity. 

 

With regards to interest rates, we don’t need to go through the whole list, but we all know that this government has 

introduced programs unprecedented by any other government in the history of this province for its agricultural sector. 

 

Let’s talk about what we’ve done in terms of a percentage and compare that to what the NDP did when they were in 

power. The agriculture budget today in Saskatchewan is 54 per cent  



 

June 11, 1985 

 

3253 

 

higher than it ever was under their administration — 54 per cent higher. And we say that, and you have to ask 

yourself, well where did you get the extra money, like over $150 million of new money into agriculture? 

 

One of the places we got it is right through our corporate rate structure, which the Minister of Finance is proud to 

indicate to this Hose is the highest in Canada. I believe it'’ twice the corporate rate that you have in Manitoba — twice 

the corporate rate. So we’re able to take those moneys that we get from those multinationals that you hate so badly and 

we’re able to put it into agriculture — 150 million new dollars — 54 per cent. 

 

So do I ever hear any of you ever talk about that? No, not at all. You never talk about the fact that we have done more 

for agriculture than any minister under an NDP government has ever done in the history of this province. Ever. 

 

You had a farm fuel rebate program, supposedly to help the farmers in easing the cost-price squeeze, which you raise 

in your motion. And what did you do with it? Well you had one minister, Gordon MacMurchy, who took it off. And if 

that wasn’t enough, you had another one, his name was Edgar Kaeding. He used to represent Saltcoats riding. The he 

took it off. So you had two ministers of agriculture that took away a farm fuel rebate program. 

 

And you’re quiet on that. Sure you are. You want to forget that. There’s a few things in the past you want to forget, 

and those are some of them. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s no point in my standing here and going down the whole list . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Yes, that’s right. The NDP applaud that because they don’t want to hear me go down a whole list of accomplishments 

in agriculture — a tremendous accomplishment by this government in agriculture — because it far supersedes 

whatever the NDP were able to do. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there is one thing that needs to be brought to their attention before I take my place. When you take 

a look at all of the provincial programs, the federal programs, and add them up and see what they come out to as a 

benefit to the people of Saskatchewan . . . to the farmers in Saskatchewan, and I just want to share that with the 

members, just for their information. If I take a look at the totals: provincial, 161.3 million; federal, 161; stabilization 

insurance, 636; for a total of 959.3. 

 

Now then, average that per farmer. And what is that worth per farmer? It’s two point . . . 2,443.9 provincially; 2,439.4 

federally; and 9,636.4 for the stabilization and insurance; for a total of $14,519.70 per farmer. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — And you say we don’t do nothing for farmers. 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — And we don’t anything for farmers — 160-some-odd million dollars in new money, a budget 

54 per cent higher than yours, and those kinds of benefits per average per farmer. And on top of that we’re on top of 

the hopping grasshopper control. Right? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what needs more to be said? We now rest our case on that. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1615) 

 

PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 



 

June 11, 1984 

 

3254 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mrs. Caswell that Bill No. 53 — An Act 

respecting Freedom of Informed Choice concerning Abortions in Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 

 

HON. MR. DIRKS: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The fundamental question raised by this Bill is as follows, I believe: 

does the state have a compelling interest to ensure that a woman about to have an abortion understands very clearly 

what is involved; does she understand the nature of the procedure, the possible implications and risks, and the state of 

development of the unborn child? 

 

I would argue, Mr. Speaker, that the state, that society through its government, does have a compelling interest to 

ensure that such information is made available. And I would therefore submit to this Assembly that the principle 

inherent in this Bill, that of provision of information, is a sound principle, at heart a democratic principle, and that this 

Bill is in the best interest of the citizens of this province. 

 

I wish to take a few minutes to elaborate, Mr. Speaker, on why I believe society does have a compelling interest to 

ensure that accurate and full abortion is provided. In the first place, Mr. Speaker, abortion is the taking of developing 

human life. That is an incontestable fact. What we know today about fetal life is far in advance of what was known a 

decade or two ago. Long gone are the days, Mr. Speaker, when anyone in good conscience can refer to the developing 

fetus as but a blob of cells or an appendage of maternal tissue. 

 

The science of fetology has in recent years rapidly pushed back the frontiers of knowledge concerning the humanity of 

the unborn child. Indeed, this accumulated knowledge has led prominent medical persons who once advocated an 

open approach to abortion, to reject their earlier position, and today they embrace a far more selective approach to 

abortion. 

 

This very fact itself, Mr. Speaker, should be sufficient reason for us to support the view that if highly educated 

professional physicians have changed their minds on the abortion question, based on new-found knowledge, then 

surely the unprofessional lay person should have access to similar information in order that their decision concerning 

abortion would be an informed one. 

 

I shall not take the time of the Assembly to review in detail the information which fetologists have produced during 

the past decade. That information is readily available to those who have the time and inclination to research such 

information. 

 

Suffice it to say that based on this expansion of knowledge, people on all sides of the abortion controversy 

unanimously agree that abortion does, in fact, terminate a separate and distinct developing human life. And it is 

because abortion is involved with the taking of developing human life that the state must take appropriate steps to 

ensure that such life is not taken capriciously, precipitately, in a atmosphere of undue pressure, or without a due 

appreciation for the nature and possible consequences of the abortion procedure. 

 

While our law does permit abortion, Mr. Speaker, we nevertheless owe it all society to ensure that the ending of that 

life will not take place without those involved clearly appreciating the magnitude and the reality of the abortion act. 

That appreciation, Mr. Speaker, obviously cannot take place without full and complete disclosure of accurate 

information about the fetus, the abortion procedure, and possible short- and long-term implications. 

 

Now some will argue that the present procedure is adequate to provide that information.  



 

June 11, 1985 

 

3255 

 

However, those in our society on both sides of the abortion controversy who have researched this matter in any detail, 

will have to candidly admit that on occasion pregnant women have unfortunately not been given full, complete, and, in 

some cases, even accurate information on abortion. 

 

Surely, Mr. Speaker, those who are responsible for making the decision to terminate an unborn human life should also 

clearly make that decision with full knowledge and free from any undue pressure. It would seem tome, Mr. Speaker, to 

be rather contradictory for a civilized democratic society which puts a high value on informed choice and on life, to 

suggest that those involved in the abortion decisions shouldn’t be denied such information. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, because we are talking about today a medical procedure which results in the taking of 

developing human life, surely then society, through its government, does have a compelling interest to ensure that full 

and accurate information is provided to the pregnant women considering an abortion. 

 

I wish now to move to the second major argument in support of the principle of this Bill. Just as we have witnessed a 

substantial advance in fetal science since the 1960’s, so we have also come to understand that abortions may have 

significant physiological implications to which citizens should not turn a blind eye. 

 

I will not take the time to review in detail the many physiological implications of abortion, except to note for the 

Assembly that they include such significant implications as a higher rate of premature births and a much higher rate of 

miscarriages in subsequent pregnancies. 

 

These, of course, are significant implications, not only for the mother, but clearly for all citizens in view of the higher 

medical costs which will be borne by taxpayers as a consequence of these implications. 

 

I would note, Mr. Speaker, that a recent report carried in The Toronto Star indicates that Saskatchewan has one of the 

highest rates of teenage abortion. And of course we know that teenagers who undergo abortions experience a much 

higher rate of premature birth in subsequent pregnancies. 

 

The risks and long-term problems associated with such abortion-related premature births should in and of itself, Mr. 

Speaker, be sufficient reason for information about abortion risks being provided. 

 

I also want to speak about the psychological risks attendant to abortion. What has become clear over the past decade 

and a half is that abortion is not a simple medical procedure with but minor consequences for many women who 

undergo abortions. What is also clear is that many women who have undergone abortions did so without accurate 

information, under pressure, and they have suffered because of that decision. And had they known then, prior to the 

abortion, what they know now about abortion, they would not have chosen to terminate the developing life within 

them. 

 

The devastating psychological implications of abortion have been well documented for some years now, Mr. Speaker. 

The rapid proliferation in the United States of branches of the organization entitled Women Exploited by Abortion is a 

clear indication that women may suffer devastating consequences from abortion, and that in many instances they were 

provided with very little, if any, information prior to the abortion. 

 

I refer here to the article carried in the Washington Times on Wednesday, October 3, 1983. We have no reason to 

believe, Mr. Speaker, that the psychological impacts of abortion in Canada or in Saskatchewan. Indeed, here in 

Saskatchewan as early as 1974, a practising  



 

June 11, 1984 

 

3256 

 

psychiatrist, Dr. E. Jones, after having referred 500 patients for legal abortions based on psychiatric grounds, reversed 

her position on the abortion controversy, based on the psychological impacts of abortion on the women with whom 

she was dealing. 

 

And as early as 1966, Mr. Speaker, the council of Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists in England 

reported that the incidence of serious permanent psychiatric aftermath from abortion is variously reported as being 

from between 9 and 59 per cent. 

 

I would therefore argue, Mr. Speaker, that the state, that society through its government, does have a compelling 

interest to provide abortion information to anyone considering an abortion. To deny any woman the right to make a 

truly informed decision is discriminatory against women. Indeed, it is undemocratic. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to briefly deal with the objections that have been raised against the principle of this Bill. 

It is suggested that the effect of this Bill would be to limit access of women to abortion. I do not believe this would be 

the case, as Dr. LM Hanson, associate professor of obstetrics and gynaecology at the University of Saskatchewan, and 

one who should know, has publicly stated: “Bill 53 is not designed to limit access to abortion, for (he goes on to state) 

how can information limit access to abortion?” 

 

Secondly, it is suggested that the information to be provided to the woman would be nothing but anti-abortion 

propaganda. I would remind the members that the information to be provided under this Bill is readily available to the 

professional medical community, and would be provided to the woman by a practising professional physician or 

physicians. To therefore suggest that the information referred to in the Bill is propaganda is to call into question the 

professionalism of our medical experts. 

 

Thirdly, it is argued that the decision to have an abortion should be purely a private decision between a woman and 

her doctor with no form of interference or intrusion by the state. However, Mr. Speaker, the fact that we are dealing 

with matters pertaining to the destruction of developing human life is sufficient reason — indeed it is a most 

compelling reason — for the state to take an active interest in this matter. In addition, the psychological and 

physiological implications  of abortions are not simply private implications. These implications impact not just on the 

woman but also on family, friends, associates, and very clearly on the taxpayer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill which in principle deals with the provision of information. For the reasons that I have 

elaborated I believe that the provision of abortion information is a sound principle, in keeping with our best 

democratic traditions. It is a Bill which is based upon information garnered from tin the fields of medical science and 

human psychology. It is a Bill whose basic principle is worthy of legislative support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have fought against the unnecessary taking of developing human life for many years, and will continue 

to do so. Few causes are more important. But I also believe, Mr. Speaker, that we as legislators must act, and must be 

seen to be acting responsibly within our legal boundaries. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is argued from many quarters that this private members’ Bill is unconstitutional. Some advance 

the argument that the provincial legislature does not have the legal jurisdiction to pass a Bill dealing with the 

particular subject matter before the Assembly today. Whether or not this legislature, or the federal parliament, has 

legal jurisdiction to legislate on this matter is a very important question. Others advance the argument that various 

provisions of the Bill, even if amended, would violate the highest law of the land, the charter of rights. These are 

arguments that responsible legislators cannot dismiss, and which must be given rational consideration. 



 

June 11, 1985 

 

3257 

 

Because of the legal issues involved in this Bill, because of the sensitive and potentially divisive nature of this 

legislation, and to ensure that this Assembly is not seen to act perceptibly, and that the people of this province can 

have faith that this legislature will not step beyond its legal boundaries — I believe it would be in the best interests of 

all concerned, on both sides of this matter, for this private members’ Bill, along with proposed amendments, to be 

referred to the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal for a ruling on its constitutionality before this Bill proceeds further in 

our legislature. Such a reference would ensure that this legislature does not pass legislation which is beyond its 

constitutional jurisdiction, if indeed this Bill is unconstitutional, which I hope it isn’t. And such reference will help 

provide guide-lines for this legislature as to what law-making authority pertaining to abortion is, in fact, in the 

jurisdiction of this particular legislature. 

 

In conclusion then, Mr. Speaker, just as I believe the principle of this Bill is in the best interest of society, I also 

believe it would be in the best interests of our citizens for this private members’ Bill to be referred to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal for a ruling on its constitutionality. 

 

(1630) 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think all hon. members understand the comments made by the 

member from Regina Rosemont. There are few that have spoken more strongly on the issue and fought more strongly 

on the issue than that hon. member. And I personally know the difficulties which he faced in taking the position that 

he did, a position that I believe that all hon. members and all fair-minded people will see as a reasonable and necessary 

approach. 

 

Many questions have been raised a to whether Bill 53, if enacted, would be constitutionally valid legislation. It has 

been clear, Mr. Speaker, that the province has jurisdiction to enact legislation in relation to matters of health and 

hospitals. It also has jurisdiction in relation to consent to medical treatment in a general sense. It could be certainly 

argued that Bill 53 deals with these subject areas, and that therefore it is within the jurisdiction of the province to act 

in the manner set out. 

 

Indeed, it could be pointed out that subsection 251(7) of the Criminal Code specifically preserves the need to obtain 

any authorisations or consents that may otherwise be required when a legal abortion is to be performed, that is an 

abortion pursuant to section 251 of the Criminal Code, and unless there is relevant federal legislation the proposed Bill 

may then be valid under the provincial health power. 

 

It is also beyond doubt that the province has jurisdiction in relation to the matter of consent to medical and surgical 

treatment. And the province’s powers are set out in those sections of the British North America Act: section 92(7), the 

establishment of hospitals; section 92(13), under property and civil rights; and section 92(16), matters of a local or 

private nature. 

 

It is apparent, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill deals with matters related to health and medical consent, and therefore there 

are grounds to believe that the Bill is valid under provincial legislation. 

 

However, all hon. members know that abortion is a subject matter which has been dealt with by the Criminal Code of 

Canada, and section 251 of the code outlines the circumstances n which abortion can legally take place. Section 251 

appears to leave room for the operation of provincial laws. Nevertheless, concerns have arisen as to whether Bill 53 

might infringe upon the criminal law power of the Parliament of Canada, and be in conflict with section 251 of the 

Criminal Code, and therefore ultra vires of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the Supreme Court of Canada has recently ruled on the paramountcy or the exclusivity of the criminal law in the 

Westierdorp case. 

 

I further add, Mr. Speaker, that the question of morality has been upheld by the courts as one  



 

June 11, 1984 

 

3258 

 

within exclusive federal — not provincial — jurisdiction. If the Bill is ruled as having a moral purpose as opposed to a 

health purpose, it would then be ruled ultra vires of the province because, as I say, morality is a matter within the 

federal jurisdiction under section 91(27) of the Constitution Act of Canada. 

 

Concerns have also been raised as to whether some of the provisions of the Bill might be inconsistent with certain of 

the rights and freedoms guaranteed under the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. For example, the section 

requiring the husband’s consent would probably violate section 15(1) of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, and may 

violate section 7, guaranteeing the life and security of the person. I am advised that the member proposing the Bill is 

proposing amendments to correct this particular section. 

 

The question of consent of a parent or guardian of a child may also violate section 7, and may also discriminate by 

reason of age, contrary to section 15, but also the hon. member proposing the Bill is proposing an amendment which 

would, in my view, take away the contravention of the charter. 

 

I’m frankly not persuaded by the argument that freedom of expression is violated by section 2 — violated by the 

proposed Bill. It’s not one that in my view is a strong argument because the Bill requires the supply of information 

and is not telling a doctor what to say and there is nothing to prevent a doctor from giving information supporting an 

abortion. 

 

So I question whether the charter arguments are as strong in light of the amendments, I’m advised, being proposed by 

the hon. member. 

 

However, the issues raised are deep and real concerns. And the issue is an important matter. In the circumstances, in 

my view it is appropriate that the issue of the constitutional validity of the Bill be referred to our court of appeal 

pursuant to The Constitutional Questions Act before it is further considered by the Assembly. 

 

In asking the court of appeal to review the Bill before it is enacted through a special reference, we will be able to 

remove any doubts as to whether or not the province has jurisdiction to act in the manner proposed. And I believe 

strongly, Mr. Speaker, that this is a responsible way to deal with this legally difficult issue. 

 

A reference to the court of appeal will allow the matter to be dealt with by those very people who will ultimately 

decide the issue in any case. Parties on both sides have threatened to take the Bill to the courts and, as I say, it will be 

before the courts if those arguments are to be taken at face value. And I think all people would take them at face value. 

 

The procedure of a reference will expedite a judicial resolution of this matter. For the first time after the decision by 

the courts, all legislatures in Canada will know their legislative limits in dealing with this very important issue. And 

we hope, Mr. Speaker, that this procedure will allow an expeditious resolution so that we as legislators can deal 

securely with the legislative powers that we have on this matter, and that those parties concerned about the issue will 

know the limits and the legislative powers of all legislatures in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m therefore proposing an amendment, seconded by the member from Meadow Lake: 

 

That all words after “that” be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 

 

Bill 53, An Act respecting Freedom of Informed Choice, concerning abortions in Saskatchewan, be not now 

read a second time, so that the subject matter of the Bill may be referred to the Court of Appeal of 

Saskatchewan pursuant to the provisions of The Constitutional Questions Act. 



 

June 11, 1985 

 

3259 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is an amendment that I will be making, and I will advise, as well, that under the provisions of The 

Constitutional Questions Act of Saskatchewan, either party would also have an automatic right of appeal to the 

Supreme Court of Canada which should further expedite a resolution of the issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move the motion, seconded by the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

The debate continues concurrent on the motion and the amendment. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today, Mr. Speaker, to participate briefly in the debate on the Bill 

before us and the important issues it raises. 

 

Some of the government members opposite have said outside the Assembly that the Bill is about a fundamental, 

moral, and religious issue — abortion. And there are many of my own constituents and many other Saskatchewan 

people who will agree that abortion is indeed an absolutely fundamental, moral, and religious issue. In their view, 

from the time of conception, the fetus is an unborn child, a distinct and unique person, a human being. Abortion is 

therefore, accordingly, according to this view, the ending of a life, the killing of a distinct and unique person. They 

find that wrong, and a violation of basic moral and religious principles. 

 

Some summarize their position as the “right to life,” stressing the positive value they attach to life of the unborn child, 

and their opposition to abortion which ends that life. And they look across Canada at the large number of abortions 

annually, and they are indeed shaken: more than 30,000 per year in Ontario; more than 12,000 per year in British 

Columbia; more than 6,000 per year in Alberta; more than 65,000 a year across Canada. 

 

And they looked to the Conservative governments across Canada, because there are eight provincial and one federal, 

and they are deeply disappointed. They see no support from the British Columbia government, but 12,000 abortions 

per year; no support for their position from the Conservative government of Alberta, but 6,000 abortions per year; no 

support for the right-to-life position from the Government of Ontario, but more than 30,000 abortions. And now, no 

support whatsoever for the right-to-life position from the Mulroney Conservative government in Ottawa, but 65,000 

abortions across Canada each year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when those who espouse the view that abortion is fundamentally wrong — morally and religiously 

wrong — when they look closely at this Bill, they see it does not deal with their concerns. It does not acknowledge 

their position and endorse it. Those people, Mr. Speaker, are very disappointed with what has been brought forward in 

this Bill. 

 

Moreover, they are especially disappointed because of the Bill’s central thrust, its central and critical provision, the 

matter of consent. How, they ask, does destroying an unborn child become correct and acceptable just because one 

more person consents to that killing? Why is it morally wrong for a young unmarried woman to have an abortion, they 

ask, but somehow right, somehow okay, if she has the consent of her parents? For those Saskatchewan people, Mr. 

Speaker, this Bill is totally wrong since it seeks to sanction or endorse abortion if only we get the consent of some 

individuals. 

 

As I said, Mr. Speaker, as we have looked at this Bill, I submit that it is indeed a bad Bill — bad from many aspects; 

and as others have said, in respect to the constitutionality, but also in addressing the position of those who are opposed 

to abortions. 

 

I want to indicate that Campaign Life of Saskatchewan have examined the details of the Bill. I want only, in closing, 

to quote a portion of their comment. And they say: 

 

While we cannot object to the principle of informed consent prior to abortion —  



 

June 11, 1984 

 

3260 

 

which incidentally is required for any surgical procedure including abortions, without Caswell’s Bill — we 

must object to her presentation of this as a pro-life Bill with pro-life support. 

 

I want to quote one other passage from another paragraph: 

 

It is written, providing the choice to abort, and does not address itself at all to the right to life of the unborn 

child. 

 

One closing comment by the Campaign Life of Saskatchewan: 

 

This Bill provides no effective measure to eliminate unnecessary abortions or even to limit them. Even 

strengthened, the effectiveness of Caswell’s Bill would be minimal . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. I would caution the member about using the names of another member. If he has a 

comment about the member, then use the constituency. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — I was just in reply . . . Well, I won’t argue, fine. 

 

Even strengthened, effectiveness of the Bill would be minimal, since it does not address the issue of abortion 

squarely. This, too, is typical of the PC government’s other attempts to appear to be taking a pro-life action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to comment on the motion that has been put forward, or the amendment by the Minister of Justice, 

to indicate that the government had a full opportunity to review the Bill, to give some consultation, certainly from the 

Minister of Justice and the department, in respect to the constitutionality, in respect . . . It could have been sent out to 

the various groups for their comments, but it was brought in, and now the government are finding themselves in a 

dilemma. They want to refer it to the court of appeal to determine the constitutionality. 

 

I think what it represents is a division in the caucus across the way and this is a method of bailing out of a dilemma 

which they have placed themselves. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to begin my comments with a word about the 

procedure. It is most unusual, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Constitutional references are not unknown in this Assembly. Constitutional references do take place from time to time, 

but I’ve never seen a constitutional reference take place quite in this fashion. 

 

What has been done in every other occasion is that a Bill proceeds and the amendments are made which might 

strengthen its constitutional position, and then after the Bill passes, but before it becomes law, it is then referred to the 

court of appeal. I’ve never seen a Bill referred directly from second reading to a court of appeal without any attempt to 

clean up the Bill. 

 

And there are some obvious things that could be done to clean up the Bill. The fact that this highly unusual procedure 

has been used I think confirms what everybody knows, and that is that the members of the Executive Council know 

this is a bad Bill. It will not work. It will do more harm than good. This is their way of accomplishing what they 

haven’t the courage to tell the member from Saskatoon Westmount, and that is that it’s not a good Bill. This is their 

way of accomplishing what they have not the courage to say. 

 

I’m going to put it in crystal clear. My first line of my comments read . . . I rise today to speak briefly on Bill 53 and 

register my firm opposition to the Bill. At the onset, I wish to establish two things, notwithstanding some of the 

comments which have been made. While the proponents  



 

June 11, 1985 

 

3261 

 

of this Bill would like to say it’s a Bill about abortion, it is in fact a Bill about human rights, the rights of women. 

 

The second thing I want to say is that the Bill does absolutely — nothing whatsoever — to acknowledge or to respond 

to a major social issue before us, the deeply troubling issue of unwanted pregnancies and how to reduce that number. 

For the real social issue here in Saskatchewan and elsewhere in Canada is not abortion, but assuring that every child is 

a wanted child, every pregnancy a wanted pregnancy. That is the real social issue facing us. That is the problem which 

all of us, men and women of all parties, should seek to address and resolve. 

 

This Bill, Mr. Speaker, is wrong-headed, and it is offensive on several counts. The comments have been made about 

the constitutionality of the Bill. I agree with some of the comments made by the Minister of Justice. I could add a 

number of other grounds by which I think this Bill violates the constitution. Given the approach of the Supreme Court, 

court of appeals in recent times. it would seem not to have a great deal of chance of surviving any reference. 

 

I say to the member from Saskatoon Westmount, I think the Bill is therefore dead. I would have felt better if the 

members of the Assembly had voted in that fashion, instead of accomplishing the same thing in this oblique fashion. 

 

The Bill purports to require that certain information — it might just as fairly be called certain propaganda — be 

formally communicated to a woman, and in some cases to her husband and parents. The nature, the source, the 

authorship, the approval of this propaganda is left unspecified in the Bill. But it is clear from the sponsor’s remarks, 

and the remarks which other members have made, that the propaganda is to be narrow, one-sided, biased, 

authoritative, and directive. 

 

Much more serious however and much more alarming are the central principles and provisions of the Bill which focus 

on consent. This Bill, in short, would require not just the consent of the woman herself, but the consent of the father, 

or, if she’s a minor, or both parents. First of all, there is no mention of the father of the child. What the Bill’s 

proponent has not specified is that the father must also consent. Why that should have been the case, I don’t know. 

 

But it is the simple issue of consent which is really at the heart of the Bill. It would require that a mature, independent 

woman, who should otherwise have all the legal rights of an adult in a democratic society, all the rights of free people 

in a free society, suddenly finding her rights diminished and curtailed and her freedom reduced. 

 

The Bill says that not only is her consent required . . . And I state the obvious, her consent is required before any 

operation of any sort if performed by any doctor. I do not think this Bill adds to that fundamental principle which has 

been a part of medical practice for as long as there have been doctors. 

 

Not only is her consent alone, but the consent of her husband is needed. She becomes less than a free person. She has 

fewer rights than before. She must now have the formal written consent of other people if she wishes an abortion. 

That’s the central thrust of this Bill. It is an affront to women. It totally ignores the many ugly circumstances which 

result in unwanted pregnancies — cases such as rape and incest. It is regressive. It is offensive to women’s rights, a 

violation of fundamental human rights of women. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite members opposite to take a hard, close look at the Bill, and to note what its opponents are saying. 

Many are saying that they do not advocate abortion as a means of control, but they certainly do not endorse any 

legislation such as this which violates human rights in such a fundamental fashion. 

 

Others agree that abortion is indeed a moral and religious issue, a matter of conscience for a  



 

June 11, 1984 

 

3262 

 

woman to decide herself in consultation with her medical and spiritual advisors, but they do not endorse such a blatant 

violation of the rights of women, the basic human rights which ostensibly are held equally by all individuals in a free 

society whatever their sex. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I make another, I think, obvious comment. No one would quarrel with the role which has been 

enunciated in a sense for the Bill, and that is that all consent should be free and fully informed. No one suggests if 

should be otherwise. It is a serious violation of the ethics to which all doctors subscribe, and to which I think they all 

privately subscribe as well, both publicly and privately: that is that all consent should be informed, all consent should 

be voluntary. 

 

I think doctors make an effort to ensure that all consent is full and informed. If they don’t, they leave themselves open 

for legal suits which are very, very expensive, in addition to the embarrassment of them. It is our position however 

that this Bill doesn’t accomplish that, doesn’t contribute to it, and is offensive on the grounds of human rights. 

 

Let me just say a couple of words about what would be the clear consequences if the Bill is passed, and I cite only 

three. First, it will set back many, many years the progress Canadians have made inhuman rights. Secondly, it will 

almost certainly reduce the number of abortions in Saskatchewan thus forcing affluent women or those who have 

strong, close support to go to the United States or elsewhere to seek an abortion, while those who are not affluent or 

have not one to support them don’t have that option. Finally, the Bill will do nothing, to meet the basis of the problem 

— to reduce the number of unwanted pregnancies in our society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill before us is a bad Bill. It is poorly conceived. It is poorly drafted. It represents an offensive and 

regressive policy decision. I firmly oppose it, and would really have wished that members opposite had had the 

courage of their convictions and had voted on the Bill. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to speak briefly on the debate which is occurring concurrently 

on Bill 53, as well as the reference motion put by the Minister of Justice. And I want to say that I suppose that in this 

case I respect the judgement of the Minister of Justice on this one issue where he has, on behalf of his caucus who 

have moved in a very inappropriate way in the past month with Bill 53, bailed them out once again. 

 

I find it I suppose in some ways disgusting that a government would bring in a Bill like this, knowing full well all the 

consequences that would come with it, out it before the Assembly, and then not having the courage, as they later 

changed their mind to believe that it was a bad Bill, trying to avoid voting against the Bill, and then had to call on the 

Minister of Justice to get them out of the problem that they had created. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my view . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Being 5 o’clock this House is now recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


