



















































Hansard: May 31, 1985


2789 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 31, 1985 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to introduce to you, and through you to the Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, a group of 20 grade 11 and 12 students from the Arran high school. They are accompanied by their principal, 

Mr. Thelander, and their teachers, Mr. Folk and Mrs. Maga. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome the students here this afternoon, and hope that they find the proceedings here interesting 

and informative, and that they have a nice visit to Regina while they’re in the city. I also wish you a nice visit to the city, 

and may you have a safe journey home. I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming them here today. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. MR. DOMOTOR: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, a group of 

grade 7, 8, and 9 students from Colonsay, numbering 43 in total. They’re situated in the west gallery. 

 

I hope they find the Assembly interesting and informative, and have a safe trip home. I’ll be meeting with them at 10:30, 

and I’d like all members to welcome them here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Minimum Wage Increase 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Premier and the Minister of Labour, and in view of the fact 

that the Deputy Premier is making one of his infrequent visits back to the province. . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Wouldn’t know the answer. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — And would not know the answer, I suppose my question will have to be directed to the 

beleaguered Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, will you confirm that your cabinet has recently approved a proposal to 

increase the minimum wage by 25 cents an hour, effective August 1st of this year? 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, whenever cabinet makes a decision cabinet will announce the decisions, and 

we’re not in the habit, nor is any other parliamentary form of government in the habit, of divulging discussions in a 

cabinet. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well will the minister agree that 25 cents an hour represents an increase of only 5.8 per cent, 

and that is to be contrasted with a rise in the increased cost of living of 21 per cent sine the last increase in minimum 

wage? I’d ask you, Mr. Minister, to explain the fairness of an increase of that magnitude vis-à-vis a 61 per cent increase 

for your political advisers. Seven thousand dollars a year for your political advisers, and 25 cents for the working poor. 

Would you explain the fairness of that, Mr. Minister? 

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2790 

 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the question is purely hypothetical. The only thing that is not 

hypothetical, Mr. Speaker, is the position of the members opposite and Nadine Hunt, that the minimum wage should go to 

$6.54 an hour, and we don’t subscribe to that view. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if your cabinet is able to understand the impact of the minimum wage 

freeze on the working poor. Someone working full-time at the minimum wage makes $8,840 a year. Since 1982 the 

increase in cost of living has gone up by 21 per cent. That means a decrease in their purchasing power of $2,200. Will 

you not admit that the minimum wage, Mr. Minister, has meant a serious erosion in the purchasing power of the working 

poor? Will you not admit that the freeze in the minimum wage has hurt like the devil with respect to the working poor? 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well Mr. Speaker, we in this side of the House have tried to focus our emphasis on doing 

what we can do, and we’re really quite proud of it; and that is to try to create and maintain as many jobs for the people in 

this province as we possibly can. Our view is that we do that in many ways, and one is that we do not have to lead the 

nation in highest minimum wage. We are there now. We believe that the programs that we have undertaken should be 

geared towards creating the most and maximum number of jobs, and quite frankly, we’re very proud of our record in the 

last three years in that regard. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — To put it mildly, Mr. Minister, others are less impressed. 

 

Mr. Minister, when you announce the 25 cent an hour minimum wage hike, I assume a day or two after the session ends, 

will you at least have the decency to make public the results from your Minister of Labour’s phoney survey with respect 

to the minimum wage and the working poor? After all, that stalling tactic is what you have used for the last two years to 

justify — not increase the minimum wage. So will you at least release the results so we can see how biased and 

incomplete the minister’s survey was? 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan, as I indicated, will do whatever it needs to 

do. To indicate the direction it’s going to take, Mr. Speaker, our interest primarily is to maintain and create the maximum 

number of jobs that we can for the people of this province. Since the three years that we’ve been in office, we have 

consistently been the best in this nation in job creation, the best in this nation in maintaining jobs, the best in this nation 

in having the lowest unemployment rate of any place in this country consistently over the last three years. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

Salary Increases of Minister’s Staff 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for the minister in charge of the crop insurance. Mr. 

Minister, Mr. Speaker, it has to do with salary increases for the political staff of the minister. This week he has justified a 

salary increase of some 16 per cent for his chief political adviser, one by the name of Gerry Williams, with the claim that 

he has been promoted from ministerial assistant to a special assistant to the minister. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. In Beauchesne’s, paragraph 359(8), it says, “A question that has previously been 

answered ought not to be asked again.” 

 

And I believe that question has been asked several times and answered several times. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister in charge of the crop insurance board.  

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2791 

 

 

Can the minister explain why his chief adviser, Mr. Gerry Williams, has received three separate salary increases? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. The question has been asked and it has been answered, and I would ask you to move 

on to another question. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — I wonder if the minister could explain why a Mr. Williams has received three separate 

salary increases in the past 22 months, which has seen his salary go from 32,000 per year to just over 52,000. Can you 

explain that to us? 

 

HON. MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to explain this once more to the members opposite. This was 

explained several times in estimates, and the reason for it has been reclassification of jobs. He is my chief adviser, plus he 

is a full employee also of the crop insurance corporation. That’s where he maintains an office, and you’ve been told that 

many, many times in estimates. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question to the minister of crop insurance. Mr. Minister, for the benefit of 

some of the teachers that are here today and the other people in the public sector, could the minister explain why or how 

he can justify a 61 per cent increase for his chief adviser in the past 22 months? 

 

HON. MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are playing with figures here when they’re talking 

about 16 per cent or 61 per cent. 

 

We’ll talk, Mr. Speaker, about the schoolteacher. If there’s a schoolteacher that has been changed of position to a 

principal, they’ll have a change of salary. It’s a reclassification of jobs and it’s that way throughout this province. It 

always has been and it always will be. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Another new question to the minister of crop insurance. Mr. Minister, for the benefit of some other 

people then, the single parents, the working people, anyone that’s on minimum wage working in this province, can you 

explain to them the fairness in a 61 per cent increase to a chief political hack in 22 months, Mr. Minister? 

 

HON. MR. MUIRHEAD: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. It’s the same thing with someone on minimum wage. If you’re on 

minimum wage and you happen to get a different job, regardless of what it is, it’s a reclassification of jobs and you do not 

stay at the minimum wage; you take the new salary. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Minister, supplementary. I’d like to say, Mr. Minister . . . Are you telling us that this individual is 

doing something different than he did 22 months ago, today, other than just a reclassification in a title? He is still working 

in your office doing the same job, and in 22 months he received a 61 per cent increase. What was the difference in his 

position? 

 

HON. MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite were told, and they were told, and they were told, in 

my estimates, that yes, when he first began working for me when I became minister, he was working entirely for me. 

 

But there has been several changes in his duties. He is working for crop insurance and there has been a difference, and 

that is being responsible for individual coverage for winter wheat, and he has an office in crop insurance he is the man 

that is completely responsible. So there has been a change in his duties. You have been told there’s been change in his 

duties and that is very plain and simply, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — I have here a sheet that outlines the increases of one Mr. Gerry Williams. On August 1st of 

1983 Mr. Williams was being paid $2,695 per month or 32,340 per year; January 1st of `84 he got an increase to $3,051 

per month or 36,612 per year; February 1, 1984 another increase to $3,740 per month, 44,880 per year; now on January 

1st of `85, an  

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2792 

 

 

increase to 4,340 per month or 52,080 per year. Mr. Minister, this is a 61 per cent increase for this individual in 22 

months — a $20,000 a year increase. 

 

Can you tell us whether or not you think this is fair in light of the fact that teachers and nurses and potash workers are 

being told there’s no money for them for the work they’re doing? 

 

HON. MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are just asking the same questions they asked me in 

estimates. They know that when I brought Mr. Williams into the office that he had a certain job to do. I didn’t know what 

his qualifications would be to get him to do more work; what he would be doing for the crop insurance board. Mr. 

William is also now being paid — and he’s had different duties given to him from the crop insurance board. He is 

working for the crop insurance corporation of this province, and also working for my office. 

 

If you just go back and read Hansard, you’re just asking me the same questions that you asked me for two hours in 

estimates. And I just cannot give you any more than that because you’ve already had the answers. It’s as simple as that. 

 

And you’re talking about your 61 per cent increase. Those are your figures; they are not my figures, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Perquisites Enjoyed by Minister’s Staff 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — A question, Mr. Speaker,, to the minister in charge of crop insurance. I ask the minister: can the 

minister tell us what perks this high-paid Mr. Williams receives as a political adviser, in addition to his salary of more 

than $52,000? 

 

Is it not correct, Mr. Minister, that in addition to the $52,000 per year paid to Mr. Williams, that he has a government car 

for personal business, personal and business use, a Visa card with unlimited coverage for his meals and hotels, 

entertainment expenses, and season tickets to the Saskatchewan Roughriders — all this paid by the Saskatchewan 

taxpayers? 

 

And can the minister deny any of these perks? 

 

HON. MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Speaker, yes, I sure can. Mr. Gerry Williams has never ever been at a football game 

using a crop insurance ticket. 

 

The members opposite know quite well that Mr. Gerry Williams has not got a car of any kind assigned to him. They 

know that quite well, that there is a car signed to crop insurance, if they’re doing crop insurance work, the same as when 

they were in government. You don’t take your own car out to do government work, do it for the crop insurance 

corporation. But he has no car assigned to him — absolutely none. It’s absolute false. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — A supplemental, Mr. Speaker. Is the minister aware that in 1984 and again in this year that the 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation has paid for four Saskatchewan Roughrider season tickets? Five hundred and 

twenty dollars each was paid out by the crop insurance corporation, section . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Order. I’m going to ask the members to contain themselves a bit. You can’t hear what 

the member is asking. The minister couldn’t possibly answer. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously they’re hurting very badly and they can’t refrain from heckling. 

 

I ask the minister again: is he aware that in 1984 and again in this year the Saskatchewan crop insurance has paid for four 

Saskatchewan Roughrider tickets? Five hundred and twenty dollars each was paid out by the corporation in section 2, 

row 8, seats 15 to 18, I believe. Is the minister  

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2793 

 

 

denying that these payments were made? And I ask him who, in fact, if not Gerry Williams — whether Gerry Williams in 

fact uses any of those seats, and how can he explain why hard-pressed Saskatchewan farmers should be paying for his 

football tickets. 

 

HON. MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Speaker, I told the member opposite that Mr. Gerry Williams has never been to a 

football game on his own, or under crop insurance — has never been. And if we have crop insurance football tickets to 

the Roughrider games, it would just be the same practice under the prior government. It did come to my attention last 

year that in 1984, if I had a use for them to entertain someone, I have them. But I didn’t even do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So if there’s . . . If the crop insurance corporation has tickets for the football Roughrider games, it would be the same 

practice as the last 11 years that many Crowns do have Roughrider game tickets, and there’s been no change. If there’s 

been crop insurance tickets, Mr. Speaker — in crop insurance — it’s been the same practice for the last 11 years. 

 

I have made no change; I have given no orders; and I don’t even know whether they have them for `85 or not. I don’t 

know anything about it other than I was asked if I needed them in 1984, and I said no. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — A further supplemental final one, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask the minister: are you stating in this 

House that other than in `84 and `85, that in previous years that the crop insurance had, in fact, been purchasing football 

tickets? Is that what you’re saying? Because I’ll tell you that no tickets were purchased, Mr. Minister, so you’d better be 

pretty careful. 

 

I’m asking you, Mr. Minister: have you the information that supports your presentation that there’s been no change in 

policy, and that tickets were purchased other than `84 and 85? 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Order. 

 

HON. MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Speaker, all I do know when it comes to Roughrider tickets, I have my own tickets; 

I’ve paid for them for 13 years, and I’ve never used them. And I have to come back with that answer because I don’t 

know for sure. I’ve never been told. 

 

But I as minister have never okayed any additional tickets. So if there’s tickets there, they probably were through the past 

years, but I will have to find out for sure. I will find out for sure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Travel Expenses of Minister’s Staff 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — . . . (inaudible) . . . in charge of crop insurance. It has to do with travelling done by his 

ministerial assistant, one Miss Debbie McNabb, in June of last year. Can you explain why or how or for what reason your 

political assistant ran up a bill of $688 in air flights between Regina and Moose Jaw, paid for out of CVA account? 

 

Can you tell me what your ministerial assistant was doing using the executive aircraft to fly from Regina to Moose Jaw? 

Can you explain that little item? 

 

HON. MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll have to take notice on that. 

 

Conflict of Interest — Sedco Official 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I address my question to the Minister of Tourism and Small Business, and 

the minister in charge of Sedco. And it deals with what I consider to be a blatant conflict of interest whereby he approved 

an investment in a Regina real estate firm by the president of Sedco, Mr. Doug Price. 

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2794 

 

 

Last week the minister claimed again and again, and I think that’s fair, that he gave Mr. Price approval for the purchase in 

accordance with Sedco’s conflict of interest guide-lines. At that time, Mr. Minister, you were unable to quote from the 

guide-lines or to supply them to the Assembly. 

 

Will you be supplying a copy of the Sedco guide-lines to the Assembly, guide-lines which permit the authorization which 

you gave to Mr. Price? 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Speaker, I have absolutely no problem in supplying the guide-lines of Sedco regarding 

conflict of interest. They were established at Sedco quite some time by the Blakeney administration, and we are still 

abiding and using those same guide-lines. Mr. Price was definitely within them at the time that the approval was given to 

him, and I have no problem at all in supplying that. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, will the minister give us . . . Mr. Speaker, and Mr. 

Minister, will you give us an undertaking that you will table the guide-lines? Because they seem to be very elusive and 

we haven’t found them. 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Speaker, in the last series of questioning I very clearly stated that I had no problem in stating 

those guide-lines and I was prepared to take notice. They did not accept my offering at that time. If they would like me to 

accept that offering now and table those guide-lines, I have absolutely no problem and I will do that just as soon as I 

possibly can. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, last week you claimed that Mr. Price had already 

taken steps to sell off his shares in Frances Olson Realty Ltd. Can you advise the House whether or not that transaction 

has been completed, or whether the shares are still owned by the president of Sedco? 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, Mr. Price was making arrangements to divest himself of that 

particular investment. I know that negotiations have been continuing from that day forward. I don’t know what state 

they’re in, whether they’re completed at this point in time or not. Hopefully those arrangements have been made by this 

time, but I can’t honestly say that as fact this morning. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. Would the minister assure the House that the shares have in 

fact been divested and have not simply been transferred to another member of Mr. Price’s family, such as his wife or his 

father-in-law or some other close relative? Can you give an assurance that the shares will have been effectively divested? 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Speaker, at the time that Mr. Price decided to divest himself, it was clearly understood that it 

would be a divestiture clean and totally arm’s length, and I don’t appreciate that line of questioning one bit. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Whatever the minister appreciates, I would appreciate if the 

minister would advise me whether the complete divesting was going to be to the former member from North East, Mr. 

Sutor. 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what he’s getting at about the former member from Regina North 

East. To my understanding he had absolutely nothing to do with anything concerning the investment. That has been 

clearly indicated to me. And I don’t know where they get their information from, and I can even comment on that kind of 

a stupid question. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to address a question to the member, Small Business and Tourism. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would like to know, in this here infamous purchase by Mr. Price and Mr. Seaman,  

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2795 

 

 

can you advise the House whether in making that purchase they sought any provincial assistance in respect to it? That is, 

was there ever an application for provincial assistance, or whether there was any Sedco money advanced to Price and 

Seamans in the infamous purchase of a share in the Frances Olson real estate? 

 

HON. MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Speaker, that’s the most ridiculous question I’ve ever heard. Are you asking me, did Sedco 

finance his private investment? And if you are, the answer is clearly no. 

 

Nursing Home Construction — Saskatoon 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Health, and it has to do with the announced 238-

bed nursing home in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Minister, what I would like is if you would give us an update report on the progress of that construction project — 

whether the final site analysis has been completed and we know the location, and whether any sod has been turned or 

actual construction started on that 230-bed nursing home. 

 

HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I think it would be best referred to the Minister of Supply and Services, who’s in charge of 

building the home. I’d ask him to answer. 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, what I would say to the hon. member: the real construction should be 

started as early as July 15 of this summer. The site analysis has been completed. The site has been chosen. When I say, 

“real construction,” Mr. Speaker, I’m talking about the foundations and into the ground, and the sod turning will certainly 

have been completed. 

 

I would invite the hon. members opposite to come to the sod-turning ceremony. I know the people in Saskatoon ware very 

excited about this project. I’m not sure that NDP members look all that excited about the project, but I would invite NDP 

members and others in the province to come to the sod turning which will be within weeks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, supplement to the minister. The people of Saskatoon were excited four years 

ago when it was first announced, and it has taken a long time to get to that point. 

 

But my question to you, Mr. Minister, is that in the process of the last four years there has been a good deal of concern, 

and I think a growing concern, that the site location . . . and as I understand it, over four years the opinion in Saskatoon 

has changed, and a large number of people in groups . . . and you have got petitions that the site possibly be changed from 

the present location to the old sanatorium site. 

 

And what I would ask you, Mr. Minister, is whether or not at this time you’re considering moving the new 238-bed 

nursing home from the present location, where you have identified it, to the old sanatorium site? And I ask that merely as 

an information point. 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Well the short answer to that, Mr. Speaker, is no. I might add to the hon. member that as it 

relates to what he suggests is waffling on site location and so on for this project, is something that is clearly not true. 

 

The hon. members opposite, Mr. Speaker, will talk about the site of a nursing home in Saskatoon. I understand that NDP 

members in Saskatoon are even entering the debate as it relates to the site of an arena in Saskatoon. We talk about 

construction in Saskatoon, we talk about construction in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. The hon. members opposite have really 

no place in the debate when you consider 11 years . . . 

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2796 

 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Grasshopper Control Program 

 

HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to announce today to you and to the members of 

the legislature, an emergency program to deal with the severe grasshopper problem that much of Saskatchewan is 

experiencing. 

 

It is the view of this government that we are not prepared to see the grasshoppers destroy our farmers’ crops, and in fact 

eat into our framers’ incomes. As a result, Mr. Speaker, we are undertaking a grasshopper control program which is 

unprecedented in the history of Saskatchewan. And this, Mr. Speaker, is over and above the programs and the policies 

and the positions that I announced earlier this week in the House. 

 

The announcement today, Mr. Speaker, will indicate to you and to members of this House that this government is 

prepared now to assist and cover one-half the cost of insecticides bought by rural municipalities to control grasshoppers 

on road allowances. 

 

The grasshopper situation is a major concern, and it requires action of this magnitude if it is to be properly controlled. 

Under the past control legislation in this province, rural municipalities are responsible for grasshopper control on road 

allowances. By splitting the cost of insecticide with rural municipalities, this government will substantially reduce the 

financial cost to municipal governments, and hence, their farmer ratepayers. By taking part in this program rural 

municipalities can set examples for farmers by removing sources of infestation before grasshoppers move into adjacent 

fields and cause crop losses. 

 

The bottom line is that rural municipalities and individual farmers can and must assume major responsibility for battling 

grasshoppers. Our government has provided them with the means to do that. Provincially-controlled community pastures 

may be a source of grasshoppers which invade adjacent privately owned land. To ensure that this does not take place, and 

to ensure that the provincial government does ensure to control the grasshopper pest, provincial pastures will be sprayed 

where outbreaks occur. 

 

All the pesticides and money in the world, Mr. Speaker, are useless in the fight against grasshoppers unless farmers know 

and use proper treatment procedures. Getting information to farmers is essential to the success of this control program. 

Through a major education program we’ll ensure that the best technical information and specialists trained in pest control 

are readily available to farmers, rural municipalities, and others affected by grasshoppers. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to respond to the minister on the most important 

issue of the plight of farmers in Saskatchewan today, and especially as it relates to the grasshopper infestation in the 

province. 

 

Mr. Minister, you will know that as early as last November your department had predicted an outbreak of grasshoppers in 

this province, the likes that we haven’t seen wince 1931. And I think you mentioned that the other day in question period. 

 

And I would say to you, Mr. Minister, that the people in south-west Saskatchewan have completed their grasshopper 

spraying program. They have completed their grasshopper spraying program. And I would like to say to you, Mr. 

Minister, that this is much like planning winter works program in February and March, that you traditionally do. 

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2797 

 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do appreciate that the minister is responding to the lobbying that was done from the member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and I would say to you, Mr. Minister, that at a time when farmers are facing massive tax 

increases, that this will do little to help them out. 

 

But I wonder if you would do one more thing for the farmers of this province and for the people of this province, whether 

you will immediately instigate a study into whether or not there’s any connection between massive outbreaks of 

grasshoppers and Tory governments in this province. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 94 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill, an Act to amend The Income Tax Act, and this 

Act is the beginning, Mr. Speaker, of what we hope will be a major reform to the tax system in this country, Mr. Speaker, 

ultimately leading to a modified flat tax in this country. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The minister knows that in introduction of a Bill, all you can do is introduce it and move first 

reading. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 95 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Insurance Act 

 

HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The Saskatchewan Insurance Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

MR. MYERS: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to introduce to you and through you, 10 students from the 

Saskatoon Community College. They are seated in the east gallery, and they are accompanied by their instructors, Debby 

Menz, Dan Fitzgerald, and Ron Golden. The Community College is in the constituency of Saskatoon Centre, and on 

behalf of my colleague from Saskatoon Centre, I would like to wish them a warm welcome to the Assembly, and would 

hope other members would join me in welcoming them. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 

 

At 10:38 a.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal 

Assent to the following Bill: 

 

Bill No. 93 — An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year 

ending on March 31, 1986 

 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:39 a.m. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 54 — An Act respecting Apprenticeship and Qualification for Certification in Certain Trades 

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2798 

 

 

Clause 1 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister introduce his officials? 

 

HON. MR. CURRIE: — Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to introduce my officials. Sitting to the right of me is 

the deputy minister, John Law; and to the left of me is Dan Roberts, who is the director of apprenticeship and trade 

certification branch; and immediately behind Dan is Jane Sather, who is the Crown solicitor for the legal services 

division. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, would you begin by giving me a list of those whom you consulted with respect 

to the Bill? I have received some complaints, Mr. Minister, from some segments of the public that they were not 

consulted. That inevitably causes a good deal of alarm, and I would ask you, Mr. Minister, if I could make myself heard 

over the goon from Lloydminster, who you consulted? 

 

HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Chairman, in reply to the question asked by the hon. member, we have consulted with the 

following groups: with the provincial apprenticeship board; with the trade advisory boards (by that I mean the 26 

designated trades), and I would point out that they have equal representation of employees and employers; we consulted 

with a representative from the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour; with the north and the south building trades; with the 

Saskatchewan mining association; with the various trade unions — virtually all the trade unions interested in 

apprenticeship training. 

 

(10:45) 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Do I take it from that that you did not consult with any trade unions directly? Your 

consultation consisted solely of the provincial apprenticeship board and the trade advisory board? 

 

HON. MR. CURRIE: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the trade unions, or the trades people, nominated their representatives. 

For instance, the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour nominated a representative who would serve on the provincial 

apprenticeship board. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, consulting with the trade advisory board serves a different purpose than the 

trade unions themselves do. Heretofore government has always consulted with the trade unions directly, with the SFL. 

 

I am disappointed to see that the minister is a subscriber to the Lorne McLaren school of politics which suggests that you 

avoid everybody who doesn’t agree with you. That’s a difficult way to govern a province, Mr. Minister. That is the way 

the Minister of Labour does it. But I’m disappointed to see that the wisdom of that has permeated the Department of 

Advanced Education. 

 

There’s a good deal of concern with respect to this Bill, some of which might be misplaced; some of which might have 

been dispelled had you met directly with the SFL and directly with the unions which represent the trades. 

 

Mr. Minister, some of those concerns are with respect to the Bill itself. And if you have no objection, I will ask a series of 

questions under the first heading, which in fact in some cases touch upon other sections. 

 

Mr. Minister, subtrade is not defined in the Act. Was that an oversight or was the job too challenging for your 

department? Or why didn’t you define subtrade? The concept is certainly an integral part of the Act. 

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2799 

 

 

HON. MR. CURRIE: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’d have to respond at least a little bit to the inferences and the 

innuendoes made by the member from Regina Centre. 

 

In answer, no, I’m not taking on anybody else’s political views. I take on my own political views. And I’m not sure that I 

uphold the old traditional thinking politically. I do believe, and I have believed all my life, in consultation with other 

people, and particularly with people who have vested interests. And I am completely satisfied that there was sufficient, 

that there was adequate, that there was an extreme amount of consultation with all of the groups involved, either directly 

— and in many cases it was directly — or indirectly through their representatives. 

 

And if that isn’t in keeping with the principle of consultation, then I quit. I quit. I don’t know what the hon. member over 

there is asking for. So I just want to clear that for the record. 

 

And as a matter of fact, just a couple of days ago we did meet with the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. They raised a 

number of these same kinds of things, and it appeared to me that they were adequately answered. 

 

Now getting to this issue of the subtrade, this was something that was asked for by the trades. It was asked for 

specifically in the area of two areas: one was the autobody repair area and the other was in the area of crane operator. It’s 

something that they want to point, to be able to give credit to those people who specialize within a major trade such as 

those two trades are. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, Mr. Minister, is you used . . . When you said that there was an extreme amount of 

consultation, the normal meaning of that is that there’s too much. Mr. Minister, if you’re labouring under the fear that 

you’ve consulted too much, may I put your mind at rest. You didn’t make that mistake. 

 

Mr. Minister, I asked you as second question. That as with respect to subtrade. The concept is used; it is not defined. I 

wonder why, and what you mean by the term. 

 

HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Chairman, this review has been going on since 1982, and in view of the fact that the Act 

has not been changed since 1953, at first it was thought that we could make the changes in the general regulations. But as 

far as the subtrade part is concerned, the subtrade does appear in the regulations, and it appears to be defined in the 

following manner: 

 

Subtrade means a branch of a designated trade recognized as a subtrade by trade regulation. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, I gather part of what you’re saying is that although it’s a new Act, this portion 

of the Bill hasn’t been changed since time immemorial. I gather that is the thrust of your comment. 

 

I’m not a subscriber, Mr. Minister, to the theory that merely because an Act was badly drafted and we have made do with 

it for 50 years is an adequate excuse for incorporating that into it. 

 

One of the reasons for that, Mr. Minister, is we have not, I think, in the history of the province, had a government in 

office that is as anti-labour as this government. I don’t think there’s any equal to this government. 

 

Mr. Minister, the fear of the trades . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m getting so much assistance here. Mr. Minister, the 

fear of the trades is that the government will use the broad regulatory power here to restrict the definition of trades, and 

thus restrict the protection given by the Act. And that is a real fear, given the history of this government’s treatment of 

working people in labour. There is no evidence of that, Mr. Minister. It would just be consistent with your past behaviour. 

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2800 

 

 

So I’d ask you, Mr. Minister, to respond to that fear that you will in fact use the broad regulatory power, including the 

power to define such key terms as “subtrades”, to restrict the ambit of the Act and thus restrict the protection of the Act. 

 

HON. MR. CURRIE: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t share the member’s concern about a fear that we are . . . What has 

happened has happened in consultation with the trade unions, with the employers and employees, and it has happened as 

a result of their desire to make these changes in the Act. They have felt that the Act has been too cumbersome in the past, 

that it has been completely out of date with what the needs of the industry — and by industry I mean employers and 

employees — have been in this province. And so it’s an attempt to satisfy the needs of the industry. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Chairman, I would ask the minister to give us a definition of permit. What is meant by 

permit? 

 

HON. MR. CURRIE: — Yes, I’d be pleased, Mr. Chairman, to supply a definition of a permit. The permits will replace 

the certificates of registration cards. Permits will only be issued when a voluntary apprenticeship trade becomes a 

compulsory apprenticeship trade. The permit will be issued on application to non-journeymen and non-apprentices 

already working in the trade. This will enable individuals to continue working in their trade once it becomes a 

compulsory apprenticeship trade. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Is that, Mr. Minister, in the regulations? Was that part of your ministerial briefing book? Or 

where did you get the definition from? 

 

HON. MR. CURRIE: — Thanks from the briefing, yes, that I’ve received. But that’s part of the regulation. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, do you have the draft regulations that you’re going to use under this Act with 

you? Could you table them? That is a customary courtesy when you’re bringing in a new Act which has extensive 

regulatory powers, to table the draft regulations. It doesn’t of course commit you to those specific regulations, but it does 

assist us in making some sense out of the Bill. 

 

HON. MR. CURRIE: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, we have a draft copy of them and I’ll send them over to the hon. member 

immediately. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — May I then ask you what section I find the definition of “permit” in. What section or 

subsection of the regulations is it? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

MR. HODGINS: — Mr. Chairman, it’s my pleasure on behalf of my colleague the member from Kelsey-Tisdale to 

introduce to you, and through you to all members of the Assembly, a group of 14 grade 9 students who are visiting with 

us here from Bjorkdale. They are accompanied by their teacher, Bill Dovell, and their bus driver Wayne Beeching. 

 

I understand they are seated here in the Speaker’s gallery, and I do also understand that will soon be, or are now, enjoying 

the benefits of a new gymnasium in their school. 

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2801 

 

 

I will be meeting with you for pictures and drinks a little bit later on, and I would invite all members of the legislature to 

welcome this group from Bjorkdale. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 54 — An Act respecting Apprenticeship and Qualification for Certification in Certain Trades 

 

Clause 4 (continued) 

 

HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Chairman, the permit is defined in section 2(n), and I’ll be sending the regulations over. 

We only have the one copy here at the present time so that we have to share it for the matter of the committee. So the 

permit is defined in section 2(n), and it applies to section 11, the section under compulsory apprenticeship trade, and 

specifically to subsections (6) and (8) of 11. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Okay. Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. That’s satisfactory. I appreciate the courtesy in 

giving us the regulations. We can move on to the next section, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Clause 4 agreed to. 

 

(11:00) 

 

Clauses 5 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 13 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, this is a very odd clause. Or I read it and it seemed, to 

me, strange. I’m not sure what it means to say. It seems to say that apprenticeship contract may, subject to the approval of 

the director, be terminated by consent of all the parties, or may be cancelled by the director. 

 

It seems to suggest that an apprenticeship contract may not be terminated without the approval of the director. Indeed 

that’s the reading that anyone would take from it. Now you will know, Mr. Minister, that an apprenticeship contract is a 

contract of employment, and there is just no way that you can have a contract of employment that can’t be terminated by 

the employee. There may well be some cause of action or something, but we just don’t have in our country contracts of 

employment which are binding on the employee indefinitely. That indentured servitude went out a century ago. 

 

And I am asking you what this clause means to say. As I say, on the face of it it seems to say that a contract may be 

terminated by the consent of all the parties if the director approves, and leaves the suggestion that if the director doesn’t  

approve, it can’t be terminated. 

 

Now obviously a contract of apprenticeship can be terminated by the apprentice at any day of the week. Certain things 

may flow from that, but you cannot maintain someone in a condition of servitude. What are we driving at with respect to 

this particular section? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to take this opportunity to introduce a group of students 

from Kipling, which is in my riding of course — grades 4, 5, and 6, seated, I understand, in the west gallery, but given the 

number — 80 in number — I would suspect that  

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2802 

 

 

some of them might as well be in the Speaker’s gallery. 

 

They are here, of course, to visit the legislature. I hope that they find their visit interesting. I will be meeting with them at 

about 11:30 for pictures and drinks in the members’ dining room. And I would like to as well indicate that they are 

accompanied by their teachers: Charlotte Shoemaker, Jane Fischer, Gordon Bates, Karen Carson, and a number of 

chaperons of whom I won’t take the time to mention and take the time of the House. 

 

They are as well accompanied by their bus driver, of course, Don Neudorf. And I would just like to ask all members of 

the Assembly to join with me in wishing them a good visit here, a safe trip home, and we hope we can have you back 

again some year. Thank you. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 54 — An Act respecting Apprenticeship and Qualification for Certification in Certain Trades 

 

Clause 13 (continued) 

 

HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Chairman, in reply: the contract of employment and the contract of apprenticeship are two 

different kinds of contracts. They co-exist simultaneously. The contract of employment may be terminated without 

terminating the contract of apprenticeship. All that the director is actually doing is cancelling the contract of 

apprenticeship as a result of the cancellation of the employment contract. 

 

Clause 13 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 14 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 20 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I just have one further question with respect to this Bill, and I can ask it here. And it deals 

with the same subject as my colleague from Regina Centre was dealing with, and that is the matter of permits, certificates 

and permits, and that phrase recurs throughout the Bill, and “Certificate” is defined in the Bill and “permit” is not, and 

you have now pointed out to us that permit is defined in section 2(1) of the regulations. 

 

My short question is this: was the term “permit” used in the previous legislation, and has there been any significant 

change in either (a) the definition, or (b) what is conceived of as covered by permits in this legislation, as opposed to the 

previous legislation? 

 

HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Chairman, the answer to the first question is no, the permit did not exist in the previous 

legislation. What did exist were certificates, certificates of registration, and we made this change of terminology to avoid 

misleading the public. 

 

Previously, the certificates were granted on the basis of number of years in apprenticeship, that is 1, 2, 3, and 4, and this 

was misleading. And at the suggestion of the trades advisory boards we have introduced permits so that . . . A permit is 

less suggestive of qualifications than was the certificate. Where a certificate, a person could have had . . . having had one 

year in apprenticeship would have been classed as an apprenticeship with a certificate 1, people were led to believe that 

this was the highest qualification and that it had something to do with qualifications, so that the permit would be less 

suggestive of the qualifications. 

 

Clause 20 agreed to. 

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2803 

 

 

Clause 21 agreed to. 

 

Clause 22 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Minister, one just tiny question. I note that you are requiring the name and address and 

the social insurance number of the tradesmen who appear on records. There once was a time when Progressive 

Conservatives took the position that social insurance numbers, this social regimentation should not be used other than for 

the purposes for which it was intended. I take it you have abandoned that proposal and are now using a social insurance 

number as your general record, as well as the use that has been give to it by the federal government, not only in the social 

insurance field, but also in the income tax field. 

 

So far as I’m aware, this is the first provincial legislation which requires a social insurance number to be given. I could be 

wildly wrong on that, but I’m asking you whether or not you believe that to be true? 

 

HON. MR. CURRIE: — I would just prefer to give my own opinion. I can’t give the opinion for the Progressive 

Conservative Party of Canada, but I believe that we should preserve, as much as we can, confidentiality of all information 

from the point of view of individuals, and in so far as its application to this At is concerned, it appears that it is very 

essential to use the social insurance numbers in order to administer the Act. And all parties agreed, and so I would concur 

with that directive. 

 

Clause 22 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 23 to 28 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 54 — An Act respecting Apprenticeship and Qualification for Certification in Certain Trades 

 

HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time. 

 

(11:15) 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 87 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act 

 

HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, before I get into the discussion of the passing of Bill 87, the second reading, I 

would like to join with my colleague, the member for Moosomin, to welcome the students and chaperons from Kipling 

that are here today. 

 

Kipling was the school where I first started my teaching career. And as I look up into the gallery I see some of the people 

that are here as chaperons and parents were my students some 22 years ago. It reminds one that time is marching on, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But I want to welcome you here today. And I think it’s very appropriate that you’re here on the day that I give second 

reading to what we believe, on this side of the House, is a very important  

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2804 

 

 

piece of legislation for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to explain the purpose of the amendments to The Medical Care Insurance Act and to outline the 

main features of this Bill. 

 

As I’m sure all members will know, the Government of Saskatchewan has recently concluded an agreement with the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association. This agreement, called the Saskatoon Agreement II, contains three major provision. 

 

First, all extra billing by physicians in Saskatchewan will come to an end. Second, a new medical compensation review 

process will be established. And third, a mechanism will be put in place to provide for the resolution of disputes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my government colleagues and I are very proud of this agreement. It was reached after lengthy and intensive 

consultation with the SMA, and it shows that the government and the medical profession are capable of working together 

in a constructive way. The agreement is one that recognizes the legitimate interests of the medical profession, preserves 

the professional independence of physicians and, at the same time, maintains the integrity of our medical plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments to the medical care insurance Act are designed to provide the legal basis of the terms of the 

Saskatoon Agreement II. Accordingly, the Bill contains the following major provisions. First, no physician who provides 

insured services may bill for them above the insured rate, but physicians will continue to have the right to bill patients 

directly at the insured rate. 

 

Physicians will have the right to practise outside the medical care plan entirely, in which case all of the services will be 

uninsured, and they will not be subject to the extra billing provisions. This right will be subject to the condition that 

reasonable access to insured services is not jeopardized. 

 

I should mention, Mr. Speaker, that the provisions regarding extra billing in practising outside the plan will also apply to 

other professions who provide insured services under the Act. 

 

Next, Mr. Speaker, the Bill provides for the establishment of a medical compensation review committee, through which 

the government and the SMA will consult on determining fair and reasonable compensation for physicians. And the Bill 

provides two avenues for the resolution of disputes when an agreement cannot be reached through the compensation 

committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out one other major feature of this Bill. The current medical care insurance Act contains 

many sections dealing with collection of premiums, penalties for non-payment of premiums, and so on. These provisions 

are obviously not in effect because we no longer have premiums, but we are taking this opportunity to repeal all 

references in the Act that have anything to do with premiums. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have said on many occasions that our government has no intention of re-introducing any kind of premiums 

for medical care services. I don’t know of any way to demonstrate that commitment more emphatically than by removing 

all legal basis for the imposition of such premiums. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Agreement II is an historic document. It establishes the foundation for a close, constructive, 

and harmonious relationship between the government and the medical profession in the years ahead. These amendments 

provide the necessary legal basis for the agreement. And I am therefore pleased to move, Mr. Speaker, that The 

Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Amendment Act be given second reading. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2805 

 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I will be having a look at the Bill and discussing it with some of the 

individuals associated with the medical profession and users over the weekend. I want to know how the impact of the 

automatic check-off for doctors will work, whether or not all doctors are in favour of paying what is essentially a union 

fee now. There are some things in the Bill that I would just like to take the time to check with doctors and users, and 

therefore I would beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 91 — An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 (No. 2) 

 

HON. MR. EMBURY: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to move second reading of this Bill, An Act to amend The Urban 

Municipality Act, 1985. 

 

This Bill makes some important changes, Mr. Speaker, to one of the major statutes administered by my department. It 

amends the new Urban Municipality Act which was passed in November of 1984. 

 

The urban Act, as it is called, sets out the powers and duties of over 500 urban municipalities, Mr. Speaker. These 

municipalities include cities, villages, towns, and resort villages which contain over 70 per cent of the population of the 

province. 

 

My department consulted with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and urban administrators for 

over a year and a half before the new Act was finally passed last fall. Municipalities have requested a number of new 

amendments which are reflected in this Bill. 

 

Amendments to a major new Act are not unusual during the implementation phase, Mr. Speaker. However, these new 

proposed amendments arise from the fact that the new Act is being field tested for the first time in its new form. Frequent 

amendments are to be expected in an Act containing more than 300 sections, and which is used on a daily basis by 

practising administrators. 

 

The requests for amendments reflected in this Bill are both of the streamlining or fine-tuning variety, as well as some new 

major provisions responding to new concerns in the municipal field. For the benefit of members of the House, I will not 

mention the minor housekeeping amendments in the Bill. I want to deal with just a few highlights. 

 

First, let me say that the important provisions fall into two categories. The first category is a series of reforms designed to 

make the operation of urban local government more democratic and to provide better accessed information for municipal 

residents. The second category includes reforms and major urban administrative matters. 

 

Let me simply list some of the amendments of the first category, Mr. Speaker, dealing with improved local democracy 

and citizen accessed information. First, in conflict of interest, we are adding a new provision which requires that a 

member of an urban council leave the council meeting when he declares a conflict of interest. The member of council 

must not return to the meeting until council has completed its discussion on the matter in question. 

 

This protects both the council member and the local electorate, Mr. Speaker, because it ensures that a member who has 

declared a conflict does not, by his mere presence at the meeting, influence his colleagues to vote in a manner favourable 

to his interests. 

 

This change is motivated in part by recent court cases. The courts are now ruling that it is not enough for a member of a 

public decision-making body to declare a conflict if he or she continues to sit at the meeting while the matter is under 

debate. 

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2806 

 

 

Secondly, rules of debate. We are putting in a new provision making it explicit that the mayor must permit debate on 

motions put forward in a proper manner by members of council. Also, we are saying in the Bill that a seconder for a 

motion is not required in a village or resort village. Often the council of a village consists of only three members, so a 

seconder is really impractical, and such a requirement would seriously limit debate. Taken together, these reforms will 

foster full and free debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Thirdly, access to information. A new provision in this bill requires that the clerk of the municipality must record in the 

minutes of the meeting of a council every instance where a member of council declares a conflict of interest. The clerk 

must also record in the minutes the fact that the council member leaves the meeting while the matter on which he has 

declared a conflict is under discussion. This provision also applies to council committees and municipal boards. There’s 

also a provision in the Bill to ensure that notice of completion of the assessment roll is published in the Saskatchewan 

Gazette. This will allow persons owning property in a municipality who live outside the municipality to receive proper 

notice so that they can appeal their assessments if they wish. 

 

And finally there is a new provision permitting a landowner to have his tax notice mailed directly to the financial 

institution which holds his mortgage, if he so wishes. 

 

In short, Mr. Speaker, we are making local government a more open system with easier access to information through 

these amendments. 

 

May I now clear into the second major theme of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, dealing with significant local policy and 

administrative concerns. 

 

The first area is store hours. In the area of shopping hours, Mr. Speaker, there are two amendments of consequence. First, 

we are removing the restrictions on shopping hours, contained in the Act, from resort villages unless the council of the 

resort village adopts the restrictions contained in the Act by by-law. We are simply returning to the system resort villages 

enjoyed until the new Act was passed in 1984. This will permit stores in resort areas to remain open to serve the influx of 

cottagers and vacationers on weekends, for example. 

 

I want to add, Mr. Speaker, that the urban Act still contains provisions which prohibit Sunday shopping except in 

convenience stores and the like. We feel these provisions are still legally valid despite the fact that the Supreme Court 

recently ruled that the Lord’s Day Act is unconstitutional. We fell, Mr. Speaker, that Sunday should be preserved as a day 

of rest. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, it is in the public interest to encourage the use of agricultural land for farming until it is needed 

for urban development. Some of the farm land in the province, however, is located within the boundaries of urban 

municipalities — in villages, towns, and in some cases in cities. 

 

This Bill contains a provision similar to that of a number of other provinces. It will provide that farm land of five acres or 

more, located in an urban centre, will be assessed at the lower rural agricultural rate provided that the land over five acres 

is being used exclusively for farm purposes When this land is developed for urban use, it will then be assessed and taxed 

at urban rates. 

 

Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, dealing with municipal liability. SUMA and the larger urban centres have been requesting for some 

time that we amend the Act to protect municipalities from legal liability for damage caused by natural disasters where the 

municipality, itself, has not been negligent. 

 

This matter was brought to a head by the severe summer rain storms of a couple of years ago which caused extensive 

property damage in the major cities. The cities discovered that they are  

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2807 

 

 

possibly at risk on the legal grounds of nuisance whether or not they are negligent in such cases. 

 

As a result, we are including in this Bill a provision stating that municipalities are not liable in nuisance for damages 

resulting from the overflow of water in sewers, ditches, and the like, caused by extraordinary natural events. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on to mention other features of this Bill; for example, the new sections which ensure that the 

regulations under the urban Act will apply to assessment procedures carried out since the Act was passed. These are 

purely technical adjustments, but they are, nevertheless, of considerable importance to municipalities. They keep the 

municipal administrative machinery running smoothly. 

 

However, I wanted only to cover the main new features of the Bill, Mr. Speaker. It strengthens local democracy and gives 

citizens more access to information of their local councils. It includes some major policy reforms that SUMA and many 

individual municipalities have asked for to respond to local needs. These reforms will assist the councils of cities, towns, 

and villages in Saskatchewan to continue to provide the honest and efficient administration their citizens have come to 

expect, and which we believe they deserve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to urge all members to support the Bill. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — It’s a busy day. Mr. Speaker, we want an opportunity to examine the Bill and, in light of the 

Minister’s comments, would therefore beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(11:30) 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Embury that Bill No. 72 — An Act 

respecting the provision of Financial and Other Assistance to Urban Municipalities and Hamlets for Capital 

Works Projects be now read a second time. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t need to detain the House long on this. I’m not sure whether I will 

have spoken on it before, but I think not. 

 

This deals with the capital fund that the government has set up to replace the existing capital fund, and I want to 

underline our regret that the fund is for two years only, and not for a longer period. It is necessary with many capital 

works to plan three, four, or five years in advance, and it is difficult for communities to launch into a major road 

construction project, or a major construction project of any kind if the guarantee of the capital funds is for a two-year 

period only. 

 

It is difficult for governments, I know, to give longer-term commitments. The two previous funds were for five-year 

periods, the capital funds. And the cultural and recreational facilities capital fund, which was in some ways similar, was 

also, as I recall it, for five years. That gave people an opportunity to do some more or less long-term planning, and we 

urge that on municipalities; we urge that on any government. And I therefore am sorry that this fund provides only for a 

two-year period. 

 

I note that its name has been changed from the community capital fund to the provincial capital fund, to make it rather 

than a CC fund which it was before, now it is a PC fund, and I think that perhaps if it bears that name perhaps a two-year 

period is sufficient, sine it probably will have no further relevance under that particular set of initials. 

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2808 

 

 

So I underline, Mr. Speaker, the original comment of my colleague in expressing regret that it’s a two-year period. We 

welcome the modest increase from $20 to $25; we are sorry that the commitment is so short; and we are amused at the 

change of name. 

 

HON. MR. EMBURY: — Mr. Speaker, just a couple of comments in regards to the Leader of the Opposition’s remarks. 

I would agree with the member opposite, and I am glad to see that he is agreeing with our government’s general thrust on 

five-year planning as outlined in the budget. But I do remind him that this two years of this capital program was requested 

by the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, and it is the same time frame as we would expect to get our 

recommendations back from the Local Government Finance Commission, which will give us recommendations on long-

term financing for local governments, and that’s the reason for the two years. This was set up in consultation, as we 

always do in this government, with the organization involved. And I would urge members to support the Bill, and I move 

second reading of Bill No. 72. 

 

Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 

 

WOMEN’S SECRETARIAT 

 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 41 

 

Item 1 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister introduce her officials. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have with me today, in talking about the Women’s Secretariat and 

going through their estimates, Ms. Leah Siebold, the executive director, and seated immediately behind her, Janet Wile. 

 

If I could make a few introductory remarks before getting into any of the questions or financial clarification that the 

opposition would have, I will take the opportunity to do so. 

 

This agency that we will be discussing today, Mr. Chairman, is only approximately one year old . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I assure the member from Regina Centre it won’t be long, but it will be worthwhile. It’s only 

approximately one year old, and within that one short year many things have been done within government in order to 

create the opportunity of equal opportunity, within various government departments, in addressing women’s issues. 

 

The agency has been involved in many issues this year, Mr. Chairman. Some of the issues are controversial; some are 

perhaps more business-like. But nevertheless, the impact on women is very great. Those issues deal with anything from 

pornography and prostitution to business information and conferences, education, guidance counselling, training, and, of 

course, an ongoing liaison role with the federal and other provincial governments. 

 

We have also been involved this year, Mr. Chairman, in an action plan to be tabled with the federal government this year 

for the United Nations. And it is titled, what we would say, is creating a balance and the opportunity for women within 

our society. 

 

If anything, within the Secretariat this year, perhaps we have tried to address too many issues at one time, instead of 

focusing in on two or three. Nevertheless, the issues that concern women  

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2809 

 

 

are multi, and we’ve had to deal with them and dealt with them to a great extent. 

 

So with that, Mr. Chairman, I welcome any questions that the opposition may have and look forward to clarification on 

certain issues. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — I want to begin by dealing with what one might term the unpleasantries, Madam Minister. We 

were unaware, when we were dealing with your estimates, that ministerial assistants have apparently all received 

increases. 

 

Madam Minister, I wonder if you would begin by giving me the . . . Or the Minister of Revenue and Financial Services 

may have some incompetent people who they just couldn’t stretch the point to cover, but you’re in a class by yourself 

then. 

 

Madam Minister, I wonder if you would give me names, addresses . . . names . . . I wonder if you would . . . if we can get 

a little less assistance from the Minister of Revenue and Supply. Madam Minister, I wonder if you could give me the 

names, positions, and salaries of your personal staff, and the pay increase, including retroactivity. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t have any personal staff in relationship to the Women’s Secretariat. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, that’s absolute nonsense. You have personal staff in your office who serve 

you as a minister, and you have a responsibility to give us that information, Madam Minister. And I ask you again: give 

us the names of your personal staff, the incomes, the positions, and the pay increases. 

 

It’s a legitimate question. They work for you. They don’t work for the Department of Education; they work for you as a 

minister. And that, Madam Minister, is a legitimate subject of inquiry. And I ask you to answer it. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — What utter nonsense. I’ve simply said I do not have personal staff, specifically and only 

assigned to the Women’s Secretariat, within my office. Mr. Chairman, they have the information of the minister’s staff 

within my office. It hasn’t changed since three weeks ago when I gave it to them. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — What nobody on this side of this House ever imagined is that you would be so crass and so 

insensitive as to give them huge pay increases in a year when you’re denying it to everyone else. What I want, Madam 

Minister, are the pay increases. And don’t give me the malarkey that they all somehow readily relate to Education. 

 

They serve you as a minister. And I will anticipate, Madam Minister, that at least some of your time, and therefore some 

of your staff’s time, might relate to women’s issues. I know it’s not a priority with this government, but I would think that 

some of your time would relate to women’s issues; therefore, some of your staff time relates to women’s issues, and I ask 

you, Madam Minister, for the pay increases. 

 

And frankly, I don’t see the point in denying it at this point in time. All other ministers but you have come clean. All the 

other ministers have given us the pay increases and have attempted, however weakly, to justify it. What on earth are you 

trying to do by hiding something that every other minister has given us? 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can once again send the information that I sent before in doing my 

estimates for Education on my personal staff, and it included what they were making, and if it did not include any kind of 

pay increases — if there were any — then I will gladly get that to him. And as to the breakdown on how much time is 

spent on the Women’s Secretariat, I can simply only state again there is nobody assigned specifically to the Women’s 

Secretariat. 

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2810 

 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, how many days after the session terminates are we going to get the 

information with respect to the pay increase of your staff? 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that is better answered by another question. How many days after he 

asked for the first set of information in dealing with my personal staff did he receive it? 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, I cannot believe that any minister of this government could not have 

anticipated the question with respect to pay increases. It has become, Madam Minister, in the last few days, one of the 

central issues of this legislature: the insensitivity and hypocrisy of this government ion dealing with working people. 

 

I cannot believe, Madam Minister, you didn’t anticipate a question with respect to the pay of your staff. Madam Minister, 

I allege that you intentionally came here unprepared. You either have it and are not giving it, or you intentionally came 

unprepared. Madam Minister, when are we going to get the information with respect to your personal staff? You can give 

it to us this afternoon if you want to. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Well I suggest that the member go through the blue book figures — the blue book figures. I do 

not have within the secretary’s budget — that’s what we’re talking about — the secretary’s budget. There is nothing in 

there for a person to be hired by my office for that area. I have no personal staff assigned to the Women’s Secretariat, nor 

is there any money within the budget for it, nor is any of the money in the budget going towards it. So how can I give him 

what he asks for? He’s asking for the impossible. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — What on earth is the minister trying to hide? I don’t know how you could possibly look worse 

than other ministers. The Minister of Co-ops, who now looks like Scrooge, gave a 4 per cent increase. Nobody’s been 

down to that subterranean level since then . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We owe the Minister of Co-ops an apology, 

indeed. 

 

Madam Minister, we then went to an 8 and 9 per cent increase with the next minister, which was the Minister of Justice. 

We went to 16 per cent with the Minister of Co-ops . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And 15 for the Minister of Social 

Services. And I frankly, Madam Minister, don’t know what you’re hiding. If the pay increases are higher than 16 per cent, 

then that is truly phenomenal. I can’t believe it. I can’t believe, Madam Minister, you’re any worse than the other 

ministers. You are just a lot more arrogant in answering questions. You just refuse to answer questions. And to be the 

most arrogant and reticent minister in this government is quite an accomplishment, Madam Minister. 

 

Now I ask you: when are we going to get the details with respect to the pay increases that you intentionally didn’t bring 

today? 

 

(11:45) 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Chairman, I can only state again: there is nothing in this budget to do with personal staff. I 

don’t have any personal staff to do with the Women’s Secretariat. However, I will once again send the information on my 

personal staff that is assigned to the Department of Education’s budget to the member from Regina Centre — once again. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Will you ask, Madam Minister, one of the pages to go to your office, get the information, and 

come back with it? I can tell you, Madam Minister, that although the Minister of Social Services has not always been 

described by this caucus as being the epitome of humility, at least he did that last night. Will you, Madam Minister, show 

the same courtesy as the Minister of Social Services showed? Will you ask one of the pages to go to the office and get it? 

Because it is readily available, it is readily available, Madam Minister, I am sure, from any one of  

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2811 

 

 

the secretaries in the office. Will you send a page now and get it? 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Chairman, I have a question in my mind on dealing with what is related to the budget 

within the secretariat. I don’t mind doing what the member asks, but there’s no figures in the financial estimates that 

we’re doing . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, it isn’t a cover-up. Like, you are being ridiculous and posturing for the 

sake of nothing. Now if the information he wants is out of the Department of Education, I will get him that information to 

do with the Department of Ed, but I can’t do it with the Women’s Secretariat. And let’s decide: are we doing the 

Women’s Secretariat, or are we doing Education? 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, will you show us the courtesy that the Minister of Social Services showed 

last night, and get it now? 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — In relationship to the Women’s Secretariat, I can’t do that. I’ve already told you I don’t have 

any personal staff within the Women’s Secretariat. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, will you show us the courtesy that the Minister of Social Services showed 

last night? Send someone to your office to get the information with respect to your personal staff. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve already given my commitment. I will get the information as soon as 

possible to give to the member from Regina Centre. However, however, it will not relate to the Women’s Secretariat. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, as galling as your behaviour is, I suspect it’s not the most important issue 

with respect to the Women’s Secretariat. The scandal, and it’s nothing short of that, with respect to the pay increases of 

ministerial staff is already out, and you’re going to have a hard time topping some of your colleagues. 

 

Madam Minister, with respect to the role of the Women’s Secretariat, what you have created is not a tiger but a clawless 

pussy-cat, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, you have spoken about some of the issues, but they’re all the easy issues 

upon which there’s an easy consensus. 

 

You’ve had something to say about wife battering. It may come as a stunning surprise to you to know that nobody’s in 

favour of wife battering, Madam Minister. You’ve had something to say about pornography. It may come as a stunning 

surprise, Madam Minister, to know that no one in this House is in favour of pornography. Likewise, Madam Minister, 

with respect to training opportunities, we’re all in favour of them. 

 

I wonder, Madam Minister, if you’d be prepared to give us your government’s position on some issues that aren’t quite so 

straightforward. I ask you, Madam Minister: what is the position of your government with respect to equal pay for work 

of equal value? The notion is hardly revolutionary at this point in time. It has been adopted by the Government of 

Canada, and is likely to be adopted by the new Government of Ontario. I wonder, Madam Minister, if this province can 

go as far as the province of Ontario in dealing with women’s rights and women’s pay. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Well Mr. Chairman, the issue of equal pay for work of equal value — I guess if I had $10 to 

bet today I would bet that the member from Regina Centre cannot put it into a neat definition, nor the process to go with 

it. 

 

It has raised much discussion not only within female groups, organizations, but also within male-dominated organizations 

like the party opposite. There’s obvious, as there is to anything, advantages and disadvantages. And we have stated that 

we were willing to have a serious look and study — and study the issue. 

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2812 

 

 

The member has made reference that Ontario will probably be moving towards it. I know it is certainly in the Ontario 

media. However, the member should also be aware that there are some governments who have moved into the area, and 

are now moving out because they didn’t do their homework well enough before moving into it, which brings me . . . 

 

You know, obviously, the disadvantages are clear. One is defining or determining what is “value.” That’s a value 

judgement, and “value” often means different things to different people. The traditional attitudes devalue jobs often 

performed by women. That’s another disadvantage. And the costs for enforcement, higher labour costs for employers, 

those are some of the others. Now on all of those, there is equally an advantage to be given to it. 

 

It is our opinion that the first step on this issue is raising the public awareness and understanding of the equal pay 

concept. First of all, are there any difficulties within the work-force now on The Labour Standards Act that is in play? 

And that is, employees performing similar functions must receive similar pay. Sometimes there’s minor difficulties that 

arise within that. We think the legislative changes must be reviewed very carefully for their impact. 

 

The member will be aware of the Abella report that came down at the federal level not so long ago, and in there points 

out that the public should also consider other ways, other ways, of narrowing that wage differential. I think for the 

member’s benefit, he should be aware that the Abella report is by a woman who recognizes some of the difficulties. She 

goes on to say that helpful measures include reducing occupational segregation through education and training, 

encouraging women in management and professional roles, and equalizing the entry pay levels, and, of course, 

affirmative action programs. 

 

The member from Regina Centre should also be aware that this government, under the leadership of the minister of 

government services and the Public Service Commission last year, the member from Meadow Lake, went into a 

formalized action plan in trying to deal with some of these issues. 

 

So I think that our position has been relatively clear on it. We are going to make sure that we know what we are talking 

about, and the process is outlined before moving from the standard legislation that is in play on equal work for equal pay. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The last thing this issue needs is any more study. It needs some 

action. The women of the province are not going to be mollified to hear that you’re studying an issue which has been 

studied to death. 

 

Madam Minister, does the minister who is responsible for women’s issues have the courage to state her position on Bill 

53? 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — The Women’s Secretariat, Mr. Chairman, has not taken a position on Bill 53. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Answer: no. Madam Minister . . . 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. The members aren’t to comment on Bills that are before the House. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — I think, Mr. Chairman, a scant chance that this minister’s going to comment on Bill 53, so I 

think there’s little chance of the regulations being breached. Madam Minister . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Why don’t you comment on it? 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’m quite prepared to comment on it. I am publicly opposed to Bill 53, have been, and will be. 

Madam Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well feel free to use it.  

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2813 

 

 

Madam Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. They ask the question, then they don’t like the answer, Mr. 

Chairman. Madam Minister, with respect to the minimum wage, has the Women’s Secretariat the courage to take a 

position on the abominable treatment working women and single parent families are receiving by the Minister of Labour 

with respect to minimum wage? 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Chairman, the minimum wage is only one part and a very small part of a very much larger 

question of low incomes, the people that are in low incomes, and why they’re there — particularly for older people. 

 

We have taken the position that the way to increase incomes for women is to improve their training and employment 

opportunities for higher paying jobs, and that often means moving into the traditional male-orientated areas as opposed to 

some others. We have stated many times, you could put that minimum wage level at $10 an hour and the reality would be 

if you had done nothing else on education, affirmative action, or training, you would still have women on minimum wage. 

And the member from Regina Centre can’t seem to understand that. 

 

What I hear the opposition saying is: it’s okay for women to be on minimum wage as long as you up the minimum wage; 

and that’s where he would like to leave it. And we don’t think that’s good enough. 

 

Not only do women lose out in addressing it in that manner, but we believe that society and the economy is the big loser 

in the long run on it, by not taking the opportunity for a very large percentage of the adult population out there to exercise 

their talents and their abilities towards their province and their country. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, I want to repeat for your benefit something said by that most diplomatic of 

all ministers, the Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources. He said in a quotation in the Star-Phoenix, “Maxwell 

advocates strong birth-control education plan.” 

 

I’ll read the article for you if you like, Mr. Minister, but the headline is not misleading. The Minister of Parks and 

Renewable Resources did indeed advocate, through our educational system, a strong birth-control education plan. 

 

Madam Minister, does the minister in charge of the Women’s Secretariat have the courage to take a position on this 

issue? 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — My position is well known on family education including sex education, and has been for 

about 14 years, for the benefit of the member from Regina Centre. 

 

As I recall, one time when he was for a very short period of time Minister of Education, I gave him my views on family 

education. I believe that family education is an important component of the social development of a child’s life, and at 

certain ages the sex education component becomes important also. But I also believe that the centralized function of the 

Department of Education is not to delve into that but to let the local board, in conjunction with their staff and their 

parents, decide the kind of family life education program that is going to be delivered, in co-operation, Mr. Chairman, 

with other elements of the community, whether it be the home, community agencies, perhaps the church; there’s several 

that I could think of that will, and many do take part in the delivery of a family life program. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well once again we find the minister is not prepared to take a stand on the issue, but talk 

around the issue. Madam Minister, you come down on so many sides of these issues you’ve got us completely surrounded 

— which is a fair stunt. 

 

Madam Minister, with respect to the Schneider report, does Madam Minister intend to release the report, and does the 

minister in charge of the Women’s Secretariat have the courage to take  

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2814 

 

 

a stand on this issue as well, Madam Minister? 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — I have been fully supportive of the Minister of Health’s initiative to involve the community, 

and particularly Mrs. Schneider, with her experience and her background in the whole area of not only family life but 

teen-age pregnancy within the school. 

 

(12:00) 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — It’s nice to know, Madam Minister, that you think Mrs. Schneider is a reasonable and decent 

person. To put it mildly, that was not what I asked. Madam Minister, there have been some changes recommended by the 

Law Reform Commission with respect to The Matrimonial Property Act. I think it is a fair summary the reaction by 

feminists in this province has been one of outrage and opposition to those recommendations which are thought to be 

retrogressive. I wonder, madam Minister, if the minister in charge of the Women’s Secretariat has the courage to take a 

stand on this issue. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Chairman, I have met with several women’s groups plus several individuals over the initial 

report as it came out, which I want to remind the member that it was the Law Reform Commission report. And the final 

recommendation after public hearing and further discussion has not come into the Attorney General yet. I take some 

disagreement with certain parts of the initial report and I think I have probably let that be known. I don’t think that . . . I 

think it would be unfair and prejudgemental to lay a position out before the Law Reform Commission comes in with its 

finalization and the dispensing of the commission. And I will wait for that time. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, in December of 1983 you said the most important thing that you could do to 

improve the status of women in society is to change people’s attitudes. 

 

We presumed at that time, Madam Minister, that you had some idea of those attitudes that needed changing. It’s been 

suggested to me since then that far from knowing what attitudes need to be changed, there was a need to inform the 

minister on what attitudes needed changing. 

 

I am told, madam Minister, that this is a role that the Women’s Secretariat was unable to fulfil and likewise that your 

advisory council on the status of women was unable to fulfil — able to tell you what attitudes. It’s further been suggested 

that government money for women’s programs was, in fact, fed to Tanka Resources, which is a political polling arm of 

the provincial PC party. 

 

Can you tell us if it is true that any funds which were voted to the Women’s Secretariat were in fact paid to Tanka 

Resources for any services? 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Chairman, we have spent a lot of time this year on the issue of family violence and we had 

one survey on family violence by the firm in question, that the member from Regina Centre raises. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Chairman, I have no further questions of this minister. This is a complete waste of time, 

and the minister is a complete waste of time. 

 

Mr. Chairman, this minister has refused to take a stand on any significant issues. She has refused to take a stand on 

matrimonial property; she has refused to take a stand on equal pay for work of equal value; she’s refused to take a stand 

on Bill 53; she has refused to take a stand on the question of the Schneider report. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the minister is doing nothing at all, and I don’t intend to waste the time of this Assembly any more with 

these estimates. As far as I am concerned, Mr. Minister, these estimates can go. They’re accomplishing nothing and 

there’s no point in wasting the time of the Assembly. 

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2815 

 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Item 2 agreed to. 

 

Vote 41 agreed to. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — I’d like to thank the minister and her officials. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the officials of 

the secretariat who deal with many issues and deal with all government departments and the civil service. Contrary to 

what the member from Regina Centre has to say, I have no doubt that he did not have any further questions considering 

the interest that is displayed during question period in the last year and a half towards women in this Assembly. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — I would like to thank the officials. It is my sincere regret that they’re not being given anything 

to do by the minister. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

SASKATCHEWAN LIBRARY 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 29 
 

Item 1 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. Would the minister introduce her officials? 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have with me today, on my immediate right, Karen Adams, the 

Provincial Librarian; I have Stan Skrzeszewski, director of professional services; and behind me, I have Marcel de 

Laforest, the director of administration. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Madam Minister, I wonder, in the most recent copy of the Public Accounts, under the 

administration in this area, you will notice that the administration services are overspent, or that you budgeted $322,000 

and that the number that ended up in the Public Accounts is quite different. Can you outline what the changes were in that 

area? 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Chairman, we’re talking about the `83-84 Public Accounts. We think that it is due to a 

reallocation, but because I don’t have this specific information I think I’d better check to make sure that that is correct, 

and I will get the information to the member from Shaunavon. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — That would be fine. I would appreciate it if the information was here. Traditionally we have 

information out of the Public Accounts in spending from the previous year. But while you’re at it, I noticed as well that in 

the area of professional services you spent almost $35,000 less than what was estimated. 

 

Now in an area where there is only a small amount spent, when you see changes like that you wonder why the change and 

where the money was moved to, or why it wasn’t spent when it was budgeted, or, in other words, why the huge mistake 

being made. And if you don’t have that information with you, Madam Minister, I would ask you to get it for us and send 

it to us before the end of the session, if you’d give that commitment. 

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2816 

 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Yes, I will, Mr. Chairman. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — In the area of provincial libraries, in your own personal staff, have you got any idea of the 

salary increases for your personal staff who would . . . if you had letters to write on libraries, and I’m sure that you do, 

the ministerial assistant who prepares the letters for you, the increase of that individual or individuals, and secretaries 

who would type those letters. I would like from you if you would get me the increase in the salaries. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Well, once again, none of my office staff are assigned to this particular budget. They all come 

within the Department of Education so I therefore do not have one or two staff assigned to provincial libraries. I will give 

the commitment, as I did in doing the estimates on the Women’s Secretariat, to once again send that information of my 

personal office staff. And I will also take the time to denote the secretary that does the typing, and the increases, if there 

were any. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — The final part of that question is whether you would get it to us before the end of the 

session. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Yes, I can do that. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Madam Minister, you will know that over the past number of years the regional library 

operation, which has functioned I think relatively well and served an important service to rural Saskatchewan and to 

small cities and right across the province . . . I wonder whether or not any problems exist between R.M.s or local 

governments in funding of the regional libraries. In your own area . . . I suppose we could use the example of the city of 

Swift Current which from time to time has debates and discussions on whether or not they should be contributing to the 

regional library system. Can you give me a brief outline of how you are making out in . . . whether all R.M.s and whether 

all local governments are involved now, or whether some are not, and in particular in the case of Swift Current whether 

or not they are part of the regional library in that area. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Chairman, let me deal with the Chinook Regional Library which is what Swift Current city 

is in. It is indeed true that they have had their ups and downs and discussions and withdrawal, in fact, motions tabled to 

withdraw at a certain point in time. I think things are moving along very nicely. 

 

There has been some communications and negotiations which the new Act, by the way, allows the cities to negotiate. 

Now that that is taking place, I am told that — I believe it was this week — that things were to be given a final wrap-up 

on that. So that particular area is not the issue that it was at one time. 

 

In 1985 there were 14 notices which is a decrease of three from 1984, and that also represents a considerable decrease 

from 47 notices in 1981 — 93 per cent of the population is participating. There were no municipalities that withdrew 

from regional libraries in 1984, and we have five municipalities with a total population of 3,732 of that number rescinded 

their withdrawal notices in, last year — 1984. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I noted that the budget is, I think, the exact same number 

of dollars as it was the year before, and you will perhaps be familiar with the letter written by the president of the 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipal Association, Mr. Herb Taylor, to your colleague, the Minister of Finance, in which . . . I 

will read a small portion of the letter in which it says: 

 

We note, as well, that there is no provision for change in so far as the support to the library system, and virtually no 

change in support of the ambulance system. 

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2817 

 

 

If this is to continue, both the library boards and the ambulance boards will turn to the local taxpayer once more for 

additional funding to assist them in meeting their increasing costs of providing these services. 

 

(12:15) 

 

That prediction, I think, has been borne out, at least in some municipalities. I obviously have not checked them all. 

 

What is the trend with respect to mill rates for library purposes across the province? I noted in Regina there seemed to be 

some increase. Could you give us an indication of what the trend is? 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Chairman, at the time that we were doing the preparation for budget, we had looked at 

what zero per cent increase does to third-party grants. And we also at that time went back two, three, four years to see the 

total percentage increase, and of course your inflation rate and other factors that often come about in determining. 

 

I’d been somewhat worried on the zero per cent, particularly the effect on a regional library that has a very sparse 

population and a lot of miles in between with no people. And we looked at the financial statements of the year before. 

And I guess I was somewhat reassured that given a year — and when you have a year of tight resources — that there be a 

reserve somewhere. And most of the, if not all, of the regional libraries has a surplus or reserve that hadn’t been set aside 

for a specific purpose like a capital construction project or something like that. It was basically undesignated money that 

was in the surplus fund. 

 

That’s not to say that the libraries are rich; they’re not. But they all have at least as much money as a 3 per cent increase, 

if that’s what you would have done on a provincial grant. And while they don’t specifically set a mill rate — it’s a 

percentage that they do — we believe that in many cases there were some very modest increases that you could contribute 

to library expenses. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, with respect to the ones which are clearly 

identifiable, that is the mill rates in cities like Regina and Saskatoon which have library systems separate in an 

organizational sense from regional libraries, can you tell me what has happened to the mill rates in those particular 

communities as a result of the zero increase in funding? 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Using Saskatoon as an example, within the formula, we only pay approximately 7 per cent. 

And I would think it would be very difficult . . . We could give it a try, but it would be very difficult, and within that 7 per 

cent of provincial money going in, to determine the mill rate within it. 

 

But I could certainly raise it with the board in question to find out what they put on the mill rate within the city of 

Saskatoon for library purposes. But I think you have to keep it in perspective and remember what portion is municipal 

money and what portion is provincial money. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister . . . Madam Minister, you anticipate my next question. 

With respect to the two major city libraries who are, I believe, becoming increasingly integrated with the regional library 

systems into one Saskatchewan library system which now, I believe, uses one computer installation . . . At least all the 

material is catalogued on a single program of computer hardware . . . software. I don’t know whether . . . what the 

hardware arrangements are. 

 

Do you feel it continues to be justified to pay such a small proportion of the costs of the libraries in the two major cities 

as they increasingly become part of what is an integrated provincial library system? 

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2818 

 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I believe that the Leader of the Opposition is basically talking about the 

issue of equal access, and perhaps equal grants in terms of percentage that they’re getting. We have not moved off of the 

percentage of moneys that Saskatoon or the two larger cities get from what they got say four or five, six years ago. 

 

However, it has been raised to me in discussion with both Regina and Saskatoon. And we have looked at some areas of 

service that Saskatoon and Regina may be into delivering because they have the equipment, the material, and the 

technology to do it. 

 

And I have written to ask the library boards of Regina and Saskatoon if they would consider a provincially funded 

contract to assist with the cost of circulating films outside the cities. And so far Regina has responded and, of course, has 

indicated their willingness to have a look at that which would alleviate some cost in that area of helping out other boards. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, I would urge you to pursue that. In the nature of 

things governments deal with, with the problems which confront them, and they deal with them in the order of priority of 

need, and over the last 20 or 25 years it was clearly perceived to be the need to get a tolerable and 

something-better-than-tolerable library system in rural Saskatchewan. And it started from rather small roots. North 

central in Prince Albert has gone across the province, and I think all areas with the possible exception of northern 

Saskatchewan are reasonably adequately covered with library services. I’m not suggesting there aren’t library services in 

northern Saskatchewan. I’m questioning possibly the adequacy. 

 

When that is done, then one needs to address a little more fully the question, perhaps the fairness of burden bearing. The 

two major cities have had good library systems financed out of the public purse for a long time, and I would urge you to 

consider that. And I also welcome your comments that you will consider it in the light of services which they may render 

to the combined system, and certainly with respect to film and video and that sort of thing they have good collections in 

Regina and Saskatoon. One calls them, I suppose, a library of films and a library of records and the like, tapes, which we 

ought not to try for the most part to duplicate in many of the smaller regionals, and perhaps some provincial funding to 

provide that service would be welcomed. And I commend your approach along that line. 

 

The history of these two library systems was very, very different. The cities started, I suppose, in the Carnegie days and 

got libraries and got grants on that basis, and the regional library system has been something which Saskatchewan people 

have developed themselves and in a sense pioneered themselves, since it’s, I think, still the most comprehensive in 

Canada, and certainly when it was set up it was, over the past 20 years or so . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, probably. 

I would hope so. I would hope that we can look for some progress, and the member suggests that it’s getting better every 

day. 

 

My next question is to the minister, and how does she feel that the exact same number of dollars will produce a better 

library system, or even as good a library system, in `85-86 as it did in `84-85, in view of the costs which are undoubtedly 

increasing — costs like utilities which, with all the efficiency in the world, you’re still going to have to pay more for? 

 

As rates increase, the costs of transportation, which are not insignificant in the regional library systems if you’re running 

bookmobiles and the like, and the costs of fuel keep increasing, particularly when we have governments in Ottawa which 

are increasing the fuel taxes. 

 

We have the costs of books, a significant number of which are procured in the United States, and the cost of which has 

gone up rather dramatically in the last couple of years, primarily because of changes in exchange rates. Now it may not 

go up in this particular year, but I would be far from sanguine about whether or not that will be true. 

 

Madam Minister, my simple question is this: with the exact same number of dollars, and knowing  

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2819 

 

 

that some costs are certainly increasing — and I can think of no significant cost which is decreasing — how do you 

propose to maintain the library system even at the level which it previously operated at, let alone the improvements which 

are suggested as likely to come by the member for Souris-Cannington? 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I said earlier, when we looked at budgeting this year and a zero per 

cent increase to libraries, we also looked at the impact in specific areas. 

 

You know, for instance in 1984-85 last year, Mr. Chairman, Saskatchewan led all the western provinces in our operating 

grants per person. We were at $5.81, and the next highest was Alberta at $4.47 — a whole dollar plus less than what 

Saskatchewan was at. And Manitoba was at $2.66. So there’s, you know, a very major difference in terms of what 

happened within the library budgets last year. British Columbia was down at the bottom with 2.39, but Manitoba wasn’t 

too far off the bottom of the barrel at that rate. 

 

And I guess that’s why I alluded to the surpluses that were there, had not been designated. Certainly there are some cost 

factors that have gone up. But there’s also changes in style of management, efficiencies, technologies that do take place. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition made reference to the cost of books. And I would like to inform him that the average cost 

of a hard-cover book was gone from $31.19 in 1983 down to 29.81 in 1984. Now if you take just that portion and 

examine it, along with the fact that Saskatchewan libraries received one of the larger percentage increases in their grants, 

and I think you can see that you obviously have a little bit of room to move. 

 

(12:30) 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Mr. Minister, I regret that the minister is using interprovincial 

comparisons. I regret because for every year in the last 10 Saskatchewan has spent more per capita on regional library 

services, or on all library services, than any other province. And I think we were proud of it. And for her to suggest that 

she’s going to drop back to some other provincial standards is to indicate that she is looking at a lower standard of library 

service. Otherwise she wouldn’t be using that. 

 

That’s certainly very, very clear. We have very different circumstances here in Saskatchewan with a widely dispersed 

population, and therefore a large number of our people who don’t have access to book stores and other places which 

might be thought of in some sense as substitutes for libraries — that isn’t what we have here. We, long ago, fully 20 years 

ago, made a commitment to top-grade regional libraries as part of an educational system and as part of making rural life 

more attractive, as part of keeping people on the farm. I know that some members opposite will be surprised at this, but a 

good number of farm people like to read, and enjoy reading, and get a lot of not only pleasure but information out of 

reading. There is perhaps not much evidence of it with respect to one or two of the people from the farm areas who I see 

about me, but Know that that isn’t true, it isn’t true with respect to many farm people. 

 

It has been a proud boast of this province that we had the best system. And when I hear the minister deciding that she’s 

going to compare it to B.C., which is highly urban population, or to other provinces which have highly urban populations, 

then we are going to get much fewer dollars per capita. And I think that that is a clear statement that we’re going to have 

a lowering of the quality of library services. 

 

I regret it. She is saying she’s going to spend no more per . . . no more dollars. If I can believe any of the members 

opposite, or if I could believe one-tenth of what they say, the population will increase. Therefore we’re spending less per 

capita in 1985-86 than was spent in `84-85, and that certainly spells a decrease in the level of service. It’s very well for 

the minister to say that costs are not increasing, but I think we know they are.  

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2820 

 

 

Costs are increasing; the number of people who might use the libraries are increasing; the number of dollars is exactly the 

same; the result is a lower quality of library service. I regret the government’s choice to cut back on library services. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I had stated earlier, I think to keep it in perspective, when one is setting 

a budget, if you in fact do go back and you look at the previous year’s budget, and you also do some comparison — not 

comparisons in order to bring yourself into line with other provinces, necessarily, but to see what is happening in the 

entire library field — I don’t for a minute believe that the services have gotten worse. 

 

In fact, I think that they’ve probably improved somewhat. I think they are becoming different services and that will 

increase over the years as more and more people go into home computers, be able to access information from various data 

banks, and libraries will certainly have a major challenge before them. 

 

I would also like to remind the Leader of the Opposition that this government, when it comes to education, besides public 

libraries, the effect on the public library has also come from the school system. And it perhaps is fair to say that the 

money going into the Educational Development Fund this year, particularly into libraries and resource centres, will have 

some of an impact on what is happening within the public library system. 

 

MR. YEW: — Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I’d like to ask the minister responsible for Saskatchewan libraries: I wonder 

if she could explain to me what the government’s policy is in respect of the administration and operations of public and 

provincial libraries in northern Saskatchewan — regarding staffing, funding, the upkeep and maintenance, and the 

operations in general, about northern libraries. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — I welcome the questions from the member from the North, Mr. Chairman, I guess for some 

specific reasons, one of it being that the library service within the North has not been dealt with in past years. 

 

For instance, in 1981 there was a legislative review committee that stated the belief that northern libraries should not be 

weak copies of those in the South, and that something should be done, in fact, to improve their service. But they turned 

down, Mr. Chairman, turned down a regional-type system of library service that has been proven to be very effective. 

 

We are looking at staffing. We are looking at two positions whose assigned duties relate to the North within the 

Saskatchewan Library. We have had two training workshops for library workers held annually for northern libraries. We 

also, Mr. Chairman, have a northern representative, Mr. George Cook from La Ronge, who is on the minister’s advisory 

board in dealing with library services. 

 

New materials relevant to the needs of Northerners are being purchased and will continue to be purchased. We have 

arranged for native authors to hold readings in the North, and there have been regular visits made to the libraries. Access 

to library material is also being made available without cost to the user, Mr. Chairman, and I would think that that, 

perhaps, answers some of the questions that the member from Cumberland may have. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. YEW: — Yes. I’d like to ask the minister as well: what involvement do you have with local governments in this 

respect, in terms of staffing and funding, and the upkeep of materials, etc. that goes into the North? 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Chairman, I did not hear all of the question. Could I have the  

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2821 

 

 

member repeat it, please? 

 

MR. YEW: — Mr. Minister, or Madam Minister . . . Pardon me, Deputy Speaker. Madam Minister, I was asking what 

type of involvement, what role are local government councils playing in terms of involvement, input by those 

communities, by way of staffing; by way of material and literature; by way of funding the upkeep and maintenance and 

the promotion of Saskatchewan libraries. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Well Mr. Chairman, it is local governments that pass by-laws for the libraries. La Ronge is 

perhaps a good example. And it is the local government that appoints the library board that deals with the issues that the 

member has raised. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 29 agreed to. 

 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — I would like to thank the officials with me today, and the Assembly, yourself, and the Clerks, 

and also the opposition. Thank you. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, in just closing, I would ask the minister that she would send the information 

before the end of the session — I’m sure she will — and also thank the officials, and just point out to her that a freeze on 

funding in that area is . . . 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order, order. The debate is over. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

URBAN AFFAIRS 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 24 
 

Item 1 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister introduce his official? 

 

HON. MR. EMBURY: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. To my right, Dave Innes, deputy minister; Keith Schneider, assistant 

deputy minister; Henry McCutcheon, executive director of planning; Gerry Stinson, the director of northern municipal 

services; George Dobni, the manager of accounting services; Rick Kilarski, the manager of revenue sharing; John 

Edwards, the assistant director of municipal grants, and Del Fuchs, as acting director of property tax rebates. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, would you begin by giving me a list of your personal staff, their positions, their 

current salaries, and details of pay increases in the last year? 

 

HON. MR. EMBURY: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll send it across. 

 

Okay, Mr. Chairman, I’ve sent that across. Just to explain it to the member opposite, you will see under “current salary” 

— obviously they’re current salaries — you will see to the right the percentages in increments. 

 

Bruce Evans, 8.8 per cent, which represents two years’ increments. In other words, he hasn’t had an increment for two 

years. Pat Murphy, zero; Pam Barber, 4.2 per cent; Vonda Renwick, zero; Margaret Marsden, zero. 

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2822 

 

 

(12:45) 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, would you then give me the current salary, and to what date the increase was 

retroactive to? 
 

HON. MR. EMBURY: — Those are the current salaries. 
 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Right. Then could I have the previous salaries and the date to which they increase was 

retroactive? 
 

HON. MR. EMBURY: — Okay, Mr. Chairman. Evans — first increment effective April 1, `84, and the second 

increment effective January of `85. And Barber, increment effective January `85. 
 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Please give me the salaries, Mr. Minister, of each . . . 

 

HON. MR. EMBURY: — Evans, 39,520; Barber, 32,360. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, do you want to have a go at justifying a pay increase for your personal staff in 

almost the same breath that you have denied public servants, teachers, nurses — it goes on and on and on — anything in 

the nature of an increase? 

 

We witnessed the pathetic attempts of the Premier two days ago. We didn’t think anyone would up that; however, the 

minister of crop insurance managed to do worse today in question period. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you want to have a go at the impossible, attempting to justify these pay increases? 

 

HON. MR. EMBURY: — Mr. Chairman, I will point out that in my department, 46 employees in the department 

received incremental raises, or went up the step as much as my staff did. And the average increase in the department is 4 

per cent. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, would you give me a list of the people and positions . . . Just give me the 

positions, if you like, of the . . . Will you give me a list of those positions which were increased? 

 

I don’t particularly want the names. I want to know at what level you’re increasing the . . . what level of people you’re 

increasing the . . . If you give me the names, I’ll treat this confidential. If you’re not prepared to do that, will you give me 

the positions which you increased, and the pay increase of those who hold the positions? 

 

HON. MR. EMBURY: — Mr. Chairman, I will . . . We will get that information for the member. What I’m trying to 

point out is that the members of the civil service are under the same system as the members of my staff. They have a 

salary range, they have yearly increments, and the increments in my staff are the same percentage increase as the 

increments in the civil services. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, will you give me the list of positions that were increased — the names and the 

positions that were increased, and the amount? 

 

HON. MR. EMBURY: — I already agreed to send that to you. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, I want to return to an issue which we dealt with with your predecessor, now 

Minister of Energy, and that is the multimodal station in Regina and Saskatoon . . . in Regina and Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Minister, both communities had high hopes that these buildings, which are beautiful old  

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2823 

 

 

buildings and an important part of the heritage of both cities, might be preserved. Your predecessor, the now Minister of 

Energy, was anything but encouraging when we dealt with the issue a couple of years ago. 

 

Mr. Minister, if you could give me a status report now, is there any hope for this project, or is it dead? 

 

HON. MR. EMBURY: — Mr. Speaker, I think this question was asked last year in estimates, and at that time I’d 

indicated to the member opposite that that had been transferred to the Minister of Transportation over two years ago. And 

I think if you check the record, I informed the member of that last year in estimates. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, can you send me, and we are not going to complete this today — you may have 

it with you — can you send me in a municipality by municipality, can you send me the grants they’re getting, and can you 

give me the urban assistance grants? I don’t know the name of them. If you need the name I’ll get my Estimates book out; 

I don’t have it specifically in front of me. Can you give me that, municipality by municipality? 

 

HON. MR. EMBURY: — Do you want the actuals, Mr. Chairman, or what they’re eligible for? 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’m sorry; I didn’t hear you. 

 

HON. MR. EMBURY: — Under the new capital fund, obviously every municipality is eligible for funding capital. Most 

have not applied yet, obviously. So do you want what they are eligible for this year? 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Yes. With respect to the . . . I gather we’re now talking about the . . . (inaudible) . . . I would 

ask what they’re eligible for. 

 

With respect to urban revenue sharing, I would ask for, on the municipality-by-municipality basis, what they got last year 

and what they go this year. And I would appreciate that, Mr. Minister, if it’s at all possible, before Monday at 2:30 when I 

assume we’ll pick this up again. 

 

HON. MR. EMBURY: — No problem. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, since you’re being so co-operative, would the same information be available 

with respect to northern capital grants, northern fire protection facilities, and northern revenue sharing? 

 

HON. MR. EMBURY: — No problem. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — You’re leaving me breathless, Mr. Minister. We were just dealing with the Minister of 

Education who, as I said on one other occasion, getting simple information out of her is like drawing a bed-sheet through 

a keyhole. To put it mildly, you leave me in a state of shock. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to ask you again some questions in general with respect to the provincial capital fund. I noted on 

second reading that there had been in fact a modest decrease in the fund from `81-82 to `85-86. In `81-82 the CCF 

(community capital fund) was 17.5 million; `85-86 the PC (provincial capital) fund appropriately enough is smaller than 

that, is 17.3. And of course there’s a very significant loss in terms of absolute dollars. There’s been a 21 per cent 

increase; there’s been 21 per cent inflation sine then. So in absolute terms there’s a fair decrease. 

 

Mr. Minister, when you add in the Highways capital of 14.3 in `81-82 and a mere 5 million this year, you have in fact an 

almost 50 per cent reduction in the amount of capital dollars available to municipalities. And, Mr. Minister, they’re 

feeling it. It has not gone unnoticed by the municipalities. 

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2824 

 

 

I just tore out of a newspaper some of the more complimentary things they’re saying about your budget. Leader-Post, 

Tuesday, April 16: “Provincial government cuts blamed for higher property tax.” In Regina they had to assess a special 

road repair levy . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, let’s go to Estevan then. You may get a chance to make those 

comments . . . You undoubtedly will get a chance to make those comments directly to that individual after the next 

election. But let’s go to Estevan then, if you don’t like the city of Regina. And it’s obvious that this government does not 

like this city. Let’s go to Estevan. 

 

Estevan, an operational budget calling for 1.5 mill increase in the mill rate was adopted by the city council because of 

your budget. 

 

Mr. Minister, the operating grants are down very significantly. The capital grants are down very significantly. Their 

operating grants have been frozen. Will you admit, Mr. Minister, that what you are doing is to transfer to the 

municipalities the consequences of your prolific spending over the last couple of years? You come into office, Mr. 

Minister, with a wildly irresponsible campaign promising impossible increases in the program and equally impossible 

cuts in taxes. And you tried to do a small fraction of it and that has got you into financial trouble. 

 

You are now in the process, Mr. Minister, of transferring the consequences of that prolific spending to the municipalities, 

and they are feeling the brunt of it. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, how you justify having the municipalities pay the cost of your mismanagement. 

 

HON. MR. EMBURY: — A number of points made, Mr. Speaker, most of them wrong. But I will reply to them. 

 

It’s interesting that the member opposite wishes to use the figures of 1981 and the old CCF program. In 1981, Mr. 

Speaker, was the first year of what is now known as CCF-2 and, of course, the cash flow was higher in the first year. The 

member opposite, of course, does not want to mention 1980, the year between CCF-1 and CCF-2. 

 

The members opposite were so concerned with capital funding for municipalities in 1980 that they replaced CCF-1 with 

nothing — with zero, with no capital financing for one full year for municipalities, nothing. That was their concern in 

1980. 1981, they brought in what is now known as the CCF-2. 

 

That has run out. We have introduced . . . We didn’t leave a year’s gap and left everybody with zero, with no capital 

financing at all. We came and we enriched the formula and gave them more money. That will go for two years. We 

handled that previously today, because that was SUMA’s request pending the results of the recommendations of the 

Local Government Finance Commission. 

 

The member opposite wants to leave the impression that municipalities are getting less capital dollars this year than last 

year. I think, Mr. Speaker, that the member opposite should be noted that there are 408 municipalities this year who are 

receiving more capital money this year than last year — 408. Out of that there are eight cities that received more, 387 

towns and villages, 13 hamlets — all received more . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

All right. The member opposite then wants to take the capital financing and the revenue sharing, and pointed out the city 

of Estevan who he says is going to have a mill rate increase. Well, Mr. Speaker, the mill rate decreased in Estevan this 

year by 1.3 per cent — decreased, not increased, 1.3 per cent decreased . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m sorry, because 

you don’t have the facts correctly. It’s a 1.3 per cent decrease. 

 



 

May 31, 1985 

2825 

 

 

Mr. Chairman, I suppose that we’ll continue this debate on Monday, and on Monday I will deal with specifically the city 

of Regina’s requests and their story and we’ve got out . . . I’ll let the House Leader go. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:02 p.m. 

 


