


















































May 21, 1986 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 21, 1986 
 
 

1403 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Katzman: — Mr. Speaker, it's my privilege to introduce two 
groups today in the House. The first group is in the west gallery. 
They're from Hepburn School. They are here visiting the gallery 
with their teachers, and I will be meeting with them after question 
period to discuss what happened in the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm also introducing a second group, and I will tell 
you there's three of them sitting in the Speaker's gallery behind 
me, in the first row. They are here representing the Students 
Freedom Caravan for Soviet Jews. They are here, as I said, with a 
group of 50 touring across Canada, taking a petition to the Expo 
'86 to ask for the freedom of the Jewish people who are in the 
U.S.S.R. who would like their freedom to come to Canada or other 
parts of the free world. 
 
I speak for them here, Mr. Speaker, and introduce them because, 
as one who has had some involvement, my oldest brother came 
out of the U.S.S.R. in 1930 when he was ten and a half years old; 
four years ago we were able to get one of my cousins and his wife 
and their three children out of the U.S.S.R. We still have 13 
members of our family left there, and therefore I feel for their 
cause. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish you would all help me welcome them here, 
and have a safe journey. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I join with the member for 
Rosthern in greeting the members of the Students Freedom 
Caravan for Soviet Jews, and I know that all members will share 
the profound regret we all feel, that Jews and other people are not 
able to leave the Soviet Union when they would so wish to do to 
seek a new life in other lands. And we very much hope that those 
circumstances will change, and we wish the Students' Freedom 
Caravan, and those who are working with them, every success in 
their endeavours. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure 
to introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, a group of people situated in your gallery, sir, who 
represent the membership of the Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation. 
 
They are members of the executive. Seated in the gallery is Lorne 
Scott, president; Ed Begin, executive director; and members of the 
executive —— the president's counsel, Jim Emke, Jim Kroshus, 
Gord Demoskoff, and some others who may be joining us later, I 
will introduce at a later date. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to say I've been a member of that 
organization for a number of years. They represent the conscience 
of wildlife in this province, and I ask all  

members to give them a cordial welcome. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with my 
colleague from Turtleford in welcoming the leadership and the 
executive of the Sask. Wildlife Federation to the Assembly. 
 
All members will know the great work that they have done in 
working for wildlife habitat in the province, a job that is ongoing, 
and at times dealing with governments takes longer than we would 
like to, whatever government is in power. And I would just like to 
encourage them to keep up the good work because it's very much 
appreciated, both by farmers and by people who go out on hunting 
expeditions. And we welcome you here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Trade Complaint Against Canadian Lumber Exports 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my question 
to the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Forest Products, 
who was surprisingly uninformed yesterday about a major threat 
to the hundreds of jobs in Saskatchewan's forest industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm talking about the American lumber industry's 
attempt to have a 20 per cent duty slapped on all Canadian lumber 
products entering the United States market which, in effect, would 
cut off Canadian lumber sales to the United States. 
 
Can the minister today tell us how much Saskatchewan lumber is 
sold in the United States each year, and what percentage of our 
total production is sold into the United States? And further, can he 
tell us what specific action your government will take to intervene 
in this case in order to protect Saskatchewan jobs. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in answer to the 
member's question as it relates to the amount of Saskatchewan 
lumber which goes to the United States market, it is about —— 
it's approximately 50 per cent —— 50 per cent of Saskatchewan 
lumber goes into that American market. There's no question that 
the question that the member raises is an important one. Each 
time, each time one of these countervailing suits is raised in the 
United States, mainly by members of the . . . politicians really, and 
spurred on by politicians from the north—western states of the 
United States, each time one of these threats comes forward, 
certainly all of the producing provinces, the lumber—producing 
provinces of Canada, become alarmed, as does the Government of 
Canada. 
 
I would say to the hon. member that the Government of Canada 
and all of the producing provinces are working in collaboration 
with each other. My colleague, the Minister of Forestry Service, is 
more involved in this than I am, although my interest is certainly 
there, as you have stated, because of the responsibility for Sask 
Forest Products. But  
  



 
May 21, 1986 

1404 
 
 

I would say that this government, the present federal government, 
is the first one to have a minister responsible for forestry, in the 
Hon. Mr. Merrithew. That minister is co—ordinating efforts of all 
of the producing provinces. There is no question that the matter is 
a serious one when it's raised, but we believe very surely that this 
will not come about, and that our exports into the United States 
market will be preserved. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
this is the first step, although it comes a little late when you 
consider that the American industry has been publicly talking 
about filing such a suit for many months. One would have thought 
that Ottawa and the provinces would have discussed strategy prior 
to today. But my specific question is this. Considering the fact that 
hundreds of Saskatchewan jobs hang in the balance, will 
Saskatchewan appear as an intervener at the public hearings on 
this countervailing duty case? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, there will be representatives 
through the Canadian forest service and all of the provinces who 
are producers of lumber products involved in this case and 
representing the interests of Canada and the interests of Canada's 
lumber industry. 
 
This is not the first time this has taken place; it has taken place 
before. As the member says, there have been many months that 
this has been threatened. There is no question that it has 
everything to do with the fact that the free trade negotiations are 
now just getting under way between our two countries. Obviously 
they are trying to flag that issue. There's no question that issue will 
be flagged in there. I believe that it will come out on the side of 
Canada, as do many others who are involved in the forest industry 
in Canada. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes. My question is to the minister in charge of 
Saskatchewan Forest Products also, and it deals . . . Mr. Minister, 
the petition for a 27 per cent duty on Canadian lumber sold in the 
United States was filed by a group called the U.S. Coalition for 
Fair Lumber Imports. The Weyerhaeuser corporation is a member 
of that coalition through its membership in both the National 
Forest Products Association and the Western Wood Products 
Association. 
 
In other words, Mr. Minister, the company which is about to buy a 
major share in Saskatchewan forest industry from your 
government is at the same time trying to prevent Saskatchewan 
from selling lumber into the United States. And so I ask the 
minister: can the minister explain how Weyerhaeuser's position is 
in the best interest of Saskatchewan forest industry, and how it 
will indeed protect Saskatchewan jobs? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it's interesting that the 
members are now going back to the position of being against 
Weyerhaeuser coming to Saskatchewan. The member has clearly 
said that. The member has clearly indicated the NDP's position as 
it relates to Weyerhaeuser being a corporate citizen of this 
province, involved in a lumber industry of this province, and the 
exports which must go into the United States. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Weyerhaeuser, with their interests in the  

United States are a part of that, although I don't take the member's 
word for it necessarily, but they are a part of the lumber industry 
in the north—western states of the United States; there's no 
question about that. 
 
But as I said yesterday, and I'll repeat here again today, the most 
important thing that Weyerhaeuser brought to the negotiations and 
then to the subsequent deal here in Saskatchewan, as it relates to 
paper and pulp and production here in Saskatchewan, is the 
marketing network which they have in the United States market, 
which even the members opposite will admit is a very important 
market to our products. 
 

Free Trade Negotiations 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to direct a question, 
in the absence of the Premier and the Deputy Premier and the 
Minister of Economic Development, to the Acting House Leader, 
and it deals with the issue of free trade, and it deals with the 
government's unwillingness or inability to answer some pretty 
basic questions yesterday in the Assembly about the free trade 
negotiations with the United States. The negotiations began this 
morning in Ottawa between Simon Reisman, the Canadian 
negotiator, and the U.S. negotiator, Peter Murphy. 
 
My straightforward question is this: does Saskatchewan have a 
representative at the bargaining table during these negotiations, 
and if so, who is the representative? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, my understanding is that the 
negotiations are going on between the nation of Canada, the nation 
of the United States, and those negotiations will continue on that 
basis. Saskatchewan's representative in the consultative process 
which led up to the negotiations getting on, and which will carry 
on as the negotiations continue, will be Mr. Wakabayashi, whom 
the Premier appointed to that position some weeks ago. 
 
We have confidence in Mr. Wakabayashi's ability in that area, and 
I would say to the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, as I did 
yesterday, some of the specifics, and I took notice on behalf of the 
Minister of Economic Development and Trade, who will be in the 
House tomorrow, and who will have the answers to his questions 
tomorrow. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Do I 
understand the minister to say that Mr. Wakabayashi will not be in 
the bargaining room today in Ottawa, or do I understand him to 
say that Mr. Wakabayashi will be at the table and in the room at 
Ottawa today? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask the Hon. Leader 
of the Opposition to repeat his question. There's a bit of noise in 
the House; I'd ask him for the question. I noticed while the Leader 
of the Opposition was on his feet the member from Quill Lakes 
was making reference to Mr. Wakabayashi being under the table 
and not at the table, and I'll come to Mr. Wakabayashi's defence as 
a public servant . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
  



 
May 21, 1986 

1405 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I'd be happy to repeat the 
question. It was a fairly simple one, and it was this. Do I 
understand the minister to say that Mr. Wakabayashi will be at the 
table and in the bargaining room, or will he not be at the table and 
in the bargaining room? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I said very clearly that the negotiations, as 
I understand it, are under way between Canada and the United 
States. Canada's representative is Simon Reisman. The United 
States has their own representative at the table. And there are not 
10 provinces involved in the negotiations, although all of the 
provinces are involved in that consultative process leading up to, 
and throughout the negotiations, after the various meeting with the 
other country. So there are not 10 provinces and 50 states 
negotiating. The United States of America and Canada are 
negotiating. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a new question to 
the Acting House Leader. Mr. Minister, last year Ottawa and the 
provinces agreed and announced that there would be "full 
provincial participation in any free trade negotiations" —— full 
provincial participation. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, they did not talk about consultation, 
discussion, talks, as part of a consultative process, but full 
provincial participation. To me, and to most Saskatchewan people, 
I would think that would mean a place at the table. Are you saying 
that that's not happening? Are you saying that our role is restricted 
to consulting in advance, and we will not participate in any 
negotiations? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the very acts that the Hon. 
Leader of the Opposition referred to, the talks, discussions, 
consultations, are all part of a participation by the provinces in the 
lead—up to the negotiations, obviously. It should be obvious to 
anyone when bilateral negotiations go on between two nations on 
this continent, those negotiations will be between those two 
nations. We believe that's the right way to go, and we believe that's 
the way it is going. 
 
There is and there will continue to be . . . Our understanding is that 
there will continue to be, and that there is consultation, discussion, 
talks, on an ongoing basis between all of the 10 provinces of 
Canada and the federal government of Canada, and the United 
States has its own process for that through their own political 
process. And that's the way it should be —— the United States of 
America negotiating with Canada. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, these negotiations could have a very severe impact on 
the Saskatchewan economy and Saskatchewan people, and 
Saskatchewan people understandably want to know as precisely as 
possible how their interests are being protected at the bargaining 
table. 
 
And I ask you again, sir: who will speak for Saskatchewan at the 
bargaining table? Is it Mr. Reisman and, if so, what protection do 
we have to prevent him from downplaying, perhaps even 
sacrificing, Saskatchewan interests in the course of these 
negotiations? 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The Leader of the Opposition says these 
talks could have detrimental effects on Saskatchewan. I say these 
talks could have very beneficial effects for Saskatchewan and all 
of western Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The Leader of the Opposition suggests 
that Mr. Reisman should not speak for any part of Canada from 
which he does not come. That same kind of logic would suggest 
that the Leader of the Opposition should never speak for anybody 
from Meadow Lake, an area that he does not come from. That 
doesn't make any . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Health Laundry Study 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — A question to the Minister of Health, and it 
deals with a recently prepared report for your department called 
the Saskatchewan Health Laundry study. Now you'll be aware of 
that issue; you were asked the question last Friday. You took 
notice of it. 
 
I would like to re—ask the question: who prepared this study for 
your department; what was the total cost of the study; was the 
contract for this study awarded by public tender and, if not, who 
made the final choice that that particular consultant would be 
hired? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would indicate to you in 
the House again, as indicated to the Leader of the Opposition a 
few days ago, that we noticed that the laundry service in this 
province for the hospitals was rather in a hodgepodge situation 
with the laundry coming from Meadow Lake through North 
Battleford, where there is a laundry, to Saskatoon; the laundry 
from the hospital in North Battleford going over to Prince Albert, 
where there was a laundry in North Battleford; and various other 
rather strange patterns of delivery. I felt that perhaps we could 
save some money by rationalizing and improving some laundry 
facilities, like we're doing in Yorkton, to perhaps use the health 
care dollars more efficiently. So I asked my deputy minister to 
carry out a study of these, and they had the people in SHSP 
(Saskatchewan hospital services plan), the director of SHSP look 
for firms. 
 
There were three firms that were considered. One was Northwest 
Consulting Associates, the other was Resources Management 
Consultants, and the third one was Associated Business 
Consultants. All of them have local offices here. Some of them, 
the head offices are out of Saskatchewan. Interviews were held 
with all three firms. The lowest bid was Northwest Consulting 
Associates, but in view of the directors of SHSP in consultation 
with the deputy, they did not think they could carry out the best 
job. The highest bid was Resources Management Consultants, and 
the second lowest was Associated Business Consultants, and the 
award was given to Associated Business Consultants. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I'm impressed that you  
  



 
May 21, 1986 

1406 
 
 

did something about the dirty laundry when you took over. The 
question was whether this consulting process was tendered or not. 
Was there a public tendering process? You indicated that you 
consulted with several firms, but was there a tendering process 
where all consulting firms in the province were given an 
opportunity to bid on this project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well as I pointed out, there was rather a 
strange pattern of laundry services, and we thought we could 
correct this and improve it, and I think we will be able to. We 
asked for invitation of bids from local people and local firms that 
could do it, and there was invitation of submissions. And as I say, 
there were three groups that submitted, and they were all 
interviewed. The second highest one was chosen. The lowest one 
was not chosen because . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
The second highest one was chosen. If he would listen, or if he 
prefers to laugh, it is up to him . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well if there's three, the second one is either the second highest or 
the second lowest —— depends which way you're counting it. But 
let me indicate to you that after interviews by the people in SHSP 
(Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan), the Associated Business 
Consultants were the ones hired. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Would you know whether the company that 
got the contract was the company owned by the former executive 
assistant of Dick Collver, one Ron Ryan? Is that the company? 
And also, what was the amount of the contract? I think you 
neglected to tell us what the total amount paid for that study was. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly, as I told the Leader of the 
Opposition the other day, it is the company owned by Mr. Ryan. 
The bids by the various companies were as follows: Northwest 
Consulting —— and this was not a firm bid —— this was an 
estimate of 24 to $27,000; Associated Business Consultants, 
$32,000; and Resources Management Consultants, $50,000. So 
the $32,000 firm was chosen. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder, can 
you confirm whether or not Ron Ryan was also a ministerial 
assistant to the minister of Finance in 1983? Is that the same 
individual who was an executive assistant to the minister of 
Finance at that time, the minister who dealt with Pioneer Trust and 
all those issues? Can you tell me whether or not this is the same 
individual, and what was the reason for his dismissal as an 
executive assistant with the Minister of Finance at that time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly, when the bid was provided, Mr. 
Ryan was running Associated Business Consultants. As far as 
whether he served for the minister of Finance, when he did, how 
he was dismissed, you'd have to ask that of the minister that was in 
charge at that time. I don't know. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if 
the Acting Minister of Finance could indicate whether or not this 
Ron Ryan is the same individual who was dismissed by the 
previous minister of Finance, the  

member from Kindersley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I will check with the former minister of 
Finance as to the circumstances. it's obviously irrelevant to the 
question. I took notice, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — When you talk about an old Liberal, I think 
that's a perfect example of it there, trying to pull a fast one. 
 
But I want to ask the Minister of Finance again . . . I don't think it's 
his prerogative to decide whether the questions are relevant or not, 
but I want to ask him again: the Ron Ryan who was given this 
contract —— and I say again there was no open tendering process 
that took place —— can you tell me whether or not this individual 
was an executive assistant to the minister of Finance in 1983, and 
can you tell me the circumstances surrounding his dismissal at that 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, as I indicated to the hon. member, I 
would ask the former minister of Finance. I was appointed 
Minister of Finance in 1985, which is the year previous to this one. 
I was not in in 1983, which was three years prior to this one. And I 
indicated that I would pass that on to the former minister of 
Finance who held office at that time . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
I will explain it again. I was appointed Minister of Finance in 
1985, which is not this year; it was last year. It was not 1983; it 
was 1985 —— 1983 some three years ago —— former minister 
was in office at that time. I believe Mr. Ryan worked for him. And 
I indicated that I would pass on to him the question of what the 
circumstances were and get back to the hon. members in the 
House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think I can try and explain this in as simple a manner as possible 
in hopes that the opposition can understand. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Final supplementary to the minister. I'm not 
sure why he's jumping up and down like that, Mr. Speaker, but I 
want to ask him a question and, while he's at it, whether or not he 
can inform the Assembly the salary of the individual who worked 
for your department. And while you're taking notice of the 
question, I don't think it's proper for you to pass it on to someone 
who is not the minister. Part of your duty is to bring the answer 
back. 
 
Will you tell us what his salary was, his term of employment. And 
as a minister of the Crown at the time that the OC was passed, I 
think that if you really searched your mind you could probably 
remember the date he was hired by cabinet and the date he was 
dismissed by cabinet. But if you can't remember, would you bring 
that back as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I certainly . . . My memory is not bad. It's not 
that good, Mr. Speaker, that I can remember . . . I mean, if I have 
any highlights, it's the day I realized how incompetent the 
opposition was, which was the first day of the House after 1982. 
 
Having said that, certainly I'll get the information. Just so that the 
public understands the waste of time that the  
  



 
May 21, 1986 

1407 
 
 

NDP opposition —— the information was public in the OCs, and 
they could check the orders in council. I believe that they made a 
production at the time, so the information was public. But we'll go 
back and get the public information and give it to the opposition. 
It's obviously a very difficult chore for the opposition, so we'll get 
the public information that's on record and give it back to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I took notice . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Members 
cannot take notice and then in answer to another question just flow 
on into the next question. 
 

Non—Payment of Municipal Taxes by Pioneer Trust 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you. The member from Shaunavon 
asked three questions with regard to a situation where individuals 
affected by Pioneer Trust's liquidation did not have their property 
taxes paid. The first question was whether we have lobbied the 
Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation. No, we did not; we dealt 
with the liquidator of Pioneer. The reason is the interpretation as to 
whether it is in fact a deposit or not, but we did lobby with the 
liquidator. 
 
Secondly, has it been investigated by law enforcement authorities? 
The liquidator advised us no, that there was no reason for an 
investigation by the law enforcement authorities. Thirdly, any 
laws broken in taking the money and not passing it on to the 
municipal authorities? the answer is again as the liquidator advised 
us: there's no reason for any such investigation. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Supplement to the minister. I wonder 
whether you consider it fair in Saskatchewan that a trust company 
would allow the process where individual families who paid their 
taxes, to keep that money, so that these families now have to go 
through the process of paying their taxes again, which a number of 
people have indicated is the case. Is that part of this government's 
policy to allow that to happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I frankly was shocked by that particular 
question, Mr. Speaker, because when this government dealt with 
an unfairness of people not being paid by Pioneer, we were 
severely criticized by the New Democratic Party for bailing out 
people like the Ursuline sisters, the Oblate fathers, the city of 
Regina, some trade unions, SaskSport, individuals throughout the 
province, Mr. Speaker, that were affected by the liquidation of 
Pioneer. 
 
And this is a rather historic occasion today. For the first time the 
New Democratic Party has stood up and said that the government 
should, in fact, bail out the people who were affected by Pioneer. 
And it's very surprising that today, for the first time, we get the 
request that help should be given. 
 
With regard to the particular individuals, the situation arose 
because the Columbia Trust Company —— some time prior, 
we're advised by the liquidators —— bought a number of 
mortgages. And that's a very common practice, as perhaps the 
Leader of the Opposition knows. 

The question is whether those tax moneys are considered an asset 
of Pioneer Trust. The liquidator believes that they are an asset of 
Pioneer Trust and would be paid out in the normal disposition —
— not the total amount, obviously, but whatever sum is 
determined by the liquidator, what is to be paid on the assets. So 
there will be some payment; there will be some payment by the 
liquidator who now has ruled that these are an asset of Pioneer 
Trust. Should there by any payment, yes. I would be fully 
supportive of payments to these individuals. I believe that it is fair 
that there by some payment. I am, as I say, shocked today that the 
NDP . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 43 — An Act to amend The Wildlife Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of my brief 
remarks, I shall be moving second reading of Bill No. 43, An Act 
to amend The Wildlife Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill will provide for 
more severe penalties for night hunting, trafficking in wildlife, and 
poaching —— the three most serious wildlife management 
problems today. Mr. Speaker, judging by the comments and the 
catcalls from the opposition, from the seat of their pants, they are 
opposed to this Bill. I look forward with interest to hearing what 
the member for Shaunavon has to say in response in questions in 
committee of the whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, night hunting, the act of blinding a big game animal 
with lights before shooting it with a high—powered rifle, is a 
practice . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I'm going to ask 
both sides of the House to come to order. It's very difficult to hear 
in the Chamber. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I'll repeat 
that last paragraph. 
 
Mr. Speaker, night hunting, the act of blinding a big game animal 
with lights before shooting it with a high—powered rifle, is a 
practice that is both dangerous and abhorrent. An increase in the 
maximum fine for this offence will send a clear message tonight 
hunters and will be applauded by conservationists and rural 
residents of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, illegal trafficking in wildlife is rapidly becoming one 
of the most serious wildlife management problems of the day. In 
the past five years, there has been a marked increase in the 
demand for North American wildlife for commercial purposes. As 
a result of this, the monetary value of some wildlife has sky—
rocketed, making trafficking in wildlife an extremely profitable 
business. Consequently, Mr. Speaker, substantial penalties are 
needed as a deterrent against this activity. 
  



 
May 21, 1986 

1408 
 
 

Mr. Speaker, since much poaching is carried out to supply wildlife 
traffickers, stiffer penalties for poaching will also work to reduce 
the illegal trafficking in wildlife in our province, Recently, Mr. 
Speaker, an Edmonton man received one of the toughest sentences 
ever given in Saskatchewan for a violation of The Wildlife Act 
when he was convicted of unlawful hunting. Yet the sea of 
circumstances of the crime prompted Judge Wilf Meagher to 
comment during sentencing, and I quote: "I can say I only regret 
the maximum is only $1,000. That is something the legislature has 
to address." 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is addressing the problem at the 
request of the people of Saskatchewan. My department has 
received over 3,000 letters and calls from private citizens and 
interest groups asking for harsher penalties for wildlife offences. 
At the annual meeting of the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation in 
Lloydminster, a motion was passed unanimously in favour of 
harsher penalties for wildlife offences. 
 
This legislation will do exactly that, Mr. Speaker. This Bill once 
again illustrates this government's commitment to managing and 
conserving Saskatchewan's wildlife resource for present and future 
generations. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased and proud now to move 
second reading of Bill No. 43, An Act to amend The Wildlife Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our staff is still 
going through this Bill, Mr. Speaker, and for those reasons I 
would beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 22 — An Act to amend The Education Act 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I have the 
opportunity to introduce to my immediate right, Mr. Peter Dyck 
from the Department of Education, and right behind him is Mr. 
Don Bennett from the assessment authority. And we look forward 
to any questions that the member from Regina North East may 
have. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, just a few questions on this. 
As I indicated in my remarks in second reading, most of the 
amendments that are provided here we do not disagree with, but I 
would just seek some clarification of a few items here in 
committee. 
 
Madam Minister, I know that in subsection 7(2) of the Act —— 
which is being repealed and then put into The Department of 
Education Act —— that it was a provision which allowed the 
department to produce and lease, etc., and do other things with 
audio—visual material. can you tell me whether you have had any 
difficulty with having the department do all these things with the 
existing provision as it now exists in The Education Act? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, Mr. Chairman. We have had no 

particular problem with it, and it would just better be in where it's 
being transferred to. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I thought that 
would be the case, but I was just curious as to whether there were 
any particular reasons for this amendment. It is nothing more than 
simply a housecleaning —— moving a provision from one Act to 
another. 
 
Do you intend, or does your department intend, or does the 
government intend, to broaden the scope of the activities in this 
area, of the production and the leasing and the selling and the 
distribution of audio—visual material? Is there any plan in your 
department to broaden the activities, other than what the 
department has already been doing? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, Mr. Chairman, that is not the plan. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I have some concerns about the kinds of 
material that's there, but I'll pursue that when we get to the next 
Bill. Madam Minister, if it's okay with the Chair, I will cover all of 
these under subvote 1, and then we can proceed with them. Is that 
okay, Mr. Chairman? 
 
One of the things that I had some concern about in second reading 
was the matter in section 146 which provides for access to pupil 
records. As I indicated in my remarks, there is a very major 
change in principle here. I'm curious to know if the department 
recognizes, and I suspect it does, the significance of the principle 
behind the new provision. What the new provisions will do is 
allow access to student's records by parents or guardians, 
regardless of the student's age. There is no limitation. 
 
As the legislation is now, anyone who is 18 years of age or older is 
an adult, can sign contracts, can do anything else that a n adult can 
legally do —— get married without permission —— and 
therefore school records that may be requested by someone, when 
a person is an adult, are not made accessible unless there is 
consent. 
 
Can you explain, Madam Minister, why it is thought this very 
major provision, or this very major change, is thought to be 
necessary? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, as I had indicated in the 
second reading speech, within the school Act school boards now 
have responsibility to provide education for those that are over 18 
and up to 21. And this was a recognition that for those that are 
from 18 to 21 that they do, in fact, have a right to have access 
while that student is within the school system. 
 
I had also indicated at second reading speech time, Mr. Chairman, 
that it had been suggested, when we were doing some minor 
changes in 1985, that this particular clause be looked at and 
reconsideration be given to the change. So that is why it is before 
this House. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I think I recall your comments, Madam 
Minister, about he suggestion. I guess all kinds of suggestions are 
made, and I'm not arguing with the provision. I have some 
concerns about it because I'm not  
  



 
May 21, 1986 

1409 
 
 

sure that any of us can fully understand what the implications 
might be here. 
 
Can you tell me, besides the suggestion that someone made —— 
and since I was not here, I don't know whether it was made by 
members on the government side of the House or members of the 
opposition —— can you indicate why it is thought by the 
department or, I should say, by the government, that this provision 
is necessary? I don't think simply saying that somebody suggested 
it is good enough. The implications are just too broad. 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I'm going to go back a few 
years for the benefit of the member from Regina North East. Prior 
to the 1985 amendment, what existed was that parents could not 
request access to school records pertaining to a pupil directly. 
They could only accompany the pupil who had requested the 
access. The 1985 amendment made provision for access to be 
granted to parents —— to be granted to parents —— where the 
pupil was dependent on the parent or guardian and was 18 years or 
less. 
 
Now during the consideration of the amendment by the Non—
Controversial Bills Committee, it was suggested that the 
department monitor —— and this is dating from last year's 
amendment —— monitor the reference to age in this section. And 
while I did not attend that particular committee meeting, I would 
suspect several reasons for the monitoring of —— one being that 
children between the ages ——or young adults —— between the 
ages of 18 and 21 do have access to the school system. The school 
system has a responsibility to supply that education if they so 
wish, and that, in fact, those students can be totally dependent on 
their parents, and that the parents, in fact, be allowed to have 
access for those that are between the ages of 18 and 21, if they so 
require. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I think the amendment was a good 
amendment back in '85. Obviously it was, I think, necessary at that 
time. I'm curious, Madam Minister, the result of your department's 
monitoring of this age provision —— what did the department's 
monitoring, what kind of information did it provide which would 
have brought about the need for this amendment? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess the term 
"monitoring" would perhaps better be said to be one of 
consultation. We did have some consultation with the Department 
of Justice and with the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association, who felt, in fact, that this particular amendment 
would be very acceptable and should have been done. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, thank you for that correction, Madam 
Minister. There's a very distinct difference between the department 
monitoring, to see whether they have problems, and consultation. 
And I certainly think that consultation is desirable. I was going to 
ask you the next question —— and you've answered it —— that 
the Saskatchewan school trustees is in agreement with this change, 
and I suspect the Department of Justice has also recommended it. 

I guess, Madam Minister, the problem with the provision that you 
have in the Bill is that I don't think anyone will be able to know 
how one defines "dependent." Can you indicate how, in the view 
of the department, the term "dependent" will be defined? Because 
it can be either very broad or it can be very narrow. I suppose one 
of the ways that you can define what this Bill does, it's now going 
to be: he who pays the pupil calls the tune. I would hope that that's 
not the way that this amendment is going to be applied. 
 
Can you tell me, Madam Minister, whether the government has 
considered what the definition of "dependent" will be? And if so, 
is it somewhere in the Bill that is not before us, but in the bigger 
Bill, so that there is not some confusion, or indeed in some cases 
—— and even if there is one, it's too many —— some 
wrongdoing? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, no, the word "dependent" is 
not defined in the Bill. I would suggest to the member from 
Regina North East that it is not, in fact, difficult to define what is 
dependent. I think most people in this Assembly understand what 
is meant by a dependent child, a dependent student, and a 
dependent young adult. I mean, most people in the province 
understand that. 
 
And of course the normal meaning is one of relying on the parent 
or the guardian for support or help. And of course that support is 
one of financial support ——lodging, board and room, clothing, 
the necessities of the day, and financial support in order to 
maintain their living. that is not in any way very difficult to 
understand. We all know what "dependent children" means. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, it's not the question of what we know, 
Madam Minister; it's a question of how the law may interpret it. 
We're not dealing here with what we think, necessarily, or what 
our assumptions are. We're dealing here with the law, the law as it 
will be argued by lawyers, and as it will be interpreted by the 
courts. So I simply ask you the question in all seriousness, Madam 
Minister, because I think it's a question that ought to be asked. 
And I would have hoped that the government would have 
considered the possible implications of this. 
 
In other words, what you have said in your definition —— and I 
want to say at the outset that I'm rather concerned that there is not 
a definition of "dependent" in the Bill, because it leaves it wide 
open. But according to your definition, if a young man or a young 
woman 21 years of age goes to live with an uncle, or an aunt, or a 
brother, for the purposes of going to a high school —— and that's 
in this day and age not uncommon —— and because they pay the 
board and room in that place, and because in that sense they are 
dependant on this home and the people who own that home, they 
will be able to have access to this information. 
 
Now I say that with the underlying assumption that this student 
will not have an independent income, because they will be relying 
on the lodging that is provided by these individuals they live with. 
are you saying, Madam Minister, that they will then have access to 
this 21—year—old's school files without that student's 
permission? 
  



 
May 21, 1986 

1410 
 
 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm sure that we can 
all think of various examples that we could be concerned and 
perhaps should be concerned with down the road. However, for 
the purposes of children and students going to the school system, 
kindergarten to grade 12, it is usually your parent or your guardian 
that, in fact, supports you while you are in those school years. I 
also might add that for many of those students between 18 and 21 
you will find some that are handicapped, and they, in fact, could 
be living with an uncle or an aunt while buying services with a 
particular school system. This Bill is meant that parents or 
guardian that are supporting the child while the child is in the 
school system, if there is a problem, do in fact have some rights 
and access to that school record. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — As I indicated at the beginning of my 
questions, I'm not saying that I am disagreeing with the provision. 
I just think this committee needs to know all of the considerations 
that went into it. 
 
I have one final question, Madam Minister, and that is this: have 
there, in the experience of the department, been problems which 
have been brought to the department's attention, or concerns, and 
if so, are they large in number or few? With the fact that this 
amendment is not in the present legislation, has there been a 
problem that has brought about the need to have it before us 
today? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, we have not had a great deal 
of complaints. In fact, there have been no complaints during the 
last year, if that is what the member is looking for. I would also 
suggest that, you know, one tries to look ahead and put legislation 
in place that recognizes some of the changes that are taking place 
in society instead of waiting for several complaints to come in, or 
perhaps a crisis, or until you are challenged with one. 
 
I will go back to the fact that this matter was put before the Non—
Controversial Bills Committee in 1985, which the opposition are 
members of, and at that time was asked that we do in fact consider 
this, because the issue was not one of age, so much as the 
defendant's issue, while the child is in school. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Madam Minister. That's all I 
wanted to ask on that particular section, and I don't argue with the 
need to look ahead. I might argue —— and I'm not suggesting 
that's the case with this legislation, but it may be very well the case 
in other legislation which we have before this House —— I argue 
with the government bringing forward legislation simply to fill . . . 
to make it appear as if there's something happening when the 
legislation is not necessary. In this case there may be an argument, 
depending on one's point of view, for having this amendment. 
 
I have one last question, and depending on your answer I may not 
have any further questions on it. But dealing with section 279, it is 
mentioned that there will be staged introduction of —— I'm 
having trouble finding it —— an assessment. Can you define for 
us what you mean by staged introduction? 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the staged introduction of 
reassessment is really very simple. When a property . . . The 
member from the Leader of the Opposition laughs. He obviously 
finds assessment and reassessment a little more difficult to 
understand than I. 
 
However, when a property is reassessed, there may be decreases 
as well as increases in the assessment. The increases result in 
increases taxes on that property, as the member from Regina 
North East well knows. If the increase due to reassessment was 
very significant, there was provision during the reassessment cycle 
for the increase to be phased in. 
 
And let me use the city of Saskatoon as an example. They made a 
deliberate decision to phase it in over a three—year period so that 
the impact was not difficult for the citizens that lived there. We 
have some municipalities who were reassessed in the last year of 
reassessment, the 10—year cycle, and they could not stage or 
phase in as the city of Saskatoon did, and this proposed 
amendment allows them to do that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. I think that's a good provision. I 
might argue with you about whether reassessment and the increase 
in taxes is a simple matter, and I think maybe most property 
owners would argue with anybody who would suggest that. 
 
Madam Minister, those are all the questions that I have. Mr. 
Chairman, thank you for allowing us to go under clause 1, because 
I think we can now proceed, unless others have some questions. 
 
(1500) 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 23 — An Act to amend The Department of Education 

Act, 1983 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I indicated when we were considering the 
Act to amend The Education Act, that I had some questions on 
this Bill, dealing with the actual practical application of this 
provision. 
 
Madam Minister, I think one of the concerns that many teachers 
have, in fact I think most teachers have, is the limited supply of 
audio—visual materials that's available, not only the limited 
supply but in some cases the quality; the fact that many of the 
materials that are available are extremely outdated and in fact 
many of them are not produced in Canada. 
 
I guess I speak to some extent from personal experience as a 
class—room teacher. And I really say that in all sincerity and I 
don't say it in a critical sense, because I would suggest that the 
problem has existed for some time, although there was, I think, 
some very positive attempt and some positive results in changing 
that around when  
  



 
May 21, 1986 

1411 
 
 

we had an agency called Saskmedia corporation, which not only 
purchased materials that were produced elsewhere, but also 
commissioned the production of materials. And I really believe, 
Madam Minister, that the production of materials relevant to 
Saskatchewan schools is a very important matter. 
 
Let me go back to the question of the limited supply. There are 
some units in some subject areas that really in order for them to be 
effectively taught, have to be taught at certain seasons of the year. 
And I'm talking about science, although you could apply it in 
social studies, depending on what happens to be happening around 
the world at that particular time. 
 
One should not in the class—room follow the textbook from page 
1 to page 201. If a certain part of the social studies course has 
some relevance to what's happening internationally or nationally at 
that particular time, most teachers would say, this is the unit I'm 
going to work at now because I can motivate my students; the 
students can look at some real things that are happening around 
them. But then they face the problem that there are so many other 
teachers who may want to do that at that time that they cannot get 
access to some of the audio—visual aids that are available. And I 
think if this provision . . . And I know it's simply a matter of 
moving the provision from one piece of paper of a Bill to another 
one, but if in the doing of this it in some way results in more 
production and a provision of greater numbers of supplies, I would 
be the first to congratulate you and the department. 
 
I know that in the —— was it in the budget speech or the throne 
speech? —— there was an announcement of an agency which will 
now produce, I believe, audio—visual materials. If you wish to 
comment, or if you can, I would like you to indicate whether that 
will get into the business of producing educational materials. If 
you're unable to do that, then I will ask the minister who might be 
in charge of that particular agency. 
 
Can I ask, Madam Minister: is it the intention of you, your 
government or the department, to do more work in the production 
of Saskatchewan material, audio—visual material, that can be 
used in the schools of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, with that question and the 
preamble to it, we are into a whole host of other issues, including 
curriculum and a few other things. The amendment before us —— 
and let's deal specifically with that —— is simply to move the Act 
from The Education Act to The Department of Education Act, 
which better describes what the department does and what it's 
responsible for. 
 
In terms of the member's comments on materials, whether it's 
audio—visual or perhaps written textbooks, I'm pleased to hear 
him say, first of all, a recognition that it's been a long time coming 
in getting some mechanism in order to produce better —— 
particularly Canadian—made; perhaps Saskatchewan —— 
material. The member will be pleased to know that we have been 
making some special efforts in that particular area within the 
Department of Education itself. I look forward to the new 
program, whoever the minister may be responsible  

in terms of the educational television network that will be 
forthcoming. I think it will be something that the education system 
will be able to use for many, many years, and it can do nothing but 
improve, even as a first step, improve the access that teachers have 
to various materials. 
 
In the conversations that I have with many teachers, I'm well 
aware of their concern over access to films, videos, including 
written textbooks. I know many of them utilize the public library 
system, the regional library systems, those from rural 
Saskatchewan, and when they have depleted that resource, they 
perhaps then turn to the department including the branch that we 
are now talking about in terms of this particular amendment. Other 
than that, Mr. Chairman, I have no further comments on it. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Your comment, Madam Minister, about the 
long—time coming is an interesting one, because in fact there was 
a mechanism, and I think a very effective one, in place prior to 
1982 to provide material. It was called Saskmedia. In the euphoria 
of your government after your election and in the attempt to 
recreate the world, I think unfortunately it was decided that 
Saskmedia ought to be abolished, and it was, although not totally 
in that it became a part of the Department of Education, became 
simply a distribution centre of materials from which teachers and 
the public could order. I really regret that Saskmedia was not 
allowed to carry out its work because I think over the last four to 
five years it could have made a very substantial contribution to the 
production of important and relevant materials which may have 
been more available. 
 
If I may go to some specifics, and then we can proceed on this 
very quickly because it is consequential to what we've already 
talked about. I noticed that in subsection 8, it's repealed and there's 
another section substituted, but whereas it used to be called . . . the 
department is responsible; it now says the minister is responsible. 
And I'm not arguing, but is there some legal need for that or is 
there some other reason why that is a change in word? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, it's very simple. The 
minister is in fact responsible for the Department of Education, 
and that's why it states that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — It stated the Department of Education 
before, so once again it's simply housekeeping, I assume, and 
means nothing. 
 
I notice in (b) under 8, it is indicated that "materials that will be 
used for educational purposes not related to elementary or 
secondary education." Can you give an indication of what kinds of 
materials you might be talking about here? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, if I could, for the students 
from Swan River, before they leave I would like to welcome them 
to Saskatchewan, Regina, and to the legislature. They're a group of 
junior high students from Swan River, Manitoba. I believe there's 
50 students, grades 7, 8 and 9, with their teacher, Garry Anderson, 
who are here in Saskatchewan today. I'm sure all  
  



 
May 21, 1986 

1412 
 
 

members will want to wish them a safe stay in the province and an 
enjoyable one, and a safe return to their province of Manitoba. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 23— An Act to amend The Department of Education 
Act, 1983 

 
Clause 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, in answer to the member's 
question, what this does is allow the acquisition of such things as 
films, audio—visual materials, that are not done in the department. 
They perhaps would be done by . . . You referred to Saskmedia; I 
could refer to a new network, perhaps the British Columbia 
educational network, that type of thing, to make available to 
school systems if they so wished. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I'm not sure that you got the question right. 
It says that: 
 

the production, acquisition, sale, lease, distribution, 
exhibition and handling of educational programs and 
materials, including educational programs and materials that 
will be used for educational purposes not related to 
elementary or secondary education. 

 
Does the department provide this material for purposes other than 
that of elementary and secondary education? That's all I wanted to 
know. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Saskmedia previously had materials that 
were not related to the programming in elementary and secondary 
education. And what this does is allow, through education, the 
acquisition of those materials to be handled by us. Before, that was 
not allowable. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would in fact 
like to thank the two officials that are with me today, and the 
member from Regina North East. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well let me also indicate my appreciation 
to the officials for providing us with the answers, and I look 
forward to having them here when we get into the consideration of 
the estimates of the Department of Education. 
 

Bill No. 16 — An Act to amend The Venture Capital Tax 
Credit Act 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister please introduce his 
officials. 

Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I'd like to introduce Ken 
McNabb, who is the assistant deputy minister of Tourism and 
Small Business; and on my right, Tony Koschinsky, who is our 
legal adviser. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I don't have any large 
number of questions. I would like to ask some questions, and I can 
probably do them in clause 1 and save the time of the committee. 
 
Some of the questions relate to the explanatory notes, so if they are 
at hand it would assist. With respect to the way that the 
explanatory notes are set up —— and I don't know whether this is 
appropriate to direct this to you —— but under the heading 
"section of the Bill," I would like to think that there was under that 
heading the appropriate section in the Bill and not the Act, if I may 
put it that way. I t just would make it easier to follow —— and I 
don't know whether I make myself clear. But section of the Bill 2 
—— it's not section 2 of the Bill, but it's section 3 of the Bill, 
which happens to deal with section 2 of the Act. But that's a 
question of form. 
 
I'll move on to section 4 of the Bill, which is section 5 of the Act. 
And here is a change, and there are a couple of changes. One 
clearly makes the Bill . . . the Bill will make the Act applicable to 
communities between 5,000 and 20,000, if I may put it that way. It 
will cover the Yorktons and the Swift Currents, but still leave 
excluding the four major cities. 
 
Is there any significance to the changes in wording? The Act as it 
now stands talks about a corporation primarily engaged in 
business, and the new one talks about investing in businesses 
primarily outside a city. Is there any significance between 
investing in a business and investing in a corporation which is 
engaged in a business? Was there any significance in that change 
of wording? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, first of all I understand 
what you're saying about the numbering, and I will take that under 
consideration. And I think you might be right that that might make 
it easier to follow in the future. 
 
The answer to the second question is no, there's no significance to 
that. It's meaningless, I guess. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I'm turning over my explanatory notes, 
and the next one refers to section 7 of the Bill which doesn't refer 
to anything that's before us. I'll put it this way: is there any change 
proposed in section 7 of the Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Well, Mr. Chairman, Leader of the 
Opposition, there's no change in that section of the existing Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I refer now to section 5 of the Bill, 
section 9(2)(b) of the Act, and I note that there is added prescribed 
agricultural and livestock production activities to the list of 
businesses that may be primarily engaged in, if I may put it that 
way. Are there any other changes of significance in the new 
9(2)(b) from the old 9(2)(b)? 
  



 
May 21, 1986 

1413 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — I think the only other change of 
significance is one we've already discussed, 9(2)(b)(vi) which of 
course we've talked about, which gives you the right to apply the 
venture capital to any business in a population less than 20,000. I 
think, other than that, that's the only significant . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I'm 
looking at the explanatory notes again. I'm just looking at the last 
paragraph there which says: 
 

The new provisions provide for the minister to exercise 
discretion in favour of specific projects which have a 
significant impact on economic activity and employment. 

 
That is a general comment, but there is no specific provision in the 
Bill which refers to ministerial discretion, except the 5,000 to 
20,000 one . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay. Thank you, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
With respect to section 6 of the Bill, section 10(2) of the Act, 
would the minister indicate what the significance of that is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — I think, Mr. Chairman, that what we're 
trying to do here is clarify exactly what the venture capital 
corporation can do. The word "in," as the note indicates, is 
redundant. So they felt they maybe had more powers than they 
actually did, and they had to comply with the other elements, so 
that has been removed to simplify the . . . make it clear, I suppose, 
what exactly is meant. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, turning to . . . I will give 
you notice in advance. I'm going to ask a question about section 7 
of the Bill and section 9 of the Bill. Section 7 of the Bill seems to 
deal with, I suppose you'd call it inside trading, or internal dealing, 
or non—arm's length transactions, and the original Bill, the 
original Act, seems to say that no venture capital corporation shall 
invest in a business if the proceeds of the investment are used to 
finance the purchase of goods or services through a shareholder of 
the corporation —— I'm summarizing. And you now say, unless 
it's in the ordinary course of business. 
 
Do you see any problems with that where venture capital 
corporations might be organized to take over a significant portion 
of the operation of one of the shareholder organizers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I think there are two 
elements to the question. The reason for this inclusion is primarily 
in smaller centres where the local hardware store owner might 
want to buy into the venture capital and still continue to sell nails 
to the project, something simple like that. 
 
The other question was in terms of a take—over —— I think there 
are two elements again; some attempt to take over would 
obviously not be in the normal course of business. And secondly, 
section 12 of the regulations prohibits anything of that type. And 
so if that is a sincere concern, we can certainly monitor it. But we 
think it's taken care of  

in the rest of the legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that the 
history of sales to the public —— and I know this is a specialized 
public —— but sales to the public are one of the main areas of 
abuse, as undoubtedly there's been people organizing public 
companies in order to take over businesses they already owned. 
It's classic if you're in the securities regulating area, and it would 
be a surprise if it weren't tried in the venture capital area, but I note 
that you are taking steps to see that it doesn't become an area of 
abuse. 
 
(1530) 
 
One last question, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister. Could you 
offer an explanation on section 9 of the Bill with respect to 
reduction of capital. Perhaps I could say: is it anything that is other 
than purely technical and purely legal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I think it is purely 
technical and purely legal. The explanatory notes may go through 
it. I think the basic concept in layman's language —— when we're 
talking about technical and legal, I certainly am talking in 
layman's language —— the concept is that if an investment is 
made, an initial investment of $100,000, that that amount must be 
in the fund over the five—year period. If there . . . You would be 
allowed to withdraw some of it if the retained earnings on the 
other side maintain that level, but the $100,000 investment must 
stay in the fund during the five—year period. And the reason for 
the wording is to make that eminently clear. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the 
minister and his officials. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 22 — An Act to amend The Education Act 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Bill No. 23 — An Act to amend The Department of Education 

Act, 1983 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 16 — An Act to amend The Venture Capital Tax 
Credit Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill  
  



 
May 21, 1986 

1414 
 
 

be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Maxwell that Bill No. 40 —— An Act 
respecting the Establishment, Maintenance and Use of Park Land 
and Park Land Reserve be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We've checked this 
Bill out, and I want to say at this time that we will not be opposing 
the Bill, Mr. Speaker, and if there are any questions we will do 
that in committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Parks and Renewable Resources 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 39 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I'd like to address a few 
questions to the minister with respect to forestry. I would like to 
ask the minister, firstly: what dispositions of forest reserve or 
timber are currently outstanding for a considerable period of time? 
 
I'm not asking for any short—term leases, but you will have given 
perhaps some leases to MacMillan Bloedel, some to PAPCO, 
some to Simpson. Could you give us an indication of what major 
dispositions of timber land are now outstanding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I assume 
you're referring to ongoing forest management licence agreements 
and the negotiations taking place with the companies. Am I 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Yes, I think . . . I would ask for your 
response along that line, and then I will follow up if it doesn't 
appear to be what I'm looking for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — There are five, I imagine what you would 
call major, four major, one minor. And then there are others that 
would be small operators. 
 
There's MacMillan Bloedel lease; Simpson Timber; L & M Wood 
Products from Glaslyn, which would be the minor one; 
Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation; and then 
Weyerhaeuser, which we would term major, plus the small 
operators. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, with 
respect to Saskatchewan Forest Products, what type of disposition 
exists from the department to Saskatchewan Forest Products? 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — What we have with Saskatchewan Forest 
Products Corporation is a volume harvest agreement. Are you 
looking for a precise size of agreement and the exact amount of 
wood which would be allocated to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — No, Mr. Minister, I'm looking for any 
indication of whether or not the volume harvesting agreement is 
restricted to certain geographic areas, and whether it has a time 
limit in years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The agreement is currently still under 
negotiation. It would be for 20 years. And the precise geographic 
location has yet to be determined. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, can you 
tell me under what security of wood supply, timber supply, 
Saskatchewan Forest Products mill at, say, Carrot River now 
operates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — They are now working under the existing 
volume harvest agreement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, in 
general terms, what does the existing volume harvesting 
agreement provide with respect of the rights of Saskatchewan 
Forest Products to harvest timber to be processed at Carrot River? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, it is 20,000 
cubic metres per year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, can you 
advise me whether that is assured to Saskatchewan Forest 
Products for a given number of years and, if so, for how many? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I'm assuming you're saying that they have 
this 20,000 cubic metres per year, and is there an allowance 
specifically to Carrot River? The forest management licence 
agreement which is currently being negotiated will be with 
Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation. The allocation within 
their lease to their individual mills will be under their jurisdiction. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Perhaps I will ask what the situation now 
is as opposed to what is being renegotiated. What is the situation 
prior to any changes which may result from the current 
negotiations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The current situation, hon. member, is that 
Saskatchewan Forest Products has access to all of the sawed 
timber outside all other FMLA (forestry management licensing 
agreement) areas. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — The Sask Forest Products has access to 
them outside areas which you have identified, and I'll ask you to 
identify again for me the FMLA area, if I understood it correctly, 
and I'll ask you to identify that further. 
 
And do they have it on any assurance of long—term allocation 
other than their association with the  
  



 
May 21, 1986 

1415 
 
 

government? Is there an agreement in writing between the 
government and the corporation specifying access for a period of 
time or term of years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Now, Mr. Chairman, hon. member, we're 
looking for some information back here. I'm assuming that what 
you're getting at is that you want to take a look at the area of 
interest, as we call it, that Sask Forest Products currently has, and 
what it is liable to have at the conclusion of the round of 
negotiations for their next FMLA (forest management licensing 
agreement). 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Yes, the first part of it is right, anyway. 
I'm asking what access Sask Forest Products now have, and you 
tell me that it is access to the forest, generally, not now covered by 
forest management licence agreements in the name of Simpson 
Timber or the other existing ones, the four you have identified: L 
& M; Simpson; PAPCO; and Mac—Blo, or MacMillan Bloedel. 
I'm asking what the existing arrangement is which gives Sask 
Forest access to the forest to require timber, and I use Carrot River 
as an example. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — We do have access to the Big River 
supply area and a piece on the eastern part of the province around 
Carrot River. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, you 
mentioned Big River. With respect to the mill at Big River, or 
Bodmin, I will call it, is it accurate that that mill has had access to 
a supply of timber in the Doré Lake—Smoothstone area, and 
perhaps elsewhere in that general area, for the Bodmin mill and for 
the Big River mill preceded it for many years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Correct. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, is it 
accurate to say that the timber which has been available to the 
Bodmin mill for a considerable period of time has now been 
disposed of, or is in the course of being disposed of, by means of 
an agreement with Weyerhaeuser? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — In the Big River supply area, a part to the 
eastern side would be going to Weyerhaeuser in Prince Albert. 
That's the part that contains the large stands of hardwood which 
are not processed in the Bodmin mill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, are you 
advising me that the wood which has . . . the areas where softwood 
has been obtained for the Bodmin mill —— and here I'm speaking 
purely from recollection —— in what I call the Doré Lake—
Smoothstone area, and which certainly in the past has been a 
fruitful source of softwood, are you telling me that that is or is not 
part of the disposition to Weyerhaeuser? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, east of Doré Lake it is. It is also part 
of the deal with Weyerhaeuser; Bodmin will become part of 
Weyerhaeuser. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — So you're telling me, Mr. Minister, that 
the area which provided the timber, the softwood timber, for 
Bodmin is partly in the Weyerhaeuser deal and partly not in the 
Weyerhaeuser deal; the portion east of  

Doré Lake is part of the Weyerhaeuser disposition, and other 
portions are not? Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Essentially that's correct. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, since 
the Bodmin mill is going to Weyerhaeuser, judging from press 
release —— and we have no other information, Mr. Chairman, 
and Mr. Minister —— and since the portion of the forest which 
has been the area where Bodmin has got its timber, since the 
portion that is going to Weyerhaeuser is, as you say, made up to a 
significant extent of hardwood, and since hardwood is not 
processed at Bodmin, am I correct in assuming that a good deal of 
the softwood, which in recent years has gone to Bodmin, will not 
go to Weyerhaeuser and therefore will not be available for the 
Bodmin mill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — There will be no shortage of softwood for 
the mill at Bodmin. What we are going to see is intensive forest 
management whereby the hardwood in that area will be going to 
Prince Albert for us in the paper mill project and pulp. The 
softwood will be going to Bodmin. In fact, Bodmin could increase 
in its capacity of softwood because they will not be competing 
with PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company) and they will not be 
competing with the Meadow Lake area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I hear 
what you say, but are you asking us to believe that all the 
softwood in the area will go to Bodmin, and that which is 
pulpwood will not go to Prince Albert? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I'm really 
not asking you to believe anything. Because, judging by the line of 
your questioning, I know exactly where you would like to take it; 
whereby you can once again scare the workers at Bodmin, scare 
the workers at Carrot River, scare the workers at PAPCO, scare 
the workers at Meadow Lake, and say this government is giving 
away the resources —— gloom and doom; we're going to shut 
down all the mills. That is patently false. We have made allowance 
for an increase in the softwood both to Meadow Lake and to 
Bodmin, and their future should be assured. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if I can get some 
answers rather than some speeches, and they were . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Mr. Chairman, will you let me know when I have 
the floor? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Member of Elphinstone, you have the floor 
right now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My question 
to the minister was: are you saying to me that all the softwood in 
the area that is tributary to Bodmin will go to Bodmin, and that 
under intensive forest management none of the softwood which is 
of pulp size will go to Prince Albert? Is that . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The soft timber will go to Bodmin and 
pulp size would be going to Prince Albert. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That is not 
what you told me before. We can read it, and you told  
  



 
May 21, 1986 

1416 
 
 

me the softwood would be going to Bodmin and the hardwood 
would be going to Prince Albert. So that what you're saying the, so 
far as the softwood is concerned, is that the disposition will be the 
same as in the past —— saw timber going to Bodmin and the pulp 
going to Prince Albert? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes. Let me read it to you again. In your 
charming courtroom manner, were you leading up and leading up 
and leading up to the question which I anticipated right at the 
start? Why don't you just get up and ask the question? In fact, don't 
bother, I'll give you the answer now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
What's this clown at the back yelling about? 
 
I'll give you the answer now. The Bodmin mill is assured. The 
Meadow Lake mill is assured. We welcome Weyerhaeuser into 
the province. We anticipate a better forest management licence 
agreement with them than we've had in the past. And what's more, 
we welcome the small operators once again back into this 
province —— the very people you squeezed out by conscious 
decision in 1972, who are only too happy now to see the 
opportunity to be back working the Saskatchewan forests. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 
we are obviously getting a maximum of rhetoric and a minimum 
of answers. And the questions, it seems to me, were designed to 
elicit facts, and all they have elicited is a great flow of rhetoric. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, have you concluded an arrangement? Have 
you signed anything with Weyerhaeuser? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The forest management licence agreement 
with Weyerhaeuser has not been signed yet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I'll ask the 
question again. Has your department signed anything with 
Weyerhaeuser? Is there any agreement signed between yourself, 
Her Majesty the Queen in the right of the province of 
Saskatchewan as represented by the Minister of Parks and 
Renewable Resources, and Weyerhaeuser Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — No, we have not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, are you 
negotiating with Weyerhaeuser on behalf of your department, or is 
your department, or anyone on behalf of it, negotiating with 
Weyerhaeuser? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Our department is negotiating with 
Weyerhaeuser to conclude a forest management licence 
agreement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Are you able to 
give any information on the terms of that forest management 
agreement as to its duration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Twenty years, five years renewable, as are 
all of the others which we are currently negotiating. 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, you 
refer to others which you're currently negotiating. I'll ask you, with 
respect to the ones which are in existence, what is the arrangement 
with respect to —— I will use Simpson and MacMillan Bloedel at 
this time —— for what term were those forest management 
licence agreements? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — With Simpson, MacMillan Bloedel, 
Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporations, L & M Wood 
Products of Glaslyn: 20 years, five years renewable. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, just so 
we're clear: those are the terms of the existing arrangements with 
those organizations, and not the term of any new arrangements 
which you are negotiating. Is that accurate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — No, sir. PAPCO had been 30. In a new 
negotiation, it would be for 20, as are the others. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I'm not 
making myself clear. I'm not asking what will be, but I'm asking 
what is. You told me that nothing has been signed with 
Weyerhaeuser. I take it that nothing has been signed with Simpson 
and with MacMillan Bloedel and with L & M. If they have, you 
will advise me that new agreements have been signed, but if they 
have not, will you tell me what the length of the existing 
agreements is with respect to those recipients of forest 
management licenses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — No others have yet been signed, as you 
indicated. Existing, for PAPCO, was 30, and for each of the others 
I mentioned, 20 years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, when 
you speak of PAPCO for 30, this will have been for 30 years 
commending in probably 1968 or when the agreement was 
signed? At least in the late '60s. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — PAPCO, I'm advised that date was 1965. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, can you 
give me any other indications of the terms of the proposed 
arrangement with Weyerhaeuser? You have indicated that you're 
negotiating; you've indicated that it's not signed; but you have 
indicated its term. What other terms of that agreement between 
yourself and Weyerhaeuser can you disclose to the House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Without going into particular details, we 
are looking at higher stumpage fees. We are looking at increased 
level of reforestation at the expense of the company in return for a 
20—year agreement, renewable every five years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, are you 
able to indicate the level of stumpage fees which you're talking 
about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Given the nature of some rather technical 
and intricate negotiations currently taking place nationally, I 
would be somewhat loath to put on the record the precise nature of 
those stumpage fees just now. 
  



 
May 21, 1986 

1417 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, in the 
opinion of the minister, are the fees going to be high enough to 
Weyerhaeuser Canada to convince Weyerhaeuser U.S. not to push 
for tariffs on Canadian timber on the grounds that the stumpage 
fees are too low? We all know that Weyerhaeuser U.S. and its 
allies are now calling for tariffs, and calling for tariffs because 
they say Canadian lumber production is subsidized, and more 
particular, subsidized because of low stumpage fees. 
 
Now do you think that the stumpage fees will be high enough to 
convince Weyerhaeuser Canada so that it can convince 
Weyerhaeuser U.S. not to claim that this is a subsidy? And if it 
isn't, will you assure the committee that you will charge sufficient 
stumpage fees so that Weyerhaeuser Canada will be able to 
convince Weyerhaeuser U.S. that there isn't a subsidy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Sir, we have no evidence at this point that 
Weyerhaeuser U.S. is part of the lobby to which you referred. I am 
satisfied that the stumpage fees which are being negotiated are fair 
and equitable and without controversy within Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I don't 
know whether this is the appropriate time to get into a discussion 
with the minister on whether or not Weyerhaeuser U.S. is part of 
the groups which are pressing for the tariffs. But I'm going to ask 
the minister: are you not aware that tariffs are being pressed for? 
Are you not aware that these are being pressed for by lumber 
groups in the United State? And are you not aware that 
Weyerhaeuser U.S. is a member of at least one of the lobby groups 
pressing for the higher tariffs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I'm well aware of the situation both 
nationally and internationally, and I understand the stumpage rates 
are comparable with those in other provinces, at least the ones 
which we are currently negotiating. I should point out to the hon. 
member that negotiations on a national and international level in 
terms of trade are being handled by my colleague, the minister in 
charge of Economic Development and Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, dealing 
with Weyerhaeuser and with the stumpage which is being 
charged, and with the, I think, undoubted fact that groups in the 
United States are pressing for tariffs against Canadian lumber; and 
the undoubted fact that one of the grounds is that Canadian lumber 
is subsidized because of alleged low stumpage fees; and that the 
matter is being pressed by something called the coalition for fairer 
lumber imports; and that part of that coalition is Western Wood 
Products Association: is the minister aware whether Weyerhaeuser 
U.S., or one of its subsidiaries, is associated with that particular 
industrial group called Western Wood Products Association, 
whose address is Portland, Oregon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I'm not aware of the specific group to 
which you've alluded, but we can certainly check it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, are you 
able to give us any other proposed arrangement with 
Weyerhaeuser? 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Sir, we are negotiating for other 
agreements. I'm somewhat loath to divulge the precise contents of 
the agreement which we are trying to conclude with 
Weyerhaeuser, formerly the PAPCO company, in light of the 
negotiations with the other companies. 
 
I will say this: they will be consistent and they will be fair. And 
the stumpage levels will certainly be considerably higher than the 
ones previously negotiated by the previous administration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just in case 
we're wondering about which previous administration, it was not 
the administration of which I was a part, but the administration of 
the Hon. Mr. Thatcher who negotiated those particular stumpage 
arrangements. 
 
And they certainly were low, but times were different. And I'm not 
here now being necessarily critical of the inducements which were 
held out to get the pulp—mill in to Prince Albert. I am just saying 
that, just so that there would be no confusion as to the particular 
origin of those stumpage arrangements. 
 
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, can you give an indication of when 
you feel that negotiations with Weyerhaeuser will be complete and 
agreements will be available for public scrutiny? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — From the point of view of my officials and 
my department, sir, we are fairly close in concluding the forest 
management licence agreement. However, I'm, as you would 
understand, not empowered to speak on behalf of negotiation is 
regarding the details of the sale of the company. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you 
would give us the estimated amount which you expect to spend on 
advertising in the 1986—87 year, and the amount that was 
actually spent in '85—86. 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I'm having some difficulty 
pulling some numbers together because they're scattered all over 
the map here. I can tell you, 262,000, the figure I gave you last 
week, was for '85—86. And '86—87, we've got it spread—eagled 
among printing, advertising, newsletter, department newsletter, 
and various other things. I can undertake to have someone break 
that down, and we'll get that number to you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, could you give me the amount 
of that advertising that was contracted through Dome Advertising? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I can give you the last figure we had for 
this past year; dome was $198,578.25. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, have Tanka —— I'm not sure 
how it's pronounced, T—a—n—k—a, Tanka Research or Tanka 
consulting . . . What's the pronunciation? Tanka. Has Tanka 
Research had any contracts with your department, and if so, what 
amounts are they? 
  



 
May 21, 1986 

1418 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Nothing with Tanka. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, could we have details of 
contracts of service entered into by . . . consulting contracts in 
effect. Contracts of service may be too broad. Can we have details 
of consulting contracts entered into by your department? The 
minister of fits and snits, the Minister of the Environment —— 
I'm trying to think of the name. The Minister of Environment gave 
that to us, and we assume that you're prepared to do that as well, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I have a rather lengthy list of all of our 
contracts for '85—86. We have them ranging from a couple of 
hundred dollars up, because we do an awful lot of contracting out 
for parts and various things. I'd be pleased to have these 
photocopied and send them to you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, I want to ask you 
whether or not there are any campgrounds still selling firewood to 
campers. Has that program been entirely discarded? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well I'm very happy that the member has 
brought up the subject of firewood. And I'm looking at page 1376 
of Hansard, last Friday, when the member decided to stand up and 
talk the clock out. And he ran off at the mouth, and he made a lot 
of accusations and allegations. The three—piece suit from Regina 
Centre stood up and made all kinds of allegations and accusations. 
One of them was firewood. No, we don't charge for firewood. No 
you've got it right in Hansard. You're saying, "Why are they 
paying for firewood?" Wrong. They're not paying for firewood. 
 
But let's take the rest of it. You stood there and you said, and I'm 
going to quote . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You're making my day. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — No, my friend, you're making my day. 
You see, the opposition have this mentality somehow, you know, 
they said to ministers, if you're nice to us and you let us make up 
anything we like and let us make all kinds of false accusations, if 
you let us away with it, we'll let you off estimates very quickly. 
Well I'm prepared to stand here in estimates till hell freezes over 
before you are going to get away with any false allegations. 
 
So let's start with the first one. "Camp fees, the fees for camping, 
have doubled," he says. Not true. Camping fees increased by $1 a 
night in 1983. In 1982, for an electrified site, it was $6. From 1983 
to the present, it's $7; non—electrified was $5; from 1983 to the 
present, $6. So there you're caught with your first allegation. Now 
either you didn't do any research and you made a guess, or you 
tried to mislead everybody, and you tried to mislead the people 
unfortunate enough to watch this charade of yours on television. 
 
Then you said the swimming pools are only open on weekends 
and that for twice the money. Not true again —— not true again. 
The swimming pools are open more than weekends and certainly 
not for twice the money. In fact,  

as soon as I find it, I'm going to read out to you the exact cost of 
that. 
 
Then you talked about park fees, and you said that the park fees 
had been gong up as well. You said the parks are open for a 
shorter period of time since 1982. No, that's not true. In fact the 
parks are open year round. The summer park season is from 
Thursday preceding Victoria Day to Labour Day, inclusive, and 
that's been the case for many years. 
 
Swimming pools. You said swimming pools are only open on 
weekends and they're open for twice the money. No, you're caught 
again making something up. The hours of operation —— let's take 
Buffalo pound. The pool opens June 13th. June 13 —— June 27, 
the hours: Friday, 12 noon —— 8 p.m.; Saturday, Sunday, 10 a.m. 
—— 8 p.m.; June 28 —— August 17, 9 a.m. —— 8 p.m. daily. 
 
Cypress Hills: July 1 —— August 22, Saturday, Sunday, 10 a.m. 
—— 9 p.m.; June 21 —— June 30, 10 a.m. —— 9 p.m. daily; 
August 23 —— September 1, 10 a.m. —— 9 p.m. daily. Caught 
again, running off at the mouth, making up things. 
 
Then where do we go to? You talked about McLean picnic site. 
You talked about the voluntary registration system. You said there 
are people taking registration, looking after the place, and it opens 
later. Not so. It opened earlier this year to accommodate Trans—
Canada Highway traffic going to Expo. So you're caught again 
making something up. 
 
Then you went on a little further —— and we'll turn down to 
hunting; we'll turn to hunting. Well let's take a look at what you 
had to say about hunting and about game . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . .Oh, you go ahead and mock my accent. That's 
your privilege, to mock my accent. I don't mock yours, and I 
understand you have one. 
 
But let's see what you went on to say here. You said about white—
tail deer and about the hard winter, or the hard winter they had a 
year and a half ago . . . Then you said, "But neither, Mr. Minister, 
did you do anything about it." You said, "Mr. Minister, the 
problem —— and I think they'll admit it in retrospect" . . . the 
wildlife association, you called them (it's federation) —— you 
said the problem was too big for them; we didn't do anything 
about it. We put $1.2 million into that program. 
 
And through the combined effort of department personnel, which 
involved one—third of this department's total staff, and over 
two—thirds in volunteers —— general public, farmers and 
wildlife interest groups —— approximately 1,900 feeding sites 
were operated throughout the province. About 4,000 tonnes of 
deer pellets and hay were purchased to feed an estimated 45,000 
deer and 1,000 elk. Supplemental feeding was restricted to 
approximately 196,000 square kilometres of critical deer range 
with intercept feeding carried out province—wide south of the 
forest fringe. 
 
So you said that we did nothing as a department. Well, I've caught 
you; you're running off at the mouth making all kinds of 
comments that strictly and obviously were not true. 
  



 
May 21, 1986 

1419 
 
 

Look at the other things you talked about. You made some slurs 
about the management of wildlife in this department. Apart from 
the management of parks, which you said we didn't manage at all 
. . . And I could point out the number of electrified campsites that 
we've added just in the last year, which your administration chose 
not to do —— a total of 632 newly electrified sites at eight 
locations in the last year; and you call that part mismanagement. 
 
We've added several million dollars worth of capital activities 
within the parks. You call that mismanagement? 
 
I'd like to get back to the kind of things you said about the 
management, again whereby you were casting slurs and aspersions 
on these good people sitting behind me whose responsibility it is 
to manage, conserve, and enhance the wildlife of this province. 
 
Are you not aware that we have the only critical Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act in Canada? Are not you aware? And that was 
brought in since our administration. 
 
Are not you aware that we are the first province to sign in and 
commit funding to the North American water—fowl plan, which 
has been an enormously successful and well—accepted program 
all across the country? We're the first province in. In fact the 
federal government, when we get the other provinces together to 
sign, want to come here and do it in Regina in recognition of the 
fact that we were first into this. 
 
Well, hon. member, you have just acquired for yourself the 
unenviable position of getting the undying enmity of all kinds of 
sound and solid public servants across this province. You criticize 
them for the way they're managing and running and looking after 
the parks. You've criticized them for the way they're managing 
and looking after wildlife in this province . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, I wouldn't ask you to resign. I wouldn't 
reduce myself to that kind of level and get into that kind of insult 
with you. I wouldn't do that at all. 
 
But you did say that I don't visit the parks and that I should get out 
and take a look around the parks in Saskatchewan. Well, as a 
matter of fact, last summer I did precisely that. You said I should 
take my vacations in the parks. I want you to know I didn't take 
any vacation at all last year —— none. But what I did do was, I 
took several days and I drove out to various parks in the province. 
I went out in just my runners and sweat—suit, just like a tourist; 
went through the park gate, introduced myself to staff, had a chat 
with them, wandered around the parks, took a look for myself, and 
met the public. 
 
You said I should be out meeting the public. You see, you didn't 
bother to check your facts. I went out and had a chat with 
members of the public and said, what do you think of the parks? 
Nice day; good swimming pool; nice facilities here. Then 
afterwards, when we'd been chatting, if I felt it appropriate, I told 
them, I'm the minister in charge of the parks and I'm just interested 
to see what you folks think of the parks. 
 
(1630) 
 
Contrast that with my predecessor who used to be the  

minister of this department under the NDP, Reggie Gross —— 
Reggie the skier. What did Reggie do? What did Reggie do about 
looking around the parks of Saskatchewan? Well Reggie the skier, 
January 19 to 22, '82, went down to Denver for a few days —— 
Denver. I've never had the opportunity myself, but I believe there's 
good skiing down there in Denver, Colorado, which certainly isn't 
in Saskatchewan. Reggie the skier. 
 
What else did Reggie do for skiing here? I've got pages and pages 
of stuff that Reggie did. Oh here he went to Helena, Montana. Isn't 
that where Big Sky is? Isn't there an excellent ski resort down at 
Helena, Montana? Reggie went there in March of 1981. 
 
What else did Reggie the skier do? Well Reggie went to Whistler, 
B.C., in January of 1981. Oh and do you know why he went? He 
went to inspect a resort complex. Do you know what he did after 
that? A week later, do you know what Reggie the skier did? 
Reggie went to Helena, Montana, again for another few days. 
 
Oh here's another Reggie the skier. Reggie the skier, March 5 to 7, 
1980, Reggie the skier went to Banff. Now am I wrong or is there 
a nice ski facility in Banff? I believe there is. 
 
Oh here we go again, Vancouver in February of 1980. He's a boy 
who was the minister of Parks. He never saw a Saskatchewan 
park; he was too busy skiing around the world. 
 
What else did he do? Well my goodness, my goodness, here's 
Reggie going to Calgary. Isn't that close to Banff where there's 
good skiing? And what did Reggie do there? Reggie went to 
discuss the use of a snow tiller at Blackstrap, but he did this in 
Calgary. Well that's Reggie the skier. 
 
What about Reggie the tourist? Reggie the tourist, July 1981, 
here's Reggie the tourist in the Netherlands. He's at The Hague. 
And what else did he do in 1981? He went to Frankfurt and he 
went to Paris. Reggie the tourist was in Frankfurt. Reggie the 
tourist was in Paris. Oh I forgot to mention, that year Reggie the 
tourist also went to London, England, and Köln in Germany. 
 
Here's another one. Reggie the tourist, he must have really liked 
Europe because —— guess what —— a year later he went back to 
Frankfurt, and he went back to Paris, and he also took in 
Amsterdam. Reggie the tourist. 
 
How about Reggie the football fan? Reggie the football fan went 
to New Orleans and took in the Super Bowl in January 28th to 
February 5th. Oh guess what, though, guess what. In that same 
time frame, our football fan couldn't forget he was a skiing 
enthusiast. So just on the way back he dropped in to Aspen. Isn't 
Aspen where the skiing takes place? Isn't that a ski resort? So here 
we go: Reggie the tourist, Reggie the skier, Reggie the football 
fan. 
 
And yet this member for Regina Centre tells me I've got to spend 
more time visiting Saskatchewan parks —— something I've 
already done. Well I suggest to you, sir, that you take your mouth 
and have it looked at by a  
  



 
May 21, 1986 

1420 
 
 

proctologist. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I think I'm going to do that 
again. I elicited more information with that running out the clock 
than we've got in two months. I presume, Mr. Minister, if I run the 
clock out again, we'll get some more information. That's the only 
information we've got in two months. 
 
Mr. Minister, we do want to finish these estimates today if 
possible. I would like, Mr. Minister, to deal with the question of 
reservations. Mr. Chairman, I wonder if it's possible to have any 
order in here. I can't hear myself talk. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to deal with the question of reservations at 
parks. I have been at parks frequently, seen a goodly portion of the 
park reserved, and then the people who make the reservations 
don't come. I really wonder, Mr. Minister, if it is a sound scheme 
to be taking reservations for $6 campsites. I think the system is 
unenforceable. It means that a number of these sites are not used 
until after 8 o'clock. Sometimes they're then let out. I understand 8 
o'clock is the time when they are then put up for general 
availability. 
 
But I really wonder, Mr. Minister, and I think many campers do, 
whether or not the reservation system really serves a useful 
purpose. It seems to me that it is abused every bit as much as it is 
used. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — . . . (inaudible) . . . abuse. However, I can 
tell you, in 1985 evaluations, 6,408 reservations were made; 34 
reservations were guaranteed and did not show and did not cancel. 
That's 34 out of 6,408. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, those figures are simply 
not accurate. I have seen . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh I don't 
know whether it's intentional or otherwise, but the figures aren't 
accurate. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have been at camps. I have been at campgrounds 
where there were 34 in a single evening that weren't used in a 
single park site. There are large numbers of these things that sit 
empty, and they're not mobile homes. They are people who don't 
come, who don't pay, and those campsites are not used. 
 
Mr. Minister, those figures are simply not accurate. I don't know 
where you got them from. And I don't particularly want to know, 
because I assume you can concoct some source that sounds 
credible. But, Mr. Minister, your figures aren't accurate. There are 
large numbers of those campsites that sit empty. It annoys me and 
it annoys other campers who don't have those sites, who often are 
shuffled off to much poorer sites while the better campsites, which 
are available for reservation, sit empty. 
 
So I say, Mr. Minister, your figures are simply not accurate and I 
don't know where you got them from. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Not all of the sites that are vacant are 
because of reserve—a—site and somebody not showing up. The 
ones that are reserved have an "R" on them. 

You're questioning my figures. I'd remind the members of the 
committee here, you're the gentleman who stood there and said: 
we doubled the fees; we doubled the swimming; we're charging 
for firewood; we did nothing for white—tailed deer this year. And 
I'll put my credibility, and the figures given to me by my officials, 
against you any day of the week. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, I had a few more questions I 
wanted to ask, but I'll allow my colleague to do it before I . . . 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, with leave, I would like to 
introduce a few guests. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is my pleasure, Mr. 
Chairman and members of the Assembly, to introduce to the 
members here the members of the Student Executive Council of 
the Technical Institutes in Saskatchewan. We have with us here 
Tracey Vigar, president of Kelsey Institute association; Todd 
Benko; Vickie Haughn, social director; and Daryl Fraess, 
president of the Wascana student council. 
 
I would ask members to join with me in extending a welcome to 
the student executive council members. This is a newly organized 
council. It's in its formative stage, Mr. Chairman. And certainly we 
want to extend best wishes for success in the new organization that 
the students have launched. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — With leave, I would like to, on behalf of the 
Minister of Advanced Education and the government, extend our 
best wishes to these four young people. Creating and building, 
when it comes to a new organization, is a particular challenge, and 
we wish you great success with it and a very special success with 
your years in the technical training institutes. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Parks and Renewable Resources 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 39 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have three short 
questions, Mr. Minister, and then we can move on with the 
estimates. The questions that I have, you may not be able to 
provide me with the answers here today. If you haven't got that 
information, if you would agree to provide that in writing to me, 
Mr. Minister, the information that you don't have, then we will 
proceed. 
 
The first one I wanted to ask, Mr. Minister, is regarding the big 
game surveys that you carried out last year. Could you give me the 
number of contracts that were given out to airlines for aircraft to 
carry out that survey, and the names  
  



 
May 21, 1986 

1421 
 
 

of the aircraft firms that carried out the survey. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I can certainly find that information for 
you and have it sent across to you as soon as possible. If I can't get 
it today, you'll definitely have it by tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay then, Mr. Minister. You agree to 
provide me with that information regarding the game surveys. 
 
The next question I want to ask is the hiring policies of your 
department regarding stand—by crews and react crews. It has 
come to my attention that individuals have had their names down 
on the list for up to as high as four years and now have been told 
by your conservation officers —— specifically in Buffalo 
Narrows, and you can check this one out —— that they wouldn't 
be taking any local people, but would be hiring union personnel 
for react and stand—by crews, and the next hiring position would 
be coming out of Calgary. 
 
If you don't have that information, Mr. Minister, you could also 
provide me with that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I know 
you're aware of the recall system that does exist within the 
department. Those folks who had been employed previously are 
on recall for the next year. I was just checking with the officials. 
We're not aware of any out—of—province people coming in or 
any contractual arrangement, verbal, written, or otherwise, that's 
been made with people from Calgary. However, I can undertake to 
verify that and I'll give you that in writing. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Yes. That's fine, then. You will provide me 
with the information to the hiring policy regarding react crews and 
the stand—by crews in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to now turn to the final item that I have here, and it's 
regarding a fishing project that I believe your department was 
involved in —— I know your department was involved in it to a 
certain extent —— on Lake Athabasca this winter. I know the 
individual, Steve Oneski, who was in charge of that program was 
down here and was quite concerned about some policies that were 
taking place. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could indicate what the 
Department of Parks and Renewable Resources, just how they 
were involved in that project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The gentleman by the name of Steve 
Oneski —— and I'm not certain of the spelling, but I'll find that 
out and get it to you —— did get some federal government 
funding and he did some project work in Lake Athabasca. He 
produced 750 pounds of fish, a mixture of whitefish and lake trout 
—— and I don't know the breakdown and the poundage there —
— which he subsequently sold in Fort McMurray. I'm advised, 
and  

we're not entirely certain, but I am advised that he's currently 
looking around the countryside for more money. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, could you indicate how much 
money was put into that project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — We had no money in that as a provincial 
department; it was federal money. I've asked my director of 
fisheries to ascertain the amount of money he did receive 
federally, and when I find that out I'll certainly be happy to 
provide it to you. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Your officials could indicate if it's 
approximately $100,000 that was spent on that project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I believe it's in that range some place, hon. 
member. I think it's less than that. The figure 90,000 is being 
bandied around. I'd rather check it and try and find a definitive 
answer than just guess, but I'm hearing the figure, about 90,000. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I just want to close off by making a short 
remark, that when you take a project that has got $100,000 to 
spend and they produce 750 pounds of fish, now that is absolutely 
unbelievable. If our commercial fisheries and fish operators in this 
province worked under these conditions, well, you could imagine 
what you'd be paying a pound for that fish. And if this individual 
is looking for more money, then I question how in the world you 
could give any individual more money when you've already given 
them close to $100,000 to produce 750 pounds of fish. 
 
I know that that money came from the Conservative government 
in Ottawa, and I know that it was approved by one John Gormley, 
the member of parliament for the Battlefords—Meadow Lake, but 
I want to say that it was a provincial resource and a provincial lake 
that was being utilized. 
 
I just say that when we take a look at the massive debt that we 
have in this country and in this province, and we see that they will 
give $100,000 to an individual without any questions asked and 
allow them to go on all winter and spend that money and produce 
750 pounds of fish, most good commercial fishermen produce that 
in one day. My gosh, this is really what I call a waste of money, 
and I don't even know if that 750 pounds of fish was sold to the 
corporation, or if it was sold in Fort McMurray, or where it went. 
But if other commercial fishermen could get $100,000 and go out 
and produce 750 pounds of fish, they could have that work all 
done in one day and collect their $100,000. But I just ask you, Mr. 
Minister, to have your officials check into that project. And I think 
this is the type of projects that we don't need. 
 
There was a number of good commercial fishermen fishing on 
Lake Athabasca last winter. Fond—du—Lac fishermen are good 
fishermen. And I think that that training program —— if the 
trainees could have been put out on the fish—line with a 
commercial outfit that was fishing there from Fond—du—Lac or 
Uranium City or Camsell Portage or the Buffalo Narrows—
Beauval area,  
  



 
May 21, 1986 

1422 
 
 

any of them fishermen could have taken them on and showed 
them how to fish. But to allow this type of a fishery to go on our 
lakes, I think is bad business. 
 
With that, Mr. Chairman, we can proceed now to go through item 
by item. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I would like to respond, Mr. Chairman, to 
what the hon. member has just said. First of all, we had no money 
in this project at all. Secondly, my department was not consulted. 
This was a unilateral decision made by CEIC (Canada 
Employment and Immigration Commission), who were 
responsible for the funding of the program. Officials in my 
department did complain about the program, and the complaints 
have fallen on deaf ears. 
 
And just for the information of the hon. member, I don't 
particularly care what political stripe the government in Ottawa is, 
but when they do something, or officials do something, that I don't 
like, I'm not afraid to stand up and tell them so. And if you check 
with what happened at the wildlife colloquium in Ottawa a week 
ago, you'll realize I was not slow to be critical of some of the stuff 
that had been done there. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What is CEIC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Canadian Employment and Immigration 
Commission, under the auspices of Flora MacDonald, I believe. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 16 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, I see that you have a cut in the 
Meadow Lake region, and you also have a cut of five staff. Could 
you indicate where the five staff reduction is and the reason for the 
cut in the Meadow Lake region? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — You'll find them in subvote 05, and as I 
recall there was a question about that in the first day of the 
estimates. That was a transfer of positions, and they show up in 
subvote 05. 
 
Item 16 agreed to. 
 
Items 17 to 23 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 24 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Under 24, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you 
could indicate . . . There's a cut here also of a million dollars. If 
you could indicate where that cut is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — We do expect some more revenue because 
of increased tourists travelling to Expo. So with anticipated 
increased revenue, the level of subsidy will be down. And there's a 
reduction due to more effective and efficient operations as well. 
 
Item 24 agreed to. 

Items 25 and 26 agreed to. 
 
Vote 39 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Parks and Renewable Resources 
Capital Expenditure — Nil Vote 

 
Agreed. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Employment Development Agency — Parks and  

Renewable Resources 
Employment Development Fund — Vote 65 

 
Mr. Thompson: — could you indicate where the $2 million 
grants go to for the heavy—haul roads? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I believe you're reading 
out a whole page of items, and the only applicable item to my 
department is indeed number 13. The others are not applicable to 
this department. 
 
Item 13 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Parks and Renewable Resources — Vote 39 

 
Vote 39 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, indeed I would. I'd 
like to extend a warm thank you to all of my officials who have 
done an excellent job, not only in preparing for the estimates, but 
in the administration of the department during this past year. It's 
been a pleasure to work with them. I'd also like to thank the 
members of the opposition for the spirited questioning, 
particularly my critic the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On behalf of the 
opposition, Mr. Minister, I would like to thank you and your staff 
for the co—operation in doing your estimates. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:03 p.m. 
 


