




















































March 25, 1986 Hansard Evening


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 March 25, 1986 
 

177 
 

 
EVENING SITTING 

 
SPECIAL ORDER 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Klein, seconded by Mr. 
Domotor, and the amendment thereto moved by Hon. Mr. 
Blakeney. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I enjoy 
this opportunity to enter the debate on what I consider to be — 
in fact is going to be — the last throne speech of the 
government opposite. 
 
I want at the outset to say, since we will be going to the polls 
very shortly, and our party is ready and waiting for the 
announcement . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I know that a number of the members opposite 
have decided that they will not seek re-election. And I want to 
say that, in my view, that a number of them have made a very 
wise decision. 
 
But certainly as others have joined, I want to join with those to 
congratulate the contribution made by some of the members of 
this House who have decided not to seek re-election. 
 
I want to join with others in respect to the member from 
Rosthern, who has added some to the House — all of his 
efforts, I know, in a very sincere way. I want also to say the 
member from Cumberland, on our side . . . It was a pleasure 
working with the member from Cumberland, and I know he did 
a tremendous job on behalf of the people he represented. 
 
I want to also say that these last four years have been a great 
challenge — a great challenge to our caucus, because following 
the last election, Mr. Speaker, we were confronted by some 56 
stampeding members of the government. And they thought that 
never again would the New Democratic Party rise to where the 
people of this province would be seeking them to form the 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And what I want to say is . . . and I want to 
congratulate the co-operation and the dedication of the eight 
members of our caucus that work together as a team and 
endeavour to bring forward opposition. And I think even the 
press will admit that with so few, we did an excellent job in 
bringing the issues to the people of Saskatchewan. And so I 
want to congratulate the tremendous effort of each and every 
one of the members of our caucus, and our leader. 
 
I want to say that we are now heading into an election. And we 
have had the throne speech, which we would have thought 
would have outlined sort of the future 

economic development and direction of this province. 
 
But this throne speech is, Mr. Speaker, a culmination of four 
years of PC government. And as such, it is a document that 
sums up all that we have come to learn about the members 
opposite: a government that substitutes rhetoric for reality; a 
government that believes only what it wants to believe; a 
government that hears only what it wants to hear; a government 
that believes inequality is a fact of life, and it works to keep it 
that way; a government that believes if you assist the wealthy, 
that eventually the poor and the unfortunate will benefit. 
 
This is a government that substitutes press releases for action 
and economic development; a government that believes taxation 
should be based on the ability to evade, not on the ability to 
pay; a government that believes that fairness is a socialist plot; a 
government that says it believes in family, and legalizes liquor 
advertisement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A government that constantly is saying it 
believes in the family, and it uses pornography as a source of 
revenue. A government that believes that the natural resources 
of this province belongs to the corporations that develop it, 
rather than the people who own it. A government that believes 
that if you are poor, you should be taxed, and if you are rich, 
you should in fact be rewarded. 
 
A government, Mr. Speaker, that believes you must sacrifice 
the many for the benefit of the few; a government that believes 
the bigger you are, the better you are. You know, a government 
that makes a major commitment to a new start in education by 
reducing the amount of money it spends on education. A 
government that implements so-called management efficiencies 
by outrageous patronage appointments. A government that 
believes welfare reforms means the weak and the helpless must 
suffer; a government whose job creation policy means the 
unemployed will suffer; a government which claims to be 
listening but whose hearing-aid has been turned off since 
elected in '82. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A government that believes the secret to 
success was sincerity, and that once they could fake that they 
thought they had it made. A government, Mr. Speaker, that 
attempted to persuade the people of Saskatchewan that they had 
a model Premier. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, Webster's 
Dictionary defines "model" as a small imitation of the real 
thing. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, this is a government where image was all 
important; nothing else mattered. And as a result, this is a 
government that has given us politics of misery and 
confrontation and politics of exploitation. Four wasted years, 
Mr. Speaker, summed up in this throne speech, a dismal 
recitation of failed strategy and of failed philosophy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, soon the Premier will plunge this province into an 
election. And I want to say that the people are 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

178 
 

waiting. They are filled with expectation. This will be their 
opportunity. And I want to say to the members opposite, the 
public will not waste this opportunity. They will pronounce 
their verdict on your four years of misperformance. 
 
And I say that when the Premier sallies forth to meet the people, 
he should look to history. Conservatives are fond of history. 
They look to the past with relish. They even try to turn the 
clock back to the past. They seek to live in the past. 
 
When they look at the past, as they prepare to call this election, 
the Premier should remember the soothsayer who said as he 
passed Caesar, "Beware the Ides of March." 
 
Or perhaps the Conservatives should look to the past here in 
Saskatchewan and remember what happened to the last 
Conservative government, the Anderson government, that 
sought re-election and was rewarded, and was rewarded, Mr. 
Speaker, with the political extinction it so richly deserved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to you that there is nothing more spacious in 
this world than the room that this government has for 
improvement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Unfortunately, the people are no longer willing 
to provide you with this opportunity. Mr. Speaker, history will 
repeat itself when you go to the polls, I say. 
 
The people have rejected the politics of greed. I say that the 
people rejected the politics of meanness. They have rejected the 
politics of fear. The people have rejected the politics of 
exploitation. The people have weighed you in and balanced and 
found you wanting. 
 
They have pronounced the verdict, Mr. Speaker: guilty on all 
counts. And they wait now for the opportunity to deliver the 
sentence once more — political oblivion. 
 
And it's ironic, Mr. Speaker, that it is the Conservatives 
themselves that will provide the opportunity. For in thousands 
of homes and farms across Saskatchewan, I'll tell you the 
people of this province are waiting — quietly, confidently, 
expectantly — for the opportunity that will soon be provided 
them. We ask, Mr. Speaker, in our cities, in our towns, in our 
villages, in our farms, the people of this province are waiting. 
The people have evaluated — four long years they evaluated. 
Four mean and wasted years they have had to take a look at. 
The people know and they say that enough is enough. And now 
they wait for the opportunity that this outfit must provide to the 
people — an election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how could a government that won such a mandate 
four years ago find itself in such a position as they did in 
Regina North East. Mr. Speaker, it was bad enough to know 
that in Regina North East, that they reached rock bottom. And 
what makes it even worse is that they have no where to go in 
the rest of the province but down. 

Mr. Speaker, this government should have remembered before 
it implemented its short-sighted, disastrous economic and social 
policies, that if you live only for today you will surely ruin 
tomorrow. And, Mr. Speaker, this saying is truly correct, and it 
is their tomorrow that they have ruined. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people looked at the government whose vision 
of the future is determined by a party which faces the past with 
closed and shuttered minds; by a party whose allegiance is to 
the blind traditions of the past. A party whose vision of the 
future is determined by blind reliance on failed dogma; a party 
whose vision of the future substitutes slogans for substance, and 
prattle for programs; a party whose vision of the future is 
determined by men who live by exploiting the misery of others. 
Mr. Speaker, the people will reject the politics of exploitation, 
the politics of meanness, and the politics of inequality. 
 
(1915) 
 
They will instead choose, Mr. Speaker, a future with security 
for all, a future with dignity for all; a future where exploitation 
of man by man will end; a future where reward comes with 
effort; a future where individual worth is recognized; a future 
where the qualities we value are honesty, caring, and 
commitment. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, the people wait. They await the election call, 
and their judgement, I predict, will be swift for the members 
opposite. It will be, in my view, a terrible experience for them. 
Your mandate will have to be nasty, but short, and worse still 
for the members opposite, the people will remember. They still 
remember. And on every farm, every home, every hamlet, in 
every village, in every town, in every city throughout this 
province, people will say: never again — enough is enough. It 
is time to turn faces to the future, a future of new hope. 
 
Mr. Speaker, four years ago there was high growth in this 
province, economic growth. There was increasing population. 
There was a low provincial debt. There was a fair taxation 
system in place. And four years later we have virtually no 
economic growth; high unemployment — over 40,000 people 
are unemployed; almost $2 billion in debt in four years. We 
have a tax system that is blatantly unfair. And we have a 
population, having seen the operation of this government, are 
starting to leave. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan people are fed 
with the PC record of unfair taxes, rising unemployment, 
financial mismanagement, weak leadership. These are the 
things that people of Saskatchewan are saying about the 
members opposite. They have brought unfair taxes, the highest 
in the history of the province, last year. They say they have 
economic development, and unemployment is rising. They say 
that they have economic development and we have the highest 
welfare rate in the history of the province. Over $200 million 
spent annually on welfare — over $200 million annually on 
welfare. 
 
And I want to say to you that we have weak leadership. Never 
before in this province have we had a premier so spineless and 
lacking so much of direction. This province 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

179 
 

has had strong tradition of leadership. We had Tommy Douglas, 
Woodrow Lloyd, Ross Thatcher, Allan Blakeney. And now take 
a look at what we have in the chair of the Premier and the 
Deputy Premier. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan people have asked 
themselves: can we afford four more years under the Devine 
government? That's the question they ask. Can we afford four 
more years under the Devine government? And the people will 
say — I say the people will say — never again. 
 
The Saskatchewan people are going to return again to a 
government that is committed to fair taxes, to real job creation, 
competent financial management of the province, and 
compassion for those in need — and committed, I may say, to 
stand up against the Mulroney wrecking crew in Ottawa. That's 
what the Saskatchewan people are seeking. 
 
The Saskatchewan people will turn to a government where large 
corporations and the wealthy will be made to pay their fair 
share of the taxes in order that we may, in fact, finance the cost 
of education and health in this province; where taxation policies 
will ease the heavy tax burden on the low and middle income 
earners. 
 
And the Saskatchewan people will turn to a government that 
will replace the flat tax, that tax that allowed the wealthy of 
society to deduct as an expense their houseboat at La Ronge, 
their apartment buildings, or their oil wells, or their film 
ventures. But this flat tax placed on ordinary people . . . I'll tell 
you they couldn't have any deduction for their children. They 
couldn't have as a deduction the medical bills and they couldn't, 
even if they made a contribution to a charity, have it as an 
exemption. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you and tell the people of 
Saskatchewan here tonight that the flat tax that is based on the 
ability to evade rather than the ability to pay will in fact be 
removed. We will also restore, I want to say, the money 
collected under the unfair tax on used vehicles to the people 
from which it was gouged. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I am getting letters from my 
constituents, writing in and saying — the Premier himself has 
stood up, the Premier has stood up, and he pulled the tax on 
used vehicles, the E&H tax. And they say, he put it in last April 
in his budget and he said in December it's an unfair tax — and 
he pulled it. And they say, well where was he when he put it 
into effect, they say. Where was the rest of the cabinet? Why 
didn't they know it was unfair when they put it into place the 
first time? And you know what the people of Saskatchewan 
say? We wouldn't have minded if he had left it in place at least 
during the year of the budget, but to have pulled it half-way 
through is of benefit to some; but why should I be penalized? 
 
And I'll tell you, to the people of Saskatchewan that paid that 
unjust tax, we in the New Democratic Party are promising that 
we will, in fact, reimburse them for the E&H tax that was 
charged on used vehicles. Mr. Speaker, I say to you that the 
people of Saskatchewan will turn once more to a government, a 
government that will provide 

real jobs and real opportunities to every person in 
Saskatchewan. Because here we find, in Saskatchewan under 
the Tories, one person in 10 here in this province who is now 
either unemployed or on welfare. 
 
I say that we will have a job program of meaningful 
employment. The people of Saskatchewan will turn once more 
to a government that will encourage small business to grow and 
create new job opportunities by guaranteeing stable interest 
rates. The people of Saskatchewan will turn once more to a 
government that will work in co-operation with local 
governments to eliminate the burden of municipal taxes on 
Saskatchewan business men. The people of Saskatchewan will 
turn once more to a government that would have an 
employment policy of Saskatchewan first; where government 
contracts would be awarded to Saskatchewan businesses and 
jobs would be available to Saskatchewan workers. The people 
will turn to a government that will build needed public facilities 
today to be used by Saskatchewan people tomorrow. 
 
I say to you that the government will build public facilities 
today to create immediate jobs now and real assets for our 
future, hospitals and nursing homes, highways and university 
facilities, schools. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that our leader today 
announced what I think the people of this province will 
welcome, and that is a housing policy which I think will meet 
with the approval of thousands and thousands of people across 
this province. 
 
Today the New Democratic party, through our leader, 
announced, unveiled a major new housing policy which will 
create 1,800 new direct jobs and generate $1.3 billion in new 
economic activity over the next five years by setting a 
minimum target of 8,000 housing starts for Saskatchewan for 
each of the next five years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And what I want to do, Mr. Speaker, is go over 
the four-point housing policy that is being provided by the New 
Democrats. 
 
First of all, $7,000 in down payment assistance for first-time 
home owners. Let's go through that again. For a new home 
owner, first-time home owner, $7,000 down payment 
assistance. And I want to tell you that this assistance will be not 
for one year, for two years — for three. 
 
Secondly, a family home protection plan will guarantee home 
mortgage interest rates of 7 per cent for seven years on the 
$70,000 of the mortgage. In addition, Mr. Speaker, a home 
rehab assistance plan will provide up to $7,000 in assistance for 
making major renovations or repairs to older homes. 
 
This I say, Mr. Speaker, is indeed having a faith in the people of 
Saskatchewan. If you take a look at the basic impact that it will 
have, the impact of increasing the number of new housing units 
from just 5,000 that they had last year to a minimum of 8,000 
would be major. As I say, it would create 3,000 new direct jobs 
a year in 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

180 
 

Saskatchewan; 15,000 new direct jobs over the next five years, 
without counting the many spin-off jobs created by the purchase 
of appliances and carpets, and fencing and landscaping, and so 
on. It would generate $240 million a year in direct new 
economic activity for a total of 1.2 billion over the next five 
years. And the housing rehab program will generate 600 direct 
new jobs a year or 3,000 direct new jobs over the next five 
years. It would generate up to 30 million a year in new 
economic development, or a total of 150 million over the next 
five years. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, what we have, what we 
demonstrate here is faith in the Saskatchewan people. We have 
said that under the Tory government during the past four years 
we have seen the social cost of their economic mismanagement. 
We have seen unemployment rise to over 40,000 — 15 to 16 
per cent young people unemployed. We have seen 60,000 
people receiving welfare. We have see the human tragedy that 
is associated with being on welfare and unemployed. And we 
say, Mr. Speaker, that the housing program will put young 
people to work, will put the plumbers and the electricians and 
the carpenters to work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, it's a program of 
working with the people of Saskatchewan, not working with the 
multinational corporations outside of this province. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, building today is what we're doing, 
building today to provide future opportunities for our young 
people — real jobs for our young people, not work projects, not 
work projects as the minister of social welfare has been 
providing; real careers for our young people, not the quick fixes 
and the part-time jobs that you've been providing. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, when I was walking around and 
campaigning in the last federal election, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
tell you the human tragedy of unemployment. I went into one of 
the towns in my constituency. I was knocking on doors. I came 
to this door, to this home, and I'll tell you as I was approaching 
. . . These people laugh at the human tragedy of their economic 
policies. They laugh and they think it's funny when I tell you of 
the human tragedy that's going on. But I'll tell you . . . I'm going 
to tell you what it is. Here is a human being, a young man, 30, 
35 years of age. He has worked all his life. It was, I believe, in 
the fall when I met him, and all that summer he had not been 
able to get a job. He was walking and pacing back and forth 
around his house, almost in the stage of a nervous breakdown. 
And I spoke to him and I said, how are things going? And he 
indicated to me what had happened to him. 
 
(1930) 
 
He said, I've never been unemployed in my life. He said, I don't 
know how to adjust; I've tried everywhere to find a job. He was 
out working on highways in heavy construction, and he says, 
they've practically shut it down in this province. And he says, I 
have tried all over Saskatchewan and I’ll go anywhere. And 
when I . . . 

An Hon. Member: Give me his name. I'll hire him tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — The member from Kelvington-Wadena says he 
will hire him. He'll give him a Tory job, one of these $4.50 jobs 
— that's what he'll give him. 
 
And the housing program is going to get Saskatchewan turned 
around and working. Okay. Laugh, laugh. Look at the jokers 
laugh. Yes, I like to see you laugh. All right. A tremendous 
economic development will take place with the housing 
program, and they will provide real jobs and real opportunities 
to look to the future with certainty and pride, and not with fear 
and uncertainty as exists today. 
 
The people will turn to a government that will protect our farm 
families by reducing the price on farm fuel by a minimum of 32 
cents a gallon, by introducing measures that will cut the cost of 
farm fertilizers, that will pressure the federal Tories to make 
possible the development of low-cost, generic farm chemicals. 
The people will turn to a government, Mr. Speaker, that will 
fight the disastrous recommendations of the Nielsen task force 
report on agriculture. 
 
The people, I say, Mr. Speaker, will turn to a government that is 
committed to putting people first; a government that will restore 
opportunity and fairness to Saskatchewan life by providing a 
guaranteed income for Saskatchewan seniors 60 years of age 
and over; improving and extending mortgage protection for 
Saskatchewan families; increasing health care staffing levels; 
improving and extending home care services; providing 
affordable and accessible day care of the highest quality; 
creating an educational system that will provide equality of 
opportunity to all, and in so doing guaranteeing that our young 
people will be truly prepared to face the future confident in their 
ability and training; creating a business climate which will 
reward creativity and initiative. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, the people, I say, will reject the failed 
strategies of the government opposite. The people will reject the 
flawed philosophy of the members opposite. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, they will look to the future — a 
new future: a future which puts humanity first; a future where 
the real purpose of our existence is not to merely make a living, 
but to make a life; where we look not to the standard of living, 
but to the standards of living; where we do not love things and 
use people, but rather use things and love people.A government 
that values not what we take, but what we share; a government 
bound together by common ideals, common objectives, and a 
common dedication to the great cause, the welfare of people of 
Saskatchewan; a government confident in the belief that, as our 
problems are man-made, so also can they be solved by man. A 
government committed to building bridges between people, 
reminding us of our feelings, desires, and hopes, and confident 
that the forces that unite us are greater than those forces that 
divide us; a government that refuses to believe that man's 
destiny is settled in the market-place alone. 
 
In fact, in the last four year this government has 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

181 
 

attempted to build here in Saskatchewan a society, as I said, 
based on greed and selfishness and ruthless competition. And I 
say that you have reaped the tragic harvest of social and 
economic insecurity. 
 
The people realize and look now to a government that will 
remember the founders, the makers, and the builders of our 
province — our basic heritage; that will remember that kindness 
and compassion are virtues that cost little yet have great 
purchasing power, and that only the truly strong can show 
compassion. A government that recognizes that our provincial 
character and history has made great virtues out of some of the 
sterner qualities of man — frugality, discipline, and endurance 
— and that these should be rewarded; a government that 
recognizes that those people whom we seek to serve have out of 
their hardship learned to work together for their mutual benefit. 
A government that recognizes that willingness opens the door to 
achievement, and that we must provide that opportunity to each 
and every resident of our province; a government that realizes 
the extent of our sensitivity to the rights and needs of others is 
an excellent measure of the kind of society in which we want to 
live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I stand in opposition to this throne speech. I 
suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that it is a shabby document, 
devoid of compassion, short on hope — failed vision of the 
future. The people of Saskatchewan deserve more, so much 
more, Mr. Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan want a vision 
of the future that will command hope, bring respect, and 
provide opportunity. Those are the things the people seek. A 
command of hope, bring respect, provide opportunities. I say, 
Mr. Speaker, this document with its recitation of the past offers 
none of these. 
 
It will be a new government, Mr. Speaker, and a new throne 
speech, that will once more bring hope, respect, and opportunity 
to the people of Saskatchewan. A government which believes 
that destiny makes us brothers, that no one goes his way alone, 
that what we give to others comes back into our own. A 
government where peace, love and brotherhood speak out loud 
and clear; where every man, woman, and child shall blend their 
hope in one; where our province shall indeed be one 
brotherhood and stand in everlasting sun. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that we on our side of the House are 
looking forward to an opportunity to going to discuss with the 
people of Saskatchewan an alternative to the disastrous efforts 
of the government opposite. Mr. Speaker, I stand in opposition 
to the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Speaker, it indeed gives me 
pleasure today to rise and speak and I want to pay particular 
attention to the implications of the throne speech on my 
constituency of Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
Today I sat here and listened and found the members opposite 
talking rather humorously. And I don't think it was their 
intention to be humorous, but in this day and age when one has 
to cling to moments of reality on occasion, their comments do 
appear humorous, unless one were a little twisted in opinion. 

This business of the big corporations and the wealthy being to 
blame for all the world's problems is something I heard, Mr. 
Speaker, in the early '70s and in the '60s, and I don't think it's 
any secret that the members opposite are locked into that era 
and in fact think they could somehow get the public to support 
them if they can beat up on a corporation or rich people. 
 
And as my colleague, the Environment minister, mentioned a 
few days ago, their definition of rich people unfortunately 
includes widows, elderly — people who I don't consider rich. 
That's the problem. That's a fallacy with their position. 
 
I guess, Mr. Speaker, the other thing that is a bit disheartening 
is that a good number of my constituents watch these 
proceedings and take an interest in our democratic system. And 
the advent of television in the legislature has given an 
opportunity for our people to watch our proceedings and to 
learn about the differences between the two sides, the 
opposition and government. 
 
Now, unfortunately the members opposite don't seem to want to 
be factual on what they say and I want to just correct some of 
the things that they have just mentioned, for the benefit of my 
constituents, because I don't think it's fair that people are misled 
in that manner. 
 
For example, a few minutes ago the last member that spoke 
indicated that the unemployment rate in Saskatchewan was 10 
per cent. Well, that's simply untrue. The latest figures are 7.6 
per cent. It is one of the best unemployment rates in Canada, 
and it has been consistently the best since we were elected in 
1982. Mr. Speaker, there's no excuse for the member to have 
said that the unemployment rate was 10 per cent because it's 
simply untrue. I had hoped that the NDP would have learned by 
now that this simply doesn’t impress the public, and is 
irresponsible, because we have a duty as legislators to be 
forthright and honest with the people we serve, regardless of 
our political beliefs. 
 
The throne speech spoke about the vision for the future, and I 
suppose one advantage we have as a governing party is that we 
now have nearly four years of government under our belt and 
we can rely on performance and statistics and what we have 
done to counter the accusation and innuendoes from the other 
side. So clearly it's an advantage. 
 
We, for example, can prove clearly now that we didn't take 
medicare away, and you'll recall that the members opposite 
promised the people of Saskatchewan that we would, and we 
haven't. In fact we've improved health care; built more nursing 
home beds than ever before, ended the moratorium on nursing 
home beds that the members opposite had placed. So clearly, 
the jury has come in on that issue and that issue is that they 
misled the public again. 
 
Now let's look at some of the other issues that have been 
brought up in the last few days. Let's look at the last four years. 
As a member from the Prince Albert area, I have further 
responsibilities in northern Saskatchewan. Unfortunately for the 
people in northern Saskatchewan, 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

182 
 

they aren't represented by responsible MLAs and they are 
represented by two NDP MLAs. So clearly, they've haven't 
brought forth the facts as to what the opportunities are in 
northern Saskatchewan, as to what government policy has done 
in northern Saskatchewan in the last four years. 
 
Well let's just deal with some of them — uranium, for example. 
The Northerners obviously have been concerned that the 
decision of the NDP to close the uranium mines and destroy 
hundreds of jobs is not good for northern Saskatchewan. 
Whichever definition of employment you use, I couldn't find 
one that said that closing mines creates employment. But the 
NDP in their battle against unemployment feel that they must 
close the mines to work in that direction. So clearly the 
Northerners have difficulty in understanding that concept. 
 
(1945) 
 
Next we look at the gold industry. Now the gold industry in the 
La Ronge gold belt, for example, has never been as vibrant as it 
is now — never before in the history of this province. It is 
because there were some fundamental changes in the tax 
structures that affect the gold industry. 
 
Saskatchewan includes northern Saskatchewan, which is truly 
open for business. We said that to the investors. We changed 
the rule that enabled the state, the province of Saskatchewan, to 
simply come and take over half of a mining venture if the 
government felt like it. We changed that rule. 
 
And we said to potential investors, to small investors 
everywhere in Saskatchewan, to larger investors, we said to 
them, if you risk your money in a high-risk venture such as a 
gold operation, we will simply tax you on your rewards. We 
aren't there to steal your industry from you after you've taken 
the massive risks that are necessary. 
 
And what's happening up there . . . And I can hear the NDP are 
starting to squawk from their seats. And you know you're 
getting to them when you mention, when you're hearing that 
sort of thing, Mr. Speaker. It's music to our ears lately because 
you know you're talking about facts that people see and realize 
ever day in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
What's happening in the La Ronge gold belt? Well, we have the 
first gold mine being constructed, together with a gold mill. 
Employment will be roughly 75 people full-time when it comes 
on stream, which is soon. It's presently under construction. 
 
The content of northern people employed in the industry at this 
stage is beyond 50 per cent, which is remarkable without 
legislating affirmative action, like the previous government 
attempted to do. We didn't force anybody to hire X number of 
people from the La Ronge area, or X number of people from 
Buffalo Narrows. We sat down with the industries and told 
them what we expected. And in a co-operative sense we've been 
successful, because we work with the private sector; we don't 
fight the private sector. And that's a distinct difference in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we looked at other things in northern 

Saskatchewan. And closer to home, we're building a technical 
school in Prince Albert. The technical school will be able to 
handle over 600 students per year. And the school is targeted at 
producing education connected to the mining industry, to the 
forest industry, to everything that's good and productive in the 
northern part of Saskatchewan. 
 
I might add that another political party that leans to the left, and 
in fact has toppled over on occasion, promised that particular 
school for three elections. In three campaigns we heard the 
promise in the Prince Albert area. And it sort of made me think 
back when I heard about the last member speaking, making his 
promises about housing construction. It sort of rings a bell, that 
election time is here and so are the promises. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people in my constituency are more astute 
than that. They look at performance. My colleague from Prince 
Albert indicated today that we have a difference in reputation, 
the NDP and the governing party. 
 
The Conservatives are known for building and the NDP are 
known for spending and promising. They promise a lot. They 
don't build anything, but they spend. They nationalize industries 
without creating one new job. And that somehow creates 
employment. I don't see it. I'm not sure it makes any sense at 
all. 
 
Now I heard some interesting comments yesterday. One of the 
NDP members got up and said, capitalism doesn't work in 
northern Saskatchewan and will not work. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
the people of northern Saskatchewan believe in free enterprise. 
They believe that small businesses can work. They don't believe 
that profit is sinful. And it's working in northern Saskatchewan. 
Therefore we've embarked on new uranium ventures. A new 
mine will come on stream in the early 1990s, creating over 400 
direct jobs and hundreds of indirect jobs. 
 
Now some of the other comments that were made yesterday — 
I think I have to deal with them because again I feel I have a 
responsibility to the people in my constituency who I think 
were offended by some of the comments by the NDP yesterday. 
For example, one of the NDP members indicated that people in 
his constituency are committing crimes because they don't live 
in the same conditions that they would in a jail. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I have never ever heard such warped, twisted logic 
from any political party before. It shows you how far these 
people have gone in their endeavour to discredit anything good 
that happens in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have people in my constituency that don't live 
with the same amenities that people in the provincial 
correctional institute live under. I have people like that. But 
those people would never think of going out and committing a 
crime because they don't appreciate the way they live. And that 
comment is an insult to people in my constituency and other 
northern constituencies which the member was referring to. 
And I think he owes the Northerners a public apology for that 
particular statement. 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

183 
 

A final point on that particular issue. If the member feels that 
the standard of living is too good in the provincial institution in 
Prince Albert, he should have recalled that it was the NDP 
government that designed and built that particular institution. 
And there are many people that say that perhaps it's a little too 
cosy. But we didn't do it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the issue in northern Saskatchewan . . . There are a 
number of issues but clearly the NDP have been going around 
the north country these days. They didn’t go there much during 
the four years. They weren't very interested. Even the MLAs 
themselves didn't travel around much. But they, I guess after 
they heard the throne speech, they had to go into the 
communities and throw cold water on anything that sounded 
good and expressed optimism in northern Saskatchewan. So 
their solution is, well, let's bring back the DNS, that institution 
of perfection. They want to bring it back, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today I think I'm firm in saying — and I'm sure the Premier 
would say it if he was here as well — we will never bring back 
the DNS to northern Saskatchewan as long as we're in 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — So what else would be done? If you 
bring back the DNS then they would close the uranium mines. I 
talked about that. You have to close the gold mines because 
these royalty structures are too unfair because they are creating 
a private sector opportunity. These awful corporations and 
investors are able to make a profit which surely can't happen in 
northern Saskatchewan. So the NDP would want to shut them 
down. 
 
But the NDP are getting into some areas that are even more 
fundamental and a greater threat to the social security of 
Northerners. The latest promise they've made is that they will 
immediately ban leg-hold traps in northern Saskatchewan. Now 
it's my understanding that the two northern MLAs didn't say 
that, or skated around the issue when they were back home, but 
clearly that's a position taken. A traditional basic industry in 
northern Saskatchewan is being threatened by the NDP because 
they happen to be a little cosier with Greenpeace and with some 
of the left-wingers from eastern Canada. They are being 
dictated to so they decide to sing to the music. So you have to 
ban leg-hold traps. Forget about the industry, forget about the 
jobs that are created in northern Saskatchewan. That's their 
position. 
 
Well I mentioned earlier that the Premier wasn't here, and the 
reason for that is that the Premier had some work to do in 
Prince Albert today. Rather pleasant work, Mr. Speaker. And I 
was there, as well. And, in fact, many people were there to 
participate in a very exciting time for a fine city in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And the announcement was carried over the media today, and 
the announcement simply was that a paper mill will be built in 
Prince Albert, Saskatchewan. That particular paper mill will 
create over 200 direct new jobs in Prince Albert. The spin-off 
jobs, according to economists and experts, will be over 400. 
Those are 

indirect jobs in the service sector, in various service industries 
that provide services to the new paper plant. In fact, the paper 
plant will be the second largest in Canada and will produce 
approximately one-fifth of all the paper supply in the country. 
 
Much of the trade will be with the United States, another 
arch-enemy of the members opposite. However, this enemy of 
the NDP will probably be buying a great deal of the paper 
produced in my home town. And I'm proud of that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The throne speech talked about vision. And what we saw in 
Prince Albert was a city achieving vision, achieving a goal. 
 
It's no secret, Mr. Speaker, that we've worked on that project for 
over two years now. It's taken time, and it took hard work, not 
only on the part of the Premier and the Minister of Economic 
Development, but also the people involved in PAPCO — the 
management, the workers. It was a joint effort. 
 
I just wanted to go over some basic details on this fantastic 
announcement, because everyone is Prince Albert is very proud 
of this announcement. New opportunities are to be created in 
local businesses, new opportunities everywhere. The whole 
region will prosper and benefit. Northerners are going to play a 
major part in providing wood for the industry. Those 
arrangements are already under way. 
 
The technical school is geared up and almost ready to turn out 
employees who are going to be trained in forestry. Never before 
in the history of Saskatchewan have we had an institution 
particularly targeting at northern enterprises. And today we saw 
a northern enterprise come into reality, a dream of many people 
in the Prince Albert area. 
 
The NDP talked about real jobs earlier. Now, I don't know 
whether they think that paper mill jobs are for some reason not 
real jobs. We know that the only job creation the NDP would 
really do is in the government sector, and maybe they're saying 
those are the only real jobs that exist. Now I can understand 
that. That's consistent with their philosophy. But, Mr. Speaker, 
today when the Premier made that announcement in Prince 
Albert, and I looked around at small-business people, 
employees, truckers, everyone, it was clear that they believed 
that a paper mill job is a real job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — So I flew back to Regina, Mr. Speaker, 
and I thought, well, it was such a happy day for the people in 
Prince Albert. The NDP in Prince Albert didn't even speak up, 
and I'm not surprised that they didn't. I didn't expect them to 
congratulate us through the media. I went home for a few 
minutes and switched on the TV. What is the first thing that I 
saw? It was the NDP members screaming and ranting and 
raving about the biggest announcement that we’ve seen in 
Prince Albert. They were accusing the government, and in 
effect accusing the people of Prince Albert, of putting together 
one of the most innovative paper mill deals in the history 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

184 
 

of western Canada. And there they were, on the screen, 
criticizing, typically criticizing free enterprise. 
 
I couldn't believe what I was seeing so I thought, well I'm going 
to take some notes here and determine whether there is anything 
legitimate. From past experience I've learned that there isn't 
much legitimate about the NDP but I felt I owed it to my 
constituency to determine whether there was anything factual in 
what they were saying. 
 
Well one of the members said it's a gift to business. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I happened to review some of the older documents and 
I find that the purchase price is very similar to the price that the 
NDP paid when they nationalized the industry. And that was 
simply the pulp mill. 
 
So it's considered by them as a gift. Now I guess their little 
fiasco with the Cornwall Centre, alias white elephant, wasn't a 
gift to big business. I guess they see some distinction there. We 
should build more Cornwall Centres and fewer paper mills. 
 
(2000) 
 
Now I felt really concerned that my memory was failing me 
because I remembered; I remember what the former 
government did with PAPCO. There was a vibrant industry 
which was announced by the former Liberal government. Mr. 
Speaker, guess what political party opposed the building of the 
pulp mill in Prince Albert. The NDP. The NDP in opposition 
opposed the pulp mill. Mr. Speaker, within a handful of years 
guess which party's candidates were taking media pictures in 
front of the pulp mill for election purposes. The NDP. 
 
So I dragged out an old press release, Mr. Speaker, and I read it 
to be sure I was familiar with my facts. And I'll quote it to this 
Assembly because it is an important day for Prince Albert 
today, an important day for Saskatchewan. I quote: 
 

First of all some adjustments must be made before the 
price is fixed, but in any event it is not CIC's intention to 
operate the pulp mill over an extended period as a wholly 
owned company. We are looking for an operating partner. 
Disclosure of the price paid for the shares at this time 
could jeopardize any further negotiations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, guess who said that? The former NDP cabinet 
minister, Mr. Cowley, on December 17, 1980. Never disclosed 
the price. Issued a press release. At that time they simply 
wanted to nationalize it, but didn't really want to nationalize it 
— they just wanted to keep it for a while. 
 
Well, we know what they think about keeping things for a 
while. They kept the potash mines for a while. That's why the 
taxpayers are forking out millions of dollars per year to pay and 
subsidize the losing operations — because they kept them for a 
while. Now, Mr. Speaker, another NDP member said, well, the 
money is our concern. It's losing money only because of the 
Tories. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, no one in the industry would ever say 
anything of that nature, but just to show this Assembly how 
ridiculous the arguments of the NDP are, I want to further quote 
the same press release, from the same Mr. Cowley, saying as 
follows: 
 

Cowley noted that the company has long-term contracts for 
its output although the pulp market has shown signs of 
softening in recent months. 

 
Now it appears, Mr. Speaker, that either the NDP are 
misleading the public or Mr. Cowley and the industry could feel 
the effects of the Tories coming on stream. It appears that they 
again have misled the public. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there was one individual from Prince Albert 
who decided to comment negatively about the announcement 
even before he heard the announcement. He commented 
yesterday, and he was one of these union leaders. He's actually 
an NDP spokesman disguised as a union leader. But he sat there 
with his feet up on the chair, and he said, well, I hate to rain on 
your parade — hate to rain on your parade, because the 
company that's coming in happens to be high-tech and therefore 
we won't gain any jobs. We won't gain any jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don't think there's much choice but to really ask 
for the resignation of that particular union leader who happens 
to come from Prince Albert. And I don't think he's going to be 
on Main Street for too many days. He'll want to stay a little low 
for a while because he was ultimately wrong. 
 
When the announcement was made today, it was found that the 
Weyerhaeuser corporation is one of the best paper corporations 
in the world, with fantastically-run Canadian operations. 
 
In fact one of the executives that were in celebrating with us 
today happened to be from Saskatchewan originally, and he 
gave me a bit of a history of the Weyerhaeuser corporation. And 
I was very satisfied to hear about their progress and the way 
they had managed to integrate into communities and help 
communities become economically stronger. Mr. Speaker, that 
is why the people of Prince Albert are so excited today. 
 
And the president of Weyerhaeuser indicated today that, yes, 
they are high-tech, but even if they are high-tech they are hiring 
215 new employees in this particular high-tech industry. So 
unfortunately, the NDP spokesperson disguised as a union 
leader was caught, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there's a number of other issues I think I 
have to bring to the attention of the House. I wondered where 
the NDP received the basis of their latest promise. The promise 
hasn't filtered up to Prince Albert yet, because after hearing the 
tech school promised for three elections, promises aren't taken 
that seriously from the NDP side in my constituency. But I 
wondered where they got this housing idea from, because I 
didn't think there would be anyone innovative enough to think 
about it. And clearly they took one of our programs and decided 
to make it a little better, and twisted it around a bit, and now 
they figure, we're going to gain some points by at least throwing 
out the promise. At least throw out the promise. 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

185 
 

See what happens. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, coincidentally, as I'm riding back on the 
plane today after announcing the paper mill for Prince Albert, I 
picked up a Prince Albert Daily Herald. And guess who's 
buying advertising in the Prince Albert Daily Herald. The 
embassy of the U.S.S.R. And I have never seen this before. This 
said, "The Soviet Union for a better and peaceful future." 
Someone said, only in Prince Albert. Well I don't think only in 
Prince Albert. I guess this is going to start to appear in other 
magazines, other publications, and I'm not saying that the NDP 
have anything to do with this particular timing, but I want to 
quote a little section from what the Russians are saying about 
their wonderful economy. And they're trying to communicate 
with us for some reason. One little paragraph said: 
 

The plan is to provide every family with a modern, 
self-contained apartment or house by the year 2000, a 
standard currently enjoyed by 80 per cent of the urban and 
over 90 per cent of the rural population. Much more 
housing will be both built and modernized than ever 
before. The government will also provide more assistance 
to those building co-operative housing and individual 
homes. 

 
So clearly, I guess what's happening is, even your left-wing 
politicians are starting to understand that the people on occasion 
require assistance in housing. In 1982, the NDP didn't 
understand this. Now they understand, Mr. Speaker; now they 
understand. When interest rates were 20 per cent, well, it wasn't 
feasible. We're too busy nationalizing potash mines; we're too 
busy doing everything else. And even the people at Socialist 
International didn't advise the Leader of the Opposition to try a 
new scheme to support people who want to own their own 
houses. So clearly I am not surprised with the NDP 
announcement. If the Soviet Union is seeing it, I'm not 
surprised that the members opposite are seeing it. Everyone is 
understanding that we must protect home owners and must 
provide a safety net. 
 
But I want to tell the members opposite that even the Soviet 
Union is a step ahead of them. And I'll quote another part: 
 

Over the next five years, wage and salary increases 
provided factory and office workers in productive sectors 
will for the first time be essentially derived from and 
limited by the revenues earned by the enterprises 
themselves. 

 
Now get this one, Mr. Speaker. 
 

This will motivate employees to work as efficiently as 
possible and to produce goods of the highest quality. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, for a few moments I'd like to discuss things 
that are relevant particularly to my constituency of Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake, We have a bit of a historic area 

there. Obviously the area has produced prime ministers, and I 
believe I'm the third Minister of Justice from my constituency. 
We've had a leader of the Liberal Party. Senator David Steuart 
was the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake — a fine man 
who is still doing a fine job. 
 
And people in my constituency still have a high degree of 
respect for our democratic system and our political system in 
general. And people in my constituency are very astute 
politically. And they as well look beyond promises, and they 
look at who delivers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In my constituency we've done our research. Today more 
people are working than in 1982. There's no comparison, Mr. 
Speaker. The optimism is higher today than ever before because 
of the excitement in the Prince Albert area. And obviously the 
excitement was heightened today with another promise that we 
made to bring new economic development to Prince Albert and 
area. And the paper mill is another sign of us as government 
keeping our promise to the people in Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
Well who can deliver, Mr. Speaker? That is really going to be 
the question that my constituents ask whenever an election rolls 
around. It's a question they always ask because they are astute 
people. They watch the political scene and they're concerned 
about the constituency and the area, their children, their 
families. 
 
Well, the people in Prince Albert-Duck Lake are very pleased 
that the technical school in Prince Albert, the Northern Institute 
of Technology, is nearing completion. And in fact many young 
people and adults from my constituency are starting to enroll in 
the school. Fantastic opportunities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In relation to seniors, when I because a member I did some 
research and discovered that there was a high ratio of seniors in 
my constituency. Across Saskatchewan we have a growing 
percentage of seniors, growing by over 2 per cent per year. In 
fact by the year 2000, 25 per cent of us will be senior. And 
clearly in Prince Albert-Duck Lake we have a high number of 
seniors. 
 
So we identified the needs now. The public, obviously the 
voters in my constituency never believed the NDP when the 
NDP said that we would take medicare away. And that scare 
tactic unfortunately was tried on the seniors in my constituency. 
And it didn't work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we therefore brought to my constituency a seniors' home, 
over 100 units, Mr. Speaker, the Northcote Manor. It's now 
opened and people in my constituency occupy that particular 
building because they deserve to occupy that type of a building. 
They've earned it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The comment made by the NDP member yesterday hits home 
there as well, because many of the seniors that live in the 
Northcote Manor went through the times when their standard of 
living was nowhere near what the inmates enjoy in the Prince 
Albert correctional institute. But they didn't go to jail. They 
didn't go out committing crimes like the NDP said they would, 
because the people that built this province don't operate that 
way and never will, Mr. Speaker. 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

186 
 

From there we looked at the other parts of my constituency. For 
years small towns in Saskatchewan were virtually ignored by 
the NDP and the throne speech identifies that, identifies natural 
gas for farmers. I've got farm families in my constituency that 
are saving virtually hundreds of dollars a year because they're 
able to use natural gas to run their farms. That was done. We 
delivered, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have two small towns, one town and one hamlet, in my 
constituency which I'm very proud of. One town is a very 
historic town, one of the oldest towns in Saskatchewan, Duck 
Lake. For years and years and years the NDP would promise: 
well, you elect us because we've got to keep fighting those 
multinationals, and free enterprise doesn't work. The Tories, if 
you elect them, they're going to take medicare away. Well my 
constituents in Duck Lake said no in 1983. They said, we don't 
believe you, to the NDP. And they elected me. 
 
(2015) 
 
It wasn't very long, Mr. Speaker, that Duck Lake received a 
nursing home, a 30-bed nursing home. It's presently under 
construction, which is very interesting because I remember 
when I announced it, the next day the NDP said: no, he's lying; 
he'll never build it. The province of Saskatchewan will not build 
that nursing home. They're trying to trick you. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I was in Duck Lake last week and I could 
have sworn that I saw a nursing home going up as I drove down 
one street. I think I was right. I think it is being constructed. 
Again the NDP are caught by what they've said. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the NDP are chuckling from their seats and 
they don't think it's very important to Duck Lake to have a 
nursing home. In fact, I understand they had their gruesome 
group of has-beens and hopefuls drop into the town of Duck 
Lake last week. Of course they just came from Prince Albert 
where they promised everything that was asked for —
everything. They rode into Duck Lake and they walked into the 
town hall. I guess they heard they were needed back in Regina 
because they left fairly quickly, and it could have been because 
no one showed up, because that's what happened, Mr. Speaker. 
The people in Small Town, Saskatchewan have had it with the 
NDP because they simply don't deliver. 
 
Well a little closer to Prince Albert I've got a little place called 
Macdowall, a little hamlet. I'm mentioning these things because 
Macdowall isn't very much different than a lot of small towns 
and hamlets across Saskatchewan. Well Macdowall was 
desperately trying to get itself together to . . . It's roughly 14 
miles from Prince Albert, and as small hamlets are in a lot of 
cases, they have fierce competition from a larger centre. But the 
Macdowall people enjoy living in Macdowall, and the people 
around Macdowall enjoy sending their children to school in 
Macdowall. And under the NDP government there was a 
concern that the school would close down in Macdowall. 
 
Well of course the NDP in two or three elections, I believe, 
said, well we have to bring you a school. The 

Tories would never do it. The Tories will be busy killing 
medicare, so that they can't build you a school. Mr. Speaker, 
guess who delivered the school — the Progressive Conservative 
government. 
 
And in addition to that — in addition to that — the enriched 
housing units across Saskatchewan is a Tory innovation. I guess 
when we were busy destroying medicare we had a little bit of 
time to design enriched housing. So, many communities, 
including neighbouring communities of Shellbrook in the 
Shellbrook-Torch River constituency, have received enriched 
housing units. 
 
And Macdowall has received a small enriched housing unit, a 
self-contained unit, which certainly boosts the local 
infrastructure, provides life, allows elderly to stay with their 
families. They don't necessarily want to move into the city, and 
that should be their choice, Mr. Speaker. And we've done that 
across Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I finally want to say that although we get a 
little disappointed in what the NDP say, and very frustrated . . . 
In fact, earlier tonight, when I heard the NDP say that we had 
10 per cent unemployment, it gets under a person's skin after a 
while, even though us politicians are said to have thick skins, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But when I think of it another way, I guess there isn't much 
damage being done, because when you think of it, we have a 
very progressive community in Saskatchewan. We have 
progressive people. We have people who are awake, who know 
what political parties say and what they do. We have a public 
that's very aware. We have an educated public, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Therefore I will support the throne speech. And people in my 
city of Prince Albert, as I was leaving today, asked me to pass 
on a message to the government side — to keep up the good 
work. And we will, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 6 
 
Thompson Lusney 
Engel Shillington 
Koskie Yew 
 

Nays — 29 
 
Devine Morin 
Tusa Muirhead 
Berntson McLaren 
Schoenhals Bacon 
Duncan Johnson 
Katzman Parker 
Schmidt Young 
Smith (Swift Current) Hopfner 
Myers Caswell 
Hepworth Glauser 
 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

187 
 

Dutchak Sauder 
Dirks Gerich 
Martens Petersen 
Smith (Moose Jaw South) Swenson 
Hodgins  
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that it 
is indeed a pleasure for me to be able to take part in this debate. 
For now I believe that we Progressive Conservatives can look 
back on the past four years: four years filled with achievement; 
on four years of promises kept; on four years in which we have 
indeed opened this province for business, and in reality, Mr. 
Speaker, have turned this province around and set it on a new 
course, Mr. Speaker, a new course which will benefit each and 
every person in our province. I believe that the people of 
Saskatchewan can see the benefit of our policies and will send 
us back in full force. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that the people of the province will, 
some time within the next 12 months, be called upon to make a 
very, very crucial decision. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the 
people of this province have seen the fruits of the last four years 
and I believe they have no doubts in their own minds of which 
way they are going to go. 
 
What we have seen in the last four years with the members of 
the opposition is flip-flopping, flip-flopping, flip-flopping. 
 
I look at my own constituency, Mr. Speaker, the constituency of 
Maple Creek, which is a pleasure and honour to represent; a 
constituency filled with vibrant people, people who look 
towards the future with a great positiveness; people who are not 
afraid of the ups and downs that we have found ourselves in and 
will continue at times, to find ourselves in. 
 
I look at the gas activity, Mr. Speaker, that has sprung up in my 
constituency in the last four years because of policies brought in 
by this Progressive Conservative government. Things are 
happening in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, that 10, 5, 15 years 
ago, people didn't think would be possible because of the 
regressive, oppressive policies of the former administration. 
 
I find it highly amusing, Mr. Speaker, after having the pleasure 
of sitting as an opposition member for four years and listening 
to the anti-business, anti-success, anti-profit rhetoric from those 
members when they were in government. And those members 
sitting opposite, Mr. Speaker, have seen the positive results of 
some very innovative policies that have been brought in by this 
government. 
 
(2030) 
 
And one I find very interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that I would 
really like to hear from the real Leader of the Opposition. It's 
interesting that with all their vitriolic rhetoric in the House, their 
anti-oil company, their anti-business rhetoric, they go on day in 
and day out. January 2, 1986, recorded in the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix, the headline: 

NDP would tax breaks to oil industry. The NDP believes it 
can get close to $300 million more in taxes from the oil 
industry, and will try to do so if re-elected. 

 
The article goes on, Mr. Speaker, to say: 
 

They said $300 million in tax breaks to the industry could 
be cancelled. Activity in the oil patch could be maintained 
close to its current level and the money redirected. 

 
That's their philosophy, Mr. Speaker, or at least that was their 
philosophy on January 2, 1986, as reported in the Star-Phoenix 
from Saskatoon. 
 
Less than a month later, January 28, 1986, in the Pipeline, what 
does the Leader of the Opposition say? "The opposition leader 
went on to say that the NDP incentive program implemented 
during the 1970's did have holes." 
 
Well it did, Mr. Speaker, because they paid for dry holes. They 
paid for non-producing holes. 
 
But what else did Mr. Blakeney, the Leader of the Opposition, 
say? After saying that they would cancel the tax incentives, the 
tax breaks to the oil industry, he's quoted in the Pipeline, a very 
prestigious magazine that's read by all the energy people across 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Blakeney . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. I would ask the member not to refer to 
other members by their names, but rather by their positions or 
their constituency. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — The Leader of the Opposition, Mr. 
Allan Blakeney, said: 
 

We have no objections to tax holiday incentives for 
exploration. We believe in generous tax incentives to the 
oil industry. 

 
Well I say, Mr. Speaker, it's a flip-flop. You cannot believe 
what the members opposite say. And the people that work in the 
oil patch, the people that work in the energy field, the young 
workers, the old workers, they know that the NDP speak from 
both sides of their mouth, fork tongues, and they will continue 
to do so, because they don't care about the people. They don't 
care; they never have. Their policies show that, and I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that it's evident that the people of this province will 
respond, come out in great numbers and support the 
Conservatives. 
 
I believe that in the Speech from the Throne which was aptly 
delivered last week, we have proof positive, Mr. Speaker, that 
this government is just beginning to hits its stride. We have a 
long forward-looking plan for Saskatchewan. We are fortunate 
to have a leader that has a vision, a vision of where this 
province is going, and a vision of how to get there, and the 
fortitude to implement the programs necessary to go that way. 
 
I believe that in the past four years, we as a Conservative 
government have brought in more solid legislation than 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

188 
 

any other government in the province's history. But, Mr. 
Speaker, that is just a start, because the full benefits of what has 
happened will become apparent for years and years to come. 
 
But I can say, Mr. Speaker, that despite our accomplishments in 
the four short years that we have had the privilege of leading 
this province as its government, I can assure the people of 
Saskatchewan that this government is going to be just as 
energetic and just as forceful in seizing the opportunities ahead 
as we have been in our first term. 
 
And I can say with great pride, Mr. Speaker, and I'm sure I 
speak on behalf of all government members, that we look 
forward to serving the people of Saskatchewan in the next four 
years with the same diligence as we have in the last. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, we should consider a few highlights of 
this government's achievements. Perhaps our greatest 
accomplishment has been our success in reducing taxes 
dramatically while still providing so many services to the 
people of our province. 
 
The tax cutting started hours after the election in 1982, hours 
after the transition of power, when we killed the gas tax. The 
gas tax we felt was an extremely unfair tax, a tax that was 
perpetuated on the people of Saskatchewan by the NDP. 
 
That one single move, Mr. Speaker, is saving Saskatchewan 
drivers 7 to $8 every time they fill up their tanks. And since 
1982, according to Statistics Canada, Saskatchewan has had the 
lowest energy prices in the whole country. And I think that's a 
great accomplishment; it's something we had campaigned on in 
1982. And it was one of the first campaign promises that we 
delivered on. 
 
But then after removing the gas tax we immediately moved to 
eliminate the taxes on children's clothing, and taxes on 
electricity for farms and homes. That itself was a great overall 
annual saving to the people of our province. 
 
We also created the Public Utilities Review Commission which 
has also slowed the rate of increase for car insurance costs, 
home heating costs, and electricity costs. We, as I said before, 
also eliminated the sales tax on electricity in homes. 
 
I think perhaps one of our important achievements, or 
accomplishments, Mr. Speaker, was the introduction of the 
mortgage interest reduction plan, a plan which helped 52,000 
home owners across the province. Home owners who were 
threatened with foreclosures, home owners who were threatened 
with not being able to have money for their basic necessities, 
because of what was being gobbled up in high mortgage interest 
rates that they had to pay. That was also a plan, or a promise 
that we had campaigned on, and it was delivered in the first 
year. The NDP of the day said it couldn't be done. We said it 
could, and we did it. We also, as a government, reduced the 
personal income tax rate. They also said it couldn't be done; we 
said it could. 
 
I think one of our prouder achievements is the 

billion-dollar commitment to health care to rectify the years of 
neglect by the Blakeney government. And, Mr. Speaker, I must 
say I find it rather uneasy — I get an uneasy feeling when I hear 
the members opposite scream and holler, day in and day out, 
about the lack of nursing home beds in the province, and the 
lack of nurses to man our hospitals. 
 
I think if you look at the record, the record speaks for itself. The 
former administration did not have the foresight — either 
unwittingly or knowingly, refused to recognize that 
Saskatchewan has one of the fastest growing rates of seniors in 
the whole of the country. They chose to ignore that fact 
deliberately I believe, when they established the moratorium on 
the construction of new nursing home beds in the province. And 
that neglect, that unwise decision by the former administration, 
is coming to light. 
 
Right now, we do not have enough nursing home beds to 
accommodate the number of people wishing to go into these 
wonderful homes, but with the announcements by the Minister 
of Health, we are well on our way of providing the necessary 
beds and the necessary capital construction to correct a very 
serious error by the former government. 
 
I believe that that is one of our commitments to one of the 
corner-stones that we feel are very, very important. We have put 
the elderly first, of course, with the programs such as the $11 
million injected into the special care home construction area. 
 
In our first two years of government, Mr. Speaker, in the first 
two years we spent $11 million on nursing homes compared to, 
I believe it was $7 million spent by the NDP over a course of 11 
years. We financed 164 new beds and 164 replacement beds in 
1984-85, and we are committed to building another 300 beds in 
1985-86. And on top of that, Mr. Speaker, we are putting over a 
million dollars into special care homes for home care services 
such as respite care, day programs for seniors, and enhanced 
home care for people with intense service needs. 
 
I believe that we have made a very major, major commitment, 
Mr. Speaker, to cancer research and treatment facilities, 
equipment, and the staffing of these facilities. The new Mental 
Health Act ensures the human rights of patients, and expands 
mental health services for children and the youth, and provides 
more training opportunities and more training positions for 
psychiatrists. And new funding also was increased for crisis 
hostels in Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that our commitment as a Tory 
government, our commitment as Progressive Conservatives to 
look after the needs of others, that need is well documented and 
very plain for everyone to see. 
 
Our investment in rural and regional care centres total over $50 
million, Mr. Speaker, whereas the NDP spent less than $20 
million in 11 years in this area. Ambulance funding was 
increased by 19.4 per cent. We have co-operated with the 
Kinsmen. Kinsmen, as you know, are people who volunteer 
their time and their efforts and do a great service, not only here 
in Saskatchewan, but 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

189 
 

across the country. Here in Saskatchewan, as I said, we 
co-operated with the Saskatchewan Kinsmen Foundation to 
establish a children's rehab centre in Saskatoon. And with the 
Lions Clubs we co-operated to establish the first eye bank in 
western Canada. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that those are two fine examples of how 
people who volunteer, people who give of themselves to others 
— how people that volunteer to those organizations can work 
hand in hand with government and together accomplish 
something that benefits all the residents of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that we as a government 
recognize the contributions made by these organizations such as 
the Elks and the Lions and the Kinsmen, and the thousands and 
thousands of other groups out there that work for others. 
 
Patient care. Patient care is what matters. That's an area that 
matters very much to this government. And Mr. Taylor, the 
Health minister, announced late in February a $100 million 
program to fund 500 new nursing positions. This will help 
reduce the waiting time for surgery. Some of the money will be 
earmarked to buy new equipment and diagnostic services, and 
to increase, as I say, the patient care staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every day in question period in this session so far 
it seems that there is a question from either the member from 
Shaunavon or the member from Regina North East on the 
number of nursing positions or the inadequate number of 
nursing positions. 
 
And when they go out around the province, Mr. Speaker, 
speaking to groups of nurses and groups of people who are 
keenly interested in this area, the NDP are never quite honest, 
Mr. Speaker. They will never admit that in 1976 they cut 420 
positions in the budget that year. And the cut came effective 
July 1, 1976. 
 
An Hon. Member: They've been known to lie. They've been 
know to lie. 
 
Hon. Mr.s. Duncan: — Well, they've been known to be less 
than honest. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I can say with great pride that since the 
member from Indian Head has been named Minister of Health, 
the number of nursing positions has increased year by year. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, in 1983-84 the Department of Health, under 
the able leadership of the Minister of Health, added 80 new 
nursing positions, and another 500 are promised over the course 
of the next few years. I believe 200 are to be integrated into the 
system this year. 
 
But even with the doom and gloom that the NDP espouse every 
day, we should have a good look and an honest look at exactly 
what is happening in Saskatchewan in the area of hospital beds. 
 
(2045) 
 
Saskatchewan is 36 per cent above the Canadian average in 
general hospital beds per capita — 36 per cent above 

the average Canadian number of beds. Saskatchewan is also 21 
per cent above Canadian coverage in general nursing staff per 
capita. I think that that speaks for itself, Mr. Speaker, and as I 
said we have looked at 11 years of neglect, prioritzed our 
priorities in the order that things had to be done. 
 
When you look at our commitment to health, our commitment 
to education, our commitment to agriculture and our 
commitment to job creation, those are the four corner-stones of 
our province. Those are the areas that people are interested in. 
People expect good services in those four areas. And I can tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, that this government is a government that 
delivers. 
 
I find it disconcerting that when we maintain the level of 
educational funding in the province and in fact increase it while 
other provinces are decreasing the commitment to funding 
education, that we were able to come up with the $150 million 
educational development fund. That fund, Mr. Speaker, has 
been called by respected and well-known educators in our 
province as one of the great moves in this province's 
educational history. And we believe rightly so; it should be 
considered one of the greatest moves. It gives school boards and 
universities time to plan forward, forward for five years to make 
their long-range plans. We believe that our youth is one of our 
major resources and because of that education must have a very 
high priority. 
 
The money out of that fund is being directed to such things as 
acquiring computers for schools, improving libraries across the 
province, programs to prevent drop-outs and to improve 
attendance. It is strengthening the programs for gifted learners 
and we're putting money into career counselling and into 
teaching skills that are needed in today's workplace. 
 
We must not forget that we are discussing not only a 
government that has a genuine concern for people — one that 
cares — but we are talking about a government that has a vastly 
different way of doing things than did the NDP. We are a 
government that consults, listens to the people. We consult with 
groups that are affected by different types of legislation. When 
we look at changes that are needed in education we consult with 
those that have hands-on daily experience in the job. 
 
I think that we can just look at a simple thing like the wonderful 
heritage celebrations that went on last year. We asked the 
people of the province, the people of the municipalities, the 
towns and the villages, to come up with some ideas for heritage 
year. And they did absolutely admirably, with not a lot of 
money injected. When the NDP had Celebrate Saskatchewan, 
hundreds of . . . well, not hundreds, I'm sorry, that's an 
exaggeration, Mr. Speaker, but millions of dollars went in to 
administration. The way we did things — we encouraged towns 
and villages to set up show-cases to display their local crafts, to 
honour their pioneers, and literally every town and village 
across Saskatchewan participated in the celebrations last year, 
and I believe about a million people came home for a lot of 
these celebrations. That's just an example of what people can do 
if they're given a little bit of seed money, a little bit of 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

190 
 

encouragement. They can just do marvellous things. And I think 
that speaks well of the people of Saskatchewan because people 
of Saskatchewan have a pride, a very inborn pride of going out 
and tackling a situation or a problem or a challenge and the 
pride comes in accomplishing what they set out to do. That's a 
throw-back to our pioneer days, I believe, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I can say that in the last four years they have not been the most 
buoyant of times that we have seen in Saskatchewan. We've had 
difficult times with grasshoppers, low commodity prices, 
increasing input costs for farmers, all those type of things. But 
perhaps we have to be optimistic. We have to look to the future. 
These things run in cycles, and perhaps the commodity prices 
have hit the bottom of the cycle and they're on the way up. But I 
think the past four years and the type of weather and all those 
things that sometimes we don't like to talk about have occurred. 
We must put it into perspective. 
 
As I've said, all we have to do is look at what the energy 
industry has done for us in this province since it came to power. 
Every Saskatchewan citizen knows how the energy policies 
have paid off, Mr. Speaker. And it's no wonder then that 
Saskatchewan's oil program has become a case study at the 
nationally acclaimed school of management in Banff, Alberta. 
A Banff school official says that our consultation with the 
industry is an example of how to do business in the '80s and is a 
good example of how to work together so that everyone comes 
out ahead, Mr. Speaker. "Everyone" means the government, the 
people of the province, the taxpayer of the province, and of 
course that particular industry. 
 
I referred earlier to the exciting developments that are going on 
in the gas fields of my riding of Maple Creek. I know that these 
developments, as other markets are found for the gas, will 
continue and that prospects for export sales early this spring 
will encourage further exploration. And I might say that a lot of 
the people that work for the companies in my area are young 
farmers, young farmers who are trying to get a little bit of 
off-farm income; farmers who understand the importance of 
having a vibrant industry. 
 
I talked to farmers who are very pleased with the surface rights 
lease payments that they get and only wish that there would be 
more activity going on, on their particular farm. 
 
But maybe, Mr. Speaker, when we look at some of the 
challenges that we have faced over the course of the last four 
years, I would have to say that probably one of the most 
difficult challenges faced by this government was the drought 
of the last two or three years and the devastation that it brought. 
I think that no one could argue that the drought has been very, 
very serious — perhaps more serious than we can describe. 
 
But what happened with the programs that we brought in, either 
by ourselves or in conjunction with the federal government? I 
would have to say that last year probably saw the largest 
drought assistance package ever undertaken by any government 
in this country — not only our government; any government — 
and by mid-November the various programs that were available 

to producers had put something like $312 million of cash into 
our farmers' pockets. 
 
But we as a government didn't just decide, well this is what 
we're going to do and go ahead and do it. We met with the 
various farm groups, the stock growers, SARM — well, a 
whole bunch of them. We worked on this package together 
because we didn't want to bring out something that was not 
acceptable to that group, the group that was most highly 
affected by it. As the people know, we did bring in sort of a 
two-part program to assist Saskatchewan farmers affected by 
low commodity prices and poor production. We brought out the 
6 per cent cash for operating loans for farmers and, of course, 
the oil royalty gas rebate program; whereas farmers and the 
people of Saskatchewan can see the direct benefits of having a 
vibrant industry in this province. 
 
I would say that these programs provided the largest single cash 
injection into the agricultural community ever undertaken by a 
Saskatchewan government and that money, Mr. Speaker, finds 
its way back into the towns and the villages and the cities of the 
province. That money was used to pay off fuel bills, grocery 
bills, and buy Christmas presents and whatever. So it's a matter 
of giving these people some hope, some direction, some 
optimism for the future. 
 
When I go around my riding in the past few weeks, the 
producers are very optimistic. We've had a fair amount of rain 
last fall and a fairly good snow coverage this past winter and 
people are looking forward to be able to plant their crops once 
again and have their cows and heifers calve out this spring. 
People are in quite a good mood. I think that's largely because 
we sat down together and worked out a program that was good 
for everyone. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that there isn't a person in 
Saskatchewan, whether it's a school child or an adult, that 
would not argue that agriculture is our most important 
economic base in the province and we must look for other ways 
to enhance it. We have nearly 40 per cent of Canada's farm land 
and yet too much of what we produce is imply exported as raw 
grain. Everyone recognizes the need to process more food at 
home, to convert that grain and roughage into meat right here. 
And it's the livestock industry, Mr. Speaker, that can give us the 
value-added things that we're looking for and help create jobs. 
 
When I look at Gainers meat-packers and Intercontinental 
Packers, these two firms have the foresight and expertise to help 
in this area. They have the expertise to market in California, 
which is a huge potential market for us. And I was please to see 
that both firms have committed themselves to building that type 
of processing capacity here. 
 
I call this the latest move in a strategy to turn this province's 
livestock industry around. And when you look at what's going 
to happen when these two giants complete their expansion here, 
the Gainers project will mean roughly $200 million per year 
going into our agricultural economy through increased hog 
sales alone. It will mean 600 new jobs in the plants, and another 
600 to 800 in hog production, feed supply, transportation, 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

191 
 

and other related services. It will mean $150 million worth of 
new investment in hog production facilities, and about $250 
million in new exports, and millions of dollars in new tax 
revenues — tax revenues that will be used in the four areas that 
we feel are the corner-stones of our province. 
 
I can remember how the opposition scoffed at this development, 
and even today, and over the course of the last week, in their 
responses to the throne speech, have still scoffed at this 
development. But I think they should be well off to read the 
press release of the Deputy Premier who, I believe, described 
the situation very well. He said that: 
 

This is important because for the first time in 40 years it 
means a government in Saskatchewan has said, we're tired 
of sitting by and watching other provinces diversity their 
agriculture production while we continue to produce export 
grains for world markets, which are increasingly 
uncompetitive because of foreign subsidies. 

 
He went on to say that: 
 

We are tired of sitting by, as previous governments have 
done, and watching other provinces use incentives to 
attract agriculture processing away from Saskatchewan. 

 
It was a move to tell the world that we in Saskatchewan are 
going to build on our major strength — agriculture. And Mr. 
Speaker, I am sure the farmers and the producers of 
Saskatchewan will remember some of the comments of the 
members opposite in their speeches of late and things that had 
been said during the announcement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that it has been an honour for 
me to serve as a cabinet minister, and it's been an honour to 
participate in this government's efforts to turn this province 
around. And I would like to spend a few minutes on just a few 
of the things that we have done in my department, the 
Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs. 
 
Last year we introduced a new classification system for films 
and videos shown in the province, a classification system that 
will provide parents with information that they need to make 
informed decisions on what they and their children will view. I 
believe that this is a small step, but at least it is a step, towards 
combating the problem of pornography and violence in our 
society. 
 
My department is now providing senior groups with timely 
information packages dealing with such subjects as travel and 
prescription drugs and hearing aids, and how to avoid 
market-place scams. 
 
We have greatly improved the efficiency and the costs of the 
Corporations Branch, which registers the firms doing business 
in the province. We are, at present, trying to reduce the amount 
of legislation, legislation that we inherited from the former 
administration. We are attempting to streamline our entire 
operations, and this has a two-fold objective. 

One is, of course, to reduce our costs and ultimately the cost to 
the taxpayer, and also an important objective is, of course, to 
provide better service and quicker service to the public. 
 
One of the major changes we made was the changing of the 
auditing requirements under the Non-profit Corporations Act, 
and this saves small corporations substantially in auditing fees 
and other related costs. 
 
We have developed, in conjunction with the Chamber of 
Commerce in Swift Current, a self-help package outlining the 
consumers' and the businesses' rights and responsibility in the 
market-place. And that particular package has been a great 
success and is often used as a teaching tool in many seminars 
held in community colleagues and whatever, throughout the 
province. 
 
(2100) 
 
I believe very strongly, Mr. Speaker, that more than anything 
else politics is actually about leadership. And if there is one 
person in this province with a sense of the times for 
Saskatchewan, it is, of course Premier Grant Devine. He is the 
person who is listening to the people. He is showing the people 
that he can respond. But I think his leadership goes beyond that 
particular sector. 
 
The market for our products is, of course, the world. And 
Saskatchewan's challenge is and will be in marketing, and the 
Premier, above anyone else, knows and understands marketing. 
 
As I said before, our province has 40 per cent of Canada's entire 
farm land base, and our farmers are well educated. They have 
the best machinery and the best equipment, and they have the 
best access to the newest in farm technologies, technologies in 
the areas of chemicals, of management and bookkeeping 
techniques. Irrigation programs are coming on-stream. Not one 
Saskatchewan farmer couldn't produce more if the markets were 
there for his products or his production. 
 
But this province must have access to markets, and it's a 
continuing concern to us. Premier Devine understands the 
importance of marketing like few politicians, past or present. 
He was raised, of course, we know on a Saskatchewan farm and 
worked as an economist for government and the universities. 
He has a degree in business administration, and that degree 
includes a lot of hard work in marketing. 
 
I believe that that marketing expertise will be vital to us in the 
years ahead. We are a resource province, Mr. Speaker. We 
market our products all over the world, and if we don't find the 
markets, there is no use in us producing or enhancing our 
production. 
 
Premier Devine is already acting, and we saw that in the very 
forceful way in which he brought agriculture to the very centre 
of national policy, making in — that has never been seen in this 
province. He convinced the Prime Minister of Canada to place 
agriculture on the agenda at the recent first ministers' 
conference in Halifax. And that, Mr. Speaker, has set the 
wheels in motion for development of a new food strategy, not 
only for 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

192 
 

Saskatchewan, but a new food strategy for Canada. But more 
importantly, he has assured that Saskatchewan will play a key 
role in developing this strategy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would, in closing, say that I believe that our 
government has brought in innovative programs, programs 
which have garnered the support of the majority of people of 
Saskatchewan. We understand, as a government, that we will 
never get the support of 100 per cent of the people, but we will 
continue to be satisfied with the support of 80 per cent of the 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to support the main motion. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, will be 
supporting the motion on the floor, and I'd like to take this 
opportunity, before I begin my remarks, to thank the member 
for Maple Creek for her very enlightening remarks that we've 
just had the pleasure of listening to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think that what we had last week, Mr. Speaker, was something 
that a lot of us here in this House have known for a long time. 
We had the NDP come out with their election platform, and it 
confirmed to a lot of us here that, as we expected, the NDP is 
totally void of any new ideas. They're void of leadership. I think 
that's probably, Mr. Speaker, the reason that they're void of 
ideas is because until you have a leader, it's pretty hard-pressed 
for any party come up with some decent direction for this 
province. Certainly as Conservatives we have the leader in this 
province; the NDP are void of a leader. Certainly I imagine that 
shortly after the next election they will group together and 
attempt to come up with some sort of leadership for their party. 
But until that time, Mr. Speaker, I think that there's only one 
real choice for the people of this province, and that's the Grant 
Devine and Progressive Conservative leadership that we've had 
for the last four years. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member knows that he 
should not be using the names of individuals, but rather their 
positions, and I would ask him to do that for the rest of his 
speech. 
 
Mr. Young: — I will refer to the Devine government or 
something along those lines if that's permissible. Thank you. 
 
I would also like to point, Mr. Speaker, the address that we have 
had as a government to the seniors of this province. Certainly, if 
you recall that for the last seven years of NDP government there 
was only one $5 raise for senior citizens on their cost of living 
increase, and certainly, Mr. Speaker, the record of our 
government over the last four years is certainly many-fold of 
that of the NDP. 
 
We took it upon ourselves, Mr. Speaker, in recognizing the 
situation of seniors in this province, to raise the income plan as 
far as singles went, Mr. Speaker, from 25 to $50 per month, and 
as far as couples, senior couples 

went, Mr. Speaker, from $45 to $75 per month. And I would 
like all members in this House just to reflect on that for a 
moment and compare that to what the NDP did over their much 
longer term in office. Five dollars. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, that's 
far from all we have done as a government to assist the people 
who built this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have introduced here in the last year our 
seniors' heritage program, Mr. Speaker, that will assist 
approximately 75,000 seniors across this province who have 
incomes less than $30,000, and certainly, Mr. Speaker, couples 
will receive up to $700 and single seniors, between 25 and 
$30,000 a year annual incomes, will receive $500 per month. 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, this is a far cry from what the NDP 
provided along those lines to seniors when they were in 
government for so long. 
 
But certainly, Mr. Speaker, the NDP are quick to jump to the 
defence of seniors and profess that they are behind the farmers, 
and even yesterday in the House, the Leader of the Opposition, 
I couldn't believe it, but he got up and pretended that he was in 
support of small business. This is a guy, Mr. Speaker, who has 
fought business and small business through his entire political 
career. He gets up in this House after he's defeated in 1982 and 
has the gall to suggest that he is the great champion of small 
business. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I've been here four years; I'm not going to 
be here much longer, but certainly that man showed more gall 
than I've ever seen before in this House when he got up and 
suggested that he was the champion of small business. 
Certainly, I don't think the people of Saskatchewan are going to 
be fooled. They know how he cross-checked them and 
intersected them in every opportunity in his 11 years of office, 
and for the people to believe that he will now make a 
one-eighty and come to the defence of small business is just too 
hard to believe, Mr. Speaker. And I suggest to you that it will 
not come to pass that, if he were elected to office, he would 
continue on with the same dogmatic socialistic policies that run 
interference at every intersection with small business. And 
certainly we can see, Mr. Speaker, what it has done in the ways 
of job creation in this province, what small business has really 
been — the engine of our economy, Mr. Speaker. And certainly 
another four years of Conservative administration will continue 
to nurture the engine of our economy. 
 
In closing on the senior citizens, I want to also point out the 
benefits that our seniors' home repair program has had. 
Certainly it is one, Mr. Speaker, that applied to just about all 
seniors. If they were in a very healthy income group, they 
certainly didn't receive the advantage of it, but for most people, 
Mr. Speaker, most seniors in the province, this program came to 
their benefit and, as an aside, Mr. Speaker, it provided to small 
contractors and small repairmen, home repairmen and the likes 
like that throughout the province, some business and some work 
which I am sure was appreciated by them, possibly as much as 
it was appreciated by some of the seniors. In that respect, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to commend my government on that particular 
program. 
 
I also want to point out some specific instances that our 
government has assisted seniors, and particularly within 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

193 
 

my own constituency of Saskatoon Eastview. Last summer, Mr. 
Speaker, in my constituency the even took place at the St. Ann's 
nursing home, but there was an announcement that the Premier 
and the minister in charge of Sask Housing, and many other 
officials were there, we announced the largest ever in the 
history of Saskatchewan seniors' housing construction program 
that has ever taken place in Saskatchewan. The three locations 
are St. Vladimir's Village, which will be on the intersection of 
the freeway and Taylor Street; St. Ann's nursing home; and the 
third one is the University Drive Alliance Church. And 
Reverend Boldt and the good people of the University Drive 
Alliance both are presently up and going with their seniors' 
complex. The St. Ann's expansion will be going under way, and 
similarly when the ground freezes out, thaws out, Mr. Speaker, 
the St. Vladimir's Village. 
 
And I would like to point out, Mr. Speaker, of what a far cry 
this has been from the policies of the former government. We 
have a candidate who was the former minister of health with the 
NDP who is running adjacent to my constituency in Saskatoon. 
And this guy has the gall to get up on platforms in Saskatoon 
and suggest that he has somehow or another made a one-eighty 
turn and he's behind seniors now. He was the man, Mr. Speaker, 
who put the moratorium on nursing home construction under 
the NDP administration. And this guy, as with the gall of the 
Leader of the Opposition, now has the gall to stand up and 
suggest that has somehow or another made this great change 
and that he's behind seniors. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, the construction that's taking place in my 
own constituency, and I could go on and on about nursing home 
and senior citizens housing construction throughout 
Saskatchewan, but I'll just stick, for these purposes, to the 
constituency of Saskatoon Eastview. I think, Mr. Speaker, that 
anyone can see that our policies and programs that we have had 
with respect to seniors in Saskatchewan have been far in excess 
of anything that the NDP did over their years; their priorities 
were certainly elsewhere, Mr. Speaker. They were interested in 
potash mines, buying what was it — $183 million worth of 
farm land — their head was in another space, Mr. Speaker. The 
seniors — they could wait, they could wait for a while but 
certainly their priorities were not the seniors. I think, Mr. 
Speaker, again my government must be commended in its 
priorities. I think to a great extent, Mr. Speaker, a government 
can be judged on its priorities, and I think that we will stand 
well in any such judgement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(2115) 
 
I noticed as well, Mr. Speaker, that it strikes me as odd, when 
the NDP came out a day or two ago, or was it even this morning 
possibly when I heard it the last time, with their 777 plan, and 
this is their catch-up to our thirteen and one-quarter program. 
Four years have went by; when people were losing their houses, 
Mr. Speaker, when interest rates were 22 per cent, these birds 
had the audacity to suggest that it was a federal program. They 
said, let Ottawa take care of that, we're busy buying potash 
mines and buying land bank; that interest problem can't be us. 
As far as Wes Robbins, who was the minister 

of finance at the time, he said, well that's impossible, the 
thirteen and one-quarter program just can't work; it can't be 
done. And of course, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Robbins was done, the 
program came into being, it's been very beneficial, and now, 
after four years, these people are coming up with a kind of a 
warmed-up version of it. But certainly we're beyond that. We 
have the program. People appreciate it, Mr. Speaker. We're on 
to building paper mills, upgraders, nursing homes, cable 
manufacturing plants, bacon plants, etc., etc. 
 
And these guys are coming out of a time bubble, Mr. Speaker, 
four years late, and suggesting that they're going to be the great 
saviour of the home owner. Well certainly, Mr. Speaker, they 
have old leadership; they have old ideas; they have 
warmed-over Tory ideas at the very best. 
 
And certainly I could go on to picking holes in the 777 program 
that they've announced, Mr. Speaker. But I think that it's fair 
enough to point out that it's four years late and it is nothing 
more than a program that we already have in place. And 
certainly the leader stepping out of his time bubble and looking 
at the people of Saskatchewan as we looked at them in 1982, 
certainly isn't going to be what the people want in 1986. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that we have a very imaginative 
government with our present Devine administration; and that to 
go back in time, to walk backwards to the way things were 
before, is certainly a regressive step and is not the vision that I 
believe both people in this province think of when they think of 
their future. I think that certainly our Premier is the Premier 
with a vision for the future. He is certainly not a negative, 
living-in-the-past leader, such as the NDP opposite 
unfortunately have to claim as their best. 
 
I'd like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that 44,000 families in this 
province have taken advantage of our thirteen and a quarter 
program. On the average it works out to 3,400 smackeroos in 
everybody's pocket. I think, Mr. Speaker, that is a far cry from 
any proposal of the NDP. I would imagine their 77 program 
will be wrought with means test and red tape and things that we 
can't imagine here today. If they were ever elected, it would 
certainly be a regular NDP program. 
 
You'll recall, Mr. Speaker, that our program had no means test. 
You had a house, your interest was over thirteen and a quarter, 
you got the program. Certainly the NDP are renowned for 
having programs that apply to everyone. They're targeting their 
particular political group, and certainly to the detriment of most 
of the people most of the time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As well, I want to again remind my constituents in Saskatoon 
Eastview of our gasoline tax program. I think it's fair, Mr. 
Speaker, to remind the electorate, to remind them just how the 
NDP tax worked. How it worked was a lot . . . it was the same 
way as they increased their salaries here in the legislature, as 
MLA's. It was sliding. The thing worked even if the legislature 
wasn't convened. Even if it wasn't brought up on the floor of the 
legislature, the gas tax piggybacked and up it went — 
piggybacked onto federal increases. 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

194 
 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, they didn't want to face the light of day 
here in the legislature, so they designed that tax. Similarly, as 
pertains to their own salary, they also had a mechanism built 
into The Legislative Assembly Act whereby their salaries as 
politicians would automatically raise without them monkeying 
with the legislation — the cowards that they were, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we took office and we passed, as the times came up, Mr. 
Speaker, legislation addressing the NDP legislation and zeroing 
out our increases as members. Certainly the cabinet did the 
same thing. 
 
Now the NDP could see with our majority that there was no 
way that they could stop those motions of ours, so you can 
understand how they came out on those issues. 
 
But I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that if we had not 
been elected government, those birds over there would not have 
touched that legislation, and their increases would have went up 
without being noticed and without being accounted to the 
public, Mr. Speaker. And again, I think that my government 
should be commended for addressing that situation in the open 
and frank way in which they have. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I come from an urban constituency, 
Saskatoon Eastview. I do note on my list of electors there is the 
odd farmer who lives in my seat. Certainly it hasn't as many 
farmers as most rural seats. But I think, Mr. Speaker, that it's 
still my duty to go on and point out to the people in general 
what this government has done in the area of agriculture. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that it would be fair to say, and I think 
most members sitting over there and most members sitting over 
here would think that no matter who was the Premier, if it was 
the Liberals or the NDP or our particular Premier, that 
something would have been done for the farmers in this 
province, having regard to the severe weather conditions and 
hopper conditions and every other sort of condition that fell 
upon farmers in the last few years. 
 
But on the other hand, Mr. Speaker, I really don't think that 
there's anyone in their heart of hearts who would believe that 
any other government would have done as much as the Devine 
government and this administration has done for farmers. I 
really don't believe that. 
 
I look back at the types of solutions, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP 
had for farm problems. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, not only did 
they not do as much in a dollar and cent way for farmers — we 
have given over a billion dollars to farmers during our 
administration in assistance — their biggest address to the 
agricultural problem was land bank. And even that address was 
only a $183 million expenditure. 
 
But it wasn't an expenditure on farmers, Mr. Speaker. They 
can't chalk up the 183 million that they spent as assistance to 
farmers. It was in fact, Mr. Speaker, assistance to their 
philosophy. It didn't benefit the farmers to be buying their land. 
In fact, what it achieved was a driving up of land prices so that 
anyone wanting to get into the business had another bidder in 
the game. 

I know in the R.M. where I grew up, and in most of the R.M. 
maps that I have looked at, before we got into government the 
largest single owner of land undoubtedly was the Saskatchewan 
land bank commission, Mr. Speaker. They had worked their 
way into every little R.M. in this province as the largest land 
owner. 
 
Now that is the way the NDP addressed the agricultural 
problem. They certainly would not deal with gas prices. Far 
from it. That was Ottawa's problem. They dealt with the farmers 
in some pretty cruel ways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I remember when my dad was alive, Mr. Speaker, he had 
worked all his life and built up a real nice farm, and inflation 
came roaring along between 1972 to 1975; 1975 is when it 
really hit hard. Prior to that, land was 15, $16,000 a quarter, but 
during those years it jumped right up to . . . it was selling 
around $50,000 in 1975. 
 
In this legislature, right in here, Mr. Speaker, there was a real 
smooth fellow by the name of Roy Romanow. And he said in 
this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and Hansard will bear me out — 
he introduced the death tax. He said, well this is for the real rich 
people. This tax is going to take money from the rich. He said 
all these big-business men, we're going to get their money when 
they die. Well, of course, Mr. Speaker, they were a lot smarter 
than he was. I don't know if they ever got a nickel out of these 
guys. They moved their assets around and were not really 
subjected to the death tax. But he said in this legislature, Mr. 
Speaker, that this death tax is not to be after farmers. He said it 
wasn't the farmers that they were going to get the money for. He 
said it's for these rich people. The NDP always have these rich 
people that they're going to get, eh. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it was all said and done, when the taxes had 
been collected and finally after considerable political pressure, 
the NDP withdrew the death tax. When it was all said and done, 
Mr. Speaker, over 95 per cent of the money that those birds 
over there collected from the death tax came from farmers. You 
betcha. That was their farm policy, Mr. Speaker, the death tax. 
Hit them when they're down. Hit them when they're down. Hit 
the widows, hit the orphans. Hit them when they're confused 
after a death. That's how they did it, Mr. Speaker. I say shame 
on those people. That is some farm policy you birds had. Tax at 
the time of death, that's real nice. I condemn you for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's families out there who have paid that 
money. Did you people ever suggest that you would pay it back 
after you changed your mind? No way. Tens of thousands of 
dollars per family, at that particular time in the family that you 
took it. You birds had no conscience at all. That was it. Sorry 
folks, the tax is over. We're not going to look back. 
 
But when the shoe is on the other foot, for a paltry $4.3 million 
you really have a lot to say. All of a sudden you have this great 
conscience. I suggest that a lot of the farm families, Mr. 
Speaker, are going to remember the cruelty of the NDP death 
taxes and are going to be hard-pressed for a number of 
generations to grant those people any forgiveness for what they 
did to the farming community. 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

195 
 

That, Mr. Speaker, is the NDP history in agriculture. I say that, 
certainly for the new farmers who live in my constituency, but 
generally for the benefit of people throughout this province to 
really get a grip on the differences between their policies, Mr. 
Speaker, and the farm policies that we have had. 
 
I could go on and on and on with stabilization program and feed 
transport programs, and this and that and this and that. But I 
think, Mr. Speaker, that that ground has been well ploughed by 
other members on this side of the House in our throne speech. 
I'm going to leave that. But I certainly wanted to bring out Mr. 
Romanow and the words he said about the death tax and where 
the money would come from and then in fact where it came 
from — the farmers. I don't want to let those people over there 
sleep, thinking that they got away with that ploy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, our rural gasification program was not 
on the agenda of the NDP. It was not something where they 
wanted to spend any of their resources. They were more 
interested in more ingenious methods of dealing with the farm 
problem, Mr. Speaker. And I condemn them for that oversight. 
It certainly took a new government before movement came 
afoot in that area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I'd like to also, just before I go much further, Mr. Speaker, 
address Saskatoon particularly. Certainly I am one of 10 MLAs 
who are all Tory MLAs from the city of Saskatoon, and I can 
remember living in that town for many years under eight NDP 
members. 
 
One of the things that strikes my mind, Mr. Speaker, and I've 
never yet been able to figure it out. And possibly the Clerk 
some day will come through and just show  me what happened. 
But each MLA, as we all here in this House are aware, and 
certainly I think a lot of people out in TV land are aware, we get 
an allowance, Mr. Speaker, to run a constituency office and to 
provide communications to our constituents. 
 
Now the MLAs in Saskatoon all have constituency offices. 
They all have secretaries and phones. You can go in there and 
deal with your problems. You know where to find your MLA in 
other words. 
 
The NDP, one of them from Saskatoon was a full-time school 
teacher and came down here when need be. Had no 
constituency offices. The NDP that represented my 
constituency had no constituency office. There was one office 
in Saskatoon with one person to look after 10 constituencies. 
 
Now some of my other colleagues in Saskatoon did some 
research, and they found out that these birds pulled the full 
amount of secretarial allowance, the full amount of 
communications allowance, and I don't what happened to the 
money, Mr. Speaker. They certainly . . . it's not evidenced in the 
years that I was in Saskatoon before I was elected. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatoon MLAs must be 
commended in coming through with the pure purpose of their 
moneys. We all have offices, and I would think that 

the people in Saskatoon appreciate that. 
 
I know the fellow nominated to run in Saskatoon Eastview. His 
name is Ray Martineau, and he has pledged that if he gets 
elected in the constituency of Saskatoon Eastview that he will 
have an MLA office with a secretary and run her above board 
like you should, Mr. Speaker. And I want to commend him at 
this point for that undertaking and again ask those members 
across the hall: what did their colleagues do in the last term 
with that money? It totally escapes me. Anyhow, Mr. Speaker, I 
will leave that. 
 
Another thing, we had eight NDP MLAs in Saskatoon, Mr. 
Speaker — eight of them — full slate. They had her 100 per 
cent. And in 11 years in that city of mine the only thing that I 
can see that they can claim to be their accomplishment is one 
building — the Sturdy Stone Building. That's the building, Mr. 
Speaker, that had the marble bathtub, and named after a bunch 
of their earlier followers. That's all they had. Eleven years, one 
building — the Sturdy Stone Building, Mr. Speaker. Nothing 
else. Everything went into Regina. Everything went to Regina, 
Mr. Speaker. They had eight members; they took the place for 
granted, Mr. Speaker. There was no effort generated by those 
members to help out the city of Saskatoon. 
 
But now they have the nerve, Mr. Speaker, to be running for 
their party in Saskatoon again. They've changed, of course. It's 
another 180 on their part. This time they're going to stick up for 
Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. Well I don't think, Mr. Speaker, that 
people will buy that in that city. 
 
(2130) 
 
I'm just going to name a few things, Mr. Speaker, and I want 
everyone here to bear in mind that the NDP in 11 years brought 
the Sturdy Stone Building. Four years with a full deck of Tory 
MLAs in Saskatoon has brought what? There's 24 different 
things here, Mr. Speaker. I just want to read them into the 
record so that the accomplishments of the 10 Conservative 
MLAs in Saskatoon do not go unrecognized or unnoticed by all 
members of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There's in-place funding of $14.75 million for a multi-purpose 
arena. Saskatoon has been crying for an arena for 10 years. 
They called it the old barn, the arena that we had for along time. 
This government comes out now . . . Of course after the event, 
the Leader of the Opposition says: oh, me too, me too. If we 
happen to be elected government, that funding will still be in 
place. And his little NDP candidates are running around the 
constituency with the me too, me too, at the door, saying that 
don't worry, we won't take away your arena if we get elected. 
Well, I'll believe it when I see it. 
 
Canpotex, the international marketing agency, has moved to 
Saskatoon. Now these birds get up and they fight Canpotex at 
every intersection, eh? That's real evil, that thing. And certainly, 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the people involved in Canpotex in 
Saskatoon appreciate that company, what it's doing in the 
marketing of our products. And certainly moving its head office 
from Toronto to Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, is not unappreciated 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

196 
 

by the people of my constituency and, I'm sure, the people of 
Saskatoon as a whole. 
 
A $7 million refurbishment of the Western Development 
Museum — now certainly, Mr. Speaker, you're getting into 
some big dollars here. And I think that that is something that the 
Conservative MLAs can take credit for, and so they should. 
 
We have a new child care incorporation which provides 
pre-school day care to approximately 300 new families in 
Saskatoon. That's over and above anything that the NDP can 
take credit for. 
 
The cancer clinic, Mr. Speaker, $17 million worth of cancer 
clinic, 100 per cent financed by this Devine government, Mr. 
Speaker. Certainly our record in health care, hospital 
construction, etc., etc. — I could go on all night on that, Mr. 
Speaker. But sometimes something like the cancer clinic, it gets 
the bubble of the news release — a $17 million, yes, cancer 
clinic — and it's soon forgotten by a lot of people. And I don't 
think, Mr. Speaker, that it's unwarranted for me to remind that 
to members and to people throughout Saskatchewan that, 
certainly, if anyone has had the tragedy of that disease in their 
family, they will darn well appreciate the compassion that's 
evidenced by this government in addressing a new cancer 
clinic. 
 
Certainly hand in hand, Mr. Speaker, the big, bad, 
free-enterprise people, the people that these birds attempt to 
downplay at every intersection — the McDonald's hamburger 
people and Bill Mitchell and a lot of other good people from 
Saskatoon have built a Ronald McDonald House in Saskatoon 
to work hand in hand with people who have relatives suffering 
from cancer, where these people can stay while their loved ones 
are being treated for cancer. 
 
That certainly, Mr. Speaker, is something that, I think, was 
nurtured — the idea of community participation was certainly 
nurtured by our government, although by no means am I here 
taking claim to it. It was certainly workings of the community. 
But I think that this government is certainly not one that would 
run interference with anything like that. And I don't know to 
this day what the NDP position is on the Ronald McDonald 
House, but I'll have to wait and see, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have the geological sciences building at the university —
another $18.6 million — and announced just a few weeks ago, 
Mr. Speaker, $78 million worth of agriculture building. I think 
most of us in Saskatoon are familiar . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Young: — . . . with what you get, Mr. Speaker, for that 
kind of money. We're all familiar with the Ramada Renaissance 
hotel that was built by Mr. Remai, and you can see what sort of 
mortar and stone you can get for numbers of this size. And 
certainly the agriculture building will be as big and good, I 
would hope, having relatively the same amount of money spent 
on it, as that particular complex. That certainly is going to 
provide 

jobs, Mr. Speaker, and certainly works hand in hand with our 
government's commitment to agriculture. 
 
The NDP have said emphatically, Mr. Speaker, that that 
building was on the low end of their priority list. And from that, 
Mr. Speaker, we can all rest assured that, if they would have 
been elected in 1982, that particular building was not going to 
be placed in any other position on their list other than the 
bottom of the list, where it was when we built it. 
 
Thirty-one million dollars worth of engineering building at the 
university, Mr. Speaker. And all in all we have increased our 
actual and real funding to universities. When we took office, 
Mr. Speaker, $100 million was going to universities by way of 
funding by the NDP. We took office; on every budget I would 
sit here and listen to increases in our spending on university. 
Now I could go on about secondary education, technical 
colleges — new ones, additions, on and on and on — but in the 
areas of university alone, our last budget was $133 million, a 
full third more funding than the NDP funded the university. 
 
Certainly it's autonomous, Mr. Speaker. We shoved the money 
under the door. The university administration spends it as best 
they can, and they decide which colleges are going to have so 
many professors, and so on and so on. But certainly, Mr. 
Speaker, without the funding that we provide, the universities in 
Saskatoon and Regina could not be carrying on nearly as well 
as they are today. 
 
And I think that when I watch the Students' Union president and 
the presidents of the university come here with their teeth filed 
every budget time wondering what's going to happen, and they 
walk out with smiles on their faces, Mr. Speaker, after every 
budget, I certainly think that we have been pulling our load in 
the area of education. 
 
And I want to commend our government on the funding. 
Coming from a university town like Saskatoon, that has come 
through for funding of the university in Saskatoon, that has 
come through for funding of the university in Saskatoon. It's 
very, very important to the lifeblood of Saskatoon, and certainly 
we have been pulling our load in that area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
All in all, $202.9 million of planned and ongoing hospital 
construction in Saskatoon. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, every one of 
our major hospitals in Saskatoon, St. Paul's, University, and the 
City Hospital — City Hospital, brand new hospital — are 
spinning towers on top of the University Hospital every time 
you turn around. The new expansion of St. Paul's Hospital. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, we are addressing the capital 
requirements of the universities — $100 million here the other 
day from our Minister of Health towards staffing, CAT scan 
machines like never before, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Certainly, certainly when we took office Saskatchewan was the 
eighth province in Canada on health care spending. In other 
words, just about every other province in this country was 
spending more per capita on heath care than Saskatchewan. We 
were the bottom of the barrel, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Certainly today we are at the top, or second from the top, 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

197 
 

on health care spending, and certainly, Mr. Speaker, health care 
and health care spending is very near and dear to the hearts of 
the people of this province. 
 
The NDP made much of it. Every election they would drag out 
the old grey mare, Mr. Speaker, and say, listen, if you elect 
those Tories, they'll destroy medicare. I mean these guys had 
worked the situation right to the bottom of the barrel by this 
time, but they still campaigned on it, and, I might add, 
successfully in 1978. 
 
But the people of the province who were not sure of the NDP, 
they elected a government — our Devine government — and 
they've seen health care spending go right off the map, Mr. 
Speaker. We certainly have been pulling our load, and never 
again will those rascals over there be able to go to the doors and 
campaign with the scare tactics that they used successfully for 
so many elections. Don't let them take it away, they would say. 
Well that particular campaign slogan is long gone by the NDP. 
Certainly we can use that slogan if we really wanted to, because 
the improvements that we have had everywhere in health care 
are certainly such that never again will the NDP be able to 
pound on that drum, Mr. Speaker. $2.7 million for the 
Kinsmen's children's centre; $40 million for the science and 
technology research; 12 research infrastructure facilities in 
Saskatoon; 1,230 new jobs created through Sask employment 
development program for social services in Saskatoon — 
certainly, Mr. Speaker, an imaginative idea that we would have 
never seen if the NDP would have remained in office. We have 
354,000 in grants to seniors' organizations. We have $11 
million in grants to organizations in support of the handicapped, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Certainly I have had, as an MLA, a lot to do with handicapped 
people in my constituency. I have Cheshire Homes on Louise 
Street in my seat, and I have Elmwood Lodge, and I have a lot 
of residences where both people with physical and mental 
handicaps reside. And I know very much what goes on in those 
places, and I know that our increases in funding have certainly 
been appreciated by the both mental and physically 
handicapped people at least who live in my constituency. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, I want to commend our Minister of 
Health and our government for recognizing the plight of some 
of these people and addressing their problem by way of dollars 
and cents, which was certainly a lot better than the rhetoric 
address that they received from the NDP. I'm very proud of that. 
And when I leave this House, Mr. Speaker, that will be one of 
the things that I will look back on I'm sure over the years and be 
proud of. 
 
There was the Canada Summer Games which we scored in 
Saskatoon. And I'm very proud of that, Mr. Speaker. And I 
know that every one of us MLAs lobbied over the telephone 
and in letters to the Minister of Sport in Ottawa. And I like to 
think, Mr. Speaker, that possibly our efforts pushed it over the 
top and secured that for Saskatoon. And I want to thank my 
colleagues for the work that they did in working towards 
obtaining those summer games. It's down the road a bit, but it's 
going to be a big deal, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Young: — Finally, Mr. Speaker, $24.5 million for 240 
special-bed nursing homes located in the Fairview constituency, 
the largest nursing home in the construction. 
 
Some of my members are peppering me with numerous 
megaprojects, Mr. Speaker, that I have missed. But certainly it's 
beyond anyone's capability to remember all of the construction 
projects and programs that have taken place in Saskatoon since 
we've been elected. And I for one, Mr. Speaker, would need 
another three or four pages here to make the members on my 
side happy with the recitals of construction that will be ongoing 
in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would think that undoubtedly this will be 
probably my last speech in the House, certainly my last throne 
speech. And over the weeks that I have had knocking doors in 
my constituency with Ray Martineau, the nominated PC 
candidate, I certainly have a warm feeling of our prospects in 
Saskatoon and across the province. 
 
As a lawyer, Mr. Speaker, I'm aware of what's called the dying 
declaration. And in law, if someone on their deathbed makes a 
declaration, all of the rules of evidence are suspended, and it's 
allowed to be introduced into a case without any further proof. 
And I would think, Mr. Speaker, that in a situation that I find 
myself tonight, being my last speech, I think that members will 
kind of appreciate the sincerity that I have. 
 
I think that, Mr. Speaker, we have a very good chance of 
winning just about all of the seats in Saskatoon. On a good day 
we'll win them all. And I think that my fellow colleagues in 
Saskatoon are the cause of that. Their hard work, the things that 
we have brought Saskatoon, the things I recited, Mr. Speaker — 
when compared with the Sturdy Stone Building, and no 
constituency offices, and a bunch of rhetoric — is certainly a far 
cry from what the people are being provided today. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that that's going to pay off, and a 
heck of a lot of us from Saskatoon are going to become elected 
again in the next election due to the hard work that's been done. 
I know that Mr. Martineau is working as hard as I have ever 
seen anyone work, and I think that's he going to come through 
with flying colours, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I notice, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP have not had much noise in 
their throne speech about health care. And I think some of the 
things that I've pointed out that have happened in this province 
are certainly the cause of that. They certainly want to keep their 
heads low on that point, and rightfully so. If they stick them up 
they will get knocked, because we certainly have been coming 
through on that issue. And I think again, Mr. Speaker, that in 
the long haul of things, and I say this as my last speech in the 
legislature, our record in health care is going to carry us a long, 
long ways in an election and in years to come, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to, just in closing, point out to everyone here that when 
you leave this place, Mr. Speaker, I get a ticket to come to 
parliamentary dinners, and I appreciate that. I'm certainly going 
to come to them in years to come. I have 
  



 
March 25, 1986 

 

198 
 

the right to sit on the rail when I'm long gone. I don't think, Mr. 
Speaker, that I'll ever take that up. But what I will come out of 
here most of all with, Mr. Speaker, is an appreciation of how 
things work and how things don't work in government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I'm going to have 64 friends that I will know forever, I'm sure. I 
know someone now from every nook and corner of the 
province, Mr. Speaker. I certainly didn't have acquaintances 
everywhere in this province prior to my election to the 
legislature. I'm going to appreciate that. I'll be able to play 'do 
you know who?' with anybody I meet across the province and 
know a substantial person from that neck of the woods. 
 
I should say, Mr. Speaker, in closing, that I look forward to 
meeting everyone again down the road in my life to come. I will 
certainly have some good friends, I'm sure, out in the world 
after the election. In closing, Mr. Speaker, I have a few remarks 
that I really wanted to get in down the road. I would ask leave 
to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:45 p.m. 
 
 
 


