


















































June 19, 1986 Hansard Morning


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

June 19, 1986 
 

2103 
 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Non-Controversial Bills 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the Standing 
Committee on Non-Controversial Bills, I present the 15th report of 
the said committee which is as follows: 
 
Bill No. 62 — An Act respecting the Regulation of Traffic on 

Saskatchewan Highways 
 
Mr. Shillington: — As chairman of the Non-Controversial Bills 
Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 62 — An Act respecting the 
Regulation of Traffic on Saskatchewan Highways, as being 
controversial. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Bill No. 62 — second reading. 
 

Bill No. 63 — An Act respecting Motor Carriers 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the Standing 
Committee on Non-Controversial Bills, I present the 15th report of 
the said committee, which is as follows: Bill No. 63, An Act 
respecting Motor Carriers, as being controversial. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Bill No. 63 — controversial. Second Reading. 
 
Bill No. 64 — An Act respecting the Registration of Vehicles 
and Licensing of Drivers 
 
Mr. Shillington: — As chairman of the Non-Controversial Bills 
Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 64, An Act respecting the 
Registration of Vehicles and Licensing of Drivers, as being 
controversial. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Bill No. 64 — controversial. 
 

Bill No. 65 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of 

The Ambulance Act 
 
Mr. Shillington: — As chairman of the Non-Controversial Bills 
Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 65 — An Act respecting the 
Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the 
enactment of The Ambulance Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the second 
reading and consideration in the committee of the whole of said 
Bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 67 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of 
The Highway Traffic Act, The Vehicle Administration Act, 

and The Motor Carrier Act. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — As chairman of the Non-Controversial Bills 
Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 67 — An Act respecting the 
Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the 
enactment of The Highway Traffic Act, The Vehicle 
Administration Act, and The Motor Carrier Act as being non-
controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in the committee of the whole of said Bill be 
waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'd like at 
this time to introduce to you, and to all members of the Assembly, 
a group of students, grade 6, 7, and 8, from Grosvenor Park 
Elementary School in Saskatoon. They are 24 in number. They're 
accompanied today by Mr. John Barton and Mr. Warren Gervais. 
 
I'd like to certainly welcome the students here and hope they enjoy 
their visit to the Assembly. I think as a stroke of luck they're able 
to see some of the proceedings due to our increased sitting hours 
today. Normally they wouldn't have been with original schedule, 
so I welcome them to the Assembly. 
 
I hope they enjoy question period, and I'll have the pleasure of 
meeting with them at, I believe, 10:45 for pictures and then 
refreshments later. And I would ask all my colleagues to welcome 
this group from Saskatoon here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a pleasure for me 
this morning to introduce to you, and through you to the other 
members of the Assembly, 19 grade 3 and 4 students from 
Rouleau. They're sitting in the east gallery. They are accompanied 
by their teacher this morning, Mary Jane Sillitto, and chaperons, 
Debby Hamdorf, Dawn Duncan, Joan Clarke, and Sharon Leisle. 
 
As my colleague from Saskatoon mentioned, it's nice that you 
could see the workings of the Chamber this morning. Normally we 
wouldn't start until 2 o'clock on Thursdays, but because of our 
increased sitting hours till the end of the week, you are now going 
to see the workings of the Chamber in question period. I hope you 
enjoy it. I hope you learn from it. I'll be meeting with you for 
pictures and drinks later on, and I hope to answer any questions 
about  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2104 
 
 

anything which you see in the Chamber today. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the member for 
Bengough—Milestone, I'd like to introduce a group of students 
from Lang High School. They are 11 students, grade 7s and 8s. 
We would like to, on behalf of your member, welcome you to our 
Assembly, and unfortunately the sitting that we're sitting in this 
morning was only arranged late yesterday, and your member is at 
a previous commitment that he could not break. So welcome to the 
legislature, and have a nice day. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Inaccurate Home Pak Policies Sent Out 
 
Mr. Shillington: — My question is to the minister responsible for 
the SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) and it deals with 
the latest proof that this government couldn't run a candy store, 
much less a provincial government. Can you confirm, Mr. 
Minister, that between March 1st and June 15th, Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance sent out 16,000 inaccurate Home Pak 
policies to policy holders. They were inaccurate, Mr. Minister, 
because they failed to notify the policy holder that insurance 
coverage for damage to contents from sewer back—up is limited 
to actual cash value as opposed to full replacement costs. Can you 
confirm this 16,000 policy mistake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all I will confirm 
that that is indeed fact, but I'd like to pick up on a few comments 
he made before as it relates to this government being able to 
handle things and as we deal specifically with SGI. As I 
mentioned many times in the House before, the financial 
performance of SGI under this government for our four years will 
compare to your last four years like night and day. 
 
We look at the auto fund; we look at the general side; we look at 
the ability to look into reinsurance contracts. Indeed it has been 
much better for the last four years under a Progressive 
Conservative government. 
 
Dealing specifically with your question, yes, indeed that is indeed 
the case that there was a mistake made on their forms to do with 
sewer back—up, etc. But I would like to report to the House that 
through our officials at SGI, and in conjunction with the many 
agents for Saskatchewan Government Insurance throughout the 
whole province of Saskatchewan, we have dealt with the problem. 
We have been in consultation with the agents. Every policy holder 
that was issued that particular policy that had the mistake is being 
notified. They will have until June 30th to respond, if they do not 
by then, then their agent will contact them within the next two 
weeks, and then if there's some good reason why they have not 
signed the form acknowledging the mistake in their coverage, then 
they will be granted special time after that to get it if, indeed, the 
agent or SGI has not been able to contact  

them. 
 
So even though there has been a mistake made, one certainly that 
one cannot defend, I think, I would have to congratulate SGI and 
the agents all across Saskatchewan in the way that they're going to 
handle this situation, as unfortunate as it is, and we expect very 
little disruption if everything goes according to plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question. Mr. Minister, you referred it to 
the difference between night and day. I'll tell you, the rates are 
really a difference between night and day between this 
government and the last. Rates are a great deal higher. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have put the agents and the public to an 
enormous inconvenience to correct 16,000 mistakes. Can you 
confirm, Mr. Minister, that SGI will spend up to $100,000 on 
postage, staff, and computer time to send out and follow up on 
these 16,000 special notices to policy holders, not including the 
time and expense of the agents who have to try and clean up your 
mess? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will not confirm that 
figure of $100,000. I will not confirm that, I repeat, but indeed I 
outlined the process that SGI for their policy holders, through their 
agents, and through direct billing, are going to notify them. A form 
is being sent out acknowledging the mistake and asking the policy 
holder to send that back. I have no idea how much that is going to 
cost. 
 
Once again, to pick up on his earlier remark on rates, I would like 
to remind the House that under the NDP in 1979—80—81, they 
had rate increases in the auto fund in the neighbourhood of 28 per 
cent, 20 per cent. Their rate stabilization reserve was negative. 
Under the Progressive Conservative government, when you look 
at the four years, auto rates for vehicles in Saskatchewan have 
gone down, and we have indeed a rate stabilization that is at such a 
level that the Public Utility Review Commission, which we have 
set up, is even looking at that because it's so high. 
 
So for the member opposite to in any way infer that the financial 
position of SGI was indeed any good under the NDP is totally 
ludicrous. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you're inevitably going to have 
a relatively large number of people who don't get the letter back. 
Do you seriously intend to cancel their insurance coverage, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I'll go over that one more 
time. When the error was made apparent to our officials at SGI, 
the number one thing, which is logical, is to inform everyone that 
got that policy of the mistake. That is being done by direct letter 
with a form in there acknowledging, for their signature, the 
mistake and to get the coverage straight. If that is not totally done 
by June 30th, then the agents themselves will be contacting their 
policy holders to find out exactly what is happening and  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2105 
 
 

to get them to acknowledge it. If indeed that doesn't happen, if 
somebody has been away on holidays or for some reason cannot 
acknowledge the mistake, then there will be additional time 
granted. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if indeed somebody does not wish to 
acknowledge the change in the policy, then I believe, with 
adequate communication, that there is no alternative but to cancel 
the policy and help out the policy holder in another way. But if 
they have been contacted, which we are endeavouring to do either 
through direct mail or through the agent or through an extended 
grace period, then if that person has been contacted and does not 
wish to sign the form, then I believe there is no alternative but to 
cancel that insurance policy. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, what 
do you intend to do about losses that occur in the meantime before 
this horrendous process of yours works it's way towards a 
completion? What are you going to do about losses that occur 
between now and whenever you get around to these things? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, he calls it a horrendous process 
that we're going through. Does he have a suggestion of a better 
process to go through? As usual, the NDP have no indication of 
what they would do. 
 
Number one, I think SGI is acting very responsibly on this. But 
indeed if the case is . . . and to my knowledge and what I am 
informed, that the only way that this clause would be enacted is if 
we had a storm like we did in 1983 in the cities of Saskatoon and 
Regina, where there was a huge storm and a one in 100 years, 
where this clause would actually be kicked into effect. So if indeed 
that happens before acknowledgement and before June 30th, then I 
guess SGI would have no choice but to pay out. 
 

SGI Procedure on Large Liability Insurance Claim 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — New question to the minister of SGI. Recently 
in a settlement to a Regina dentist — as a result of that judgement 
one of your bureaucrats in SGI suggested that they would have to 
keep an eye on that particular court case, and it may affect the way 
your corporation does business. 
 
My question is, does it mean they're going to harass claimants? 
Does it mean that liability insurance is going to rise in cost? Or are 
they going to settle with claimants as they should? 
 
A recent example, the Townsend fire case, demonstrated that 
harassment within your organization is not uncommon. And I ask 
you, is that going to be continued to all claimants who, in fact, 
claim against liability insurance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member brings in 
numerous points into that. For his information, liability rates have 
increased in the last six months or so, not only in our province of 
Saskatchewan, but right across Canada . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Mr. Speaker, I'm not so sure he wants to hear the answer — 
but not only in our province of Saskatchewan, but right across 
Canada, 

North America, and in Europe. And one of the causes for the 
increases in liability rates have been increased court settlements. 
 
For your information on the case you have mentioned, SGI is 
indeed not holding the policy. It's indeed held by the Manitoba 
corporation. So the comment by our official at SGI was simply 
that this is part of the whole liability problem that we're looking at. 
It's been raised in the House; it's been raised in committee; it's 
been raised in my office numerous times — the high rates. 
 
And this is part of the reason why SGI, as a general insurance 
company, has got to be very wary of what's going on in liability 
rates, because in a lot of cases reinsurance markets enter into, or 
other companies across the world would actually reinsure SGI. 
That's part of the reason why the rates are going up, and another 
cause is the high court settlements that have come in that have not 
hit Saskatchewan to a large degree, but indeed we have been hit 
with a few cases — and one is that one there — but indeed SGI 
does not hold that policy, rather through Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the fastest 
growing areas in SGI is your special investigations unit which 
does from time to time harass some of the claimants with respect 
to insurance claims. I ask you: as a result of that statement by your 
public relations director, does it mean that claimants who do claim 
liability insurance will be further harassed in their determination to 
settle with your monopoly in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Well, Mr. Speaker. I would challenge the 
member opposite to read the statement of that official from SGI 
where he sees anywhere in that statement the word "harassment". 
SGI, in the general side, is working as a business, and there is a 
special investigative unit that is kicked into effect on numerous 
cases where there is some suspicion, and I believe . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, the member opposite would have . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member has asked a 
question. Give the minister the opportunity to answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, I believe the member opposite 
would have us believe that SGI is indeed the only insurance 
company in the whole world that has a special investigative unit. 
That is indeed not the case. One of the reasons that we do have a 
special investigative unit is for the protection of policy holders. If 
indeed there are some cases that are not totally legitimate, they are 
investigated. 
 
If indeed, I take from his selection, that any claim that comes in 
should not be investigated for the protection of any other policy 
holder across our province, then that's the position he can take. I 
believe it is responsible. He can take an individual case if he 
wants, but his interpretation on what happened that indeed it's 
through the special investigative unit of SGI, the policy holders of 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance are being served and, I 
believe, serviced efficiently. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — With respect to SGI, the fire commissioner of 
Saskatchewan recently stated to me  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2106 
 
 

personally that if the policy of the company on large liability 
claims to investigate rather than compensate — to follow that 
through with a long—term investigation forcing claimants into 
court, in fact, to find settlement with your monopoly. 
 
I ask you sir, is that your policy? Is it the policy of SGI to 
investigate rather than compensate, even in spite of the fact there 
isn't any evidence to investigate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, I do not know where the 
member's getting his information on what he says is policy. On 
large claims SGI does look at it. If there is reason for suspicion, 
based on what they have found, then it is investigated — not in 
every case. That is not policy. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — The fire commissioner of Saskatchewan 
indicated to me it's not uncommon. In large claim cases, SGI 
investigates, not compensates. And I ask you. He suggested to me 
it was your policy. Is it your policy not to pay, and draw people 
into court, at their own expense, because of a long—time 
investigation by your organization? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, let's take a case where there 
might be an unfortunate incident where there might be a large 
claim . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, I'm really not sure where the 
member is coming from. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He came from the Tory party. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. It's your question period that's 
being wasted when the shouting is going on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, as I pointed out in my earlier 
answer, when there is a large claim against an insurance company 
— in this case SGI — whatever you wish — then for the 
protection of other policy holders . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You harass the claimant. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, he calls it harassment, and I 
would like to see him prove that in any case. But I would think 
that in defence of all other policy holders — and there's hundreds 
of thousands of them around the province of Saskatchewan — if 
there is a large claim and there is reason for suspicion, then it 
should be investigated. For him to say that everyone is 
investigated, that is not true; but indeed, when there is reason to 
have it investigated, that is done. 
 

Public Consultation re Free Trade 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to direct a 
question to the Minister of Economic Development and Trade. 
Mr. Minister, as you are aware, the Premier yesterday named three 
commissioners who will conduct a public, so—called, 
consultation program this summer as a major step in the 
government's game plan to make sure Saskatchewan voice is 
heard in the Canada-U.S. trade talks. 
 

I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, do you think that it's a little late, 
after you have established and put the position of your government 
and your Premier that you are indeed free traders, to now to be 
going out with a pretence of consulting with the public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the position of the 
Government of Saskatchewan has been and, as I understand, the 
position of governments of Saskatchewan for the last 75 years 
have been that we, as a province that relies so heavily on trade, are 
in favour of enhancing our trade relationships, whether with the 
United States, with anybody else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we endorse and have . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I'm going to ask the member for Regina North 
East to control his talk this morning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — We have for some time endorsed that 
concept, Mr. Speaker. Those negotiations are going on and will be 
going on for some period of time. What the Premier announced 
yesterday is an opportunity, while these debates are going on, 
while these negotiations and discussions are going on, the people 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. This, I think, has gone just a little 
too far this morning, with continual shouting right through the 
question period, and I'm going to ask the members for order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — During that period of time, Mr. Speaker, 
while this particular issue is on the public agenda, we, as the 
Government of Saskatchewan, believe it is imperative that we ask, 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan for their particular views 
on various issues — whether it's the trucking industry and what 
that does for them; whether it's the farm machinery manufacturer, 
what it does for them; or it's the potash industry, the lumber 
industry, whatever it's going to be. 
 
People will have an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, people will have an 
opportunity for their input into that particular negotiations, to go 
along with the Government of Saskatchewan on those particular 
programs. The members opposite, in government for 11 years, 
seldom, if ever, went to the people and asked what their view 
might be on a given program here or there. I believe it's a proper 
way to go. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, a supplement. A supplement, Mr. 
Speaker. I'll tell you, Mr. Minister, the position of your 
government is becoming farcical. Right now we are in the midst of 
the trade talks, and they're going on. You have committed to 
people of Saskatchewan and Canada that you're free traders, and I 
ask you: do you not agree that the public of Saskatchewan should 
have been consulted prior to your commitment by the Premier and 
yourself as committed free traders? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, that the 
governments of Saskatchewan for a long time have supported and 
endorsed free trade, as have the people of western Canada. We 
make our living by trading in this part of the country. We have 
traditionally been  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2107 
 
 

opposed to the protectionism that has been practised through the 
national policy in this country, of having to buy — having to buy 
more expensive manufactured goods, consumer goods, and in so 
doing, subsidized eastern industries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'll give you an example: every time someone in 
Saskatchewan buys a colour television set, we pay $75 tax to 
central Canadians by way of tariff; every time a women's dress is 
purchased, $15 from this part of the province, this part of the 
country, goes east to protect eastern textile manufacturers. And the 
list goes on and on, Mr. Speaker; the list goes on and on. 
 
This part of the country for some time has endorsed free trade, 
support broadening our trade base, because that's the way we build 
new jobs in this province. You look at the member opposite — 
talk about somebody who's inconsistent. His leader, Eddie 
Broadbent, I'm not sure from day to day where he stands. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Supplemental, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to ask the 
minister: what kind of a signal do you think you're sending out to 
the rest of Canada, and indeed particularly to the Americans, when 
in fact by establishing a commission you indicate that you haven't 
done your homework. You don't know the impact. You're asking 
the people of Saskatchewan now to give their opinion on the 
matter. What kind of a signal are you sending out to the 
Americans who you're negotiating, when you're indicating you 
haven't done your homework? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — To indicate, Mr. Speaker, that we haven't 
done our homework. Mr. Speaker, the members opposite would 
have you believe that at no time should you ever consult with the 
public — that's never been part of their strategy on anything. They 
believe in doctrinaire their position of their particular party that 
said at their convention will be the position of their government or 
will be the position of their party. They never bothered consulting 
with anyone. 
 
What we are going to do, Mr. Speaker, during these consultation 
hearings, is have people who are directly affected by those 
particular trade issues advance publicly as to what they see, and 
the importance that they would see of those trade initiatives. 
 

Expenditure of Tax Dollars 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Question to the Acting Minister of Finance 
in the absence of the Premier and the Deputy Premier and the 
Minister of Finance. 
 
My question which I would have wanted to direct to the Premier 
has to do with the expenditure of tax dollars, and in particular the 
expenditure of federal tax dollars, and the reports yesterday . . . 
And I have here a report from the Toronto Globe and Mail and the 
headline is: "Mulroney staff spent $811,000 on three trips." 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, this trip which included a stay at the 
presidential suite of New York's Pierre Hotel at a cost of $1,200 
per night, I wonder whether, Minister, you can  

indicate in terms of the Saskatchewan taxpayers who had to pay 
federal taxes to support this kind of foolishness by the federal Tory 
Prime Minister, do you support that as . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. The member 
is referring to federal issues, and the ministers here are not able to 
answer questions dealing with federal circumstances. I think that 
needs to be left to the federal government. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — New question to the minister, and it deals 
with the expenditure of Tory government's lavish expenditure on 
travel and that sort of thing. And I want to refer, by way of 
background, to the expenditure of the Prime Minister in Ottawa — 
$811,000 on a junket to New York. 
 
I want to ask you about our Premier in this province and his lack 
of forthcoming on certain issues. I would give the Prime Minister 
at least credit for telling the public that he's spending $1,200 a 
night on a suite . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Does the member have a question? Order. 
Order. The member has been making statements but not getting to 
his question. If you have a question, get directly to it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — My question to the minister is this: in light 
of the fact that Tory prime ministers and premiers, whether it's 
Dick Hatfield in New Brunswick or Brian Mulroney in Ottawa . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I'll take the next question from 
some other member. 
 

Structuring of Free Trade Commission 
 
Mr. Hampton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister of Economic Development and Trade, and perhaps he 
may have to take notice and give it to the Premier. 
 
There was a new commission structured recently to tour this 
province to learn and to listen to the people with respect to free 
trade. I ask, Mr. Minister, that in the last four years there were 
several committees structured from your back—benchers and 
cabinet members that toured this province, that listened and 
learned with respect to agriculture, with respect to health, 
ambulance care, fire protection, etc. 
 
My question now is: is the Premier now telling the people of the 
province, or is he telling his back—benchers that they are no 
longer competent, and therefore must go outside of his 
government caucus to appoint three people to do the job for him? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there are times when 
you have legislative committees; there are times when you 
government committees consisting of cabinet ministers; there's 
times when you have commissions that don't represent either on of 
them. 
 
With regards to the hon. member's question, if you could get your 
colleagues in front and at your side to be quiet, I'll try to respond 
to your question. 
 
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2108 
 
 

With regards to the question of the particular hearings that are 
going around the province: as you know — I would trust that you 
know — during the negotiations that will take place between now 
and over the next year or two years, whatever it is, between 
Canada and United States to try to work out a trading 
arrangement, that's going to involve some trade—offs. In any 
situation you're going to be trading off, and that's going to be the 
function of the chief negotiator for this country. 
 
And those trade—offs are going to become a significant impact: 
how much is agriculture going to pay versus the textile industry; 
how much is . . . Those types of things are going to obviously be 
dealt with by Reisman when you come to negotiate a trade 
arrangement — and which becomes priorities here, there, or the 
next place. 
 
And so that's what people are going to have an opportunity to do. 
To deny people that opportunity, I think, would be wrong for 
governments. I think your party would certainly support the right 
of the public to make input into that type of negotiations, or a right 
into the input into the price of agriculture products. There was 
most recently a bingo inquiry that I think was, for the most part, 
received. Those type of approaches by government, I think, are 
important, and I think the people want to have an opportunity to 
make that input that way. 
 
As well, there's an opportunity by members to put an input, or 
people to get an input through their elected MLA, whether it's a 
cabinet minister or back—bencher, member of the WCC, member 
of the NDP, or member of the ruling Conservative government. 
 
So you use all of those processes to come to the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Indian and Native Affairs Secretarial 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 25 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. This morning we 
have with us to assist us, Joe Leask, the secretary of the Native and 
Indian Affairs Secretariat; Bill Calder, assistant secretary; Al 
Higgs, assistant secretary; John Reid, director of economic 
development; Harold Danchilla, senior policy analyst. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I welcome the 
minister's officials with regards to the estimates before us, Indian 
and Native Affairs estimates. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to begin my questioning by asking you the 
number of staff you have in your department, their salaries and 
their wages increases, bonuses paid, if any, during the court of the 
last year. 
 

Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I'm sorry, there was noise around you and 
I couldn't hear the last half of your question. Would you please 
repeat that? 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, I asked for information from you to 
provide me with a list of your staff, their salaries, wage 
increments, bonuses paid, if any, over the course of the past year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I gather you're talking about the senior 
staff, are you? I'll send that right over. 
 
Mr. Yew: — My next question to you, Mr. Minister, is related to 
the Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat. Mr. Minister, given the 
Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat's responsibility to co—
ordinate all government budget submissions into a native package 
of programs during the preparation of government estimates, 
could you, Mr. Minister, provide me with this information for the 
fiscal years 1983—84, 1984—85, 1985—86, and the current fiscal 
year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Could the member perhaps qualify his 
question. Are you talking about a report on activities or the 
financial expenditures? 
 
Mr. Yew: — I'm talking about, Mr. Minister, the full government 
budget submissions into what I refer to as a native package of 
programs, related to social and economic programs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Yes, I want to advise the member, I have 
two of the fiscal years he asked for; however, I don't have the 1981 
year he asked for. So I'll send what I have over, and if you require 
anything further because of what you don't find in here, I'll 
undertake to get you the balance. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. My second question to 
you, Mr. Minister: you claimed in your last two annual reports you 
have created some jobs in 1983 and '84 and also some jobs in 
1984—85 through the Indian economic development program. 
Mr. Minister, I would appreciate having from you a breakdown 
which indicates whether these jobs are full-time, part-time, long-
term or short-term jobs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — We could provide a list of the projects for 
you which we did last year as well. The 1,500 jobs that were 
created which I've been using are full-time jobs. 
 
Mr. Yew: — You've mentioned 1,500 jobs, Mr. Minister. Could 
you provide me with the breakdown of where those jobs exist. Are 
they permanent or are they short-term jobs? You know, it's pretty 
hard to assess the successes of the policies and programs of your 
department. You talk about 1,500 jobs — I'd like to know, and the 
people of the North, and the people in general in Saskatchewan, 
and the people of native ancestry throughout the province would 
certainly like to know where those 1,500 jobs are, and if they are 
part-time or long-term employment options. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — The numbers I used are full-time,  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2109 
 
 

permanent jobs. What I could do is send you a full extensive list of 
all the businesses that have started as a result of our fund, and the 
businesses have addresses beside them. I don't have a per business 
breakdown of the jobs on site at this time, but if you wanted to do 
any kind of an analysis, the information I can get you which I have 
with me should give you the basis for that. And if anything further 
again is required, I could supply that for you. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Just following through with that question, Mr. 
Minister, what would be the average rate of pay for those jobs — 
approximate average rate of pay? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — No, I don't have an analysis of that. The 
jobs certainly wouldn't all be classed as minimum wage jobs. 
There's a good range of opportunities that were created in various 
ventures, individuals for instance driving a truck for a sand and 
gravel company as opposed to someone working in a restaurant. 
So you would have your range of salary very similar to any other 
community, I suppose, that you want to compare to, a white 
community in relation to a native community. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Following through to that question, Mr. Minister, in 
terms of employment and unemployment, I would like to ask you, 
Mr. Minister, your perception of what the unemployment rate is in 
the Indian and Métis communities? 
 
(1045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I would suspect that the unemployment 
rate across the board would be 50 per cent or higher, although 
some of the areas such as northern Saskatchewan in your 
constituency, several communities would be probably around the 
80 per cent mark, whereas some reserves would likely have 
unemployment lower than that, such as 30 per cent. So it varies a 
great deal. 
 
However, to sum it in my view, we have a serious unemployment 
problem in the Indian and native communities. And it's something 
that we've been trying to address with our economic development 
program, as well as other work we've been doing — for example, 
with the mining companies in the North to hire local, and to 
acquire participation of Northerners. 
 
However, we also have unemployment in southern communities 
in relation to natives. It's something that is a difficult challenge for 
any government. But I believe we're making progress in that 
regard. 
 
Mr. Yew: — With regards to the Northern Affairs estimates we 
did the other day, earlier in the week, Mr. Minister, particularly I 
think we did it on Monday, I noted in your senior staff that there 
was, in terms of native Indian or Métis senior officials in your 
department, in the information you provided, I couldn't find one 
particular native person of Indian and Métis ancestry in that 
department. 
 
Now in your department in front of us, the Indian and Native 
Affairs Secretariat, I'd like to ask you what percentage of natives 
do you have in that department? 
 

Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I'm pleased to say that it's 42 per cent. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Forty—two per cent. Is that the total list of senior 
executive officials in your department, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well no, 42 per cent is across the board, 
involving all staff in the Native and Indian Affairs Secretariat. So 
it involves some field worker positions. It's across the board, 
unless you wanted a different analysis from me. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Acting Speaker. No I was asking at 
the senior and at the executive level, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well I don't have the percentages broken 
down because our Secretariat isn't that large. However, for 
instance, our director of field services, the senior person is a native 
person. And, as a matter of fact, my deputy seated beside me is 
Métis as well. So we have been cognizant of the need to bring 
people who understand the issues, and we've been quite successful 
in that regard. As well, we've been encouraging communities to 
put forth names of people to us who we could acquire for positions 
that become open in due course, and we're able to acquire some 
highly qualified native people for those positions. And we're very 
pleased with our percentage of 42 per cent. In fact, I'm not sure of 
any other government agency that has acquired that type of 
percentage previously. 
 
Mr. Yew: — A moment ago, Mr. Minister, I appreciated the fact 
that you concurred with me that there is a serious unemployment 
problem in the North and in the province in general with regards 
to Indian and Métis people. The native communities are being 
confronted with a lot of hardships and very few opportunities. Can 
you tell me, Mr. Minister, . . . can you indicate how you 
realistically expect to wipe out native unemployment with an 
effort of the limited magnitude we see before us? 
 
Your government saw fit to announce, during the televised 
coverage of the budget speech, that funding for the Indian 
economic development fund was being increased by $1 million, 
and I refer to Lane's, the Minister of Finance, budget speech of 
March 27th. However your government failed to address the fact 
that funding for the Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat as well 
was slashed by 17 per cent this year — a cut of well over 
$500,000. To be more specific, $513,000. That's over half a 
million for 1986—87. 
 
If the minister is listening, I could go on. So, Mr. Minister, when 
you work out the difference between the increases and the cuts and 
the adjustments for inflation, you really aren't paying much more 
attention to the needs of people of native ancestry. You clearly 
aren't breaking any ground and resolving the massive social and 
economic problems confronted by the native community. In fact, 
Mr. Minister, your paternalistic attitude towards native Indian and 
native people is clear. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have decided to ignore all kinds of 
recommendations in support of the Saskatchewan Native  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2110 
 
 

Economic Development Corporation. I want to ask you: is there 
any chance, Mr. Minister, that you will recognize the need to let 
native people participate in the decision making process, let them 
set their own priorities, and that you will in fact support SNEDCO, 
the Saskatchewan Native Economic Development Corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well, you know, the member mentions a 
lot of issues there, and I think on these matters, as we have before, 
we will be disagreeing and agreeing to disagree because of our 
political differences. 
 
For example, when you look at a budget of one department and 
analyse that and say, well, that won't cure the problem in northern 
Saskatchewan, you're absolutely right because there are a number 
of matters that all work towards increasing employment in the 
North. And I find it extremely difficult for you people in the NDP 
party to at one time say, well, we're concerned about 
unemployment in the North, and in the second breath, when you 
get to your convention in Saskatoon, you pass a resolution to 
phase out uranium mining which employs hundreds and hundreds 
of native people in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So you've got to get your act together and make a decision. Do 
you want real economic growth in northern Saskatchewan, or do 
you want to bring back the DNS? which certainly would have an 
admirable budget before us today, doing nothing for native people 
in northern Saskatchewan. But the politician could stand up and 
say, well, look at these millions of dollars that I'm spending on the 
bureaucracy called the DNS. 
 
Well I don't intend to operate that way. Instead, the secretariat has 
been charged with a more important responsibility than the DNS 
was charged with. The responsibility that my officials have in the 
secretariat is to work with mining companies, with educational 
groups, with departments across the spectrum to determine the 
best ways to maximize employment. 
 
Let me give you an example. You don't have to take it from me in 
the legislature because obviously my opinion may be biased. 
However I'm looking at a clipping from the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix from June of this year, and the headline says: "Cluff 
Lake mining operation example of native commitment." And in 
the article it goes on to explain how successful the Cluff Lake 
project has been with educating Northerners, bringing them into 
the process, and working with northern people to train and to 
employ. 
 
Now this wasn't done because I held the hammer as a government 
cabinet minister over the heads of the officials of Cluff Lake 
mining. This has been going on under our government because the 
companies are realizing that trained people will cost less if they 
can come in from local communities. Now that makes common 
sense, Mr. Chairman, and that's how we continue to operate. 
 
In regards to Key Lake, I mentioned a graduation ceremony I was 
at last year which really exemplifies the difference between this 
government and the former NDP-DNS regime. I attended the 
graduation where  

roughly 20 people from Buffalo Narrows and area were 
graduating from a special mining course that was co-sponsored by 
the mining company and our Department of Advanced Education 
and Manpower. And as they were receiving their certificates, at 
graduation, they also received job offers at the same time — every 
one of them. That means good planning. That's what our 
educational system is now doing in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So we've got a very difficult challenge ahead of us. And I think the 
member and I concur in that respect that we have many 
difficulties, a high unemployment rate. But we have also a 
tradition of governments assuming that they do more than 
Northerners. And if you look at the 11 years under your regime, 
for example, you can point to most communities and you can see 
the unemployment rate increasing over the total 11-year period 
under your administration. 
 
Now that's not necessarily your fault because there were some 
complex issues working there. But I raise that to indicate that 
bringing back the DNS or changing its name to SNEDCO, will not 
solve the problem. The economy in northern Saskatchewan is in a 
sense fragile, however there's great and vast opportunities in 
tourism, in mining, in processing. You look at the wild rice 
business in La Ronge that is on its feet because of this 
government. It's something that we recognized. It's not to say we 
invented wild rice because we didn't, but if you give Northerners a 
chance to do things on their own, they'll flourish and prosper. 
 
I don't feel we need the DNS back. I think things are improving 
and continuing to improve. However, I think governments also 
have to show a willingness to change and to change policies. I 
think with the two northern members, we have been thankful for 
your input, your suggestions on a number of items, but I think in a 
non-political sense outside of this Assembly, you would admit that 
there's extreme difficulties and difficult challenges ahead of us 
which we must address. 
 
Our view is that the main way of addressing those difficulties is 
economic development. There must be economic development 
with participation of Northerners, and it must be done in an 
intelligent way. I would suggest that the DNS failed in that regard 
because everything was designed somewhere else, not in the 
North. And I think the activities between Northerners and mining 
companies today are an example of what could happen across the 
spectrum — co-operation and progress as a result — not through 
legislation, not through the heavy hand of government. Unless you 
have an example that proves otherwise, I will continue in that 
direction. 
 
In terms of SNEDCO (Saskatchewan Native Economic 
Development corporation) that's been discussed for some time 
now. And I realize that the member is associated with AMNSIS 
(Association of Métis and Non-Status Indians of Saskatchewan) 
and some of the individuals in AMNSIS who have done a great 
deal of work. They have done a great deal of work in that area to 
forward the concept of SNEDCO. 
 
My understanding is, on the federal level, the federal  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2111 
 
 

government has come back to the group and asked for a total 
business plan. We are reluctant to fund political agencies that 
intend to become economic agencies. We had some concern there 
because we've seen it in the past. 
 
As you recall when our government took office, we removed $2 
million from the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations) and instead began to use it for economic development 
projects on reserves. That's why we have the 1,500 new jobs that I 
spoke of earlier. 
 
So I'm reluctant to finance political regimes for economic 
development purposes. However, I see a great deal of promise in 
some of these suggestions built into the SNEDCO proposal, and 
I've indicated that this government may be interested in 
participating on a business arrangement, perhaps, with the 
individuals in the communities that do set up new businesses. We 
may be willing to participate. 
 
In terms of the economic situation in our budget, if you are talking 
about cuts, I don't think that's totally fair. I think you'll have to see 
the increase in funding in the native economic development 
program that we have — the increase by $1 million. That should 
be taken into consideration when you're using your figures. As 
well, you will note that there is Indian participation in terms of that 
fund. We have a board of representatives chosen by the districts, 
and we value the input we've received from those particular 
districts. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Just before I go on to my next question, Mr. 
Minister, I have a few comments I want to make in regards to the 
response you just gave me. But I want to go back to the mention 
that you made about 1,500 jobs. Did you provide me with that 
information yet, or will that information be forthcoming? 
 
(1100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — We'll supply you with the copy of the list 
before the estimates are over; I'll just get it photocopied. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now the 17 per cent cut I 
referred to was directly related to the Indian and Native Affairs 
Secretariat portion whereby last year you . . . the department had 
allotted $1.5 million as compared to 1.4, and I was doing some 
mathematics last night, and I find that there is a cut of $513,000 
which represent 17 per cent cut. 
 
And also, Mr. Minister, I noted in your department you have cut 
four jobs, four—person year jobs as well, and this, Mr. Minister, 
indicates to me that you are putting a very low priority in an area 
that needs a tremendous amount of encouragement. The Indian, 
the Métis people, the native communities are the ones that are 
being confronted with the most severe hardships in this province. 
 
I look at the Justice estimates we had before us just the other day 
and noted that there are now, not 63, but 64 per cent native people 
of Indian and Métis ancestry incarcerated in our provincial jails, 
and in the women's correctional centres and jails, that is up by 84 
per cent — pardon me, it is now 84 per cent; that is up as well. 
That  

indicates to me, Mr. Minister, that, you know, there are severe 
hardships confronting the people of my ancestry — Indian and 
Métis people. 
 
And I'm glad that you concur with me that the problem of 
unemployment is very serious, particularly in the northern 
administration district. And I see before me, you refer to some 
news clippings. I can provide you, Mr. Minister, with some news 
clippings that tell me what your department has done. 
governments — in one clipping here dated April 5th of '86 of this 
year, the headline reads: "Government aid scares for Métis 
business plans." 
 
I want to maybe read a quote off what the executive of the 
AMNSIS (Association of Métis and Non-Status Indians of 
Saskatchewan) association said: 
 

. . . established by the Association of Métis and Non-Status 
Indians of Saskatchewan, the corporation which is in 
question, SNEDCO (the Saskatchewan Native Economic 
Development Corporation), the corporation plan an array of 
activities, business investments, training opportunities and 
programs, and a trust company, to name a few, all calculated 
to bring more Métis and Non-Status Indians into the 
mainstream of society and the provincial economy. 

 
We don't, Mr. Minister, always want to be dependent upon 
government. And I read another news clipping Mr. Minister, 
SNEDCO, the program we are referring to, again the headline 
reads: "SNEDCO funds cut because of bureaucracy." 
 
Mr. Minister, these indicate to me that you are putting very little 
emphasis in that one particular ethnic group of people that direly 
need encouragement, support and some sound economic 
commitments towards native self-determination. I read also, Mr. 
Minister, you didn't mention FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations). I have some colleagues in FSIN that provide me 
with information, but seeing as how you read from clippings, I 
want to read you another clipping. The headline reads: "Royalties 
are sought — treaty Indians, real owners of resources". And I want 
to read to you, Mr. Minister, how the member for Estevan, the 
Premier of today, how he has also ignored the needs of the Indian, 
the Métis and non-status people of this province. 
 
Sol Sanderson, the president of FSIN, stated in part, he said: 
 

Premier Grant Devine makes a big show of allocating $2 
million a year to Saskatchewan Indians for a few economic 
development projects. "We're saying to the premier . . ." 

 
And this is what I quote from Mr. Sol Sanderson, chief of the 
FSIN: 
 

"We're saying to the premier of this province; 'Look, we don't 
want your $2 million. We want our fair share of those 
economic dollars generated from those non-renewable 
resources'." 

 
Coming out of the North and coming out of various  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2112 
 
 

renewable and non-renewable resources in this province. 
 
The native organizations, Mr. Minister, can succeed provided that 
a government, the provinces and the federal government, commit 
themselves. Another clipping I have here, Mr. Minister, indicates 
to me that SNEDCO, the program initiated by AMNSIS 
(Association of Métis and Non-Status Indians of Saskatchewan) 
says that its economic plan will succeed. Mr. Minister, Tim Lowe, 
who is the administrator for the program said that: 
 

. . . SNEDCO could be brought to life with about $13 
million. It already has been recommended for $12.9. 

 
That is a misquote there, Mr. Minister, the actual figure that the 
federal government has approved is $9.1 million. Anyway, 
continuing, the article reads: 
 

. . . $12.9 million from Ottawa by the northern economic 
development program, (a program which was initiated by the 
federal government allotting $345 million in the course of so 
many years for all the provinces across Canada) and 4.5 
million by Regina was supposed to have been contributed, but 
it seems that there has been no commitment to date. 

 
It seems like a lot of money. AMNSIS says that it seems like a lot 
of money. But AMNSIS pointed out . . . If the member for P.A.—
Duck Lake would listen and stop getting ill-information advice 
from the member for P.A., he might get the question and the 
seriousness of this issue quite clearly. 
 
AMNSIS pointed out an entrepreneur, Peter Pocklington, was able 
to get more than $20 million in various breaks from the province 
for one bacon processing plant. The native people — Indian, 
Métis, and non-status people are saying, you are putting money in 
the hands of the rich, the wealthy, and the powerful, but very little 
effort and commitment into the people that directly need that type 
of funding, Mr. Minister. 
 
You can give Peter Pocklington $21 million, 11 million of which 
is a loan guarantee, and 10 million of it which is just an outrageous 
outstanding grant to a millionaire — a person well-off; a person 
that don't need that type of assistance. That is why this 
Conservative government is going to be ousted out of office in the 
next general election once the member for Estevan, the Premier of 
this province, gets the courage to call an election. 
 
I look at other news clippings, Mr. Minister. You were the one that 
started throwing around newspaper clippings. I can read you two 
letters from two different mayors that were published, made 
public. And I'll read them to you, Mr. Minister. In a recent article 
in the Star—Phoenix, the mayor for Ile-a-la-Crosse said: 
 

Mr. Sid Dutchak, the minister responsible for northern and 
native affairs, and the rest of his cowardly government . . . 

 
If the member for Saskatoon Riversdale would give me an 

opportunity to finish my debate. And if she wants to enter the 
debate, fine, I'll debate with her on native issues any day, any 
week, any time. She has probably not faced the hardships that I 
and my people have faced. 
 
In terms of the letter, Mr. Minister, it says: 
 

Sid Dutchak, the minister responsible for northern and native 
affairs, and the rest of his cowardly government will never 
be able to recognize the condition of northern people, 
especially northern native people. What they will recognize, 
however, is the need for more rape and exploitation of 
northern resources with proper restitution to us. 

 
He goes on to say: 
 

We approach governments with reasonable alternatives that 
we know will work, and they call them "grandiose." 

 
That is what you said, Mr. Minister. He is quoting your response 
to some of the positive alternatives that Indian, Métis, and non-
status people have placed before your department. You call them 
grandiose. 
 

Furthermore, Dutchak believes that political organizations 
have not solved economic problems in any society. I 
certainly hope he is looking at his political, organized 
government (which you are), in which case I will agree with 
him, especially when I look at how much they've . . . (and 
that's an unparliamentary word here but) . . . and how much 
you have mismanaged our provincial economy. 

 
I won't use the word that's printed in here . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . If I said that word, then you guys will kick me out 
of the House. This is an important part of the estimates. 
 
And then there's another letter here by a councillor: "Northern 
Saskatchewan still being treated poorly." Just one little quote here 
from one paragraph. 
 
They can appoint, and that's referring to your northern 
development advisory board, the goldarn sounding board that you 
established with no authority, no mandate, no terms of reference, 
nothing — where you bypass the elected officials in the North, 
where you bypass northern organizations, where you bypass 
special interest groups such as the trappers' association, the 
fishermen's organizations, just to name a few. 
 
He goes on to say, and this letter . . . The former letter was written 
by the mayor of Ile-a-la-Crosse, Napoleon Gardiner. This letter is 
written by Max Morin, a councillor in that same council. And in 
general he says: 
 
They can appoint committee after committee and keep studying 
us. But things will never work because again our future is decided 
by the government in the south. The government hasn't made a 
commitment to the northern revenue-sharing (needs in our 
communities). 
 
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2113 
 
 

And then again, Mr, Minister, I look at another bunch of 
newspaper articles: "Welfare is claimed to be killing Buffalo 
Narrows Indians" — another mayor, a Leonard Larsen — another 
mayor, Mr. Minister. And it just goes . . . The course of your 
administration, now that we're into our fifth budget, into your fifth 
year of office, we still have not resolved any issues pertinent to 
resolving the hardships that confront the Indian, the Métis, and the 
non-status Indians in this province. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, the federal government 
committed itself to $9.1 million to fund the Saskatchewan Native 
Economic Development Corporation from the native economic 
development agency which provided that 345 million. I want to 
ask you, Mr. Minister, how does the province of Saskatchewan 
plan to participate in this major initiative? 
 
(1115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — As I indicated before, we've indicated 
publicly that if there is some sense made out of the program, if the 
federal funding does take place, we may assist some establishment 
of businesses. In fact, we have some programs now. The Gainers 
plant which you're speaking of is available to native businesses as 
well, the same program that applied in the Gainers case. We 
would be willing to look at native business to see whether there's 
any provincial assistance which would be necessary. 
 
However, I want to indicate to you that if you're accusing me of 
saying no to sending $4 million over to a political organization, 
then I accept that criticism because I won't send it over. The 
taxpayers of this province have had their money given to various 
organizations in the past which didn't result in anything successful. 
And as a result I feel we were elected in '82 to be more cautious 
and have more respect for those taxpayers' dollars. 
 
And I don't particularly see the relevance in you saying you've 
been through some hard times and therefore you can make all 
these silly accusations in the legislature. That has no effect here. If 
you come up with anything that makes sense, we will look at it. 
 
Some of the comments you made . . . We know you're against the 
bacon plant; your party is against the bacon plant, but it's not 
because of any native issues; it's because you simply don't like free 
enterprise. We know that you're against uranium mining. We 
know you want to shut the uranium mines down. I think, with the 
exception of the member from Athabasca, the members on that 
side of the House feel they want to close down uranium mining. I 
don't know how that creates jobs when half of the people 
employed in the industry are native. When you look at the other 
issues, the paper—mill in Prince Albert, the opposition to that mill 
which creates many hundreds of jobs in northern Saskatchewan 
. . .  
 
So you're getting back to quoting certain native leaders that 
happen to support your political party, saying that because these 
native leaders are saying that we're not doing a good job, we must 
not be doing a good job. Well I simply don't accept that. 
 

You quote Mr. Sanderson criticizing our economic development 
fund. Well I think that quote took place some time ago. And it 
may be in your interest to speak to Mr. Sanderson, because I 
understand in recent days he's submitted his own personal 
application to that fund. Now some of you people had better make 
up your minds as to where you stand on some of these issues. It's 
easy to speak to the press, but to carry through with actions is 
another story. 
 
In terms of some of the groups and consultation, I've gone through 
this in my Northern Affairs estimates. In terms of the trappers' 
organization, I haven't heard the dissatisfaction from the trappers' 
association that you've brought into the Assembly today — which 
indicates to me either you're out of touch, or I am, and I intend to 
look into that. 
 
I've been consulting with the trappers' association. As you recall, 
one of the resolutions discussed at your NDP convention is to ban 
leg-hold traps. I was approached by the trappers' association 
regarding that resolution. My understanding is your party did not 
pass that resolution; however, it indicates the type of philosophy 
that you people believe in. And my understanding is that an NDP 
member in Ontario, or Manitoba in fact, tabled a Bill to ban leg-
hold trapping. 
 
Now if you really are concerned about Northerners and concerned 
about real issues, you'd better start paying attention to some of the 
issues and some of the directions of your party in regards to native 
issues. 
 
The final thing I want to mention is that sharing revenue is 
something that I've heard and I've read in newspapers. When you 
ask someone to define what that really means, it's difficult to 
define, particularly from those who appear to be throwing around 
the term. The individual that you quoted, I'm not sure how he 
would define revenue sharing; however, sharing, in my books, 
means a give and take. And I'm not sure what he is prepared to 
give in this system. 
 
We have a large part of Saskatchewan that's occupied by roughly 
30,000 people — 30,000 people that in a general sense have an 
honest intent to move ahead and progress. However, it's my 
impression that some of the leadership doesn't always indicate 
what the people at the community level are saying. And for you to 
simply restrict your work in this Assembly to standing up and 
quoting two or three certain leaders that happen to be members of 
your party, I don't know why you would not look into a little more 
depth; I don't know why you wouldn't want to tell this Assembly 
what the communities are saying about uranium mining, or about 
some of the other enterprises. 
 
What is the community of La Ronge saying about the rice 
processing plant that was funded by this government which put the 
wild rice industry on its feet in the La Ronge area? What is that 
community saying about us? What is the La Ronge area saying 
about the La Ronge gold belt activity which is creating hundreds 
of new jobs because of our Progressive Conservative policy on 
gold mining? 
 
It would be more helpful if you brought in something constructive 
rather than quoting people and becoming a  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2114 
 
 

puppet of certain leaders. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, I want to ask you, you referred to that 
4.1 million. Did you say, or did you not say, that you would 
support the Saskatchewan Native Economic Development 
Corporation with 4.1, or that you wouldn't? You went on to say 
that you were elected to administer taxpayers' money in this 
province in an appropriate manner. I would like to ask you: was 
the answer yes or no? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — The answer was that we were elected to 
have respect for taxpayers and the money that they pay to 
government. Secondly . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If you can 
keep your associate quiet, I'll answer the second part of your 
question. The member from Quill Lakes appears to be talkative. 
I'm not sure whether he's ventured north of Regina. 
 
However, the 4 million was the 4 million that I was asked for to 
simply dump into the SNEDCO fund to join the federal dollars 
that were coming in. My answer was no. My answer was that if 
the SNEDCO fund got on its feet and began to do economic things 
in the communities which were visible, if new businesses started, 
we would do everything in our powers provincially to assist those 
viable businesses and viable new enterprise which are the real job 
creators in our society. 
 
That was my answer. But as far as throwing $4 million of 
taxpayers' money unconditionally at the group that has done a 
great deal of work in this area, putting this proposal together, my 
answer was no. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you very much for making that clear, Mr. 
Minister. In other words, then, you have no commitment to the 
Indian, the Métis, and non-status people of this province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to go back to the initial statement you made about looking 
after taxpayers' money in this province. I'll tell you, Mr. Minister, 
you have mismanaged that money very drastically. You have now 
put this province in a deficit position of well over $2 billion, of 
which every man, woman, and child now owes well over $2,000 
each annually — just on the interest payments alone. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order. Order. We are not 
discussing the deficit or anything of that nature . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Order, order, order. I would ask the member from 
Cumberland to keep on the topic of Indian and Native Affairs 
Secretariat . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the ruling. I may 
suggest to the minister and the deputy chairman that . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Excuse me, Mr. Chairman, I want to 
indicate to the member asking the question that I cannot hear a 
word of what he's saying. His colleagues are so noisy that I am 
unable to hear what he's asking me. I wonder if you can bring that 
to his attention. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the minister responsible for 
Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat was the one that initiated 
discussions about uranium, about  

the bacon plant in North Battleford, and about the management . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. There is no way that this 
question and answer can go on in a proper manner with this kind 
of noise, and I would ask the members to please control 
themselves. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In terms of 
looking after the public treasury, Mr. Minister, I was saying that 
you have mismanaged our economy. Rather than helping the 
people that direly need the help, you have allotted tremendous 
amount of revenue to other wealthier corporations. 
 
I look before me at Manalta Coal of Alberta, where you gave them 
a $145 million loan guarantee. You gave Weyerhaeuser a major 
agreement of $250 million of taxpayers' money. I don't argue that. 
It may or may not provide jobs, but it did certainly one thing for 
sure, Mr. Minister, in the North, and the people in this province 
were not consulted, involved; there was no public involvement. 
And that is questionable, Mr. Minister, when it come to the terms 
of reference of that particular agreement. 
 
And then in terms of Husky Oil, you gave them $390 million loan 
guarantee again. And then you go on to indicate to me that you are 
responsible for taxpayers' money. How are you responsible for 
taxpayers' money when you put this province well over $2 billion 
in the red? All we're asking for is a fair share — a fair share — of 
the revenues generated from the North. 
 
Just last night I was listening to the news, Mr. Minister. In terms 
of uranium, you raised the issue of uranium, $600 million was 
generated through uranium and through the uranium industry in 
northern Saskatchewan — $600 million — and not to mention the 
other receipts like tourism, forestry, trapping, commercial fishing, 
etc., etc. There are billions — millions, perhaps maybe in the 
billion dollars coming out of our resources, our non-renewable 
resources and the renewable resources from the northern 
administration district. And you fail to commit yourself to $4.1 
million, which is absolutely ridiculous when compared to the 
money that you earmarked for the major multinational 
corporations in this province, and out of the province, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
If you want to make a remark on that, go ahead. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — No, I don't particularly want to remark on 
that. I think we have obviously some deep philosophical 
differences in the way we approach job creation. Your approach is 
to utilize taxpayers' dollars to make work; our position is to create 
real economic development which creates jobs. 
 
Let me give you an example. In the uranium industry alone, %6 
million flows into Prince Albert in terms of wages from direct 
employment in the uranium mines. Those types of numbers exist 
in northern Saskatchewan as well, the communities all over the 
North. That's real job creation. 
 
So when you're talking about sharing revenue, I think we  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2115 
 
 

have to talk about the benefits from economic development. I'm 
sure it's within the interest of some people to simply ask 
government for $4 million based on some — perceived on fairness 
somewhere. But I simply will not authorize that kind of a waste of 
taxpayers' dollars, and expenditures of that type will only take 
place in areas that make economic sense. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, on March 26th, 1984, 
you published a review of what was referred to as the native social 
economic development package in this province. I want to ask 
you: do you, as a minister responsible for this department, agree 
with the major conclusions of that report? Number one, it states in 
that report: 
 

Government overall policy objectives in relation to Native 
economic development are not clearly formulated. 

 
(1130) 
 
And number two, Mr. Minister . . . These are the 
recommendations from that report. Number two: 
 

The current level of activity devoted to Native economic 
development in Saskatchewan is probably insufficient to 
produce any significant narrowing of the gap between people 
of Native ancestry and non-natives. 

 
Then finally, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion: 
 

Indeed the level of provincial activity devoted to direct Native 
economic expansion may, if anything, be declining somewhat. 

 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I asked for the study, which you quote 
from, to be done to show us where the opportunities were and 
some of the pitfalls faced by governments in the past. And that 
was commissioned when I was a new minister and when our 
government was relatively new. I found it quite helpful in 
formulating new policies. In fact, the clause you quote from was 
recognized when we structured our Indian economic development 
fund. The $6 million that has now been spent under that fund has 
managed . . . we levered over $21 million as a result of that $6 
million expenditures. And that leveraging took place because of 
bank financing that joined the government financing. 
 
And we looked to some innovative approaches, and that's really 
what that study does. The study is a long—term study that I think 
government departments can learn from over the years as we go 
through a transition phase, allowing Northerners to do more on 
their own and not to be dictated to by an overbearing government 
agency such as the DNS was. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I got part of your question, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
There is so much noise on that side of the House. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, was this: will the minister agree 
with this report and its conclusion, condemning the poor policies 
of your PC government? 
 

Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well, you know, the member should have 
taken the time to read the report he quotes from, and I'm not sure 
who writes his questions. But that particular analysis that you're 
reading from was done in a historic way, of previous government 
programming. And in fact there was consideration made of the 
federal programming that knits into some of the provincial 
programs. 
 
So you know, I'm not saying that our programs are perfect. And 
that's why we do studies like that which we've released publicly. 
The fact that we ask for people to be critical of our programming, I 
believe, is a sign of a caring government. And that's why we did 
that. So I don't know why you're saying there's something sinister 
about being criticized, or constructive criticism being presented by 
a report. That report will continue to be used when we formulate 
our policies in the future, as we have been using it in the last two 
years. 
 
Mr. Yew: — The report was commissioned by yourself, the PC 
government, in 1983. And the firm that did the report — I know 
you're aware, but for the record — was done by Thorne Stevenson 
& Kellogg. And the final submission was March 26th of '84. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, what have you as the minister 
done during the last year to correct the situations as outlined in this 
report and as brought to you in terms of issues by people of native 
ancestry? Can you outline some program initiatives, and as well, 
can you outline any funding initiatives? What have you done to 
resolve the problems as indicated in this report? And finally, Mr. 
Minister, can you tell me the precise cost of the study itself? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well that cost was dealt with in a previous 
budget. I can get the figure for you and send it to you. We don't 
have that with us. In fact, Mr. Leask, who is now with us, wasn't 
employed by us at that time and doesn't have any personal 
knowledge as well. We'll get that to you. 
 
In terms of correcting matters, I look at it as a study that could be 
used to improve the situation, and I believe there's room for 
improvement. And we're constantly working with native people 
and the federal government to improve our programming, because 
certainly things are not perfect. However, we've been pleased with 
the progress made to date. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, we understand that the province has 
been negotiating self-government issues with the Métis for some 
10 months. This process flows from the Saskatchewan position at 
the 1985 first ministers' conference. What accomplishments, Mr. 
Minister, and successes have been achieved today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well along with the Métis leaders from 
Saskatchewan, I attended a constitutional conference within the 
last 14 days, and I think one of the major accomplishments we've 
reached is bringing the federal government together with us, 
understanding that there's certain fundamental issues that must be 
determined towards a recognition of the necessity to transfer more 
responsibility to native people to govern  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2116 
 
 

their own affairs, and those involved jurisdictional issues who is 
responsible, whether the federal or provincial governments are, in 
relation to Métis aspirations. And the Métis leaders in 
Saskatchewan agreed with my position taken in Ottawa recently, 
and I believe we've made progress. 
 
In terms of the tripartite negotiations that have been going on, I 
would have hoped to make more progress. However, many of the 
problems we ran into were connected with some of the issues 
which we brought to the constitutional table within the last two 
weeks, and I believe now we're on track again. 
 
And it's a very slow process, but let me say in a general sense, this 
government believes that more responsibility must be passed to 
both Indian and Métis people to govern their own affairs, they 
own responsibilities, and we're seeing that happen now. On Indian 
reserves, for example, the federal government is passing more 
powers on to the Indian bands to govern their own administration, 
and that movement will continue, and I believe that that will be to 
the benefit of all native people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Now, Mr. Minister, getting back to funding for 
native organizations for a time before I get into more serious 
questions regarding native self-determination, I want to ask you: in 
terms of the scholarship fund — we were talking about SNEDCO 
a moment ago — in terms of the scholarship fund, some 18 
months ago a major contribution of $615,000 was received by the 
federal government for scholarships for Métis people now in 
studies related to economics and human development. I want to 
ask you, Mr. Minister, when and how does the province of 
Saskatchewan plan to participate in this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I actually don't know what the status is 
today; however, within the last 30 days, I met with our Minister of 
Advanced Education and Manpower who's responsible for that 
particular issue, and my understanding is that it's under present 
consideration. We have met with the aboriginal people involved in 
the issue, and I believe a response will be forthcoming shortly. 
However, the Minister of Advanced Education and Manpower is 
responsible for that particular question. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Would you say then, Mr. Minister, that in this 
current fiscal year, that financing for such a program would be 
available? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — No, I can't say that. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Again, I must say, you have very little priority on 
people of, you know, the people that are not at all in the social, 
cultural, and economic mainstream of society. 
 
I want to ask you again another question regarding the 
Saskatchewan Native Economic Development Foundation, Mr. 
Minister. The federal government committed itself at $300,000 
over the course of three years . . . Pardon me, this is related to 
native women’s' issues. 
 
The Saskatchewan Native Economic Development Foundation 
has committed $300,000 over the course of  

three years to address equality and access. I wonder, Mr. Minister, 
what input you have in that respect. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — My understanding is the matter which 
you've just asked about is part of the SNEDCO (Saskatchewan 
Native Economic Development Foundation) proposal and has not 
been approved by the federal government. You can correct me. I 
may be confusing that with another funding issue. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I met with a native organization just yesterday 
morning, Mr. Minister, and a commitment of 300,000 was made. 
That commitment is firm. The agreement is there. And I want to 
ask you, Mr. Minister, in terms of native women’s' issues, how 
much will you provide? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I'm unable to indicate that because quite 
frankly I wasn't aware that the work had been completed on the 
federal side. We knew it was part of a general package that was 
proposed, but I was not aware of that. And obviously, when we 
know exactly what the federal government is doing, we'll be 
looking at it to determine our provincial position. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, once you have done your homework 
on that particular program or issue, and once you have established 
the policy, would you please provide me with a copy of what 
initiatives or input your government is prepared to provide. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Yes, I'll contact you and provide you with 
our position when it becomes appropriate. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Getting right into the estimates before us, Mr. 
Minister, can you indicate to me . . . Can the minister also outline 
to me what impact we can expect as a result of reduced staffing 
within the Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — We've realigned responsibilities 
internally. We don't think there's going to be a shortfall anywhere. 
Those positions were not all filled in the first place, and we simply 
closed the positions. I believe from the numbers there's a net loss 
of three — not four — one has been filled again, and everything is 
functioning as it should. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, can you explain why you 
have cut grants to Indian and native organizations? Do you, as the 
minister, want to have these organizations collapse so that you will 
be free of criticism for all your inactions in terms of the native 
communities? And also, Mr. Minister, if an organizational funding 
is down, while ministerially your cabinet has gone, up from 24 
down to 19, because of political pressures; and while there is so 
much political patronage on your part, I want to ask you, Mr. 
Minister: what then is your program — what is your program for 
people of native ancestry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well I could get into it with you as far as 
expenditures. However, I think you know what my response 
would be. I wonder if you could specify what cuts you're referring 
to. You're talking about cuts to native organizations. Could you 
give me one example that I could deal with? 
 
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2117 
 
 

Mr. Yew: — Well, Mr. Minister, I can give you the example of 
the cut-backs in staffing of the Indian and Native Affairs 
Secretariat. I could give you the cut-back in the estimates before 
us, of $513,000. That's well over a half a million dollar cut-back. 
And I could also advise you, Mr. Minister, that you have not made 
any commitment towards jointly funding the Saskatchewan Native 
Economic Development Corporation for $4.1 million, where you 
can just ridiculously give a millionaire like Peter Pocklington $10 
million grants. I just simply cannot understand the mentality of 
your government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well I think that may be your problem. I 
don't think you can understand the mentality of our government. 
However, you had indicated in this House on your feet a few 
minutes ago that native organizations have been cut back. I simply 
ask you to tell me which one you're referring to, or did you make 
an error in that accusation. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, I just outlined to you four different 
items that you had concurred that there were cuts and that you had 
not made any commitments. If you have no answer to it, I'll just go 
on to another portion of our questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I gather you won't correct yourself. You 
said that native organizations were cut, so that statement you made 
is incorrect. As far as the administration of the secretariat, I 
explained to you what happened there. There is a decrease in 
number of people, a decrease in expenditures, as well as some new 
initiatives. SNEDCO is one of them we haven't agreed to spend 
any new money at. However that's different from a cut-back. A 
cut-back means that you start somewhere and spend less the next 
year. 
 
(1145) 
 
So if you have nay of those, I'll be pleased to address them; 
otherwise, I don't intend to get in an argument with you on the 
Gainers plant in North Battleford, which I know your party 
opposes; and I don't want to get into anything of that nature 
because it doesn't have much to do with our estimates. If there's 
anything further specific that you'd like to know, I'll give you the 
immediate and precise answer. 
 
Mr. Yew: — You continuously put words in our mouth, Mr. 
Minister. We are not against development. Let me make that clear. 
We are for development that will create jobs, alleviate the high 
unemployment rates that your government has generated in this 
province. We are for development that will alleviate the high 
welfare dependency rates. And in particular, Mr. Minister, the 
estimates before us relate to Indian and native affairs. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, in your heading, in the heading of 
your department, it clearly states that your department is called 
Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat. I want to ask you, Mr. 
Minister, why call it the Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat 
when in the province of Saskatchewan we have Indian, Métis, and 
non-status people? Why native? 
 

Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well that's an interesting statement the 
member has just made because the name of the department was 
derived at by speaking to certain community representatives on the 
meaning of native and Indian. And if the department was called 
Indian affairs, it obviously wouldn't include the definition of 
Métis. 
 
However, it's my understanding that Métis is part of the native 
group who are native to this country, and this is the first time I 
have ever heard this criticism. I wonder if the member . . . You 
perhaps would want to drop a letter to me to indicate your 
objection. I've never had that raised before. And you're saying that 
the Métis people are not native people. Is that my understanding of 
what you're saying? 
 
Mr. Yew: — What I am saying is that in the first ministers' 
conference the provinces and the federal government recognized 
in the aboriginal constitutional talks, Indian, Métis, and Inuit. And 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, why try to — what's the word? — 
camouflage or smoke-screen the fact that we in Saskatchewan are 
Indian and Métis and non-status people? The first ministers' 
conference recognized the Indian, the Inuit, and the Métis. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well that's an interesting argument, and 
I'd be pleased to run your comments by some of the leaders of the 
Indian and Métis population in Saskatchewan and get their view 
on it. I've never heard the objection before. And in fact your 
statement to me is very novel. As you know, we don't have Inuit in 
Saskatchewan; we have Indian, non-status, and Métis people. 
 
I haven't spent a lot of time worrying about the title of our 
department. It hasn't been a high priority. We have priorities of 
creating jobs for native people and economic self-sufficiency. 
However, if it is a legitimate concern that you as an elected 
member of an important northern constituency has raised, I intend 
to then take your objections today and consult with the Indian and 
Métis leaders in Saskatchewan to get their view and correct the 
situation if necessary. 
 
Mr. Yew: — In finalization in my estimates, Mr. Minister, I want 
to ask you: can the minister please advise where he stands on the 
issue of native self—government in terms of a land base for non-
status and Métis people in this province, and in terms of resource 
revenue sharing with people of Indian, Métis, and non-status in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — In terms of the whole issue, those items 
are on the constitutional table and involve a determination of 
jurisdiction. I indicated earlier that this government believes that 
more responsibility must be passed to Indian and Métis people in 
terms of some of the other issues you're talking about. They do 
follow that course. For example, you can't discuss revenue sharing 
when you haven't determined jurisdiction. Who shares revenue 
with whom? And I've also stated to the native leadership as well 
that there's going to be a sharing of responsibility as well as a 
sharing of revenue, if we get to that point. 
 
And I believe there's a great deal of opportunity in northern 
Saskatchewan for native people to be in control  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2118 
 
 

of their own affairs and develop the resources that we see being 
developed in northern Saskatchewan, training is taking place. I 
think there's vast opportunities. However, it's difficult for me to 
specify what self-government would look like when I don't believe 
anyone around the constitutional table can really describe it in any 
consistency. 
 
So there is a process taking place, and we're part of that process, 
and I believe we'll see some progress in that regard. However, our 
main concern is economic self-sufficiency and economic 
development for our native people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Yew: — If you believe, Mr. Minister, in resolving issues 
related to the Indian, and Métis, and non-status people of this 
province, why won't you provide a sound commitment towards 
building a sound economic base for people of native ancestry, a 
land base, commitments towards the constitutional talks, the first 
ministers' conferences held in Ottawa? 
 
Just a moment ago you talked to me whereby you will not fund the 
Saskatchewan Native Economic Development Corporation for 4.1 
when the feds can provide $9.1 million. We need capital, Mr. 
Minister. We need capital, and we need sufficient and significant 
capital in order to begin being participants in the social and 
economic mainstream of society. We don't want welfare hand—
outs. That is a waste of money, Mr. Minister. 
 
I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, that our position, the New 
Democratic Party's position in terms of aboriginal people in this 
province and in all of Canada, as far as that goes, is this: in terms 
of native self-determination or in terms of Indian, Métis, and non-
status people in this province, I want to read to you the study that 
we concurred with and the recommendations that we concurred 
with, and then we can get right down into estimates: 
 

After years (Mr. Minister) of paternalism and assimilationist 
policies, a growing number of Canadians are recognizing the 
rights of aboriginal people to self-determination. Paternalism 
has not advanced the interests or served the needs of native 
people. 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, order, please. Order, 
please. We're having difficulty hearing the member from 
Cumberland making his statement. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Attacks on 
native culture and institutions have harmed native people and have 
brought them down within the mainstream of our society. It is 
important to remember that, in all groups within Canada, the 
native people did not choose the new order but had it imposed 
upon them. They were already here. 
 
The concept of native self-government, Mr. Minister, should not 
be difficult for a people schooled in pluralistic federalism to 
understand. We find three levels of governments workable. A 
measure of self-government has been granted to universities, trade 
unions, and professional associations, among others. Our political 
culture is at heart against central control over all aspects  

of citizens' lives. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, national government control over aspects 
of Indian people's lives has been a fact of life throughout our 
shared history. The national government has always made 
economic and social decisions for Indian communities that other 
communities have made locally. Not only has this system of 
central control been unequal and unjust, it has been grossly 
inefficient. 
 
Mr. Minister, other aboriginal peoples, such as the Métis, Indians, 
and the non-status Indians, have lived in a condition of less than 
benign neglect at the mercy of governments foreign to their 
communities and culture. The principle of equality demands that 
they receive a measure of control over their own institutions. 
 
Our resolution, the New Democratic Party's resolution to that, Mr. 
Minister, is this: 
 

That the New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan will 
unequivocally endorse the principle of Indian, Métis, and 
non-status self-government for Canada's aboriginal people. 

 
That, Mr. Minister, is our position. To this point in time, your 
government on that side of the House have not made any 
commitments, not have you shared in any of the compassion that 
we on this side of the House feel for the people of native ancestry. 
 
You have mismanaged this economy so bad that it is, you know, 
the reason why your Premier will not call a general election. You 
are running . . . You can run, but you can't hide. One day your time 
will come, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, I only had a couple of 
questions I wanted to ask of the minister, and make a couple of 
comments. And I'll give you the questions first. And if you could 
just supply me with the land entitlements that are entitled to the 
seven bands: the big C Band, the English River Band, the Dillon 
Band, the Turnor Lake, Canoe Lake, Black Lake and Fond du Lac 
Bands. If you could just provide me, if they are negotiating — I 
know Fond du Lac and Black Lake, I believe, are finished — what 
outstanding land claims are there for the other five that I have 
named. 
 
Also I would like to know . . . Mr. Minister, if you could give me 
an update on the negotiations between the small community of 
Sled Lake and the Red Pheasant Band who, I believe, are trying to 
get some land in that area, and there is some conflict with Sled 
Lake. If you could provide me with that, Mr. Minister. 
 
I just want to make a few comments. I think that we do see a 
change on the reserve system and in local governments in northern 
Saskatchewan, where you see a lot of the new chiefs and council 
who now are prepared to take over more and more responsibilities. 
And I think that that is the direction that we should be going, is to 
give the chiefs and their council a lot more say, support — 
technical support and financial support — where needed. 
 
I also want to say that the northern communities, and I give you 
one example — I don't want to take too much  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2119 
 
 

time here — of La Loche, where you have a totally local 
community with the mayor and everything being of Indian 
ancestry. And all they need is technical support and financial 
support, and they're quite capable — and I'm just using the one 
town — they're quite capable of running their own affairs. 
 
I just want to make another parallel, and I don't want to get into an 
argument over this, but you talk about our government not 
listening to Northerners. I want to say that we set up the northern 
municipal council to set up local governments, and I feel that that 
was successful. There's still work to go. 
 
(1200) 
 
I question the fact when you talk about Northerners having their 
say. When I look at the advisory council that you have set up — 
and I don't want to get argumental on this — but there's only two 
individuals from the west side; there's six individuals out of the 12 
who are from the South. And I say that, if we wanted to get into 
the arguments over that, that there is a distinction there. 
 
But if I could get an update on the questions I had and the Red 
Pheasant reserve. I don't have to have that verbally. If you want to 
do that in writing to save time with that, Mr. Minister, we can let 
her go. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I'll undertake to get that information to 
you within the next week or two. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 25 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Okay. Now that completes the estimates for 
Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat. Does the minister have any 
remarks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I simply want to thank the officials who 
helped us today. I also want to thank the opposition for their 
questions. I want to make particular mention that I want to wish 
the member from Cumberland well since I believe this is likely the 
last estimates that he will be doing for northern affairs and Indian 
affairs, as he will not be running in the next election. And I want 
to wish him the very best. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want 
to concur with the minister in terms of thanking him and his 
officials for the responses and the information that is forthcoming, 
the information provided, and also the information that is 
forthcoming. I will be looking forward to receiving it. 
 
In terms of his wish for me, seeing as how he referred that this 
would be my last session, I want to indicate to the minister that I'm 
not that old as to . . . I've got a lot of ambition and a lot of 
consistency in me, Mr. Minister. You may be the one, in terms of 
your last term — speaking about last term in office — you may be 
the one. Thank you very much. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 4 
 
Mr. Chairman: — We will now begin the estimates for 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs, and I would respectfully ask 
the minister to please introduce your officials. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have with me 
today, on my left, Mr. Kessler, my deputy minister; on my right, 
Mr. MacGillivray, the superintendent of insurance; Mr. 
Zukowsky, director of policy and planning; Al Dwyer, director of 
administration and personnel; and Ted Madill, chairman of the 
Provincial Mediation Board. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, we'll begin with 
the usual routine questions. Madam Minister, can you send over 
the names of your personal staff, and their salaries, and whether 
there have been any increases in the last year and, if so, what kind 
of increases were they? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Yes, I will. I have on my staff, Mr. Don 
Baron, who commenced services with me on December 1st, 1983. 
Mr. Baron's salary is $53,000 a year, and he has had no increase in 
salary since starting. And then just the two secretarial . . . my main 
secretary and my secretarial assistants, and I'll send this over. I 
might also say that they, too, have not had salary increases. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — So you'd have one executive assistant and 
two secretarial, and I'm sure . . . You're sending it over and I think 
I'll be able to figure that out for myself. 
 
Fifty—three thousand dollars a year is what your executive 
assistant makes. Is that the normal rate for executive assistants in 
the government? It seems . . . He started at 53,000; I can see why 
there would not have been an increase. That's not a bad salary to 
start at. Is that the normal rate that executive assistants are making 
these days, Madam Minister, or is this an exception? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I think you have to look at the 
qualifications of Mr. Baron. Mr. Baron has a degree in agriculture; 
he is a former director of CBC; he produced one of the major CBC 
farm shows out of Toronto; he is a former CEO (chief executive 
officer) of Pallister Wheat Growers, and also a former editor of a 
nationally published farm publication. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, I agree, you need to look 
at the qualifications, but you need to look at the demands of the 
job and the job description. The Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs is not exactly the hugest and the most 
overbearing department in the government, and clearly, from the 
indications of some legislation that your government has brought 
in dealing with consumers, it's not actually been a department 
that's received a lot of priorities either. 
 
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2120 
 
 

Would you please, Madam Minister, provide us with the job 
description of this position and all of the work that it entails? Fifty-
three thousand dollars for an executive assistant position in any 
level of government is a very, very large amount of money. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Well I happen not to agree with the 
member. The Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs is 
an extremely important department in government. We touch 
people's lives daily; we touch every person in the province. And to 
say that my department has not done a lot of work, we have, over 
the course of the last three years, done some very, very major 
pieces of legislation that impact on the total population of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I might say that Mr. Baron has never taken an EDO (earned day 
off) off, or whatever it is that they're allowed to. He's there on a 
daily basis. He is invaluable, not only to myself, but in his link 
with the department. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, I won't pursue this long, Madam 
Minister. I think the point has been made in your answer. But can 
you tell me the nature of your executive assistant's work? Describe 
it. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — He acts like a girl Friday. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — In other words, you're paying your 
executive assistant $53,000 to answer the telephone and prepare 
letters for you? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I think the member is being rather 
facetious. I don't think that a person of Mr. Baron's qualifications 
. . . I think it's a credit to the government to be able to attract 
people of that calibre; and to say that he is not worth $53,000 a 
year is simply not true. He runs the office; he liaises with groups; 
he liaises with the department; he does a whole host of things. And 
I think you, as a former minister of Finance, know exactly what an 
MA does — ministerial assistants. And they don't sit around doing 
nothing. They are hard—working, diligent people. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I don't question that your executive 
assistant does a good job for me, Madam Minister. I have never 
questioned that of any executive assistant. I too have had 
executive assistants and I was then responsible for departments 
like the Department of Health, which probably gets more letters 
and correspondence — maybe equal to the Department of Social 
Services — and I can tell you that at no time were the salaries at 
this level for these people. 
 
Maybe they were worth it, but I still say, Madam Minister, that if 
you hire a teacher — and I'm a teacher — as a clerk, you don't pay 
him the teacher's salary. And the argument you're making is, 
simply because of a person's qualifications, you ought to pay 
whatever the salary is without any regard for what the nature of 
the work is. 
 
Madam Minister, I'm not going to pursue that any further. I think 
I've got the answer I want and so does the public, about the 
extravagance of your government when it applied to paying your 
political appointments and the frugality of your government when 
it applies to paying the  

normal public service. Somehow there is no fairness in the process 
here. Some are picked and chosen to be favoured and some are 
not. 
 
But I'll move on to my next question, and I simply want the 
information and I won't pursue it. I don't think there'll be anything 
out of the ordinary in it, but can you also provide me — and just 
send that over; we won't have to take the time of the committee — 
the salaries of your senior officials in the department and any 
increase they have received in the last year. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Yes, I'll send this over as soon as a page is 
free. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. I'll wait for that and continue. 
Madam Minister, would you also provide the committee and 
myself details of your travels in Saskatchewan, in Canada, and 
abroad? And I'm sure that your travels have not been as extensive 
as some other ministers in your cabinet, but I would like to have 
that information. And will you include in that the trips, the dates of 
the trips, the destination, and the cost? I'm not going to ask for 
who accompanied you because I know, like your colleagues, you 
won't give me that, but will you provide me with that? If you have 
it with you, I'll take it now; if not, you can send it to me as other 
ministers are going to be doing. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Can I get something clarified from the 
member? You said my trips in Saskatchewan — like trips to 
Saskatoon and that type of thing? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes. If it will take a while for you to put 
that together, like the next hour or so, we can go on with that, and 
your officials can get it to me whenever it's ready so that we don't 
hold up the committee. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Well I think you have the information on 
the trips in Saskatchewan. That was supplied to you by the 
Minister of Supply and Services in the document he sent over the 
other day. Right. We'll get you that other information. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I have not seen that document yet; but if 
you assure me it's there, I will take you at your word. But I will 
ask you to send me your trips out of province and out of Canada. 
Will you undertake to do that, please? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Well I can indicate to the member that I 
haven't made any out—of—Canada trips. I went to two 
conferences last year; one in March — or this year — one in 
March, dealing with financial institutions in financial services. It 
was attended by my counterparts from across Canada. And then 
our annual conference on Consumer and Commercial Affairs was 
held last September at Hecla Island in Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, thank you for that. Would 
you tell me whether in 1985—86 your department did any 
advertising as in the last fiscal year? And I know you have, so will 
you provide me with the amount that that advertising cost? 
 
(1215) 
 
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2121 
 
 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Yes, I'll send it over to you, but I would 
like to say that our department, our advertising expenditures for 
'85—86 were $155,816.39. The stuff that we advertised were 
things that have been developed in the department. We've done 
ads on how to operate a small business. We have started a new one 
called "Of Consuming Interest," and it's just the type . . . and that 
goes into a lot of weekly papers. And what it is, is questions that 
we get asked at the department on a fairly regular basis, and it's 
sort of an answer . . . a question and answer type column — like, 
what do I do if someone comes to the door, that type of thing. 
 
Some of the major things we did this year, of course, a lot of it had 
to do with the bingo inquiry. There was a fair amount on that. And 
a lot had to do with the new film classification Act that we passed 
last year and implemented this year. 
 
So we've done quite a bit. I won't go through the whole thing, but 
I'll send this over to you. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Will that information include any 
advertising on the tax on pornographic literature which you 
instituted last year but finally decided that you couldn't administer 
it? Was there any advertising on that particular Bill? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — No, there wasn't. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Minister, can I . . . since that is coming over 
I'll go to my next question. Can you tell me what your budget is 
for advertising for this fiscal year and the budget which we are 
considering, or is it included in information — '86-87. Thank you. 
 
Did your department pay for any polling that was done by the 
government or any portion of polling that was done by the 
government in the last fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — No, we have no polling done in our 
department. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. Madam Minister, I want to ask 
you some questions now about one of the major issues which has 
been I think receiving some attention by the public, at least as it 
applies to your department. That is the state of bingo halls and 
your bingo inquiry. 
 
And first of all . . . And I'm not sure whether you've provided it 
before. If you have, I don't have it with me. So can you tell me: 
how much did it cost the taxpayer to have this bingo inquiry which 
you established over a year ago, received over six months ago, and 
tabled only a few days ago? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — The total inquiry costs were $104,071.02. 
Three people on the commission — the chairman, Mr. 
McConnachie, received $165 per sitting day; and the other two 
members of the panel received $110 a day. And those rates have 
been established, from what I understand, for many years. 
 
So the honorarium payments were around 29,000; the contractual 
services were about 13; advertising was in the neighbourhood of 
10,000; and salaries of other  

people, like the secretary to the commission, was $27,800; travel 
and sustenance was around 7,000. If the member wants, I can send 
him over a detailed copy. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — You can send it now or later. Madam 
Minister, thank you for that information. I want to pursue this a 
little further. 
 
This commission had many, many briefs submitted to it and many 
representations made to it, and we'll talk about that later. You've 
had six months since you received it to consider it and, Madam 
Minister, now that you have tabled it, you're indicating that you 
are rejecting out of hand many of the recommendations, at least 
. . . I have here a document which says "Draft response to the 
report of the Saskatchewan Commercial Bingo Inquiry," and the 
majority of the recommendations are rejected by your department. 
At the same time, you're saying that you are going to take another 
year to consult with the public. 
 
I ask, Madam Minister: if you have rejected so many of the 
recommendations, what is it that you're going to consult further on 
when you have already gone through the process and received — 
am I correct in saying — some 5000—and—some 
representations? Seven hundred and fourteen? That even makes 
my argument that much stronger. What is it that you're consulting 
on when you have already rejected most of the recommendations 
out of that report? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — We haven't rejected any of the 
recommendations of the inquiry. What we have done in the 
department . . . And I might say, I haven't had it for six months 
because there was an extension because of the overwhelming 
response to the inquiry; there was an extension of the December 
31st deadline. We haven't, Mr. Member, rejected the 
recommendations. What we have done is we have taken each of 
the 36 recommendations and have worked out ways they may be 
integrated into a workable criteria within the department on what 
we know about the gaming area. We have accepted many of the 
recommendations. I think they are workable in today's bingo 
market—place. 
 
The problems that I had, and I've been very open about this . . . 
there were basically three recommendations that the department 
and myself have problems with, as do a large number of the 
public. The one was the recommendation dealing with the banning 
of the sale of Nevadas in bingo halls. I think we have to recognize 
that clubs that sponsor bingos and get a Nevada licence really look 
forward to the moneys that they receive from the sale of Nevadas, 
and to ban them, we don't think would be acceptable to the public 
at large. 
 
The inquiry had designed a questionnaire that they sent out to 
hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of groups across the 
province, and 94 per cent of the people that responded indicated 
that they did not want the Nevadas to be taken out of the bingo 
halls because of the moneys that they are able to generate through 
the sale. So we are asking the public now — and we will have 
those replies by July 31st — whether they agree with that 
recommendation of the inquiry. 
 
In regards to another recommendation that would have  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2122 
 
 

adult recreational and sports clubs, trade unions, and political 
parties not be eligible for a bingo licence, that was sort of split on 
the things that they got back. I think it was about 51 per cent 
thought they shouldn't get one and about 49 per cent thought, well 
they do a lot of good things with this money. So what we're saying 
is: is there a better way, is there a way to do it? Maybe we can't cut 
it off. 
 
I look at the Maple Creek Curling Club, which I'm involved with, 
and we built a new curling rink a number of years ago, and though 
we would be considered an adult sports club, the facility is there to 
the public to come in and enjoy and use the facilities. And yet our 
curling club has put a big dent in our mortgage solely on the bingo 
moneys that they generate on a weekly basis. So that is an area . . . 
 
We don't want to cut off the people completely, but we have to 
find a mechanism to ensure that groups that do get licences 
actually are using the funds for the betterment of the communities, 
so to speak. So those are sort of dicey issues. 
 
Calls that I'm getting at my office now are from clubs who say, 
look, you've got to extend that July 31st date. Our club has 
recessed for the summer and we won't be back till September and, 
you know, we want a chance to respond to this. 
 
So there is a lot of interest in it. You know, we're talking about 
massive amounts of money. And even though the percentage 
going to charities has been going down, the total dollar value 
going to charities has really gone up. 
 
So I think, you know, with the 714 respondents or groups that 
participated in the 11 hearings, I think that's an indication of 
exactly how widespread the concern and the interest in this whole 
area of gaming dollars and ways to generate gaming dollars. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I don't agree with you that there is . . . 
I agree with you to this extent — there is a wide degree of interest 
in getting to this issue and to resolving the problems that are faced. 
 
Your example of your curling club, Madam Minister, is one that I 
could apply across all of the province. And you have not, because 
of your continuous procrastinating, you have not dealt with the 
kind of problems that church organizations, service clubs in many 
cases, charitable organizations, are facing because of what's going 
on in this particular industry right now. 
 
And I will just give you one example. This is an example of a . . . 
and it was directed to the bingo inquiry, and it was back in 1985, 
in September. It comes from St. Peter's men's club. And here is 
what they told the inquiry. And now that you have delayed it 
further without even some action, this problem has been 
exacerbated to the extent that many of these organizations are 
going to have to shut down. And that is a serious problem that I 
bring to your attention, and I know others have too. And here's 
what they said in their letter: 
 

Our revenue has dropped considerably the last  

four to five years because of the impact of big bingos. We used 
to provide full sponsorship to three youth—orientated minor 
league ball teams and six church basketball teams, where now 
we are token sponsors. 

 
Our club supports many charities in the city of Regina, some of 
which are Marian Centre, Birthright, Bosco Homes, League for 
Human Life, Camp Monahan, Christmas hampers for the 
needy. As well, we sponsor two scholarships to grade 12 
graduates, financially support the home and school association, 
and support the youth corps. 

 
Our 1984 revenue compared to 1980, the revenue was down 75 
per cent. If the present trend continues, it is inevitable that our 
support of most of the charities will have to be reduced or 
terminated. 

 
And that's the problem, that by continuing to delay to deal with the 
problem, this is the problem that you're not addressing, and this is 
only one example of many. 
 
Places where people used to go to their church in the community 
and go to the church basement to play their bingo and socialize, 
and therefore the organization that ran the bingo was able to get 
some revenue, those organizations are getting wiped off the map 
because of what's been happening in the last several years in this 
whole field. And so you could have at least taken some action to 
assist these people before they are totally destroyed. 
 
Now I don't think you'd argue that the work of this organization is 
in any way work that's not important. It is extremely important. 
But what are you doing? What is your government doing by your 
inaction in saying, we're not going to help you out; we're going to 
let you go down the tubes. And that's really unfortunate. 
 
Now one of the recommendations in your report was to establish a 
bingo authority. I believe in your comment and your response you 
said the government had already agreed that that was a good 
recommendation and you were prepared to go with that. Am I 
correct in that? You accept the recommendation of the authority, 
the gaming authority, and that you're prepared to implement? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I think if you look at the draft response — 
and one of the primary recommendations of the commission was 
the establishment of a gaming authority. And we think from a 
department point of view that there is considerable merit in going 
that way. 
 
Now you talk about an individual club whose revenues have gone 
steadily down. That is very true. But while their revenues have 
been going down, other clubs' revenues have been going up — 
those that have access to commercial halls. Unfortunately, I 
believe that the only way that the specific group that you refer to, 
to get their revenues going back up again, we would have to close 
down the commercial halls. There's fierce competition between 
the halls themselves. The clubs that are in the halls, on the whole, 
appreciate the funds that they are  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2123 
 
 

able to generate through going in there one night a week, or one 
night a month, or whatever. They appreciate that opportunity. 
 
(1230) 
 
I would remind the member that I believe it was in December of 
1981, under your administration, where I think one of the 
problems really developed. It was your government, through an 
order in council, changed the definition of charities to include 
anything that is for the betterment of the community. Well that's 
pretty broad. That's when political parties and trade unions were 
able to get bingo licences. And it's just proliferated since that time. 
 
I wish I had an easy answer. One has to understand that just 
because a group gets a bingo licence, it is not a licence to print 
money, and you have no guarantee that your bingo is going to be 
successful. There are a number of bingos held where the 
sponsoring group actually realizes very little form the bingo, but 
does realize maybe 5, 6, $900 from the sale of Nevadas. 
 
Some groups, if you happen to get a lot of people in the hall that 
night, do come away with a tidy sum and put that money to good 
use, but I think groups have to understand that a bingo licence is 
not a guarantee that they are going to make money. It is gambling, 
and it's a risk. There is a risk involved, and they aren't guaranteed 
making money. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I agree. The group that comes in, the little 
Girl Guides — if indeed Girl Guides are one of the groups that 
sometimes take advantage of this bingo — are not guaranteed 
anything, but the operators are. Under the provisions that you 
have, the operators are always guaranteed. And I think that that's 
where one of the problems lies, and there are recommendations in 
your inquiry which deal with that issue. and you're going to take 
another year to deal with it. 
 
Now I know you said you're going to get recommendations by the 
end of July, but surely, Madam Minister — and you didn't fully 
answer this question — you don't need further consultation to 
establish your gaming authority. And because you did not at least 
move in this session to establish a gaming authority, even though 
you get recommendations by the end of July, you're going to be 
able to do nothing because you're going to have to wait for another 
session of the legislature to get legislation in here to establish your 
authority. Am I not correct in that? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Well I suppose, too, there are things that 
we can do through regulations. I mean, that provision was 
transferred to the provinces in December. Legislation would be 
required to establish an authority per se, but there are ways of 
dealing with some of the problems that have been identified, and 
those things can be done through regulation. And it won't be a 
year. I can assure the member, it won't be a year until we make a 
definitive policy statement on gaming. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Do you have a timetable? I would hate to 
see us go on the uncertainty that the public, when it came to the 
inquiry . . . What is your timetable, Madam  

Minister? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I can assure the member that this 
particular subject has a high priority in the department. I would 
say that once July 31st comes, we would want to have rules and 
regulations in place for the busy fall bingo session. During the 
summer it sort of drops off, and their big times . . . or their busy 
times start in the fall again, and we would want to have things 
ready by that time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I have no doubt in my mind at all that it is a 
priority in the department. I only hope it's a high priority at the 
political level of government. 
 
I am pleased to hear you say that you will deal with it in the 
summer. I would urge you not to let your preparation for the 
election overtake this priority, which your department has 
established, to the extent that you will not do anything. I would 
urge you to keep your word on this and, in fact, act on it. 
 
I don't just raise it because it's an issue that's been around. I'm 
raising it because I happen to know of many, many organizations 
that are hurting real bad. And I know you will argue, well, there's 
more money being made. Well, I agree. There's more money 
being rolled around, and there's a few organizations who are 
making a lot more. But the vast majority of organizations are 
making a lot less, and they have done as much work as any other 
organizations from the point of view of doing charitable things, 
helping minor league ball teams, doing community work, and so 
on. 
 
And so I will take you at your word that you will act by July, and 
monitor it very closely and will remind you about that time if I see 
nothing happening. And I know I won't have the advantage of this 
House to remind you about it, but I'm sure there will be some 
other ways. And so will these organizations remind you, because 
they are in trouble, and I still submit you could have made some 
changes in this session to help them out. You chose not to do that; 
that's your right. But I don't think that they will appreciate it, and I 
certainly don't. 
 
Can I ask you now about another concern, Madam Minister? The 
Consumers' Association of Canada, I believe the Saskatchewan 
branch, recently talked about fitness clubs and health spas in 
Saskatchewan, I think, at their annual meeting. 
 
They indicated that they should be licensed and they should be 
bonded, and the reasons given were that clients of fitness clubs 
and health spas have no guarantee that the instructors are qualified 
and that the company is meeting any kind of a standard. Now it is 
well—known that some of these so—called fitness operations, if 
the people involved are not qualified, can do a considerable 
amount of damage to individuals' health, and I think it's obvious 
that's what the consumer association is concerned with. 
 
What are you proposing to do in responding to this 
recommendation of the consumer association? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — There were several issues that you 
addressed in your question. I would say at the onset that our 
licensing mechanism does not include . . . or a  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2124 
 
 

requirement of licensing is not the qualifications of the licensee. 
What we do is license businesses to do their thing in the province 
with the idea of having something there to protect the consumer. 
The type of businesses that you're referring to are licensed and 
bonded through The Sale of Training Courses Act. The 
Superintendent of Insurance has to approve the contract before 
that business can use it, and in the contract is a rescission right 
similar to what you would find in other Acts. 
 
If there were to be criteria and qualifications set down for people 
to train others or to teach others, we know of no regulations in the 
province, or in Canada for that matter, that requires a certain level 
of training to be able to deliver, say, an aerobics program. But if 
those things were to be developed, that would be developed 
through the Department of Labour and not our department. 
 
Our main concern is the protection of the consumer and the money 
spent by the consumer. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I guess that's why I asked the question. The 
people who sign up in these spas are consumers. Has your 
department — since it was the Consumers' Association of Canada, 
Saskatchewan branch, which directed the recommendation I think 
to your department — has your department considered the whole 
question of applying some minimum standards or getting the 
industry to establish some and then find some way to police it and 
enforce it. Have you undertaken a serious look at the thing and 
talked to the Department of Labour before some people get 
permanently damaged? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — We have just recently received that, I 
think about three, four weeks ago. I have had talks with the CAC, 
some of their members on this, and we discussed that at a meeting 
in Saskatoon. I would say that the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs would not get involved in setting standards of 
competency, policing, and that type of thing. That would be the 
Department of Labour. To my knowledge the officials have not 
met to discuss that issue. 
 
You alluded the first time you were up that perhaps they should be 
licensed and bonded. I would just reiterate that they are licensed 
and bonded. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, a year or two ago there 
was a big issue made about your government granting a monopoly 
to the printing of Nevada tickets to, I think, a company called 
Mercury Graphics. Is that still the policy? Is all the printing of 
Nevada tickets done by one company, or have you changed that 
policy since there was such a loud protest? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — No, we haven't changed the policy. The 
tickets are not all printed by that particular company. Western 
Gaming Systems acts as a distributor of Nevadas, and they are 
doing the job of . . . In British Columbia, they set up a corporation 
to distribute Nevadas in the province. 
 
(1245) 
 
What Western Gaming does is keep a record; they collect the 2 per 
cent tax, that type of thing. They are doing a  

function for government that we no longer have to do in the 
department. I would point out that it has been working very, very 
well. We still feel that there is about a 20 per cent slippage in the 
province, mainly tickets coming in from Alberta and Manitoba to 
some extent. But what we have really achieved is a complete 
accountability in the whole system, right form the manufacturer to 
the buyer, and it's working out very well. 
 
They are in the process of putting in a computer system so that the 
RCM Police can phone from anywhere in the province and, you 
know, read off the code number and find out who was issued a 
licence, whether that ticket is a legal ticket to be sold in 
Saskatchewan. So from the department's point of view, it's 
working out very well. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, you have been involved 
with the Minister of Urban Affairs and, I don't know, maybe 
another minister, in the whole area of liability insurance and 
what's been happening to that. 
 
Has your department made any inquiries, that you can provide me 
with copies of, about the increasing insurance premiums, to 
determine whether the public is not being ripped off and what 
reasons there might be to help your cabinet committee come about 
with the right kind of conclusions? Has some inquiry been done 
by your department into this very serious situation? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I would say it is a serious concern, not 
only to us as government but, I think, to a lot of other people right 
across Canada and perhaps in the western industrialized countries. 
 
The committee that has been struck within government is 
Consumer Affairs and Education, Rural Development, Urban 
Affairs, Justice, Economic Development and Trade, and Health, 
because these are mainly the areas where it impacts. 
 
I think you can look at the whole explosion in the upper trend in 
liability costs. And what's really transpired is that the reinsurers 
now will not take a piece of the high—risk area. There are some 
types of insurance now that you just cannot get because companies 
cannot find a reinsurer for it. 
 
We are working very closely with SUMA and SARM. I believe 
SARM has sent out a questionnaire to all their members seeking 
more information. Some of the stuff has come in. In some areas it 
has really gone up; in some places it hasn't gone up. What has 
gone up is the coverage has expanded, different packages have 
been added to existing insurance, and so it goes right from A to Z 
in what's happening. 
 
This topic was discussed in Vancouver in March. We set aside a 
half a day, I believe it was, because all provinces are very, very 
concerned. In Ontario they've established an insurance exchange 
where all the insurance companies have pooled their resources. 
Indications are it's working out fairly well, and we're looking at 
perhaps establishing a Canadian exchange made up of all 
Canadian companies. 
 
So there are problems; there are no easy fixes. We could  
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2125 
 
 

bring in legislation to put a cap on awards, that type of thing, but I 
think you'd have to look at the very serious ramifications of 
actions like that. I believe it's SARM . . . SARM, I understand, is 
negotiating with a large insurance company right now as getting 
insurance as a pool — pooling all their resources. So ways are 
being worked out to handle this problem. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — My fear, Madam Minister, is that some 
organizations will be able to accommodate their needs, leaving 
many other ones stranded, and the problem is wider than just say 
SARM or SUMA. It effects hospital boards, recreation boards, 
bussing companies. 
 
I used the example in the House one time earlier this week of 
Moose Mountain bus lines — I think it was Moose Mountain — 
their insurance rate has gone up from $26,000 to $154,886 in 
1986. That's an increase of $128,886, and they say in the press 
release which they issued, in which when they were asking to have 
some routes abandoned because they said they couldn't afford 
them any more, is that the increase in the premium for liability 
insurance was greater than their profit last year. 
 
I raised this in the House at least two months ago, urging the 
government to act quickly and expeditiously and saying it should 
have started acting many, many months ago before this, and 
nothing has happened since. You're still moving along very 
slowly. So I will simply make that point. I know that you are not, I 
believe, the lead minister on this exploration, or consultation as 
you call it, but it is without any doubt a matter that cannot 
continue to be ignored or neglected, otherwise there are going to 
be some organizations like this one who are going to — on one 
simple item, insurance — go down the tube. I don't think you or I 
would want to see that happen. 
 
Madam Minister, I ask one more question, and I know it goes back 
two years, but I thought it was an interesting sum and I was 
curious about what it was for. In 1984-85, your department spent 
$26,000 at the Ramada Renaissance hotel in Saskatoon; can you 
tell me what that was for? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — That was the Superintendents' of 
Insurance from across Canada, their annual conference was held in 
Saskatchewan — Saskatchewan hosted it. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — How many people would that have 
involved? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — There was 320 people there. The 
registration fees generated some $50,000, and the surplus was 
returned to the Consolidated Fund. That was an advance to get it 
started, I believe. So it was self . . . it was money—generating, 
actually. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 4 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Consumer and Commercial Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 4 
 
Items 1 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 4 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would 
like to thank my officials for being here to assist me this morning. 
The department has had a very full and productive year. We've 
had a lot of challenges, and the people in the department have 
responded extremely well. I'd like to thank the member from 
Regina North East for his questions and hope we do it again next 
year. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I join with the minister in 
thanking the officials for being here and providing the answers 
that were asked. I have received already most of the information 
which the minister undertook to send me, and I appreciate that. 
And we are now done with this particular department, but I will be 
most certainly watching the developments on the bingo inquiry 
recommendation, as I indicated to the minister, and reminding her 
as time goes on about the need for action. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Bill No. 62 — An Act respecting the Regulation of Traffic on 

Saskatchewan Highways 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, so I can inform the House 
and the members opposite, there were three Bills that were 
reported back from the Non-Controversial Bills Committee. As I 
understand, we will simply move second reading of these Bills, 
and they will either have amendments or the vote on them and 
some detailed discussion when they move into committee of the 
whole later this day. 
 
So with that explanation, Mr. Speaker, I would move Bill No. 62, 
An Act respecting the Regulation of Traffic on Saskatchewan 
Highways. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I wonder, in closing the 
debate on this, can you indicate whether this is the Bill that 
transfers employees from . . . 64? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Right. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, referred to a committee of the whole later this day. 
 

Bill No. 63 — An Act respecting Motor Carriers 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move, An Act respecting 
Motor Carriers, Bill No. 63. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, referred to a committee of the whole later this day. 
 

Bill No. 64 — An Act respecting the Registration of Vehicles 
and Licensing of Drivers 

 
  



 
June 19, 1986 

 

2126 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill 
No. 64, An Act respecting the Registration of Vehicles and 
Licensing of Drivers. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we're 
going to let the Bill go to committee. However we have some 
concerns with some sections of this Bill, and we're going to 
discuss it further in committee. 
 
What this Bill does do is move some people from the Department 
of Highways and will be moving them into SGI, into a Crown 
corporation. That, in a sense, I suppose, would appear as though 
it's going to make the government a little smaller, and the 
government's going to go around then and say, well look, we've 
reduced the amount of people we've got in government. All they're 
going to do is move it into a Crown corporation and have the same 
amount of people just in a different area. Mr. Minister, I think 
there are some other areas there that we have some concerns with, 
and we'll certainly be objecting to them in committee. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I would just add to that, that as I understand 
the Bill — and there will be questions as we say, that we'll be 
asking in committee — but it undermines, a great deal, the 
Highway Traffic Board. And as I understand it, the suspensions of 
licence, which hitherto have been dealt with by the department and 
the regulatory agency, will now be handled by a Crown 
corporation, SGI. 
 
If you use the scenario of an individual out in Moosomin or 
Shaunavon losing their licence, for whatever reason, that will no 
longer be an issue that MLAs will be able to argue in the same 
way as they can now. And instead of the individual coming to the 
government, they will go to a Crown corporation and see about 
getting their licence back. 
 
We are opposed to that part of the legislation and will be reflecting 
that in our vote now, but wanting to find out more information 
when we get into committee on the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, very briefly just to close debate 
on this. To react to the remarks from the member from Shaunavon 
— indeed, if he would have been in the committee this morning, 
these points were covered in committee, and it was explained quite 
extensively that in fact there's really no deviation from what has 
gone on, in fact, in the past, but rather this will actually be better 
for the motoring public because in fact the officials will still be 
dealing with the suspensions, etc., as they go on, but the Highway 
Traffic Board will be the appeal mechanism and in fact it is 
enhanced. So I'll look forward to answering these questions and 
concerns in committee. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, Bill read a second time and, by 
leave of the Assembly, referred to a committee of the whole later 
this day. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 
 


