













































April 30, 1986 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 30, 1986 

969 

 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Swan: — Today I would like to introduce to the Assembly 

a group of students from grade 8 in Rosetown Division 3 

School. We have 26 students accompanied by their teachers, 

Mr. Wiebe and Mr. Torwalt, and chaperons Mrs. Slocomb and 

Mrs. Lieth. I would like to welcome the group to the Assembly 

today. I trust that you will enjoy the debate that carries on here 

in the Chamber. I look forward to meeting you following 

question period for an opportunity for an exchange of ideas and 

for refreshments. Would the Assembly welcome the guests 

from Rosetown. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to present to you and 

through you, a small group from Moose Jaw from the Seventh 

Day Adventist Academy, Moose Jaw. There’s seven in total. 

There’s seven students and their teacher, Cynthia Becker. They 

are in a very small group, but I always say, good things always 

come in small packages. I met with them this morning and had 

pictures with them and drinks, and I’m certainly pleased they 

got back to be recognized in the legislature. And I hope that 

they have a successful afternoon and a good trip home. And I 

ask all members to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gerich: — Mr. Speaker, through you and to you and to the 

members of the Legislative Assembly, I would like to introduce 

to you in the east gallery 28 students from the Leask Hutterite 

Brethren Colony, and there’s nine students also from the Lajord 

Colony. They’re accompanied by their bus driver, Mr. Gus 

Watier; teacher’s aide, Mrs. Beverley Mattock; and their 

teacher, Mrs. Judy Gerich. 

 

I hope that they find question period entertaining and interesting 

this afternoon, and I ask my colleagues to make them welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to 

you, and through you to the members of the legislature, 28 

grade 8 students from Ituna, Saskatchewan in my constituency. 

They are in the Speaker’s gallery together with their teacher, 

Mr. Bill Hudema, and their bus driver, Mr. Matt Daciw. I will 

be meeting with them later. 

 

I had their grade 12 class here last week, and I was in the 

constituency, and the member for Saskatoon Fairview hosted 

them and did an excellent job. And I want to tell these students 

that I will be hosting them personally and meeting with them at 

3 o’clock. 

 

I hope they have an entertaining and pleasant educational stop 

here at the legislature, and maybe their teacher can give them a 

little exam when they get back to  

see if they remember anything. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Katzman: — Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to welcome guests 

— 28 students from Osler School. They are here today in the 

west gallery with their teacher. And I’ll be meeting with them 

later and discussing what happens in the Chamber. I hope 

everybody else will welcome them with me. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Federal Government Aid Package for Farmers and Oil 

Companies 

 

Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question of the Minister of 

Agriculture. Today the Mulroney government in Ottawa 

displayed where its priorities are. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Engel: — I was hoping they’d put their feet in their 

mouths, but I didn’t know they’d do it that hard. 

 

They displayed where their priorities are when they announced 

the federal government aid package for some oil companies, 

which adds up to more money, more money than what it 

decided to provide to all — listen to me — to all Canadian 

farmers. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: when will Prime Minister 

Mulroney announce a deficiency payment for all export 

production by Canadian farmers to make up the difference 

between the low price, the low world prices, and the huge 

subsidy being provided to American and European farmers? Is a 

deficiency payment about to be announced or not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in the House of 

Commons today the NDP members of parliament were 

congratulating the Prime Minister on his bold moves in 

agriculture. Mr. Speaker, when you look at what the Prime 

Minister has done on two accounts — and I’ll be making a 

ministerial statement after summarizing it in some detail — but 

when you look at the two major things that were done today by 

the Prime Minister, the first is that the Prime Minister of a 

country has decided that he will take the agricultural issue to the 

international summit in Tokyo, because it’s the most important 

issue in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — And we can’t remember, Mr. Speaker, in 

immediate history, or at any time that I can recall, where the 

Prime Minister of Canada said the number one issue 

internationally — and he could choose many of them — the 

number one issue internationally is agriculture. And he was 

going to put it on the table in talking with the United States and 

with the Europeans and with the Japanese, above every other 

issue, so that he can deal with international wheat pricing, with 

the U.S. farm Bill, with EEC policies, and so forth. 

  



 

April 30, 1986 

970 

 

That is the most important thing that has happened in 

Saskatchewan agriculture in decades, Mr. Speaker. Because the 

Prime Minister of this country, who I believe will get the 

complete support of farm groups and Canadians in support of 

international agriculture, is now going to take the number one 

issue in this province and take it right to the international level, 

as I took it to the national level here in this province. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I have a list of 12 things that we have 

asked for from the Prime Minister — help to deal with all kinds 

of assistance for agriculture — whether it has to do with farm 

fuel, whether it has to do with two-priced wheat, whether it has 

to do with freezing freight rates, or freezing the elevator tariffs; 

or whether it has to do with grain stabilization payments; 

whether it has to do with removing the capital gains tax, 

drought payments, flood payments, improving the beef imports 

that are coming in, putting the restrictions — a list as long as 

your arm, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there’s been one Prime Minister in Canada, one Prime 

Minister in Canada in recent years — nobody can touch him 

since John Diefenbaker — that has listened to western Canadian 

agriculture, like Brian Mulroney. He deserves our 

congratulations, Mr. Speaker. He deserves it — just as the NDP 

members of parliament in Ottawa today stood in their places 

and congratulated the Prime Minister on his bold and 

courageous moves in agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, new question. Our little 

cheer-leader added, keep up the good work, Brian, when 

farmers all over are going broke. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Engel: — The Prime Minister, Mr. Speaker, called the 

world grain situation the equivalent of war. The world situation 

is called the equivalent of war. But unfortunately sending 

Canadian farmers off to fight unaided, all alone — they’re 

fighting the war on their own. 

 

I ask you again: have you pursued the Prime Minister to 

introduce a deficiency payment for all export production by 

Canadian farmers, and if so, when do you expect him to 

announce it? The deficiency payment is what the farmers are 

asking. All the major groups that have responded today have 

said that farmers need a deficiency payment; they can’t afford 

to go it on their own. Have you asked for a deficiency payment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member, I believe 

in all fairness, needs to be reminded of the total amount of 

money that’s been involved in the last two years. Because we’re 

talking not only hundreds of millions; we’re talking billions of 

dollars. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, today, announced by the Prime Minister, 

we are going to have the fuel tax, the tax on farm fuel, removed. 

It’s worth $80 million, Mr. Speaker — $80 million. Farmers 

will be able to buy with the rebate from the federal government 

and our own rebate farm fuel for  

20 to 25 cents a litre. He announced two-price wheat today, Mr. 

Speaker. Today, this morning, he announced two-price wheat 

up to $11 a bushel — $11 a bushel. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, that’s $200 million a year to 

farmers in western Canada. That’s up to $1 a bushel increase. 

You’re looking at an average of $4.50 a bushel, Mr. Speaker, 

because of the Prime Minister’s announcement. He said there 

was no change, a complete flat, a lid, a cap put on freight rate 

increases. That’s $40 million. 

 

Elevator tariffs are going to be held in a frozen position. That’s 

another $10 million. He’s already announced, Mr. Speaker, 

$580 million in a western grain stabilization payment. This fall 

we’re looking at another 100 million to $300 million. That 

alone, Mr. Speaker, is $1.1 billion. On top of that, $58 million 

paid in drought, $14.8 million paid in flood, a capital tax 

removed for farmers which is $50 million; crop insurance 

payments were $640 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that plus the billion dollars we got out for 6 per 

cent money, is $3.1 billion into western Canadian agriculture in 

the last two years. You’ve never seen anything like it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Now I understand, Mr. Speaker, that the 

member opposite and the opposition can say, well when is there 

going to be more. I mean that’s fair enough; oppositions do that. 

And they say, well I want more and more and more. I believe 

it’s fair, it’s quite fair to have the opposition at least 

acknowledge the significant contribution that has gone into 

agriculture from the provincial government and the Prime 

Minister of the country today, covering at least 12 of the things 

you and I have both asked for. We’ve asked for these kinds of 

things and they’ve been delivered. You’ve never seen a prime 

minister in the history of Canada deliver to western Canada like 

Prime Minister Mulroney has. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Engel: — Supplementary. There’s only one person that 

tops the Prime Minister and that’s you, Mr. Minister. You 

haven’t . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Engel: — Eight minutes into question period and you still 

haven’t answered the question. Are you asking for a deficiency 

payment, and if so, when can we expect to receive it? There’s 

one solution to the farm crisis and that’s what he’s getting for 

his wheat. Are you going to ask for a deficiency payment? The 

Americans are getting it, and the European Common Market 

farmers are getting it. Canadian farmers aren’t getting it — $3 a 

bushel deficiency payment. Are you asking for it, and when are 

we going to get it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I have asked for all sorts of 

money and all sorts of programs, including  

  



 

April 30, 1986 

971 

 

deficiency payments. But I want to make sure that the hon. 

member treats the Saskatchewan situation fairly in comparison 

with the United States. The United States didn’t receive all 

these programs that we’ve received to date. They have received 

deficiency payments, Mr. Speaker, but they haven’t received 

many of the things that we’ve got here, like the grain 

stabilization programs and the announcements that come out in 

excess of a billion dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at the combination . . . The member 

opposite farms, and so do I. When you have got interest rates 

half of what they were when the NDP in power; you’ve got 

farm fuel rates down half of what they were — a fraction of 

what they were; you’ve got the price of wheat up a buck a 

bushel as of this morning for the new crop year; and you’ve got 

other rate increases froze; and you’ve got farm fuel rebates 

going out there like you’ve never seen before — Mr. Speaker, I 

say: fair enough. The member opposite say: well, is there any 

more left? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, our track record speaks for itself. I’ve asked 

for 12 things. I’ve been delivering 12 things. If I asked, Mr. 

Speaker . . . The history of this government and the federal 

government — when I ask, they deliver, because co-operation 

works and co-operation will work in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Flat Tax on Net Income 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 

Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, obviously in the month of 

April taxes is an issue which many Saskatchewan people are 

going to be grappling with and they indeed have been doing that 

in recent days. My question deals with your government’s flat 

tax on net income. In April, in the 1985 budget speech, your 

government forecast that the flat tax on net income would raise 

an additional $39 million from Saskatchewan people last year. 

That was $39 million, for an effective rate on one-half of 1 per 

cent, because the flat tax took effect only in July. 

 

My question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: has your department 

adjusted the forecast, or do you still believe that the flat tax took 

about $39 million out of the pockets of Saskatchewan people in 

1985? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the estimates and 

the actual receipts of the government will be debated in the 

estimates of Finance before the House. But let’s keep in mind 

what the government’s policy is on the flat tax. 

 

One, tax reform in this province is a priority of this government, 

and we hope to have it a priority of other governments within 

Canada. We believe that the system of taxation, the income tax 

system, should be much simplified. 

 

Secondly, those that traditionally avoid paying taxes should in 

fact pay tax, Mr. Speaker,. And that is one of the initiatives 

behind the flat tax. We have made it abundantly clear to the 

people of this province that the flat tax concept can meet those 

two objectives — of  

eliminating loopholes and having a much simplified tax system 

for Canadians. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, as of January 1st, the flat tax on net income was 

effectively doubled over last year. It’s now 1 per cent of net 

income for the full calendar year of 1986. So if their incomes 

remain stable, whatever people paid under the flat tax this 

spring on their 1985 taxes, that will be doubled next spring 

when they fill out their 1986 returns. 

 

What revenue forecast has the Finance department officials 

made with respect to the flat tax for calendar year 1986, and can 

you confirm that you expect to raise more than the $100 million 

in additional revenue through this flat tax this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — The revenues will be considerably less than 

that. Secondly, keep in mind that on a monthly basis the half 

per cent, or the 0.5 per cent, was for six months, so it will not 

affect the monthly deductions of those on salaries. 

 

Thirdly, those that can afford to pay will, in fact, pay with the 

flat tax. We’ve made that abundantly clear. That is a far more 

fair form of taxation than succession duties and gift taxes — 

and I’m not sure whether you were the minister of Finance at 

the time. But I do believe the initiatives of this government in 

terms of tax reform and fairness are far superior to the 

initiatives of any other government of Canada. 

 

Thirdly, we should also keep in mind that in conjunction with 

the flat tax, the government reduced the income tax by 1 per 

cent. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — New question, Mr. Speaker, and with 

some background to the new question. I want to tell the minister 

. . . and he has confirmed that in 1986 the amount of flat tax 

paid will be double what people paid in 1986; he has confirmed 

that. I want to underline my new question by indicating to the 

minister that even with the federal government taxation 

structures, with the federal budgets of ’85 and ’86, people 

between the incomes of 11,000 and 22,000 are going to be 

paying more taxes, considerably more taxes. People earning 

$40,000 a year with a family of two will be paying, over five 

years, $4,644 more in income tax; while people earning 

$50,000 a year are going to be paying only $2,900 more in 

income tax; and people earning $100,000 a year of income, the 

same kind of size family, will be paying $517 less in income tax 

over that five-year period of time, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, in light of that, at a time when Saskatchewan 

families and individuals are struggling to make ends meet, how 

does your government justify making us the only province in 

Canada with two provincial income taxes? And how do you 

justify a flat tax which fails to close loopholes — even though 

you say it does — and tax shelters for the wealthy, but hits 

low- and middle-income family with more than $100 million a 

year in additional income taxes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well first of all, your figures are totally 

wrong. Under the flat tax, there are approximately  

  



 

April 30, 1986 

972 

 

600,000 taxpayers in the province of Saskatchewan. About 

220,000 will pay less tax. And nearly 300,000 or another 

80,000, I’m sorry, will pay approximately $8. 

 

We offset that with the reduction of the sales tax on clothing in 

the province so that the province of Saskatchewan joins one 

other province in having no sales tax on essential goods, a 

dramatic tax reduction for the people of Saskatchewan. We 

have taken sales tax off gasoline, we have taken it off children’s 

clothing, and as I say, the government reduced the income tax 

rate in the province of Saskatchewan by 1 per cent. 

 

In the province of Saskatchewan, those people making less than 

20,000 are paying less to government than in any other province 

in Canada. Those earning less than $30,000 a year are paying 

less to government than any other province in Canada except 

the province of Alberta; and thirdly, those making less than 

$40,000 per year are paying less to government in the province 

of Saskatchewan than any other government in Canada except 

the province of Alberta. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — A new question to the minister, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Minister, your so-called tax reductions of sales tax 

and others do not come close to your tax increases when you 

consider the amount of increased taxation under the flat tax and 

the removal of the property improvement grant which is costing 

Saskatchewan taxpayers in excess of $180 million a year. 

 

Mr. Minister, as your government enters its fifth year in office, 

can you explain how a doubling in the flat tax keeps your 1982 

campaign promise to cut income taxes by 10 per cent across the 

board? Income taxes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if we ever needed a 

reason for a flat tax we have it from the NDP in Manitoba 

where they have one of their prominent cabinet ministers who 

went through an election saying that the tax loopholes were a 

fraud and a scam, and it turns out he and his family avoided 

taxes of about $121,000 by taking advantage of a tax shelter. 

That’s what the NDP really believe, Mr. Speaker, and I suggest 

to the hon. member — I suggest to the hon. member — that the 

flat tax should be endorsed by the parties opposite, not attacked, 

because it is the only fair way to get those who can afford to 

pay tax and those that traditionally have avoided paying tax 

because of loopholes. 

 

I suggest to the hon. member — I’ve already given the figures 

— that people earning less than $20,000 in the province of 

Saskatchewan pay less to government than any other place in 

Canada. And that didn’t take into account the reduction of the 

sales tax on clothing under $300. 

 

Secondly, those earning less than $30,000 a year are paying less 

to government than any other province in Canada except 

Alberta, and that doesn’t take into account the recently 

announced initiative removing sales tax on clothing under $300. 

 

And thirdly, those earning less than $40,000 a year are  

paying less to government than any other province in Canada, 

and that doesn’t take into account the initiative removing sales 

tax on clothing under $300. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Salaries of Cabinet Ministers’ Assistants 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I want to address my question to the Premier 

and, Mr. Premier, it deals with salary increases to cabinet 

ministers’ assistants. These are, in large part, political aides 

who are already paid 45, 50, and some, $70,000 a year by 

Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

What I want to ask you, Mr. Premier: can the Premier confirm 

that there has been in fact a general salary increase for cabinet 

ministers’ aides in recent weeks, and can he confirm that some 

of those increases have been made retroactive to last October? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can confirm that 

some out-of-scope people have received their normal 3 per cent 

increments or their merit pay or whatever that normally go to 

people who are out of scope. With respect to any further 

information, I would be glad to get it and bring it back to the 

hon. member. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I’m rather appalled, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Premier would not even know in respect to the political aides 

what the increases are. 

 

I ask you further, Mr. Premier: I wonder if the Premier would 

check into the operation of one of his own departments, 

specifically the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation. Are 

you aware that your ministerial assistants in the crop insurance 

area recently received salary increases of as much as $1,600 a 

year and all of them are retroactive to last October? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will gladly get the 

information and, obviously, will go through this in my estimates 

with respect to how much people get in terms of their salary 

increases. I’d be glad to get that for you, and we will be able to 

look at it in depth as we usually do, and I’ll have all the 

information in front of me. 

 

I mean, they didn’t win on agriculture, and they’re not winning 

on jobs, so now they’re back into salary increases in crop 

insurance. If you want to look at salary increases, I’ve got 

salary increases in your administration that are 46 per cent in 

one year, and lots of them. I’ve got a stack of them this deep, 

and I’ll be glad to bring them to the legislature if we want to get 

into it. 

 

Most of the increases that we have seen recently have been the 

normal out-of-scope increases for people who are not in scope, 

obviously. And if they are on the basis of merit or they haven’t 

had an increase for a series of months or perhaps a year and a 

half . . . And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be glad to bring them all forward 

and discuss them. And certainly in my estimates, Mr. Speaker, 

I’ll be responsible for all of them as I always am. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — A new question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier. 

Mr. Premier, in recent weeks your ministerial assistants in the 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance have all  

  



 

April 30, 1986 

973 

 

received healthy salary increases retroactive to October. They 

were ministerial assistants, the same ones that last year when 

the former minister, the member from Arm River who increased 

their salaries 8 to 16 per cent. They are still in the same 

positions, doing the same jobs, but now what you have done is 

given them salary increases of as much as $1,600 retroactive to 

October. 

 

I ask you: how do you justify these massive increases to some 

political hacks of yours and cronies and not a substantial 

increase to other citizens who either work for government or for 

Crown corporations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have 

been in Health estimates and in Social Services estimates and so 

forth, and all they can do is pick on public employees. That’s 

what they do, they pick on the public employees. 

 

I mean if we want to look at the history, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure 

you don’t want me to read all these out, but I can give you some 

examples where, like, Bill Knight in the premier’s office of the 

former administration got a 46 per cent increase in one year — 

46 per cent increase. Crystal Buchanan got a 28 per cent 

increase in six months. Sheila Page got 157 per cent increase, 

Mr. Speaker, over two and one-half years. I mean I can go list 

after list, and I’ve got Koskie’s included and names that I might 

not be able to mention, but a whole bunch of them. 

 

I mean why do you want to pick on civil servants? People in the 

public service work here and work in Saskatchewan, and 

they’re proud to be professional public servants. And in the last 

three weeks in estimates all the opposition can do is pick on 

secretaries, pick on professionals, pick on the staff. I mean the 

whole civil service or public service in Regina is fed right up 

with the opposition because all they can do is pick on people. 

 

They can’t discuss agriculture intelligently. They can’t discuss 

jobs or energy, or projects, or international trade, or any of the 

things that matter. No, they can pick on secretaries and pick on 

the public service. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, from all indications and what I saw last 

night, Mr. Speaker, we’re not only going to win the next 

election, we’re going to win most of the seats in Regina just 

because of the NDP attitude. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Request made by Kelsey-Tisdale Constituent 

 

Mr. Hampton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question, too, 

is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, as the Premier and the Minister 

of Agriculture, there’s still a gentleman that believes in your 

spirit of co-operation, and that’s Mr. Hainstock from 

Kelsey-Tisdale constituency. He’s asking . . . Mr. Premier, you 

were to get back to him in a short period of time. It’s now over 

30 days. He’s asking: may he have your co-operation; it’s 

getting to the spring time of the year and he would like to get 

under way in his venture up there. 

 

Can I ask you, sir, will you give him that co-operation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I have given Mr. Hainstock 

my co-operation. I have also advised him of the two issues that 

he’s most concerned about; that is, appraisal of the farm land 

that he has with respect to how many cattle it can carry. I think 

that’s fair ball that we should have a private appraisal and with 

respect to stumpage fees and whether you’re going to charge 

them for wood or not. We’ve had the agriculture caucus meet 

with them. We have looked at our own policies and looked at 

the policies of other jurisdictions. I believe the policy we have 

is fair with respect to clearing land. On those with respect to the 

rent we charge them and now many cows it would carry, I’d 

gladly live with a private appraiser and I’ve told them that and 

we’re quite prepared to do it. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Congratulations to the Prime Minister of Canada 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today in this 

Legislative Assembly to make a ministerial statement of 

congratulations and appreciation to the Prime Minister of 

Canada. 

 

This a.m., the Prime Minister announced that he had made a 

historic decision to place agriculture on the table of world 

leaders in his discussions that are going to take place in Tokyo. 

He had a choice, Mr. Speaker, of putting any number of issues 

on the table, and he could have picked any of them at any 

particular time that applied mostly to central Canada, or mostly 

to energy, or mostly to jobs, but he has decided, with the help of 

others that have given him some encouragement, to make this 

historic decision to put agriculture as the number one issue in 

front of all the world leaders, and he is prepared to discuss it 

and to change agriculture policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the first time in generations, at least as long 

as I can remember and perhaps you can remember, that a 

Canadian Prime Minister has personally made agriculture his 

number one issue, not only at the national level, but now 

internationally. In my view, Mr. Speaker, this historic occasion 

has done more, and will do more, for agriculture in 

Saskatchewan than any single event we’ve seen in the last 

decade. As the farmers say, Mr. Speaker, all the grants in the 

world don’t match a two-inch rain. Well, Mr. Speaker, all the 

grants and subsidies that come out of the provincial government 

and the federal government could not match, and will not 

match, the Prime Minister of a country taking agriculture as his 

number one issue before the leaders of the world. 

 

In dealing, Mr. Speaker, with the U.S. farm Bill, the European 

Economic Community, the Japanese import duties, and all those 

items, Mr. Speaker, they do more harm to Canadian agriculture 

and to Saskatchewan agriculture than anything else that I can 

think of. And to have the Prime Minister pick up the ball — not 

only because the western premiers talked about it, not only 

because they took it to the premiers’ conference at the national 

level, and not only because we put it on the table at the first 

ministers’ conference and had it discussed, but now, Mr. 

Speaker, because the Prime Minister of Canada says it’s his 

number one issue; it’s his issue that he will take to the Tokyo 

conference — it’s absolutely historic  

  



 

April 30, 1986 

974 

 

and important and I say, Mr. Speaker, congratulations on behalf 

of the people of Saskatchewan, on behalf of the NDP, on behalf 

of all members of the legislature. A sincere congratulations to 

the Prime Minister, Mr. Speaker, for doing and taking the 

initiative and having the courage to take the initiative today, 

taking it to the world market. 

 

I also want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that it’s extremely 

important, in my view it’s extremely important, that all farm 

groups in Saskatchewan and across Canada, all groups 

associated with agriculture, all those interested in the food and 

agricultural business, stand squarely behind the Prime Minister 

when he is taking agriculture forward to the international level. 

Mr. Speaker, the world needs to know that all Canadians back 

the Canadian Prime Minister when he is taking the number one 

issue, food and agriculture, to that international forum. 

 

And I am calling on all farm groups and all leaders, political 

leaders and farm leaders in this province and across the rest of 

the country to stand beside the Prime Minister, endorse his 

move to put agriculture as the number one issue on the 

international market, so those throughout the world, Mr. 

Speaker, those throughout the world will know that Canadians 

— Canadians in agriculture, Canadians in the food business, 

Canadians from coast to coast — will say: Mr. Prime Minister, 

we’re behind you 100 per cent in getting us a good deal for 

agriculture in this country and to do your best at the 

international level to change things like the U.S. farm bill, the 

European Economic Community, the Japanese markets, and 

others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s time that Canadians locked arms and 

showed that we can co-operate and stand behind the Prime 

Minister as he defends agriculture for us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to also say there’s a second important thing 

that the Prime Minister did today, and it’s really significant, Mr. 

Speaker. He not only said that it’s important; he not only put it 

on the table; but what he did, Mr. Speaker, is that he made some 

moves today, on top of what he’s done recently, that are 

absolutely historic in this province. 

 

I want to give you some examples. The Prime Minister 

announced today, Mr. Speaker, he announced today that there 

will be no tax on farm fuel in the province of Saskatchewan, or 

indeed any place in Canada. Mr. Speaker, the federal 

government is gong to remove the tax on farm fuel, which is 

worth $80 million right across Canada to farmers. And they’ve 

been asking for it for some time, as have farm leaders and 

members of the legislature here in the province. 

 

Farmers now will be able to purchase fuel in the province of 

Saskatchewan somewhere in the neighbour of 20 to 25 cents a 

litre, taking the federal farm rebate and our own farm rebate on 

top of what the price of fuel has done recently — $80 million. 

 

The second thing, Mr. Speaker, is that the Prime Minister 

announced today that he will see the domestic price of wheat 

rise to as high as $11 a bushel, Mr. Speaker. That’s  

worth $200 million a year to wheat producers across the 

province. That amounts to, Mr. Speaker, about $4.50 a bushel 

for wheat in the province of Saskatchewan and in Canada. It’s 

worth a dollar a bushel, because about 20 per cent of the wheat 

that we sell goes domestic, and anywhere between 10 and $11 a 

bushel means that the price now to producers will be about 

$4.50 a bushel — $200 million. 

 

The Prime Minister announced as well today, Mr. Speaker, that 

the freight rates for western Canadian farmers will not be 

increased, and that they will be froze at the level that they are 

today, for a $40 million savings to the people of western 

Canada. He also announced, Mr. Speaker, that elevator tariffs 

will not increase, which is worth about $10 million. On top of 

that, he said that he will put on the fast track, the front burner, 

his farm review panels and his bankruptcy legislation, and will 

encourage the commodity legislation associated with 6 per cent 

money at the Farm Credit Corporation to be put forward as 

quickly as possible. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, all those moves that he’s made today, plus a 

$580 million payment on the western grain stabilization 

payment, plus another 100 to $300 million expected in the fall 

— Mr. Speaker, we’re looking at $1.1 billion in cash going to 

Canadian farmers, and certainly the lion’s share of that going to 

Saskatchewan producers. 

 

On top of that, Mr. Speaker, when the members opposite ask, 

and I ask, for help in drought, they delivered $58 million; when 

we asked for help in flooding, $14.8 million. When the farmers 

in western Canada and Saskatchewan people asked to have the 

capital gains tax removed, it was removed, and that’s $50 

million to the people of Saskatchewan. When beef producers 

asked them to act with respect to beef imports, they did, Mr. 

Speaker, saving them thousands and tens of thousands of 

dollars. And as you know, Mr. Speaker, the crop insurance 

payments have averaged $640 million as a lump sum over the 

last couple of years. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, plus $1.1 billion in cash out to farmers at 6 

per cent money that we’ve put together means in total — in 

total — in the last day, and in the last year, and the last two 

years, there’s been over $3 billion in cash put out to 

Saskatchewan farmers and Canadian farmers right across the 

board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the Prime Minister of the country is 

prepared to take agriculture as his number one issue 

internationally, when he’s also prepared to put up billions of 

dollars, Mr. Speaker, I can just say congratulations to the Prime 

Minister — congratulations for dealing with agriculture, 

congratulations for dealing promptly, and thank you very much 

for the co-operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in summary, I want to say that we appreciate what 

has been announced today. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, as 

the opposition has asked for, and as I have asked for, they have 

removed the PGRT (petroleum and gas revenue tax) with 

respect to small oil companies. And Mr. Speaker, that’s worth 

about $100 million, and it’s particularly important to 

Saskatchewan firms because we have mostly local, small 

independents. Where the Alberta province has large companies 

and  

  



 

April 30, 1986 

975 

 

multinationals, in Saskatchewan it’s mostly smaller companies, 

middle-sized companies. The PGRT was removed for up to . . . 

was $500,000. It’s up to $2 million in sales now, will be exempt 

from PGRT. 

 

The combination of the package — what he’s done for 

agriculture, which has been tremendous, plus, Mr. Speaker, 

what he’s done with respect to the PGRT — means that the 

province of Saskatchewan in jobs, in agriculture, in energy, 

received news today, not only at the local level, not only at the 

national level, but indeed, Mr. Speaker, at the international 

level, that has not been done in the history of the country. 

 

One final point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is simply this. Members 

of the legislature, members of parliament, stood in their places 

this morning, stood in their places today, and congratulated the 

Prime Minister on the moves that he has taken in agriculture. 

NDP members stood in their place today in parliament and said: 

congratulations to the Prime Minister of Canada for having the 

courage and the tenacity and the determination to do the things 

that he’s done today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe every single member of this Assembly 

should congratulate the Prime Minister on his courageous and 

his historic acts taken this morning. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have a few 

brief comments I’d like to make in response to the Premier’s 

boasting about his personal influence and about his 

cheer-leading efforts, what they’ve brought Saskatchewan 

farmers. And I think there’s two observations that are very 

clear. 

 

Number one, in the last three years the oil companies have 

made a reasonable amount of profits. In fact, their profits have 

increased by as much as 140 per cent a year during the last 

three-year period. 

 

Number two, the announcement today put cash, in the words of 

the former minister of Agriculture, on the dash. The member for 

Weyburn likes to use that terminology. It put cash on the dash 

for oil companies. But how much money, how much money is 

the federal treasury putting behind farmers in Saskatchewan? 

That’s the question I’d like to ask you. 

 

Just short weeks ago — short weeks ago — the federal 

government announced initial price of grain. Eighty-one cents a 

bushel drop in one year and this little group across the way 

here, they’re so, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 

 

And we’ve listened to a little speech here today that I was sure 

would be culminated by an election call with enthusiasm and 

the inspiration that how little it takes — how little it takes — to 

make these boys happy. How little it takes to make them cheer. 

Here are farmers that are going to get about 30 cents a bushel 

from the people of Canada — not from the treasury, not one 

dime from the treasury — and these boys are cheering and 

they’re happy. Boy, they love it. They think that’s the best news 

since home-made bread. 

 

Well I want to tell you, I want to tell you, Mr. Minister of 

Agriculture, the farm groups will stand behind you and beside 

you, and they’ll stand beside your little leader, Brian, any day 

of the week if you stand beside them, and if you stand for them. 

But where are these people coming from? Where is Brian and 

his friend, the part-time Minister of Agriculture, really coming 

from? Are they standing behind farmers? Are they giving the 

farm groups that met with Ed Broadbent and myself and some 

of our federal MPs last week — are they giving them something 

to cheer about and stand behind? 

 

Every one of those farm groups said we need anywhere from 

one . . . The lowest request was $1 billion and the highest by 

Sask Wheat was $2 billion. Instead of one or $2 billion what did 

we get? Boloney. What did we get in this announcement today 

that all these guys are cheering about? Not a nickel. Not a 

nickel from the federal treasury. 

 

The price of wheat that went down by 81 cents a bushel is 

coming up at the expense of the people buying bread, a 

two-price system we’ve been asking for. But are we getting a 

two-price system? 

 

On the telex that came through our office it said, “Mulroney 

said the government will set a new price range for domestic 

wheat.” They’re going to set a new price range, not ceiling, not 

floor, but a price range. Now when I hear a Tory, I listen, 

because Tories are known to play with words. The price range 

is from $6 to $14. 

 

What was it before? What was it before? You’re a farmer; what 

was it before? Show me with your fingers if you can count that 

high. It was $7. The new price range might be six. It could be 

six. 

 

The telex itself said, “The price determined by the Canadian 

Wheat Board now is close to seven,” and Mulroney is going to 

set a new range of six. So it’s going to depend on the election. 

It’s going to depend on the election. 

 

(1445) 

 

Brian said to this little fellow here that’s been patting him on 

the back — and you really can’t negotiate very good from a 

position of being on your knees, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s 

not a good negotiating tactic, but the little guy here, across the 

way, who’s been cheer-leading, saying what a great job he’s 

done, should take some lessons from history. 

 

And we had a very good lesson in P.E.I. . . . what was his name, 

Lee? Lee was cheer-leading and saying, keep up the good work, 

Brian. Lee used the same line. He lost his own seat. Yes, Lee 

lost his own seat. 

 

I want to tell you, Mr. Premier, that the government refused to 

respond to a call for a federal deficiency payment from all the 

grain groups of Saskatchewan — all the major grain producers. 

Instead, they announce some cosmetic changes to the two-price 

system. And if it goes to the maximum, we’ll make about 35 

cents a bushel. I don’t know where you get your dollar a bushel 

from, Mr. Premier, because if you look at the prices that were  

  



 

April 30, 1986 

976 

 

announced in the past — I’ll find it in a minute here — they 

ranged in the neighbourhood from 7 to 9 per cent. The domestic 

consumption in the last four years ranged from 7 per cent to 9 

per cent of our grain. 

 

So if that goes up it will affect about 9 cents, and according to 

my calculations, will be a 30-cent-a-bushel increase. Where’s 

the other 50 cents? To stay even with last year, to do as poorly 

as we did last year, we still need another 50 cents. It’s not there. 

And let’s be very clear about this — there’s not one penny, not 

one penny, coming from the federal treasury. 

 

And I think today’s announcement of an aid package to the oil 

industry, of well over $175 million in direct federal treasury 

assistance . . . and I’m not sure why the Premier likes to deflate 

the numbers when it comes to talking about the oil companies, 

and inflate the numbers and exaggerate the numbers when it 

comes to talking about farmers. He got out of this package 

somehow, yet if we change this formula from 6 to 11, that that’s 

somehow going to give the farmers a dollar a bushel. 

 

I’m not sure who does his calculations for him. But on 7 to 9 

per cent of the grain sold domestically, and if we have a good 

crop it will be closer to 7 per cent, but if all of Saskatchewan is 

dried out, it will be 9 per cent like it was in the southern part of 

the province last year — 9 per cent last year. 

 

That is only 30 cents a bushel — and $175 million in direct 

federal treasury benefits to the oil companies that made profits 

last year. No sign that they’re not making a profit. He likes to 

compare us with the Americans and say we didn’t do as well as 

the Americans. 

 

The man, for a Minister of Agriculture, is a disgrace to farmers. 

It’s a disgrace to farmers. Because he says he has a quota book 

and pretends to know something about farming. Well I want to 

tell the member, farmers are buying their fuel for 19 cents a litre 

down in the United States and getting $6.15 a bushel. And he’s 

saying we’re doing better than that at 3.15 a bushel, with 30 

cents or 40 cents a litre fuel. The member doesn’t know what 

he’s talking about when it comes to farm issues. 

 

The PC government today refused to provide a federal 

deficiency payment to grain farmers. Brian Mulroney cares 

about the election here in Saskatchewan. He gave them 

something to cheer about. And what was that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? What was the cheer story? What was the bottom line? 

The bottom line is that the oil companies are going to get $175 

million; the farmers aren’t getting a dollar out of the treasury. 

And I want to say that that is going to come home to haunt the 

member for Estevan. That’s going to haunt him. He is going to 

go the way of the PC leaders across Canada. When the P.E.I. 

Tories decided to hang their train onto the federal Tories, they 

lost the election. And not only lost it, but their leader lost his 

own seat. 

 

I want to make a prediction today: unless you get out and talk 

about deficiency payments like the Sask Wheat Pool is, like 

Pioneer Grain, like every grain company going, and start saying 

what farmers want to hear, that the only way they’re going to 

survive is if they get the prices of the  

grain up and get the price up to where it belongs — not 

two-bitting around like he’s doing at the expense of all the 

bread eaters in the province. 

 

I think the two-price system is great. We’ve been calling for it. 

My colleague put the Bill forward and got this government on 

track. And they’re now trying to get on the bandwagon and take 

it away from Lorne Nystrom. Well I’ll tell you, Lorne Nystrom 

did his homework. He was canvassing across the country. When 

the price of grain was reasonably good in relation to the rest of 

the world, he was asking for a two-price system. Now that 

we’re half-price wheat, a two-price system is okay. It’ll help for 

30 cents. But we need three bucks. 

 

You’re not even in it at 10 per cent about where they’re going 

to come in as far as the votes are concerned. They’ll get about 

10 per cent of the vote. He’s given us about 10 per cent of what 

we need. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 6 — An Act respecting the Application to 

Saskatchewan of the Convention on the Civil Aspects of 

International Child Abduction 

 

Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, as Minister of 

Justice I’m pleased to rise today and move second reading of 

The International Child Abduction Act. This government is 

proud to be able to participate in the world-wide effort to 

eliminate the security abductors’ fine in taking children across 

international borders. 

 

Let me take a few minutes to set out some of the details of the 

convention and the implementing legislation. If a child who is 

resident in Saskatchewan is abducted from a parent who has 

custody and is taken to a country which has acceded to the 

convention, such as France for example, that parent may apply 

to Saskatchewan Justice or the Government of France to have 

the child returned. 

 

The foreign country is responsible for searching out, sheltering, 

and securing the return of the child who is subject to an 

application and, where circumstances require, to provide legal 

aid, including the provision of legal counsel. 

 

Similarly, the parent of a French child who is wrongfully 

brought to Saskatchewan may apply to the Government of 

France or to Canada to have the child returned. The 

Departments of Justice and Social Services, in concert with 

local police forces, are responsible for locating and returning 

the child. 

 

In cases where the abducting child . . . abducting parent, rather, 

is not willing to voluntarily return a child, the courts may order 

the return. In Saskatchewan, Department of Justice legal 

counsel will represent the custodial parent; in other 

jurisdictions, a similar arrangement will exist. 

 

It is important to note that the court, under this  

  



 

April 30, 1986 

977 

 

convention, will not have the jurisdiction to review the merits of 

the particular case. In other words, if custody has already been 

determined in any jurisdiction, the abducting person will not be 

able to have the issue re-tried in the country to which the child 

has been taken. Variations will have to be made in the original 

jurisdiction. 

 

However, there are certain limited and, I would suggest, 

appropriate grounds of defence: 

 

1. The return of the child may be opposed on the ground that the 
person claiming custody did not actually have custody rights, 

or that the person agreed to have the child live with the 

person opposing the return; 

 

2. If there is a grave risk that sending the child home may 
expose the child to physical or psychological harm or place 

the child in an intolerable situation, the court may refuse to 

order the child’s return; 

 

3. The court may also consider the wishes of the children if the 
child has attained an age or a degree of maturity at which it is 

appropriate to take account of his or her views. 

 

If these factors are not present, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the court 

shall order the return of the child, though if the child has settled 

in his or her new environment and more than a year has elapsed 

since the wrongful removal, there is some scope for the court to 

refuse to make the order. 

 

Admittedly there is a fair amount of room for the use of the 

judicial discretion that may be very well appropriate in certain 

cases. But the basic message of the convention is clear: child 

abductors may no longer take security in crossing international 

borders. Children will be returned, and variations of custody 

orders must be sought in the jurisdiction where the custody 

rights were first determined. 

 

Several nations are already a part of this important convention. 

Canada, Switzerland, France, and Portugal have acceded to the 

convention, which means the convention is fully, or at least 

partially, operational in those nations. In addition the United 

States, the United Kingdom, Greece, and Luxembourg have 

signed the convention. President Reagan referred to matter to 

the Senate on October 30th of last year, and the accession by 

the Americans and the British is hoped for shortly. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our people become more mobile every 

day. It is important that government respond to the social needs 

that arise from these migrations. Law must be responsive to 

social change. In addition, it is important that Saskatchewan do 

its part to ensure that Canada remains a key figure in the 

development of international law. 

 

But what is most important is that we provide legal mechanisms 

to protect and nurture family life. As I have previously pointed 

out, this government has volunteered government officials to 

assist parents in using this convention. By our actions, as well 

as our words, we have once again demonstrated our desire to 

protect the family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act respecting the 

application to Saskatchewan of the Hague Convention on the 

civil aspects of international child abduction. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I will want to 

be making further comments in respect to the Bill. All I want to 

say today is that we are in agreement that the enforcement of 

law should, in fact, not be restricted by international 

boundaries. 

 

And we have certainly had, in respect to child abduction, 

instances where not having the accord prevented certain action 

to be taken. And I think that it’s reasonable that we take a look 

at it and join with other nations in the world to co-operate on 

the basis of preventing child abduction and escaping 

implication of the law by crossing international boundaries. 

 

So with the principle of that Act, certainly we are in agreement 

with. And I’ll have an opportunity to look, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

at the minister’s comments and any further comments that other 

groups may wish in respect to the legislation and will, therefore, 

beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1500) 

 

Bill No. 25 — An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 

today to move second reading of a Bill No. 25, An Act to 

amend The Tobacco Tax Act. This Bill increases the tax on a 

package of 25 cigarettes from 77 cents to $1,.02, effective 

March 27, 1986; and the tax on 25 grams of fine-cut or pipe 

tobacco goes from 31 cents to 41.25 cents, or $1.65 per gram. 

The tax on cigars increases from 10 cents to 13 cents for cigars 

retailing for less than 20 cents; from 25 cents to 33 cents for 

cigars retailing in the 21 to 40 cent category and from 45 to 60 

cents for cigars retailing over 40 cents. 

 

These increases, Mr. Speaker, are expected to yield an 

additional $22 million in the ’86-87 year. Therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to move, seconded by the 

member for Saskatoon University, that Bill No. 25 be now read 

a second time. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to say a 

few words and then I’ll be moving adjournment of the second 

reading debate. 

 

I make the point that the massive increase in taxes that have 

taken place in this province in the last few years is here again 

indicated with this increase in the tobacco tax. And if you look 

back in the estimates, and only go back to 1984, the total was 

59 million. That has increased now to $92 million being taken 

from ordinary people. About 50 per cent of the adult population 

who smoke are paying almost double the amount of taxes, not 

in four years but in two years. 

 

Now I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are few people  

  



 

April 30, 1986 

978 

 

that will argue that if you’re going to increase taxes, obviously 

tobacco and cigarettes are one of the places that that can be 

done. But I think there are many of the 50 per cent of the adult 

population who smoke who are wondering . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Fifty! 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, about 50 per cent of the adult 

population. I notice the member from Saskatoon doesn’t realize 

what the statistics are, but it’s approximately 50 per cent of the 

adult population. They are paying almost a 100 per cent 

increase in tobacco taxes in two short years. And what they are 

saying is whether they’re getting ripped off and whether they 

can afford to pay this increased taxes, along with the new flat 

tax, along with the used automobile tax, and all the other 

increases in taxes that we have seen under the Devine 

government. 

 

The other main issue here is whether or not the minister has 

made any provisions of this massive tax increase that some of it 

would be set aside, a percentage of it would be set aside, for 

prevention — to help young people avoid getting on to the habit 

of smoking cigarettes and becoming involved in the nicotine 

habit. And I would just put that to the minister, that we would 

have hoped and would have liked to have seen in this Bill a 

provision that would have set aside a portion of this massive tax 

increase for prevention. That isn’t here. 

 

I know that when it comes to allowing booze advertising, the 

advertising of alcohol — and we have seen last weekend the 

result of that kind of booze advertising, what it does to young 

people, at the Regina Inn — and I just say to you that we should 

have here a program, a program to educate young people about 

the problems associated with the use of tobacco and nicotine. 

And when you see an increase in taxes, as I have already 

mentioned, from 59 million in 1984 to 92 million this year, you 

would have expected that this government would have been 

using some of that massive tax increase in order to attempt to 

prevent the use of tobacco. We don’t see that happening. 

 

I want to take an opportunity to talk and to meet with some 

people on the issue of this massive tax increase, because it’s not 

an isolated case. We will be dealing with other tax issues as the 

months go by. But I want to take some time to look at this Bill 

to see whether or not we can come forward with possibly an 

amendment that would be acceptable to the minister, that would 

allow for a measure of prevention in the Bill, that some of the 

money would be spent in that manner. And I therefore beg 

leave to adjourn the debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 26 — An Act to amend The Corporation Capital 

Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I rise today to move second reading of a Bill No. 26, 

An Act to amend The Corporation Capital Tax Act. 

 

This Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, increases the corporation capital 

tax rate for banks from 2 per cent to 3 per cent. The rate for 

trust and loan corporations goes from 0.8 to 1.2  

per cent. And the tax rate for other corporations is increased 

from 0.3 to 0.5 per cent. These rates are effective January 1, 

1986. 

 

Corporation capital tax affects only our largest corporations, 

and as my colleague the Minister of Finance announced in his 

budget address, Mr. Speaker, we believe that it is only fair that 

large corporations and financial institutions should help 

establish and promote small business in the province. The 

corporation capital tax rate increases will generate 

approximately $21 million in 1986-87, which will help finance 

our many small business initiatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon 

University, that Bill No. 26, an Act to amend The Corporation 

Capital Tax Act, be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, here we have a typical 

token increase in taxes for the banks in the province. We have 

just completed, or just moved the second reading of a Bill that 

will slap a massive increase on cigarette smokers in the 

province. We now come to a Bill that deals toughly with the 

banks and takes less from them than it does from the people 

who smoke in the province. 

 

I say that this is a perfect indication of where this government is 

at. On the one hand they can be tough with the people who are 

hooked on cigarettes and smoke, and take more in taxes in one 

year from them than this Bill will take from the banks. I just 

make that point because I think that’s it’s a token Bill. It’s a 

phoney war that they’re setting up with the Boyd Robertsons of 

the world to pretend that they have this little fight going on with 

the banks and then they can go out and say, we agree with the 

NDP; we don’t like banks either. 

 

Well that’s a new theory when one looks at the donations that 

are given by the Royal Bank and the Imperial Bank of 

Commerce and the Bank of Nova Scotia to the Conservative 

Party to get them elected. And I predict that this little phoney 

war that they’ve got trying to get started with the likes of Boyd 

Robertson — who is always at hand when it comes time to help 

out with organizing the financing of the province with a $2 

billion deficit, with helping with that $2 billion deficit and 

helping to arrange the loans and help the profits of the bank — 

then the war isn’t on. 

 

But now at election time we have a Bill before us that is going 

to really take on the banks. Well I say to you that it’s a phoney 

war. It doesn’t take as much from the banks as the previous 

Bill, Bill 25, will take from the smokers of the province. And I 

just say to you that the public understand what is going on here. 

I will be looking at this closely. My colleague from 

Elphinstone, I believe, will want to make a comment on it and 

for that reason I will adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 27 — An Act respecting The Institute of Chartered 

Accountants of Saskatchewan and to repeal The Chartered 

Accountants Act and The Certified Public  

  



 

April 30, 1986 

979 

 

Accountants Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I rise today to move second reading of a Bill No. 27, 

The Chartered Accountants Act, 1986. The council of the 

Institute of Chartered Accountants of Saskatchewan proposes a 

new chartered accountants Act to be enacted by the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The existing legislation was enacted in 1934 and has remained 

virtually unchanged since that time. The institute believes that 

the 1934 Act has served both the institute and the public well. 

However, the increase in complexities of commerce and greater 

expectations of society require a legislative base more attuned 

to modern society to permit the institute to deal with them. 

 

The institute proposes the new, updated Act to strengthen the 

protection of the public, to increase the role of members in the 

establishment of by-laws, to revise disciplinary procedures, and 

to generally reflect the role of the profession in the modern 

business world. 

 

To accomplish these goals the institute proposes a number of 

new initiatives: an appointment of a lay member to the council 

of the institute; a new disciplinary procedure providing for 

investigation of complaints, new hearings, procedures, and 

appeals, as well as disciplinary action; deletion of the standard 

reporting requirements combined in other professional 

association Acts respecting membership lists and by-law 

changes; and the power to make by-laws on the following 

topics: (1) periodic random inspection of the practice of 

members; (2) standards of professional conduct; (3) regulating 

advertising by members; (4) regulating trust accounts of 

members, and records that must be kept by them; and (5) 

requiring members to maintain liability insurance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Chartered Accountants Act, 1986, is based in 

part on recommendations of the Special Committee on 

Regulations and representations of the Institute of Chartered 

Accountants of Saskatchewan on the provision of other recent 

professional association Acts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for Saskatoon 

University, that Bill No. 27 now be read a second time. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to adjourn debate 

on this as well because the member from Regina Centre wants 

to address the Bill and make some remarks on it. I agree with 

the minister, certainly, that the present legislation which was 

established in 1934 is old legislation, and times change and 

conditions change and needs change. And so as a result of that, 

the laws from time to time need to change to meet those 

changing times and conditions. 

 

I think, if I heard the member say correctly, that there will be an 

input from a lay member on the new board. I think if that is 

done effectively and sincerely, that is a good move. I believe 

and I have always believed that the consumer should have some 

input on boards and organizations of professional bodies such 

as this, as well as medical professions and others. That, on the 

outside, therefore  

seems like a good change with the new legislation. 

 

I will want to look at how effective it is and therefore will need 

to study carefully how the law itself is written up in order that it 

does what it is intending to do. I am aware of the fact that the 

Special Committee on Regulations has considered this and I 

know that there will be members of the special committee who 

may want to speak on it as well. 

 

(1515) 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in light of the fact that other 

members want to speak on this Bill and want to study it more 

closely, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend The Education and Health 

Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. It gives me great pleasure to introduce Bill No. 28, An 

Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act. 

 

This Bill, Mr. Speaker, implements exemptions previously 

announced by my colleague, the Minister of Finance, in his 

budget address. These exemptions are for adult clothing and 

footwear and yard goods priced less than $300 for each article. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am extremely pleased that these exemptions will 

provide tax savings of $23 million to Saskatchewan residents. 

Our government is proud that the most essential goods that 

people use are now sales tax free. This includes children’s 

clothing and footwear, and residential electricity which were 

previously exempted by this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure in moving, seconded by the 

member from Saskatoon University, that Bill No. 28 now be 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have here a 

minister who is moving a Bill that was supposedly an issue that 

was the flagship of their budget. This was the culmination of 

many months of planning of how they were going to fulfil their 

promise of removing the sales tax which you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and all the other members promised to do in 1982. 

 

What they promised to do in 1982 was to remove the E&H tax. 

This is what they promised. And the members may not want to 

hear about what they promised in 1982, and I understand that. 

And I understand why the minister got up and gave a speech 

that was less than a page long, bragging about the removal of 

the sales tax on clothing. 

 

Well I’ll tell you, when the people of the province hear the 

promises that are made by this group, and we’re hearing them 

now, a promise here, they’re going to build a fertilizer plant at 

the side of an upgrader — an upgrader which hasn’t got an 

ounce of cement poured for it — and then on top of the 

fertilizer plant, God only knows what’s going to be build on top 

of that, and people are making cartoons now about this 

government’s promises, as well  

  



 

April 30, 1986 

980 

 

they should. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you will know that the promises 

made in 1982, that were made in 1982 to remove the sales tax, 

were nothing but hollow promises made by a Conservative 

Party in order to get elected — in order to get elected — a 

cynical plan to promise to the people of the province to remove 

the sales tax. 

 

And here we are today after five years. We’re into the fifth year 

now of the mandate of this government and some people are 

saying that maybe these people needed a second chance. But 

they are now saying they are taking their second chance, their 

second term, without even asking for it. They’re into their fifth 

year, believe it or not. They used up their first term — up to 

four years. Now they’re not even asking the people of the 

province about the second term, they’re just taking it. And the 

opinion out there has turned, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Some of 

them were saying that they maybe deserved another chance. But 

these people are so arrogant that they’re just taking it; they’re 

not even asking. 

 

We’re now into the fifth year of the term of this government 

and here we have a promise made in 1982 to remove the sales 

tax — to remove the sales tax — and what have we got? A 

minister who is so proud of what they’re doing in that area that 

he stands up and takes less than two minutes to tell us about it. 

Now I’ll tell you, that’s a government that is proud of its record. 

 

Well I don’t think we’re going to hear much of the record of 

this government and the record of the promises, the record of 

the promises when we go into the election. I don’t think they’re 

going to be talking about the promise to cut income tax by 10 

per cent — income tax by 10 per cent — I don’t think we’ll 

hear much about that promise to cut the income tax because 

what we’ve seen is a massive increase; a new flat tax, the only 

province in Canada that pays two income taxes and everyone 

out there is filling out their tax forms today, filling out their tax 

forms today and they find that they pay two income taxes, the 

only place in the country that does that. Can you believe that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

I’ll tell you there are many people in this province who simply 

don’t believe this government and that political party because 

when they see the increases that we have had in taxes . . . Used 

automobile tax — that was put in by this minister; put in by this 

government. You know, I don’t believe it was put in by this 

minister. I don’t think he was in cabinet at that time. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Well he took it off, Dwain. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well he took it off but he didn’t give the 

money back. He kept the money. He took the tax off but then he 

kept the money — five million of it he kept. I couldn’t believe 

it. Premier Devine, he says, look I put this used car tax on, and 

he says, it was wrong; but you know what, boys, I’m going to 

keep the money. I’m going to keep it all. I’m going to keep 

every cent of it — $5 million. The people are saying, where did 

that money go? Where did that $5 million go, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? They are saying, what is that money being used for, to 

do polling for the next election? That’s what they’re asking,  

the public out there, 60,000 of them. Sixty thousand families in 

this province paid the used car tax and they are asking 

themselves what are they using that money for. Are they doing 

polling with it? Are they advertising to try to get themselves 

re-elected? A desperate government. 

 

Well, the used car tax will pay for one-quarter of the advertising 

— one-quarter of the advertising. It will also take the increase 

in the cigarette taxes to pay for the advertising. That’s why 

we’re paying more taxes in this province. 

 

We determined the other day in the House that $20 million was 

being used to advertise this inept government. And they have to 

advertise because nobody can see what they do. And they have 

to advertise continually, solidly, every day, so people may be 

tricked into believing what they do, because there is no 

evidence when they drive down the roads that anything has 

been done. There’s no evidence when they try to get into a 

hospital in Saskatoon, and there’s 8,000 people waiting that 

anything has been done there. There’s no evidence that 

anything has been done when the schools in the province are in 

rack and ruin and the number of students in terms of each 

teacher has gone up, and gone up considerably. And people are 

saying: where are these tax increases going — on used 

automobiles, where did that money go? 

 

Well, I say to you that 5 million of it, the 5 million that they 

collected . . . The reason they can’t send it back is because they 

spent it on self-serving political advertisements. Self-serving 

political advertising, because they were in such bad political 

shape they knew that without the paid for ads by the taxpayers 

they wouldn’t get elected. 

 

Now isn’t it an irony that you have a government that’s trailing 

in the polls, the very people who want to kick it out have to pay 

more taxes to try to get them re-elected. That’s what’s 

happening. You have a government that’s in so much trouble 

politically, they have . . . People buying used automobiles pay 5 

million in taxes; 5 million in taxes. And then then spend that 

money to try to get themselves re-elected. 

 

Well, I say to you that obviously this Bill that is supposed to 

fulfil the commitment and the promise to remove the 5 per cent 

sales tax in the last election — and every one of these people 

had it in their ads. Every one had it in their ads that in their first 

term of office they would remove the 5 per cent. 

 

And I could have someone go get them, Mr. Speaker. I see that 

. . . We would be able to read them out. I’m not sure if Mr. 

Speaker had ads like that in Rosetown. I won’t include him in 

the issue of how many members did. But I know the rest of the 

people in the opposite side, the rest of these people who expect 

the public to believe them going into 1986, or ’87 as Premier 

Devine is now saying — ’86 or ’87 he’s saying. He’s saying I 

may take my second term, because I don’t think the people will 

give me one. He’s now saying I’m going to take the first year of 

that second term without asking, because I don’t trust people to 

give me a second chance. That’s what they’re saying, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what the public are phoning  

  



 

April 30, 1986 

981 

 

and telling us. 

 

And I say to you that a government that grabs on to power and 

clings to it at all costs, and takes the first year of their second 

term without asking and . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I believe this has very little to 

do with the Bill that’s before the House, so I’d ask the member 

to get back to the Bill. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, I appreciate the Speaker coming 

back into the House, and not having heard the other member’s 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I’ve asked the member to get 

back to the Bill, and I would expect him to do that. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if I could explain to 

the Assembly how this sales tax Bill has everything to do with 

promises made in the last election, to remove the 5 per cent 

sales tax, then we have a bit of difficulty in doing any debate in 

the Assembly. Because what we’re talking about is the removal 

of the 5 per cent sales tax promise. And I’m saying that this Bill 

does not fulfil that promise made by Conservative members in 

the last election campaign. 

 

And I’ll tell you the people are very upset with the party that 

made those promises to remove the sales tax and didn’t do it. 

That’s the issue. And I’ll tell you this Bill 28, this phoney Bill 

that is supposed to fulfil that promise, isn’t doing the trick — 

isn’t doing the trick. And what people are saying is one of the 

reasons that these people are clinging to power — clinging to 

power into their fifth year — is because of the lack of a 

commitment to fulfil the promises. That’s the point I’m making, 

Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s fair, because the people of the 

province want to know that. They want to know that these 

people made a promise, all of them, made a promise in 1982 to 

remove the sales tax. And this Bill doesn’t do it. Bill 28 doesn’t 

do it. 

 

What this does is make a mockery of a promise that was made 

to the people of the province, to the good people of the 

province, who believed them and voted for you people for that 

reason. Now we’re into the fifth term of the government, and 

have we got the sales tax removed? Have we got the sales tax 

removed? 

 

Well look at the budget. These people who last year said that 

they would collect 382 million in sales tax — that included a 

tax on clothing; that included a tax on used automobiles — 

saying they’re now going to remove those two, but they’re 

going to collect more taxes in sales tax. They’re going to collect 

even more this year than last year even though they’re taking it 

off clothing and taking if off used automobiles. 

 

Now how does that work? Well I want to make the point that 

it’s interesting that in this Bill there is no removal of the used 

automobile tax, which we expected. It’s not in here. They’re 

keeping that in the Bill, Mr. Speaker, because after the election, 

if they are elected, they intend to re-collect it. Because it’s here 

in the numbers. It’s here in the numbers. We’re not removing 

the sales tax on used automobiles in this Bill. It’s not in the Bill. 

 

Why isn’t it? Because in their budget, in their budget they’re 

telling the people of Saskatchewan they’re going to keep 

collecting it after the election. It’s written in there; it’s written 

in there. They say in their budget, on page 6, that they’re going 

to collect more sales tax this year than last year, even though 

they’re cutting it in two areas. 

 

Well I say to you, they aren’t going to cut the sales tax. The 

reason we don’t have a repeal of the used automobile tax is 

because they want it on the books. Why do they want it on the 

books? So that immediately after the election, if the people 

were to give them a second term, they would then keep 

collecting it. That’s what’s going on. The people of the 

province know that, because they know they can’t believe these 

people because of what they saw with the promise, one, to 

lower the income tax by 10 per cent. You remember that, Mr. 

Speaker, the promise made in 1982. You were around at that 

time. You remember the promise, 1982, to remove the E&H 

tax. You remember that promise. You broke it. You broke it. 

That’s what happened. You didn’t keep your promises. 

 

And that’s why you’re not going to the people on your 

four-year anniversary, but you’re taking the first year of your 

second term without asking for it because all your promises are 

broke. All of your promises, in terms of taxes, were broke to the 

people. You’ve lost their trust. They don’t trust you people, and 

there’s a good reason for that because what you said to them in 

1982 was that you would eliminate the sales tax; you would 

eliminate the sales tax in your first term. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will remember that promise because there 

were newspaper ads, and we’ve brought it up a number of times 

in the House. You’ve brought it up a number of times in the 

House that these ads were run in all of the newspapers across 

the province, to eliminate the sales tax. And what we see here 

today, that in the budget they are going to raise $386 million 

from the sales tax. That’s a lot of money. That’s over a third of 

a billion dollars you’re taking that you said you wouldn’t — a 

third of a billion dollars. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that 

members opposite are embarrassed about that. I think they’re 

embarrassed. They should be. 

 

But I worry when I hear them speak that they’re not 

embarrassed or humble at all, but they are more arrogant now 

than when they came into the House in 1982. They are even 

more arrogant now, and I watched in question period today the 

arrogance of these people. The people who are watching know 

the arrogance of these people in the Assembly. People who 

watch the proceedings know how arrogant and boisterous these 

people are. Loud? I’ll tell you, today in question period you 

could hardly hear yourself ask the question. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. This has absolutely nothing to 

do with the Bill, and I’d ask the member to stay on the Bill. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the question period only 

refers to the yelling that’s going on right now. People . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I’ve asked the member to  

  



 

April 30, 1986 

982 

 

get back to the Bill. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well we’re trying to deal with the Bill, 

but I’m having a difficult time because from time to time I can’t 

hear or see the . . . 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. The House is absolutely quiet. 

I’ve asked the member to get back to the Bill, and I’m going to 

insist on it. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well it is now, but it wasn’t a few 

moments ago, the time period I’m referring to when I was 

dealing with the Bill to take the tax off clothing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you know that, that we have a difficult time 

dealing with Bills like this tax Bill . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member is challenging the 

Chair, and I’m asking the member to get on with the debate. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I’m not challenging the Chair. 

Obviously I’m not challenging the Chair or I would say I’m 

challenging the Chair. What I’m doing is dealing with the Bill, 

Bill No. 26 that deals with the massive tax proposal that isn’t 

fulfilling the promise made in 1982 by the people who ran for 

the Conservative Party, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the issue is. 

 

And I say to you that we are now into the fifth year of this 

government’s term, and that promise hasn’t been fulfilled, that 

this Bill we’re dealing with doesn’t do the trick, that it’s a 

betrayal. It’s a betrayal of all the people of the province — the 

people from Rosetown, the people from Shaunavon, the people 

from Maple Creek, especially along the border of Alberta, who 

voted for people in those areas because they were promised 

during the ’82 election that they would remove the sales tax. 

The business people in Rosetown and Maple Creek particularly 

were told in ads that they would have the sales tax removed. 

And they voted for the Conservative Party and they were 

misled. They were misled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know that. They were misled, and you’re 

going to do it again. The member from Prince Albert says: and 

we’re going to do it again. Well that’s fine. That’s fine; they’re 

going to do it again. I’ll tell you, that’s what kind of a 

government we have. And for that very reason is the reason that 

people are going to turf them out, is because the member from 

Prince Albert is shouting from his chair: we’re going to do it 

again. And I say to you that is the reason, the dishonesty of this 

government that we are going to at the first opportunity, along 

with the people of the province, turf these people out, because 

you can’t believe what they say. 

 

Now that has happened in a number of areas. And we’ve talked 

about income tax; we’ve talked about the sales tax; we’ve 

talked about the used automobile tax. And we have the little 

game that was played with the banks where there’s a phoney 

war being set up between the Conservative government and 

Boyd Robertson to try to tell the farmers that we don’t like 

banks now. Well if that isn’t a fine little war being set up 

between the Royal Bank  

and the PC party, I’ve never seen one. 

 

But I want to say to you that we will be dealing with this Bill, 

and we will have more words to say on it. And I therefore ask 

leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Urban Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 24 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

I would like for a little while to address a new topic here this 

afternoon. It has been brought to my attention by many people 

who live in places like Regina and Saskatoon, and other places 

where there is mail delivery, that there is a new policy of 

Canada Post which you as Minister of Urban Affairs should be 

aware of. The policy of Canada Post is such that — and they 

announced it a year ago, so there’s been lots of time to appraise 

yourself of it — but the policy of Canada Post states that new 

subdivisions will be not receiving letter carrier service any 

more, and there will be instead an introduction of a new 

community mailbox service. 

 

Now some of the reasons why people are concerned is because 

of the potential vandalism that this creates; because of the 

eyesores that are created with weeds growing around these 

things that the post office is now setting up; in the winter-time 

they’re snowed in. 

 

Are you aware of this situation, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I have not had any particular 

correspondence with any individuals or groups other than I 

believe I may in the last year have had one, I believe it was, 

indirect letter or Xerox copy of a letter from somebody who 

was particularly concerned about this issue. This issue naturally 

rests in the federal domain, Canada Post being a federal Crown 

corporation. 

 

I would remind the member that one of the reasons why Canada 

Post is likely pursuing the policies that it is is because it finds 

itself in such difficult financial straits. Over the years the 

corporation has had great difficulty in terms of being run 

efficiently. I think it’s one of the corporations that has had the 

most number of strikes of any particular federal corporation. 

Likely the particular union there is one of the most militant in 

Canada in terms of pursuing a very hard line in terms of its 

labour management negotiations. 

 

And I can only be reminded, as I stand here personally, that at 

times the NDP have asked for more militant action on the part 

of labour. And I would only suggest that that particular line is 

certainly not in the best interests of the people of Canada, it’s 

certainly not in the best interests of those people who do not 

have at present the kind of delivery that they might want to 

have, because the corporation has had such significant financial 

difficulty. And I think a fair amount of that difficulty, certainly 

to  

  



 

April 30, 1986 

983 

 

some degree, can be laid at the feet of radical unionism in this 

country. 

 

And I would certainly hope that the members opposite in the 

NDP party would want to divorce themselves from organized 

labour, because we know that in fact the problems that face the 

country, and certainly a corporation like Canada Post, can be 

traced in large measure directly to that issue of militant 

unionism. In fact, we find the NDP going in just the other 

direction these days, tightly wedding themselves to militant 

unions. 

 

That is not what the people of Saskatchewan want. I can see 

where there is some tie, certainly, to the whole matter of the 

quality of service that people receive from Canada Post. I can 

only hope that the new federal government, which is taking 

steps to rationalize and to bring greater efficiencies into Canada 

Post, will be successful in doing so, and that militant unionism 

will not stand in their way as they attempt to bring more 

efficient postal service to the people of Canada. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman, that the 

minister, rather than addressing the question which has been 

brought to my attention by literally hundreds of people — and 

that is not an exaggeration — chooses instead to bash on 

working people rather than talking about an issue which is 

important to his constituents, if they have been affected, as it is 

to now approaching something like 800 homes in the city of 

Regina, and probably an equal number of homes and families in 

the city of Saskatoon, and other locations in the province where 

there is letter carrier delivery. 

 

Instead of answering the question, Mr. Chairman, the minister, 

in the usual government’s arrogant fashion, decides that it is 

better for him to beat up on the people who work in Canada 

Post, deliver mail, sort mail, and provide a very important 

service which the public appreciates. The public knows that the 

post office has had some difficulties over the years. We don’t 

need to get into that debate here. So I’m sorry that the minister, 

rather than addressing this question, chose to divorce himself 

and his government from the concerns of constituents who 

have, I think, a legitimate concern. 

 

Now I know it’s not within the department of the minister. 

What I want to address here is the policy of the government and 

the position of the Government of Saskatchewan with regard to 

this service which is provided for people who mainly live in 

urban municipalities. Now, Mr. Minister, I’ll give you two 

examples of why I think you should be addressing the issue. 

 

One example is the people who live in an area of the city called 

Boyd Street and Benson Bay. Now in this situation they are one 

street on the end of an area called Gardiner Park. There is a 

fence now fenced off to the north. There will be no further 

construction. To the south, the next street gets mail delivery. To 

the east, mail delivery. To the west is the Ring Road. These 

people are being told by the federal government that, even 

though everybody else around them gets this service, they will 

not be able to get an extension of the service to them. 

 

And so I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that it is of concern to 

myself as a member, and it ought to be a concern to you. And I 

did not address it to you in any kind of a political sense. I’m 

addressing it to you because others who pay taxes in the city 

have raised it with me. 

 

People in the Parkridge subdivision are concerned. They are 

saying: we pay the same taxes. In fact, we pay higher taxes, 

because we’re in a new subdivision, than some other people do. 

They’re saying: we pay the same postage rates as anybody else 

in Canada. And then they say: why should we be singled out as 

second-class citizens by the federal government? And it’s your 

federal government, your federal Conservative government, 

which brought this policy in, in 1985. 

 

I’m asking you, Mr. Minister: don’t you think that, in your 

position as the Minister of Urban Affairs, you at least should 

address the issue and indicate to the federal government that 

they should reconsider this new policy which makes two classes 

of people under the Canada Post? As a representative of your 

government, would you undertake, Mr. Minister, to look into 

this and then at least write to the federal minister in charge of 

Canada Post or the Prime Minister and ask them if they would 

reconsider this policy which I believe is unfair? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, I think it would be 

appropriate for me to make a number of comments in response 

to those of the member opposite. First of all I want to make it 

very clear that my initial comments had nothing to do with the 

very fine people who work day to day at Canada Post here in 

Regina, some of them who happen to be very close friends and 

acquaintances of mine. And I have discussed with them the 

problems in Canada Post. And quite frankly they agree with me. 

 

The problem has nothing to do with the people who work at the 

local levels. They simply carry out the dictates of those people 

higher above. The average working person in the corporations 

does a job as best they can. The problem with the corporation, 

however, rests with its great inefficiencies and its 

labour-management problems over the years, and much of that 

can be laid directly at the feet of militant unionism. 

 

The problem has nothing to do with the people who work at the 

local levels. They simply carry out the dictates of those people 

higher above. The average working person in the corporations 

does a job as best they can. The problem with the corporation, 

however, rests with its great inefficiencies and its 

labour-management problems over the years, and much of that 

can be laid directly at the feet of militant unionism. 

 

If you want to solve the problems in the post office you have to 

do more than simply talk about a postal drop moving from 

position X to position Y somewhere, as much as you and I 

might want that to happen. And I certainly would support any 

initiatives that can be taken which would attempt to ensure that 

everybody has the best postal service possible. 

 

However, if the postal corporation, which runs as a corporation 

on its own out there, as much as possible without political 

influence, in order that it can provide the  

  



 

April 30, 1986 

984 

 

best kind of service to the people of Canada on an equitable 

basis, if it decides that because of the mess that it finds itself in 

as a consequence of the kinds of things that I have talked about 

previously, that it has to make certain decisions to rationalize its 

mail delivery service, then it’s naturally going to make those 

decisions. 

 

It can’t continue to lose literally hundreds of millions of dollars 

every year at taxpayer’s expense. It’s going to have to take 

some difficult decisions. Now whether those difficult decisions 

are the appropriate ones that have been made, or should be 

taken in the future, will naturally be a matter of debate. But I 

find it strange that the member opposite would suggest that the 

only problem here really is to set up a postal box at this 

particular area. I mean, the fundamental problem is that we have 

militant unionism at the head of the postal corporation, not 

down below where the average fellow is working, but at the 

head of the postal corporation. And now we have the Canadian 

Labour Congress, of which the postal union and their leadership 

is a very integral part, we have the Canadian Labour Congress 

now saying we need more militant unionism here in Canada. 

 

(1545) 

 

Well, that kind of an approach is not going to solve the 

problems of the post office, and it’s not going to solve the 

problems for the people in your particular constituency who 

don’t have the kind of postal service that they want, or that 

perhaps they believe that they deserve, or that they need. 

Certainly I support whatever initiatives can be taken, and I am 

more than willing to advocate on behalf of particular 

individuals to any particular federal department or Crown 

corporation if they believe that they, for one reason or another, 

have been hard done by. 

 

But I think that the member opposite, in all honesty here in this 

Assembly, should be dealing with the root cause of the problem 

at the postal corporation, and that root cause and its 

implications for poorer service for some people here in the 

province of Saskatchewan, in our fair country. 

 

So I would reiterate that I have no problem, indeed would be 

happy to advocate on behalf of individuals. I have not received 

any particular direct communication from large numbers of 

individuals. You mentioned 100 or so individuals in particular 

areas. Certainly I am willing to bring that to the attention of 

federal officials. I assume that the NDP members of parliament 

for the city of Regina are already so doing as well, and I have 

no problem assuming that particular responsibility. But I think 

that the member needs to — and he hasn’t done so — bring to 

the attention, along with myself, of all of the people of the 

province, that the problems with the postal corporation certainly 

are far greater than whether or not a particular box is going to 

be located here or there, or whether there’s going to be home 

delivery service at this particular location, as much as I ma in 

favour of that for everybody here in the city of Regina. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I want you 

to know that I indeed have visited several hundred homes with 

respect to this matter, and that’s why I bring it to your attention 

because a number of people asked me to do that, and I did that 

knowing that you’re not the minister  

responsible. Once again I think your irresponsibility is shown, 

that instead of talking about the concerns of these people you 

choose to attack other people. That was not my intent, and I 

regret very much that you chose to get into it, but then that is 

your style, and that’s quite all right with me. The public will 

have to judge on that. 

 

The member of parliament for Regina North East indeed has a 

petition which he is presenting in the House of Commons very 

soon with regard to this matter. And I simply, in closing this 

discussion, want to ask you one simple question: will you write 

to the federal minister in charge of Canada Post, expressing 

your concerns as the Minister of Urban Affairs about a policy 

which is unfair? And it is indeed unfair. Whatever the reason, 

it’s an unfair policy because it cuts some people out simply 

because they chose to build or buy a new home in a new 

subdivision. 

 

Will you write to the minister indicating that it’s a policy which 

is unfair, and that on behalf of your government do as I have 

done, ask that there be a change in the policy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well if the member opposite would be 

willing to present me with the names of the individuals, indeed 

present me with the petition itself of these particular persons in 

your constituency or other constituencies in this city, so that 

indeed I do have the material evidence of the concerns of those 

people — and I certainly don’t question them, that that is very 

likely possible that those concerns do exist — if you would like 

to present that to me, I certainly would be willing to review that 

particular matter and give serious consideration to advocating 

on behalf of those particular individuals. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, the petition is in Ottawa, 

but I think you’re aware that the concern is there. And I missed 

it because I was momentarily distracted. Did you say you would 

write to the minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — You said that you had received substantial 

expressions of concerns on behalf of large numbers of 

individuals. I haven’t received that communication myself, and 

I simply indicated that I would be interested in receiving that 

kind of communication, perhaps through you to me, in the form 

of a copy of the petition that the member for Regina East has 

presented in parliament, or is going to be presenting, or your 

own petition or whatever — copies of the letters that you have 

received. And I indicated that, once I have received that 

information, I certainly would review it and would give serious 

consideration to writing to Canada Post with regards to this 

particular issue. 

 

At the same time that your NDP colleague presents his petition 

in the House of Commons, I would also hope that he would 

bring up the whole issue of the inefficiencies and the problems 

that are in Canada Post because of militant unionism, which 

everybody knows here in Canada and in Saskatchewan is right 

when it comes to Canada Post. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I shall provide you with all 

the information you require and hold you to your word that you 

will make that presentation. 

 

  



 

April 30, 1986 

985 

 

I would like now to turn to another topic which is a topic of 

some considerable concern in recent months and has most 

recently been getting a lot of attention t the Regina city council, 

as it has in other councils. 

 

I’m sure, Mr. Minister, you’re aware that there is a form of 

taxation called the business tax which is a form of double 

taxation that is imposed on businesses. There has been made by 

business concerns, individual business people, by business 

organizations such as the Federation of Independent Business, 

expressed concern to all parties and to the government that this 

business tax is unfair and that something has to be done, along 

with many other tax systems that we have, to bring more 

fairness into the tax system. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you or do you not agree that the business tax, 

because it’s a form of double taxation, may be unfair and 

should be reconsidered? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Certainly an argument can be mounted 

which, I think, has some validity that the business tax is, in fact, 

in the eyes of many individuals who pay it, an unfair tax 

because they believe that they are being taxed, not once or 

twice, but three times, in various forms. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, the council of the city of 

Regina has been discussing this for the last week. There have 

been resolutions. And the councillors are very, very serious 

about the deliberations they’ve had. The problem with the 

business tax and the way your government has dealt with it, sir, 

is that your Minister of Finance — and it’s here on page 14 of 

his budget speech — once again did what he did at the SUMA 

convention. Instead of dealing with the responsibility as your 

government should, he laid it on the municipalities and he told 

municipalities that they are the ones who should be doing away 

with the burden on the unfair business tax. 

 

Do you agree with your Minister of Finance, Mr. Minister, that 

municipalities are the ones who should remove the business 

tax? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, they were the ones who levied the 

tax. And those who levy the tax are obviously the ones who 

have the authority and can certainly take the decision to remove 

the tax if they so choose. If they want to leave it on, they can 

leave it on. If they want to take of off, they can take of off. And 

I understand, of course, that one municipality here in the 

province, I believe Lafleche, has done something in that regard. 

So it is a tax at the local level, and it’s their choice as to 

whether or not they want to levy such a tax, increase it, decrease 

it, remove it, rebate it. That’s their decision. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, that’s a very difficult 

decision for municipalities to make when in the last four years 

you have made a massive cut in urban surface assistance that 

the province has provided to municipalities. You have removed 

$80 million from taxpayers when you cancelled the property 

improvement grant. You froze the revenue-sharing pool in 

1985. So although you talk about your 3 per cent increase this 

year, you have an average increase over two years of one and a  

half per cent. 

 

Now for you to stand up and say to municipalities: remove the 

business tax, you’re really saying: put on even a greater tax 

burden on property owners’ homes. That’s what you’re saying. 

 

Let me give you an example. If in the city of Moose Jaw the 

business tax was removed without any initiative from this 

government, without any financial assistance from this 

government, that would in that city be an increase of $1.4 

million of taxation on home owners. That’s an 8 per cent 

increase in the tax levy, or something of about $100 a home. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, don’t you agree that a $100 tax increase on 

top of your $230 tax increase when you took away the property 

improvement grant is really quite excessive for home owners to 

absorb? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I indicated 

previously, and we seem to be covering the same ground over 

and over again when in comes to local taxation, the overall per 

cent change in urban municipal mill rates, I believe last year 

was 0.4 per cent and estimated at around 2.8 per cent for this 

year. 

 

I have before me, for example, a heading that says, “Property 

taxes rise 2 per cent in Weyburn” as an example. I also have 

before me the rather informative article in the Leader-Post, 

dated Tuesday, April 22, 1986, which gives a very clear 

distillation of the comparative tax picture in Canada when it 

comes to property taxes. 

 

And I think the significant message here is that, because of the 

taxation decisions taken by the city council here in Regina, 

people in Regina pay the second highest — almost the highest 

— the second highest municipal taxes anywhere in the 

Dominion — anywhere. Medicine Hat pays almost half. 

Saskatoon pays about $300 less, it looks like, than in Regina. 

And cities like Winnipeg and Hamilton and Toronto and 

Fredericton and so on, Calgary, Victoria, St. John’s — all pay 

substantially less than the city of Regina. 

 

Now if you want to suggest that it is the fault of the provincial 

government that the city of Regina’s municipal taxes are so 

high, I suggest to you that you are advancing a very erroneous 

argument. The revenue sharing that we have provided to 

municipalities in the last four or five years has been significant; 

11.5 per cent, then 7 per cent, then 5 per cent. There was no 

increase the fourth year. A 3 per cent increase the next year. 

That’s a total of a 25 per cent increase over your last budget, 

and when you add on some figures for ambulance services as 

well, a 36 per cent in that period of time. Now that is a very 

substantial increase in the local tax revenue coming from the 

senior government. 

 

Now once again you may say, that’s not enough. And as I 

indicated last year, there are always going to be those people 

who will say it’s not enough. And I understand that. I suppose if 

I were in their position I would be saying the same thing. 

People always want more. And there is never as much money to 

meet all of the needs. 

 

  



 

April 30, 1986 

986 

 

The question is whether or not you’re providing a reasonable 

level of assistance from the senior government to 

municipalities. And when you take a look at the amount of 

money which we provided, when you take a look at the mill rate 

increases over the last three or four years, I think what we have 

done is to provide municipalities with a reasonable level of 

assistance. Now if the municipality of Regina wants to levy a 

business tax, that’s up to them. If they want to reduce, abate, or 

abolish that business tax, that’s up to them. But to suggest that 

the provincial government should somehow pick up the cost for 

the city of Regina certainly is not an appropriate suggestion to 

make. Indeed the citizens of Prince Albert, or the citizens of 

Moosomin, or the citizens of Saskatoon, certainly would not 

support the move whereby the city of Regina would do away 

with its business tax, and somehow all provincial taxpayers 

should have to take upon themselves the burden to now give $7 

million, or however much it is, to the city of Regina. Certainly 

that is not a very responsible suggestion, I would respond to 

you. 

 

I think the more responsible move on the part of the city of 

Regina would be to take the kind of analysis to their budget that 

should have been done over the last decade, perhaps over the 

last four or five years, and to very clearly — to very clearly say 

this particular service or that particular program needs to be 

reassessed, and we need to ask ourselves whether or not we 

have not in fact decided to tax the ratepayers of Regina too 

highly. I think that’s the decision of the council here in Regina 

needs to take, rather than saying, we have a problem in our 

backyard, we have identified it, now we’re going to shovel it 

into your backyard, and you deal with it. That’s not responsible. 

You’ve got a problem in your backyard, you deal with it. 

 

(1600) 

 

Lafleche chose to deal with their problem; the city of Regina 

needs to deal with its problem. And I would predict that if the 

city of Regina does not deal with its problem that in the next 

municipal elections the ratepayers of this city will deal with it 

as they normally do when they’re upset with the level of 

taxation that councillors put upon them. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Minister, I want to remind you 

of something. It was your Minister of Finance who said to the 

city of Regina, and therefore said to all municipalities, on 

behalf of your government which you represent here in these 

estimates today, that municipalities remove the business tax and 

that municipalities find other sources of revenue to make up the 

difference. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, since your government has said that to 

municipalities, may I ask you to suggest where the 

municipalities should raise those other sources of revenue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I would bring to the member’s 

attention that there was a number of reasons why Regina 

charges its taxpayers substantially more than other similar 

municipalities. But they have decided to run with a higher level 

of municipal service. That’s a choice that they, of  

course, take. There are likely . . . If they chose to do so, they 

could likely find greater efficiencies in their particular program 

delivery. But that’s a decision that they can make. 

 

I understand that recently Regina passed a motion to not tax 

new businesses which were established, at least not tax them at 

a certain level, and rebate a portion of the tax over a period of 

time in an attempt to generate economic activity in the city. 

Whether or not that’s successful, I don’t know. 

 

As it relates to the business tax, of course they could phase that 

out over a period of time and deal with the program side, as all 

governments have to do from time to time, and certainly this 

provincial government has taken a very close look at program 

matters and has been able to save substantial dollars in terms of 

program efficiencies. We know that across North America 

various municipalities have moved to offer certain services 

through the private sector and have been able to realize a 

significant saving by so doing, and that may be an area in which 

municipalities may want to look. So I think there are significant 

areas that municipalities can take more than a passing glance at. 

 

But as I indicated before, to simply suggest that it’s the 

provincial government’s responsibility to take up the slack if 

the city of Regina decided to do away with its business tax, I 

think is something of an irresponsible move. It is sort of, as I 

said before, shovelling the problem out of your own backyard 

and trying t foist it upon somebody else. I think it needs to be 

dealt with in the context of the administration here in the city of 

Regina. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, your success at 

finding money because of cuts in programs has been a dismal 

failure. I remind you that the expenditures of your government 

since you took office in 1982 have increased by in excess of 32 

per cent. So for you to suggest that somehow the urban 

municipalities of this province can do likewise, I think is pretty 

ill-founded advice. 

 

You may have cut programs, Mr. Minister. Obviously in the 

wrong places, as the Minister of Health proved to us during his 

estimates, where we were able to make it quite clear that there 

were problems in the health system like this province has never 

seen, because of understaffing and because of all other kinds of 

other problems. I’m sure that the city fathers of the city of 

Regina are far more responsible people than you have been as a 

government, where you have cut some of those programs but 

your expenditures have increased by 32 per cent. So obviously 

your own argument destroys what it is you’re trying to say. 

 

It’s not irresponsible of the provincial government, Mr. 

Minister, to consider some action to provide relief from 

business tax for small businesses. If you can do it, Mr. Minister, 

for the oil industry, where you can provide the large oil 

companies $300 million a year in tax reductions, why can’t you 

find even a small percentage of that to help small-business men 

in the province of Saskatchewan? That’s what I am saying. 

 

You’re the one that’s being irresponsible. It is this  

  



 

April 30, 1986 

987 

 

Conservative government that’s being irresponsible, that puts 

its priorities with the huge corporations which are not resident 

in this province — come from outside; gives them all the 

money they want; but when the small-business man says, we 

need some help, you say, go to your city, or don’t come to us. 

 

Mr. Minister, I make this point. It wasn’t the municipalities that 

raised this issue. It was your Minister of Finance who tried to 

play politics, and he tried to play politics as you’re trying to 

play politics by saying that municipalities ought to find other 

sources of revenues. 

 

My question was not dealing with the question of where they 

may cut, because if they follow your model they will increase 

their expenditures by 32 per cent. My question deals with your 

Minister of Finance’s statement in which he said, 

“Municipalities should find other revenues.” He obviously must 

have discussed it in cabinet with you and your other colleagues, 

otherwise he wouldn’t have made such a positive statement. 

 

So I ask you: what sources of revenue would you suggest? And 

I’m talking about revenue which municipalities find to be able 

to make up for this difference. 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Chairman, here we have a 

member of the NDP party, one-time minister of Finance, who 

was so concerned about small business when he was minister of 

Finance and when interest rates were at 18, 19, or 20 per cent, 

you were so concerned about small business that you did the 

following: you did nothing. That’s what you did — absolutely 

nothing to help out small business. 

 

I want to tell you what we’re doing to help out small business. 

Last week I met with a business person here in the city of 

Regina who happens to be a woman who runs a clothing store 

in the city of Saskatoon, who also happens to be a member of 

this Progressive Conservative Party because she understands 

that this is the party that’s building the future of this province. 

She told me that as a result of this government taking the tax off 

of clothing, the business in her store has increased 40 per cent 

overnight. Now if that isn’t helping some small business in this 

province, I don’t know what is. 

 

The second thing that we have done to help small business in 

the province of Saskatchewan has been to provide 8 per cent 

money to small business. Now when interest rates were 18 or 

19 or 20 per cent, did you provide any assistance to small 

business? I ask the member opposite, and he is not responding. 

He’s not even nodding his head one way or another. Did you 

provide any assistance to small business? Well I have to tell the 

members of the Assembly that you did not provide any 

assistance to small business. 

 

So not only did we take the tax off clothing but we have 

provided 8 per cent money to small business. In addition, to 

anybody who is setting up a new small business in the province 

of Saskatchewan, there is now a two-year tax holiday for those 

individuals, because we understand that small business is where 

the new jobs are created these days. 

 

Now did your government ever provide a tax holiday to 

anybody? Did you provide a tax holiday to anybody? Well once 

again to the members of the Assembly, he’s not answering. You 

didn’t provide a tax holiday to small businesses. Now I find it 

interesting that the Leader of the Opposition is now saying, 

well, maybe tax holidays are a good thing. 

 

So we provide the tax off clothing for consumers and it helps 

small business. We provide 8 per cent money to small 

businesses and they really appreciate that. I have many 

small-business people who live in the constituency of Regina 

Rosemont, and they say, right on, that’s the kind of assistance 

we need for small business. Then we provide a tax holiday for 

all of the new small businesses that are going to set up here in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But I think even more important than all of those things, the 

best thing that you can do for small business is to create a 

climate in this province in which economic activity is going to 

take place. Because when that happens, small business benefits 

because people spend their money in small business. 

 

Small businesses appreciate the fact that this is the government 

that is building the province of Saskatchewan. When you 

nationalize potash mines and you want to nationalize more 

potash mines, which is what the NDP candidate in my riding 

wants to do, you don’t help small business one iota. 

 

When the NDP in Manitoba puts on this very onerous employee 

tax, that doesn’t help small business. And when the NDP in this 

province bring into Saskatchewan the NDP Finance Minister 

from Manitoba we all have to wonder whether or not the NDP, 

if they ever got back in power, and we certainly wouldn’t want 

to see that happen, whether or not they wouldn’t put that same 

kind of a tax on small-business people in this particular 

province. 

 

Now you were talking about providing relief for small business. 

So we had the NDP in Manitoba who has this onerous 

employee tax. Here we take the tax off clothing; we give them 8 

per cent money; we have no tax on new small businesses. I 

want you to know that if there is a government in Canada that 

understands the needs of small business, this is the government 

that understands the needs of small business. 

 

And the final point I need to make, Mr. Chairman, if ever the 

members of the Assembly today had any question in their 

minds as to whether or not it was this government or those 

people over there who understand small business, I need to 

bring to the attention of the members here today the following 

information. I think the member for Shaunavon, who is 

speaking from his chair, will be most interested to hear this 

information. 

 

I have before me today the profile of all of the NDP candidates 

running in the . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I would remind the members 

of the legislature that we are going to be back on Urban Affairs, 

talking about the estimates of Urban  

  



 

April 30, 1986 

988 

 

Affairs. There’s been a great amount of latitude been given this 

afternoon. I will caution the members that from here until time 

of adjournment, I will be constantly bringing you back to Urban 

Affairs. 

 

(16145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Urban 

Affairs issue which we are dealing with today is a 

fundamentally important issue, because what is really at stake 

here is whether or not this government in its estimates 

understands small business and can help municipalities 

sufficiently, or whether or not the 64 candidates from the other 

party understand small business. 

 

And the people of Saskatchewan need to know that there are 

only four out of 64 NDP candidates that have got any business 

experience. Now how in the world you ever think that you 

could help small business in the province of Saskatchewan, 

when you’ve only got four out of 64 candidates that have got 

any business experience, is beyond me. This is the party that 

understands small business. We are providing assistance to 

them, and municipalities appreciate that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I’m glad you called the 

minister to order because this is the way he’s been going on in 

his tirades now for the better part of this afternoon. 

 

I want to respond to the minister’s comments. He said that the 

most important thing to do for small businesses in talking about 

the removal of the business tax was to create a climate in which 

small business could prosper. Well I want to say, if that is so, 

then clearly the minister and the government he represents have 

failed pretty badly. Because we have seen in the last four years 

a record number of bankruptcies in the business community in 

this province. Now if that’s creating a climate, if that’s the kind 

of climate that creates strong business, Mr. Chairman, I don’t 

think anybody, including myself, would believe what the 

minister has had to say. 

 

One of the measures that one can use in determining whether 

small business need help and whether the economic climate is 

strong, is population. Well in Saskatchewan in 1986 since 

January, there has been a net out-migration of 6,000 people. 

Now that’s a lot of people, Mr. Chairman. For some reason 

there are 6,000 more people have left Saskatchewan than have 

come into Saskatchewan. Now that is not a measure of success. 

That is not a measure of a prosperous economy. And one of the 

reasons why this is happening, because the policies of this 

government which are geared only to the big corporate business 

sector, have squeezed the small-business people to such an 

extent that the biggest creator of employment are now unable to 

do what they would like to do. 

 

I could stand here — and I won’t because we don’t want to 

stray too far afield — but I could talk about doing away with 

the tender system, about the picking and choosing of friends of 

the Conservative Party to give business . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Let us not talk about tendering 

systems. Let us talk about urban affairs. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I shall do that, Mr. Chairman. And Urban 

Affairs, I suspect, does some tendering out. There is also the 

question of the kind of employment that has not been created. I 

want to tell the minister, and then I will leave this and I will ask 

my question, which he is yet to answer even though I’ve asked 

it four times. Instead, he chooses to make a political speech. 

 

I want to tell the minister that another thing that indicates 

whether business is able to prosper under any particular 

government, is employment. And I want to tell him that 

between 1978 and 1981 full-time employment, created jobs, 

was 22,000, but between 1982 and 1985 only 16,000 full-time 

jobs have been created by this Conservative government. 

Between ’78 and ’81, 14,000 part-time jobs were created under 

the former government, but under this government only 9,000 

jobs have been created in the part-time field by this 

government. 

 

And the most crushing story of all is that dealing with people 

between the ages of 15 and 24. Between 1978 and 1981, 5,000 

jobs were created for people between the ages of 15 and 24; 

whereas between 1982 and 1985 under this government, 7,000 

jobs for people of that age category have been lost. There has 

been a reduction of those jobs. 

 

So I agree with the minister. I only use that evidence to agree 

with the minister that a strong economy leads to a thriving 

business community. During the time of the former 

government, the cash registers of the business community in 

Saskatchewan rang and business people prospered. Under the 

term of this government, it has been the reverse. And that’s why 

the business people are looking for some help and some relief. 

And that’s why business people are saying, look, the business 

tax needs to have a reconsideration. 

 

Without saying any more, I will ask the minister a 

straightforward question: Mr. Minister, since your government 

believes that municipalities should do away with the business 

tax, where does your government recommend they raise their 

additional revenues? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, I had responded to that 

question some time back when I talked about various measures 

that municipalities could take. 

 

I think the key thing here is the member opposite did talk about 

the whole economic climate as it relates to small business and 

the job creation record. And if he were to refer to the 

Leader-Post article of Tuesday, December 10, 1985, on page 4, 

he will see that under the NDP, the last years of their 

administration, from 1979 to 1981, a total of 4,000 full-time 

jobs created. 

 

Under the Progressive Conservative government, the three 

years from October ’82 to October ’85, the same three-year 

comparative period, 21,000 new permanent full-time jobs 

created. So under the NDP, 4,000 permanent jobs created in a 

three-year period of time; under the Progressive Conservatives, 

10,000 jobs . . . or  

  



 

April 30, 1986 

989 

 

pardon me, 21,000 jobs created in the same comparable 

three-year period of time. 

 

Here in the city of Regina, 8,000 more people working today 

than back in 1982 when this government first took power — 

8,000 more people working today than back in 1982. So 

certainly there has been a substantial increase in economic 

activity. Far more people working today — 8,000 here in the 

city of Regina alone — than back in 1982. And when you 

compare the permanent job creation record; 4,000 under your 

administration in your last three years; 21,000 under this 

administration. 

 

You want to compare the part-time job creation record. 

Unfortunately I have to tell you that under your administration 

in your last three years you created 10,000 part-time jobs. But 

you’re not a fan of part-time jobs; I know that. Well I want you 

to know that you created 10,000. This government had 4,000 

part-time jobs and 21,000 full-time jobs. You had 10,000 

part-time jobs and only 4,000 full-time jobs. 

 

Now I think there’s a substantial difference. And this particular 

administration is certainly committed to creating economic 

activity here in the province of Saskatchewan and we do that 

two ways. We do that by assisting small business where we 

have removed certain taxes in the past. We’re providing tax 

holidays, providing 8 per cent money for small business. But in 

addition to that, we’re moving on a large number of very 

important economic development projects in the province of 

Saskatchewan, things that you people should have thought 

about, should have worked on, but you ignored. 

 

And in all fairness to the member opposite, I know you haven’t 

been in the legislature for all that long, so I think I should bring 

to your attention some of the things that you may not be aware 

of yet: the new paper-mill in Prince Albert; the new Regina 

upgrader; the new Shand power project in Estevan; the new 

Rafferty and Alameda dams; the new fertilizer manufacturing 

plant coming in Regina. 

 

There was the new technical school in Prince Albert; the new 

agriculture complex in Saskatoon; the new irrigation projects; 

the new Mackenzie Art Gallery and museum in Regina; the new 

individual line service for SaskTel in rural Saskatchewan; 

expanding the rural gas distribution system; the new power line 

project in northern Saskatchewan; burying the power lines in 

rural Saskatchewan; new cable companies in Moose Jaw and 

Weyburn; the new rehabilitation hospital in the city of Regina; 

the new meat-processing facilities in North Battleford and 

Saskatoon; and just announced this afternoon, I believe, a new 

student union complex here in the city of Regina, certainly 

something that we are interested in seeing happening. 

 

Now there we have a very fine array of economic development 

projects on one hand, stimulated by the provincial government, 

and benefits provided to small business on the other hand, so 

that they can take the initiative to do the things that they want to 

do. That’s creating economic activity in the province. That 

helps small business, and that helps municipalities. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, the minister again  

avoided the question. He’s been doing that all afternoon, as the 

ministers of this government tend to do. They will not answer 

any questions. I will re-ask the question again, but I remind the 

minister that he should not use dishonest figures when he 

debates in this House. Because when you talk about job creation 

I will quote you from Statistics Canada, which is your federal 

government’s counterpart statistics. 

 

Statistics Canada reports — and these are official numbers — 

that full-time jobs created between ’78 and 1981 was 22,000; 

between 1982 and 1985 it was 16,000. Part-time jobs created 

between 1978 and ’81 was 14,000; in ’82 to 85 it was only 

9,000. This is Statistics Canada figures. Between the ages of 15 

and 24 — people who are just getting into the job market — 

between 1978 and 1981, 5,000 were created. 

 

Under your government there has been a loss of 7,000 jobs. 

Those aren’t some figures I’ve pulled out of the air. Those are 

figures that are provided by Statistics Canada which, I might 

add, does a pretty accurate and credible job on putting this kind 

of information together. When people of this province see those 

figures and compare them to your fixed figures, which they are, 

and your government is good at that, that’s why no one believes 

what you have to say, because they have something to compare 

to. 

 

Now I will ask for the last time, Mr. Minister, and I will not 

pursue it any more, because if nothing else, the point has been 

established that you will not answer the question, as you 

haven’t. Because it’s your government’s position that 

municipalities should remove business tax — as stated by your 

Minister of Finance to councillors at SUMA and to this 

legislature in his budget speech — and because the minister 

said the municipalities should find revenues from other sources, 

what did your Minister of Finance mean and what does your 

government recommend that the municipalities get those taxes 

from? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m sure the member 

opposite will very much want to put the question to the Minister 

of Finance when he stands in estimates. I did indicate 

previously that the municipalities do have considerable latitude 

to make decisions concerning their spending and revenue 

priorities. And that, of course, is up to them. And I certainly 

wouldn’t want to dictate to them how many parks they should 

have or how many police force they should have. That’s their 

decision. They can choose to make those decisions if they want 

to. 

 

I would simply respond to the member opposite with regards to 

his last comment concerning job creation, that in January of 

1986, of this year, there were 17,000 more people at work in the 

province of Saskatchewan than there were a year previously — 

17,000 more people at work. 

 

In terms of new business incorporations, total new 

incorporations: form 1982 to 1985 in the province of 

Saskatchewan — now if this isn’t a telling figure, I don’t know 

what is — 12,686 total new incorporations in the province of 

Saskatchewan, exceeding business bankruptcies by well over 10 

times, 12,686 total new incorporations in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

  



 

April 30, 1986 

990 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would give 

us the names of your personal staff and their salaries. If you 

want to hand the usual sheet across the aisle, that would be 

satisfactory. If you want to read it, please give it to me slow 

enough I can copy it down. 

 

Do I take it there’s been a complete change in staff? Last year 

you had Bruce Evans at 43,000; Pat Murphy at about the same 

salary; Pam Barber; Vonda Renwick; Marg Marsden. And this 

year you’ve got a complete change of staff? Do I take it there 

are none the same? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Those people were employed by a former 

minister of Urban Affairs. They are not in my employ. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, have the salaries of any of 

these three been increased within the last 12 months in any 

way? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well if you have the presence of mind to 

read the sheet in front of you, you would have seen that there 

was an increase for one of these individuals. It was an annual 

increment increase in January of 1986. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — So both of these . . . I did not get an 

opportunity to read it. Both of these two have received increases 

in the last year, I take it then, Mr. Minister, of approximately 

. . . Do I take it the first individual last year got a 20 per cent 

increase . . . a 24 per cent increase, and this year got another 5 

per cent increase? Do I take that to be accurate, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well if the member was in the Assembly a 

year ago at this time, he will remember that this issue was dealt 

with at that time when I indicated that the particular individual 

under question had been promoted because his duties had been 

substantially increased. 

 

I recall when I was promoted from being a normal class-room 

teacher to being a school principal, that there was a promotion 

in terms of salary as well . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And I 

must say, contrary to the members opposite, those were very 

enjoyable days, and I certainly appreciated having the 

opportunity to be an educator here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And when one receives a promotion, there is 

naturally an increase. 

 

This particular individual, well over a year ago now, did receive 

a promotion at that time because of increased responsibilities. 

And as I indicated, normally there is an increment increase that 

comes once a year to everybody. It came to your staff when you 

were a minister, and I’m sure you remember those days. It 

comes to all staff members on an increment basis. 

 

Teachers — they receive their particular increment. People in 

my office, people who work in the Department of Social 

Services, Urban Affairs, wherever they work in the civil 

service, receive annual increment increases if they are at a 

certain period of time in their employ in the government. Once 

they exceed that particular period of  

time, then of course there are no more increment increases; 

there are simply the annual, negotiated increases which accrue 

to those individuals. 

 

In the case of my staff, of course the first two individuals there 

did receive the annual increment increase in January, 1986, as 

they should have, and as civil servants and others, such as 

teachers and nurses and so on, who deserve increment increases 

in fact receive those increment increases. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — They did, Mr. Minister, but that was in an 

era when there was no wage freeze. I note that the individual 

has now — the first individual mentioned has now received a 5 

per cent increase at a period in time when municipalities are 

getting less than they were five years ago. I wonder how you 

justify staff, your personal staff, getting a 5 per cent increase. I 

know it’s not the 20 per cent increase it was last year, but it’s 

still a great deal more than you gave the municipalities, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I would want to make two points. Two 

points I would want to make that I think the member opposite 

will want to pay attention to very clearly. 

 

On April 1, 1982 under your NDP government, the Department 

of Urban Affairs was paying $7,320 per month for ministerial 

staff salary — you got the figure — $7,320 over four years ago. 

Today, in my office, $6,637 is paid out for ministerial staff 

salaries. Now that’s four years later. 

 

If we had been following inflation, the salaries paid today to my 

office staff should be substantially higher than what you folks 

were paying back in 1982. But in fact the amount of money 

paid today, four years later, is less, less than what you were 

paying back in 1982. That’s the first point I want to make. 

 

And I would think that if you had sufficient integrity that you 

would stand to your feet and you would offer some sort of 

commendation, that over a four year period of time less dollars 

are being spent on salary today than they were back in 1982 in 

the best interest of the taxpayer. So we expect a commendation 

in that regard. 

 

The second point I would make is this: civil servants, people 

who work for the public in the province of Saskatchewan 

deserve to have the increment increases apply to them which 

have been negotiated. I don’t think you would disagree with 

that. You would be one of those who would support very 

strongly the principle of free collective bargaining. You would 

want to see people receiving the salaries that they justly 

deserve. 

 

So here we have individuals who, of course, have a salary grid 

applied to them, and once a year they deserve an increment 

increase. You would not want to suggest, I’m sure, that civil 

servants should not get an increment increase, because if that’s 

what you want to suggest, I’ll be more than willing in the next 

few weeks or whatever to certainly knock on the doors in my 

constituency and indicate to them that you have the position 

that civil servants should not get a salary increment which they 

deserve and which they negotiated. 

 

  



 

April 30, 1986 

991 

 

So I make two points: the salaries today, in this office, are less 

than they were paid four years ago under your administration, 

back in 1982. Secondly, I believe in fairness. People deserve to 

get the increment increase which they justly have worked for, 

and I would expect that you would stand to your feet and you 

would support both of those points. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I never suggested that civil servants should 

not have increments. Indeed, we have been critical of the wage 

freeze this government has imposed. It makes no sense, Mr. 

Minister, to make some sort of an example out of public 

servants. When the industrial wage index goes up by 3, 4, 5 per 

cent, it makes no sense for public servants in this province to 

bear some particular burden. Nobody on this side of the House 

has suggested that. What we have suggested is that if this 

gentleman — I don’t want to use his name — this gentleman 

needs 5 per cent, municipalities might well make use of that as 

well. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to go back to the first comment you made 

with such pious indignation. Mr. Minister, you totalled the 

salaries, and I gather they came to around $6,000. Would you 

give me the salaries of the staff which you have as Minister of 

Social Services, as well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I’ll certainly be happy to do so when we 

discuss Social Services estimates. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — The two taken together are a very sizeable 

increase — over $7,000. Would you not agree? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well we can talk about Social Services 

salaries when we get there, and I’ll be happy to do that. I’m 

providing to you the information today on Urban Affairs, and 

I’m sure you’re happy to receive that information. And I’m sure 

you’re happy to hear that the salaries paid today for the Urban 

Affairs function in this government, to the minister responsible, 

is less today, costing the taxpayer less today than it did back in 

1982. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, as you admit — because you 

do not deny — as you admit, salaries of the people on your staff 

are a very considerable increase in the salaries of the staff of the 

minister at that time. What you have done is to have given me 

those only which you have in the Department of Urban Affairs. 

You neglect to give me that staff which you have in the 

Department of Social Services. The two taken together are a 

very sizeable increase over what the minister of the day had. 

And since you don’t deny that, I take it that you admit it. 

 

One of the reasons why this government — and I suppose we’re 

going to get to PSC (Public Service Commission) estimates in 

due course — one of the reasons why this government has such 

an overwhelming problem with the public service that you do is 

because of the disparity in the way you treat yourselves. I have 

said that this government . . . I said of another minister that 

when this government travels, you travel like Persian kinds — 

you have a great entourage sweeping after you. Well you 

maintain the same style when in office. 

 

The salaries of executive assistants in this government must be 

the highest of any provincial government in  

Canada. I’m sure that’s the case. You came in and you 

increased the salaries of executive assistants very, very 

substantially. They were then, at that point in time in ‘82-83, 

the highest in Canada, and I’ll bet they still are. 

 

You have more staff in your offices than other provincial 

governments and, Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Well, indeed you do! Indeed you do. You . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well the Minister of Energy said some nasty 

things. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I am not the Minister of Energy. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Shillington: — No, that’s right. You got demoted. You’re 

right. You got demoted. I’m sorry. I used to remember you in 

the days when you had that all-important responsibility. The 

minister has now been demoted. All I can say is, wash your 

mouth out with soap and water . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

And there’s the man who wished he was a minister, and so do 

some other people, I might say. One of these days we’ll get 

around to figuring out why they dropped one of the few 

competent people . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Would the member please get 

back to estimates on Urban Affairs rather than talking about 

personalities and other ministerial positions, please. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it may have been a 

breach of the rules, but the members were addressing comments 

to me. I assumed they wanted me to answer them, and I was in 

the process of doing that. 

 

To get back to your situation. One of the reasons you have the 

problems you do with morale in the public service is there’s 

such a disparity in the way you have treated yourselves, and 

your style and your office’s style and your style of travelling 

and the way the public service has been treated. And they see 

that in a way, I think, that many of the public, particularly those 

who don’t live in this city, do not see. 

 

Your salaries are much, much higher than the salaries of any 

other provincial government or the former government. You 

have more people on staff and it’s not obvious, Mr. Minister, 

what that staff does. 

 

They certainly don’t do a great job of communicating. I have a 

pile of press clippings here, which I’m going to get to in due 

course, from everybody from SUMA to individual aldermen on 

the council of the city of Regina, which you continue to 

criticize and treat like pariahs. If you get elected, Mr. Minister, 

with the same majority that most of those council members did, 

you’d be doing very well indeed. They just recently got elected. 

You may not like their style of government, but they got 

elected, and they did so more recently than you did. The only 

electoral test which you have had in the same time frame was a 

disaster for you. So they have a mandate, Mr. Minister. It’s not 

obvious, Mr. Minister, that this government does have a 

mandate. It is not obvious that this government does have a 

mandate. 

 

  



 

April 30, 1986 

992 

 

I don’t know, Mr. Chairman, do you want me to respond to the 

comments of the minister with respect to P.A. and Thunder 

Creek. I’d be happy to if he wants me to. I don’t think Mr. 

Chairman does; he’s frowning. 

 

Mr. Minister, I say with respect to your staff . . . My father used 

to have a saying that figures don’t lie, but liars do figure. When 

you gave me one-half of your staff and compared that to the 

entire staff of the former minister, to put it mildly, Mr. Minister 

. . . Well I’ll be darned, I think there’s a stranger in the House. 

The member from Regina North West has not been here in 

weeks. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Where has he been? 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Did the member from North East lose his 

way? I think we all ought to join and welcome the member 

from Regina North East back after his long sojourn, no doubt 

having trouble spending the $140,000 they got. 

 

Mr. Minister, you are playing with figures when you suggest 

that your staff is smaller than the former minister’s. That is not 

in fact the case. You have yours split between two departments, 

and that’s why you’re able to make the comparison you are. 

Salaries are higher and your staff complements of this 

government is larger. I don’t remember with particularity what 

the staff complement of the former minister was, but overall 

this government’s staff complements are considerably higher 

than the former government. 

 

So I wonder, Mr. Minister, you’ve got seven all told, is that 

what I take it from the fingers? Well that is, Mr. Minister, quite 

a change from three. You hold seven fingers in the air, so I 

assume that you have seven people. 

 

Mr. Minister, we had an opportunity to raise an issue with the 

former minister of Urban Affairs, and I want to raise it with you 

as well. It has to do with a change in the assessment that was 

complained of by the Regina city council. They complained of a 

change in the tax policy by this government which pumped 

$500,000 into the pockets of developers. 

 

The former minister dismissed the comment, “Regina mayor 

said he was assured that the province would make up the loss 

by increasing provincial grants to the city.” And this was in an 

article in the Leader-Post on November 23rd, 1985. The change 

affects taxes on the urban holding property of raw unserviced 

land. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you’ll tell this Assembly why you 

didn’t keep faith with the mayor of the city of Regina and make 

up the $500,000 which they lost. 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — As the member opposite may be aware, 

when the effects of reassessment were felt here in Regina, the 

tax implications for certain landholders were quite dramatic. 

Indeed, for many of them they would argue that it, I suppose, 

went through the roof. And they felt it was most inequitable. 

Consequently the decision was made by the former minister to 

amend the Act to bring those taxation levels back down. The 

city of Regina did express concern about that. And I can 

understand that they would naturally want whatever funds they 

could get. 

 

There are differences of opinion as to what is the appropriate 

level at which those particular types of property should be 

valued and taxed and so on. And that whole matter will be 

formally dealt with by the new independent assessment agency 

once the legislation is passed here in the House. And of course 

there will be representatives from the urban municipalities that 

will sit on that assessment agency board and will direct the 

affairs of that particular assessment agency, and I’m sure that 

that particular issue of the equity or non-equity of those land 

holdings will be dealt with quite capably by that particular 

agency. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well the article by Marion Marshall of the 

Leader-Post states, and I quote directly: 

 

At a Tuesday meeting (which we must assume to be the 

previous Tuesday) between Embury and Mayor Larry 

Schneider, Embury promised the provincial government 

will increase the grants to the city to compensate for any 

loss of tax revenues stemming from the change. 

 

Why was that undertaking to the mayor, if we are to assume the 

mayor was not lying about the interview, why was that 

undertaking not kept? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well my understanding is that that kind of 

an undertaking was, in fact, not made. And I’m not questioning 

the integrity of the press here, but my understanding in 

discussion with the former minister was that that does not 

realistically reflect the discussions that took place at that 

particular point in time. 

 

I’m not surprised, of course, that the mayor would want to have 

whatever money he could get his hands on. That’s a natural 

impulse of anybody who is in that particular position, and I 

would be the same way. But as I indicated, the issue will be 

referred to the new independent assessment agency and will be 

dealt with most capably, I’m sure, at that time — either to leave 

it where it is, to change it somewhat, to change it dramatically 

— but those kinds of issues will be dealt with at that time. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, it’s not in the nature of the 

mayor of the city of Regina . . . While he and I have had 

political differences, we’ve also agreed on a number of things. 

But we’ve disagreed on some things, as people in public life 

will. It’s not in his nature to either lie or exaggerate. He’s a 

person who’s fairly cautious in his statements. 

 

His statements are crystal clear. “Embury promised . . .” And 

I’m reading, using the name because that’s in the article. 

 

Embury promised the provincial government will increase 

the grants to the city to compensate for any loss of tax 

revenue. 

 

If you led him to that understanding, why do you now break 

faith with the mayor and not give him the money? 

 

It seems to me to be perfectly fair. If you think the developers 

need a tax break . . . And that view is not  

  



 

April 30, 1986 

993 

 

universally shared. But if you think property developers need a 

tax break, then you ought to pay for it and not the city of 

Regina. That was apparently the view of the former minister, 

since he’s quoted as having said that. And I wonder why you 

now break faith. As I say, it’s not in the nature of the mayor to 

either lie or to exaggerate. he’s a person who has been fairly 

cautious in his statements, particularly when he’s dealing with 

this government. So I ask you, Mr. Minister, will you undertake 

to review the matter and give the mayor the $500,000 which 

your former . . . which your predecessor in office seems to have 

promised. 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t believe the 

taxpayers of this province would want the provincial 

government to establish policy based on newspaper accounts. I 

think that would be most irresponsible. We would establish 

policy, rather, on analysis and discussion and consultation. And 

as I indicated, the matter will be referred to the new 

independent assessment agency. They of course will have 

representation from the municipalities, and they may decide to 

leave the assessment and the commensurate taxation levels 

where they are; they may decide to change them. I’m sure they 

will deal most capably with the issue. The government does not 

intend to make any changes at this particular point in time. It’s 

more appropriate for the entire assessment issue to be dealt with 

by that agency. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, this is not an 

assessment issue. This is a change in policy which has deprived 

the city of Regina of $500,000. I don’t know under . . . The 

minister could do us all a favour by explaining how he thinks 

the new assessment committee is going to deal with this. 

You’ve made a change in policy. The assessment committee 

presumably carries out your policy. I don’t know how they are 

going to correct, how they are going to make allowances, for 

something that the government did. this, Mr. Minister . . . And 

if I’m wrong I wish you’d explain to me how the assessment 

committee could make this adjustment. They carry out your 

policy. You made it. It was your policy, Mr. Minister, which 

resulted in this $500,000 loss — and the dog stands before your 

door, not the assessment committee’s. 

 

So Mr. Minister, if there’s some way the assessment committee 

can deal with this, I wish you’d explain it, because I don’t see 

it. It’s my understanding of assessment committee’s role that 

they implement your policy. If they make policy, that’s a new 

role for the assessment committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well it’s not the role of the assessment 

agency to write cheques or to hand out cheques, obviously. But 

it will be the role of the new assessment agency to monitor, to 

change, to amend assessment issues, and of course taxation 

flows out of assessment. So certainly that is something that will 

be in the purview of the new independent assessment agency. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Are you suggesting it is within the purview 

of the assessment commission to revert to the former policy of 

treating unserviced land as “urban holding property”? Is it 

within the purview of that assessment commission to revert to 

the old policy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Within their power, that will be one of 

many options which would be available to them. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I just disassociate myself 

from that comment. Unless the assessment commission has a 

vastly increased area of discretion, they issue assessments based 

on broad policy established by the government. Your 

government made a broad policy decision to change the way 

urban holding — that is raw, unserviced land — was treated. I, 

Mr. Minister, do not believe it when you say that the assessment 

commission can, of its own volition, go back to the old policy. 

That isn’t their role. 

 

Would you, Mr. Minister, define for me what the role of the 

assessment commission is? Because it’s changing very 

drastically if the assessment commission can revert to the old 

policy without being asked to do so by your government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well it’ll be the role of the agency to set 

all assessment policy. It’ll be an independent assessment 

agency. They will set all assessment policy, and of course 

taxation flows out of assessment. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well I don’t intend to deal with it any 

further, Mr. Minister. Suffice it to say that I think it is relatively 

clear that you made one error, perhaps two. When the city 

council complained of that, you undertook to “make it good,” as 

you well should have. You’re now reneging on that. That’s the 

kind of performance, Mr. Minster, that netted you such an 

astonishing result in Regina North East. It’s the kind of 

inconsistency, unfairness, which has brought you into such 

disfavour. 

 

I’m not sure what the Government House Leader wants to do. I 

was going to get into the area of grants in lieu of taxes. I’ll 

leave it then, until tomorrow. I see the Government House 

Leader indicating he wants to wind it down. I’ll deal with it 

tomorrow. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:01 p.m. 

 

 


