


















































June 18, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

June 18, 1986 
 

2077 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Estimates 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Lusney, as vice-chairman from the 
Standing Committee on Estimates, presents the sixth report of the 
said committee, which is as follows: 
 

Your committee considered the estimates of the Legislative 
Assembly and adopted the following resolutions: 
 
Main estimates to March 31, 1987: 
 
1. Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 
months ending March 31, 1987, the following sum: 
 
For legislation, $3,880,550. 
 
2. Resolved that toward making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1987, the sum of 
$2,587,030 be granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 
 
3. Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 
months ending March 31, 1986: 
 
For legislation, $33,780. 
 
4. Resolved that toward making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1986, the sum of 
$33,780 be granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 
 
5. Resolved that this committee recommend that upon 
concurrence in the committee's report, the sums as reported 
and approved shall be included in the appropriation Bill for 
consideration by the Legislative Assembly. 

 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member of 
Saskatoon Mayfair: 
 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Estimates 
be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's with a great deal 
of pleasure that I introduce to the Assembly some 51 students 
from grade 4 at the Lumsden Elementary School. They are 
accompanied by teachers Carol Youck and Karen Klippenstine: 
chaperons, Mrs. Clapworthy, Mrs. Abramson, Joan Achter, and 
Faye Krumm. 
 

It is my pleasure to welcome all of the students and guests to the 
Assembly this afternoon. I hope they find it interesting and 
informative. I look very much forward to meeting with them for 
questions after question period today, and some refreshments. And 
I ask all hon. members to join with me in welcoming our special 
guests from Lumsden to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
bring to the attention of yourself and the House a group of students 
who are visiting with us today. It's a group of 15 students from 
Stewart Russell School which is situated in the Glencairn area of 
Regina. They are here and will be leaving right after question 
period or soon after, so I've had an opportunity to already meet 
with them and enjoyed it very much. 
 
They are from grade 7 and 8, Mr. Speaker. They are accompanied 
by their teacher, Mr. Vargo, and drivers Mr. Bill Parsons and 
Janice Decelles. I hope that they have an enjoyable and an 
educational stay here. I know that members will join me in 
extending to them a warm welcome and our appreciation for 
having them come to see us here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would introduce 
to yourself, and to the other members of the Assembly, a group of 
students, 40 in number, grade 5, visiting our Assembly today from 
Whitewood. They're seated in the Speaker's gallery. They've had 
themselves a tour of the legislature. I hope you found it interesting. 
And of course I'm sure you'll be involved in other tours later 
today. I, of course, will be meeting with them, Mr. Speaker, and I 
will be making sure that they have some refreshments and pictures 
and the like. I would just ask members to join with me in 
welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Threat of Foreclosure of Choiceland Business 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 
Minister of Agriculture. I want to know whether he or his 
department is aware that a long-time company which provides 
jobs and alternative income for many people in the Choiceland 
area of Saskatchewan is in danger of being forced into 
receivership by actions of the Royal Bank. I'm referring to 
Choiceland Dehy Limited — Dehydrating Limited — which sells 
alfalfa and I believe also barley pellets, both in Canada and on the 
export market. The plant employs six full-time people, 30 
part-time people during the summer, and has contracts with about 
50 farmers in the area. 
 
My question is: is the minister aware of the threat to this company, 
and has his department decided to act to avoid the closure of this 
important facility? 
 
  



 
June 18, 1986 

 

2078 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. Lloyd Muller, the 
member of the Assembly from Shellbrook—Torch River is at this 
very moment meeting with Choiceland Dehy, along with various 
officials . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . So if the members opposite 
are not interested in my response they can argue from their seat. If 
the member of Shaunavon would like to know the answer, I'll 
respond. If he wants to talk on his own . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You didn't answer the question. Just give 
an answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The Legislative Secretary is meeting with 
the Choiceland Dehy right now and has officials with him, and 
they're looking at all the options, and we're quite aware of the 
situation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
are you aware that a loan guarantee would keep this important 
company operating with the jobs I've mentioned — between 30 
and 35 jobs — and protect 50 farmers who use this plant as a 
market for their alfalfa products? And are you aware also that this 
would involve a guarantee, by my calculation, of less than half a 
million dollars? And will you give an undertaking that this 
guarantee will in all likelihood be forthcoming, in view of the fact 
that you've offered more than $10 million to Peter Pocklington, the 
Alberta millionaire? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I'm not so sure, if the hon. member 
compares the Dehy to Peter Pocklington, he's interested in Dehy at 
all; just making a few political points with respect to an outside 
company. Of course we're looking at all options. And the 
Legislative Secretary that's there now, plus the officials, are 
examining all those. And I will give you my assurance that we're 
looking at every conceivable possibility that we can to make sure 
that the Choiceland Dehy stays as viable as possible and has a 
bright future. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, you know that this is a 
Saskatchewan-based company, owned by people in Saskatchewan, 
and it's an important source of income for the Choiceland region. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, it is also an important exporting company 
which provides an alternative source of income for area farmers. 
 
Mr. Minister, why are you so reluctant to move on this case when, 
Mr. Minister, you could find all that money for Peter Pocklington 
of Edmonton and for Manalta Coal of Calgary? You can find loan 
guarantees for those, Mr. Minister, in very short notice. Why 
wouldn't you act immediately, Mr. Minister, at this point, and not 
have this double standard for the multimillionaires and then for a 
small company that's based here in Saskatchewan? Why the 
double standard, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will just say, I won't 
get into the political argument. I'll just say we have officials on the 
scene, officials discussing it as we speak and as you ask the 
question. We're been on top of it for some time and, Mr. Speaker, 
we have legislative secretaries familiar with the industry, familiar 
with the  

area, that will be reporting back to me, and our officials will be 
looking at all the options. 
 

Incident at Prince Albert Correctional Centre 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to direct a 
question to the Minister of Justice. Can the minister confirm that 
there has been a violent incident in recent days at the Prince Albert 
Correctional Centre in which a guard was attacked and kicked 
unconscious by a group of inmates? Can you give us the details 
relating to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Yes, I believe the incident the member is 
referring to was in Prince Albert, and one inmate assaulted one 
guard, and the guard was taken to a hospital. It was a one against 
one incident, and I believe the guard suffered bruising, and that 
was the extent of his injury. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Supplemental, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, are you 
able to find out whether or not the situation took place in which 
the guard was attending to a total of 23 inmates by himself. There 
was no back-up staff at the time. And I want to ask you whether 
this is traditional that one guard would have responsibility for the 
23 inmates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Speaker, I don't have the exact 
numbers that the member is asking for; I could take notice and 
bring that back. However, I know that in this particular 
circumstance the guard was attending to one prisoner who 
assaulted him unexpectedly as he was trying to get the prisoner to 
wake up, and the assault lasted, I believe, for less than 10 seconds. 
The guard called for help, and the guard received help within 10 
seconds, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it's obvious the member is attempting to make political hay out 
of this unfortunate incident. I'll be looking into the incident further, 
and I'll bring more information back to the member if he requires 
it. 
Mr. Koskie: — A new question to the minister. Mr. Minister, this 
is just the latest in the series of such incidents that's been 
happening in the correctional centres because of the overcrowding. 
And here we sat in the Assembly the other day and you indicated 
that in fact the number of people in the correctional centres are 
over 1,160. 
 
But I ask you: the guards have been requesting a meeting with you 
in order that the overcrowding situation and the assaults that are 
taking place as a result of the crowded situations — why in fact 
will you not meet with them to discuss the situations, the 
deteriorating situation in the Prince Albert, and particularly the 
Regina correctional centres, as they have requested? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well I think it's unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, 
that the NDP seem to take advantage of unfortunate circumstances 
of this particular matter. One guard was assaulted by one inmate. 
It's not the first time that something like this has happened; 
unfortunately, in our system, it probably won't be the last. 
 
What I'm confident about is the ability of other staff members to 
react quickly, which they did in this case, and  
  



 
June 18, 1986 

 

2079 
 
 

I have to commend the staff for being on their toes. Within 10 
seconds they were at the side of the guard that did get into a 
problem. The problem did occur in the dormitory, and that's the 
extent of it. And I could bring more information down. 
 
I haven't received a request to meet regarding this incident from 
the guards in Prince Albert, and I am sure if they are concerned 
about this specific incident, they will be in touch with me. But I 
haven't been contacted yet. 
 

Demographic Trend in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question 
I'd like to direct to the Premier, and it deals with the continuing 
and growing problem of Saskatchewan's population drain which is 
getting progressively worse. 
 
Our province, you may know, Mr. Premier, had the worst net 
migration rate in the country last year — 6,000 more people 
moved out of Saskatchewan during 1985 than moved in. And the 
figures which were released today show that this population 
exodus is in fact increasing and getting; Saskatchewan has lost 
more residents in the first five months of this year than it did in all 
of 1985. 
 
Are you, Mr. Premier, aware that between January and May of this 
year Saskatchewan had net migration loss of 6,420 people as more 
than 11,000 people moved out of Saskatchewan? And don't you 
think that this exodus has gotten to the point where your 
government should act to provide some jobs for these young 
people who feel that it's necessary for them to move out of the 
province in order to be able to work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I could correct the hon. 
member on a couple of facts. One is that the population of 
Saskatchewan is growing. We have over a million people, and it's 
the first time in our history that we've been able to break that 
record, and it's the first time since Saskatchewan became a 
province that we're in excess of a million people. 
 
The hon. member suggests that we should be creating more jobs to 
keep people here as opposed to where — Manitoba or Alberta 
where the unemployment rate is higher? I mean, where would they 
be moving to — North Dakota, British Columbia? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I mean, the hon. member says, well maybe they're going 
to Ontario. Well Ontario has virtually full employment in southern 
Ontario because of a free trade arrangement with respect to 
automobiles with the United States. Unfortunately we've never 
been able to carve one out with the United States here in western 
Canada or with Saskatchewan. But frankly it doesn't make much 
sense that a young person would move any place else in western 
Canada when we have the lowest unemployment rate in the west 
and the second lowest in Canada. And we've had that over four 
years. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, as a result of a little bit of weather 
problems and drought problems and so forth, the hon. member 
says, well Saskatchewan has the lowest unemployment, and that's 
pretty good, but we've had to suffer; we haven't been able to cope 
with it. 
 

Well I'll compare the unemployment rate, which we've had the 
best for women. It's the highest in Canada for women, among the 
very best for young people, the very best in western Canada, 
second best in the whole nation, despite drought, despite 
grasshoppers, despite all kinds of things, Mr. Speaker. And you're 
saying, well young people are going to go to Winnipeg or Minot 
or Calgary or Vancouver for work. I doubt that very much. People 
are coming into the province of Saskatchewan. New businesses 
are opening. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, every single project, every single project 
that we initiate in the public sector or the private sector or joint 
ventures, the NDP are against. They're against rural gas; they're 
against individual line service; they're against bacon plants and 
paper-mills; they're against upgraders; they're against all this 
private sector investment; they're against power projects that are in 
the public sector; they're against Rafferty; they're against 
Alameda; they're against the new power plant. 
 
I mean, how can they have it both ways? We've got the lowest 
unemployment. They're against all projects. They say that the kids 
should go to Manitoba, and the unemployment rate is higher. 
They're against free trade with the United States. And in southern 
Ontario you've virtually got full employment because they trade 
with the United States. I don't even know why the hon. member 
raises the point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, in light of the fact that the unemployment in 
the last four years and some months that you now have governing 
longer than your mandate allows you to, unemployment has gone 
up to 47,000 from 20,000, the welfare rolls have increased to 
67,000 — there are 67,000 people dependent on welfare — in 
light of those facts, Mr. Premier, and in light of the fact that there 
was a net out-migration this year of 6,420 people from this 
province, how can you justify the arguments that you have made 
in indicating that indeed there is that kind of population, when all 
those statistics prove you wrong? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — He doesn't seem to understand 
demographics. You can have the population increasing, because of 
the birth rate here, and still have a net out-migration in one month 
or two months. I mean, he doesn't seem to understand that our 
population, number one, is growing, Mr. Speaker. The population 
in the province of Saskatchewan has been a million people for the 
first time in its history. And third, Mr. Speaker, under 11 years . . . 
or after 11 years of NDP, it was either declining or flat all the time 
because people would not invest here. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if you look at . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. It's impossible to 
carry on with the amount of yelling that's occurring here, and I'm 
going to ask the members to contain themselves. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the numbers are: we  
  



 
June 18, 1986 

 

2080 
 
 

have well over a million people now, and when we came to power 
it was much less than a million. So under the NDP it didn't grow. 
They were in power from 1944 virtually right through until 1981, 
except for seven years, and the population stayed the same. 
Alberta's population doubled; Canada's population doubled. What 
happened to Saskatchewan's under the NDP? Absolutely the same. 
We exported over a million people since 1936 and . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to raise the point 
that we've had NDP administration since 1944 to 1982 and the 
population of the province virtually remained unchanged. It stayed 
the same or decreased, and in that same period of time Canada's 
population doubled all over Canada. This was the only NDP 
administration in all of Canada during that period. The population 
stays flat; Canada's population doubles. We export children all 
over the place, and for the first time in our history, under our 
administration, we have over a million people, and he asks where 
the people are going. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I will suggest that the young people are 
coming home; the population is going up, and we are increasing 
economic activity better than any province in western Canada and 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — This is the third time that I've had to caution the 
members to control the noise, and I don't want to have to move 
that way again. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have another supplementary 
to the Premier who maybe at some point will answer the question, 
rather than make a speech during question period. 
 
Mr. Premier, my supplementary to you is this: so far in 1986 
people are leaving Saskatchewan at the rate of 1,300 a month. 
Thirteen hundred people a month are leaving Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I would caution the 
member from Regina North West. This is the fourth time I'm on 
my feet, and I'll caution you for the last time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Premier, a certain journalist a few short 
months ago wrote in an article indicating how you deal with the 
truth, and that's how you're dealing with it in this question period 
today. That's 1,300 people, Mr. Premier, a month who are telling 
you what they think of your government's job creation record and 
your many broken promises. 
 
And so I ask you: for all the young people out there today 
struggling with the decision whether or not to leave Saskatchewan 
to find a job, what will your government do this summer and this 
fall — not three years from now or 10 years from now — but what 
will it do this summer and this fall to provide them with an 
opportunity to have a job and to work? 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I just make the point that the 
hon. member's political party was in power from 1944 to '64 and 
1971 to 1982, and the population stayed about 950 to 960,000 
people for 30 years . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well it is true, 
and that's the facts. Go back and look at the record. You never 
were over 1 million people under your administration. And the 
facts are, during that same period, Mr. Speaker, Canada's 
population doubled — it went from 13 million to 20-some-million 
people, 25 million people. 
 
So Saskatchewan's population today is higher than it was under 
the NDP. We broke 1 million for the first time in Saskatchewan's 
history. The population is going up generally from year to year. 
He's picked a couple of months, or three months, and he says, the 
out is lower than the in. We've had the worst drought, infestation 
that we've had in years, and unemployment in agriculture is 
difficult, and at the same time he's afraid to admit . . . Why doesn't 
he just admit we have the lowest unemployment in western 
Canada . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well say that. We have the 
lowest unemployment in western Canada, the second lowest in all 
of Canada, and it's been that way for four years. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — If the members have something to say in 
question period and have a question, I'll take their question, but 
I'm going to ask for order when the Premier is answering, or when 
any other member is answering. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — You want the facts; I'm prepared to give 
you the facts. In 1986 . . . They're more interested in their summer 
holidays than they are in what's going on with respect to 
employment. 
 
In 1986 we have Opportunities '86 for young people. We 
obviously are creating opportunities in terms of new kinds of 
projects. We've got industrial incentive grants for companies and 
private and public people who will participate in creating new 
jobs, new opportunities. We obviously are building many new 
projects that the opposition is against. I mean, if they were 
concerned about young people, why wouldn't you be in favour of 
new projects in Saskatchewan? Why, in every single, solitary 
project, the opposition stands up and say, we're against that? Well, 
I mean, they asked, Mr. Speaker, they asked what I'm doing. Do 
you want me to read a list of the projects in this province, the new 
projects that they're against, every one of them? They can't have it 
both ways. They can't ask and not expect to receive. Bacon plants, 
and paper-mills, rural gas, individual line service, brand-new 
university, agricultural colleges, hospitals, nursing home — all 
those things — plus Opportunities '86, to give us the best 
employment record in western Canada and number two in the 
nation in the last four years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Premier, for the first time in a decade 
Saskatchewan has suffered a new population loss, in spite of all 
that you say. And your own figures support that argument, Mr. 
Premier. The single biggest reason for our population exodus 
continues to be young people leaving Saskatchewan to look for 
jobs in other provinces. That's the reason. 
 
  



 
June 18, 1986 

 

2081 
 
 

Is the Acting Premier, or is the Premier aware — he's so seldom 
. . . it's hard to know that he's here; he's so seldom here. But is the 
Premier aware that between January and May, a five-month 
period, more than 4,200 people in their 20s left our province in 
search of work? 
 
And if you are aware of that, Mr. Premier, how does this exodus 
of Saskatchewan's young people live up to your 1982 campaign 
promise, and I quote: "bring home our children"? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have 40,000 more people 
working now than when we took office, 40,000 more people 
working in industry — 40,000 more people working — and the 
population up, and the labour force in our province higher than it's 
ever been. So people are coming in. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if I could just have their attention for a 
moment. When you see oil prices drop by 60 per cent, the member 
opposite doesn't think that it has any impact on the oil service 
industry. He would not support the oil industry to start with, but 
when prices drop 50 or 60 per cent in a matter of months and we 
have people being laid off in the service industry and in the oil 
patch and in drilling — just look at the drop in the oil sales and the 
land sales. He doesn't think there's an impact in the province of 
Saskatchewan when oil prices drop? 
 
And he says, well, for Heaven's sakes, look at this. In April, for 
Heaven's sakes, he says that people, young people, who are 
working in the service industry might leave and might go to 
another industry. Well what do you think might happen as a result 
of wheat prices dropping or, particularly, oil prices dropping that 
amount in Kindersley, Estevan, Weyburn, Swift Current? Well, he 
obviously doesn't understand it, or he doesn't understand the oil 
business. He wouldn't get it going to start with, and then when 
they leave as a result of a price decline, he says, well what are we 
going to do, where are they going to go? Well, Mr. Speaker, 
obviously we had a royalty program to encourage investment in 
oil so young people could find work, and we've got 40,000 more 
people working today than when we took office . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 

Herbicide Spraying of Northern Forests 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the absence of the 
Minister for Parks and Renewable Resources I'll direct my 
question to the Acting Minister. 
 
I raise this question, Mr. Minister, because we're concerned about 
our lakes, our rivers, our streams, our wildlife habitat, etc. — 
including jobs. Last August, Mr. Minister — or, pardon me, 
Acting Minister — your government released a report of the task 
force on the use of herbicides in forest management. That report 
recommended the use of aerial herbicide spraying in the forests of 
northern Saskatchewan, and your government said that you 
approved that recommendation in principle. 
 
Can you advise the people of northern Saskatchewan and  

this province the status report of the task force and its 
recommendations? Does PAPCO still plan to proceed with aerial 
spraying on the herbicide, Roundup, on forests near Nipawin, the 
provincial park, this summer, or will the pending sale of PAPCO 
to Weyerhaeuser delay the project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure that it won't 
delay the project in any way in regards to Weyerhaeuser. I will 
take notice of the question, and I'm sure my colleague will be back 
here tomorrow or the next day and bring you an answer back. I'm 
not familiar with exactly what's going on up there, but I'm sure 
that the minister responsible for Parks and Renewable Resources 
will be, and he'll certainly get you the answer for it. 
 
So I'll take notice and get you an answer for it. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The member that I 
directed the question to was the former minister for Environment. 
I would suspect that that minister ought to know the issue related 
to aerial spraying of herbicides. 
 
My supplementary, Mr. Minister, is this: as you should know very 
well, Mr. Acting Minister, the people of the North are desperate 
for jobs. Rather than hire aircraft to spray herbicide Roundup this 
summer, why not convince PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp 
Company) to hire Metis and Indian Northerners to do the work by 
hand. It is a much safer method of forest management, and it 
would create desperately needed jobs in northern Saskatchewan. 
Will your government commit itself to that, Mr. Acting Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't know if they're 
inferring that Weyerhaeuser shouldn't go ahead, and go ahead with 
the paper project or not, but I can assure the hon. member that just 
a year or so ago we did a bunch of silviculture in thinning the trees 
out of the white spruce in an area north, I believe, of Nipawin, in 
the Hudson Bay area and, I'm not sure, some other places. We've 
already done that. In one instance they're taking a look at it to see 
how it would work out. I believe it's been very successful. 
 
In regards — in regards to spraying of herbicides in the North, I 
think the member's well aware that we said there's a hold put on it 
until such time as we felt it was comfortable if it could be done or 
not. There's been a task force out; they brought back 
recommendations. There has been no spraying going on, to the 
best of my knowledge. There will be none this summer, and I'm 
sure the minister will answer any other question he needs when 
he's in the House. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 67 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of 
The Highways Traffic Act, The Vehicle Administration Act, 

and The Motor Carrier Act 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. 
member, I move first reading of a Bill, an Act respecting the 
Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the 
enactment of The Highways Traffic Act, The  
  



 
June 18, 1986 

 

2082 
 
 

Vehicle Administration Act, and The Motor Carrier Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the said Bill be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Bill No. 66 — An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 

1984 (No. 2) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to move second 
reading of this Bill reforming store hours legislation in the 
province of Saskatchewan. This Bill is The Urban Municipality 
Act amendment, and these amendments will bring Saskatchewan 
store hours legislation in line with changing economic and social 
realities in our province. They are amendments which, I believe, 
will fairly balance the interests of consumers, of families, of 
businesses, of workers, and of municipal councils in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan's store hours legislation may once 
have been appropriate. Today it is among Canada's most 
restrictive piece of shopping hours legislation and is not reflective 
of changed times in which we live. I believe, Mr. Speaker, there is 
a clear consensus that changes need to be made. This Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, responds to the changed economic and social conditions 
which face us. 
 
Today a large proportion of Saskatchewan women are in the 
work-force. In many families, Mr. Speaker, both spouses are 
working. Consequently, in recent years the desire for extended 
shopping hours on the part of consumers and families has grown. 
People want more opportunities to shop, particularly on week-day 
evenings. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, there remains strong 
support for a common day of rest. 
 
There are four problems, Mr. Speaker, with the present legislation 
as I see it. In the first place, evening shopping is too restricted. The 
urban Act now allows only one evening of shopping per week, 
except in convenience stores. And in view of changing economic 
and social realities, this provision is clearly too restrictive for large 
communities. 
 
Secondly, the Act is not sufficiently flexible for municipal 
councils. The present urban Act leaves individual municipalities 
with very little room for regulating shopping hours to suit local 
community desires. Municipalities cannot permit more than one 
evening of shopping a week on a regular basis. 
 
Third, Mr. Speaker, holidays are not protected. The urban Act 
presently contains only a vague provision that municipalities may 
require stores to close on holidays. In my view, recognized 
holidays should be set aside for families and for freedom from the 
demands of work. 
 
Fourth, Mr. Speaker, the Act is difficult to enforce. The  

urban Act's current provisions on store hours are too vague to 
permit effective enforcement. Fine sanctions lack sufficient teeth 
to be effective. We need to strengthen the Act to prevent stores 
from violating municipal by-laws or provisions of the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe there has been a strong, growing consensus 
on the general direction that reform of shopping hours should take, 
and I would like to speak to that growing consensus for a moment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that a good majority of people in our 
province would like to see more evening shopping. As early as 
1979 a plebiscite in Saskatoon had shoppers voting over two to 
one in favour of more evening shopping. In recent years, petitions 
in both major cities have shown a decided preference for more 
shopping opportunities. 
 
Similarly, the urban law review committee, which included a 
majority of municipal representatives, called for more evening 
shopping several years ago. Various municipalities have recently 
made similar requests. 
 
Second, Mr. Speaker, there is strong support for the need to 
restrict shopping on common days of rest. A recent survey of 
Saskatchewan's small businesses by the Canadian Federation of 
Independent Businesses found that most businesses were opposed 
to wide-open shopping on Sunday. Similarly, a recent survey of 
Regina consumers by the Southern Saskatchewan Shopping 
Centre Management Association, revealed that a majority of 
consumers supported closing stores weekly for a common day of 
rest. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, there is, I believe, a growing consensus that 
the Act must be made more enforceable. The larger municipalities 
have been asking for the provincial government to strengthen the 
Act to indeed make it more enforceable. Saskatoon has asked for 
increased fines. Municipalities have asked for more precise 
definitions to ensure that they can effectively regulate store 
openings. 
 
Fourthly, there is, I believe, a consensus that the provincial 
government provide more flexibility for municipalities. There is 
support for enabling municipal councils to have more discretion to 
establish the rules on evening shopping. The Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association, as well as the provincial 
Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, have asked the provincial 
government to place more power in the hands of municipal 
councils. 
 
In response to this growing consensus, the following amendments 
are being introduced in this Bill. 
 
Firstly, Mr. Speaker, the Bill will permit up to six evenings of 
shopping per week at municipal council discretion. This is a key 
amendment in the Bill. It permits up to six evenings per week of 
shopping, Monday through Saturday, at the discretion of the local 
council. The amendment does not automatically allow all stores to 
open six nights a week. Local councils must pass by-laws 
determining the number of nights of shopping which will be 
permitted. 
 
  



 
June 18, 1986 

 

2083 
 
 

This change will achieve two key objectives. It will leave 
decisions regarding shopping hours squarely in the hands of urban 
councils, strengthening Saskatchewan's tradition of local 
autonomy and responding to the wishes of various councils and 
the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association. It will allow 
councils maximum flexibility to determine the level of additional 
shopping hours appropriate for their community. 
 
I note, Mr. Speaker, that the mayors of Saskatoon and Moose Jaw, 
and the president of the urban municipalities association, and the 
executive director of that particular association have all spoken 
favourably in response to these changes. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, there should be a weekly day of rest and 
holiday closing. This Bill will continue the present provision of 
the urban Act which requires that stores close from 10 p.m. 
Saturday and remain closed until 5 a.m. on the next following 
Monday. 
 
However, a new feature of the Bill is the requirement that stores 
close on holidays. Some municipalities have had this prohibition 
in their by-laws for some time, but this Bill makes it uniform 
throughout the province. 
 
A number of other provinces have specific Acts dealing with day 
of rest and holiday closing. The recognized holidays contained in 
this Bill include New Year's Day, Good Friday, Victoria Day, 
Canada Day, Labour Day, Remembrance Day, Christmas Day, 
Thanksgiving Day, Saskatchewan Day, and any other day set 
aside as a holiday by the Lieutenant Governor in Council, or any 
civic holiday. 
 
In addition, municipalities will be permitted to require stores to 
close on any holiday as specified in other Acts, or an Act of 
parliament, should the municipality choose. 
 
These day of rest provisions are reasonable in order to provide 
common days for families to be together — a strong 
Saskatchewan tradition. Mr. Speaker, standard day of rest 
legislation will also help small businesses, which have had a hard 
time competing with large retail outlets which have the staff and 
resources to operate in a seven-day-a-week environment. It will 
also mean small communities won't have to play follow-the-leader 
and opt for wide-open weekend and holiday shopping to compete 
with stores in nearby cities. Convenience stores, Mr. Speaker, will 
continue to be permitted to remain open on common days of rest, 
on holidays, and beyond the normal closing hour for 
non-convenience stores. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, this Bill strengthens the enforcement features. 
It responds to municipal requests for amendments to make the Act 
more enforceable. In this regard we have worked with 
municipalities to strengthen their hand. 
 
First, we will be amending the outdated penalty provisions of the 
Act by providing for stiffer fines. Fines for remaining open in 
violation will now be up to $10,000 for the first offence, and up to 
$20,000 for the second and subsequent offences. In the present 
Act, the first offence carries a fine of $5,000, and a continuing 
offence after the first offence involved a fine of only $250 per day. 
 

Second, Mr. Speaker, we've more clearly defined the term "store" 
to curb the practice whereby a single large store, dividing into two 
or more smaller stores, attempts to circumvent the local by-law by 
creating separate corporate entities, partitioning the large store. 
 
Third, we've acted on municipal requests to provide more precise 
definitions of two key terms: one being "principal trade," the other 
being "gross sales." Both of these terms will be helpful to the 
courts in determining what is and what is not a convenience store 
which may stay open after regular closing times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe these amendments respond to the changing 
social and economic conditions in our province. They recognize 
the desire of working women, of two-spouse, working families, 
and of many, many consumers for extended shopping hours. The 
amendments balance fairly the interests of consumers, families, 
businesses, workers, and municipal councils. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I fully recognize that the amendments won't satisfy 
everyone. That would be impossible, given the complexities and 
competing interests involved in the store hours question. But I 
believe the Bill is a reasonable response to the need for change to 
Saskatchewan's store hours legislation. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the support indicated yesterday by the 
various mayors and by the urban municipalities association here in 
our province indicates that the amendments which are being 
proposed today are reasonable; they are in keeping with the times 
that Saskatchewan is presently experiencing; they are certainly 
worthy of the support of all members of the this Assembly. 
 
I indeed would urge all members to support this Bill which will 
update and modernize Saskatchewan's store hours legislation. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will make some 
initial remarks, and then I will ask leave to adjourn the debate 
because this Bill is one in which a large number of members of the 
public have a considerable amount of interest and have only now 
begun to realize what the legislation says, and they should be 
given some time to be able to respond. 
 
I listened with interest to what the minister had to say, and I want 
to indicate that I think it is fair to say that there will be people in 
every sector of the Saskatchewan economy concerned about the 
fact that the minister, in his remarks, did not deal with some very 
substantive issues. 
 
(1445) 
 
At no point did he make reference to the impact that this 
legislation is going to have on Saskatchewan small, independent 
business people. They are the ones who are going to bear the brunt 
of wide open store hours. Business people, not only in the city, 
Mr. Speaker, but business people throughout Saskatchewan — 
family-run businesses who will be expected to, because they're 
going to have to compete, stay open for seven days a  
  



 
June 18, 1986 

 

2084 
 
 

week. Although the minister says six, I submit to this House that 
under his legislation it's going to end up being seven. 
 
There are going to be many small businesses in this province that 
will now be very seriously threatened. They are finding it difficult 
enough now to compete against the big chains. The minister and 
his government is now saying to the big chains, you can have your 
way. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I'm with you. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well the member from Cannington should 
be with me. He's from a rural constituency where his business 
people are going to be affected. 
 
The other point, Mr. Speaker, and we will be asking these in 
committee, but the other point that the minister did not bother to 
comment on was the impact on rural communities which I have 
just referred to. Rural communities which are finding and are 
saying and will find to a greater degree now, business moving 
from those rural communities to larger centres to do their 
shopping at night, resulting in some rural communities losing 
business places. And it needs not be said what impact that will 
have on the community as a whole. 
 
And the third area which the minister did not address in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, is the impact that this legislation will 
have on the people who work in this sector of the economy. There 
are going to be larger numbers of part-time employees. There will 
not necessarily be more jobs, Mr. Speaker, as has been shown 
between the situation of SuperValu and Safeway in Regina. There 
has not been an increase in net jobs. Whereas SuperValu hired 
some people, Safeway and other stores have reduced their staff, 
resulting in almost no net increase in job opportunities. 
 
But what these people are now going to be faced with, the people 
who work in the stores, Mr. Speaker, are growing numbers of split 
shifts — come to work for three hours; be sent home; come back 
to work for another three hours. Nowhere in this legislation, or a 
proposal by the government, is there any proposal that that should 
be addressed to protect these people. No benefits are provided to 
part-time employees who are going to be working into the night, 
in some cases seven days a week. 
 
And those kinds of issues, Mr. Speaker, ought to have been 
addressed by the government. They chose not to do that. 
 
I want to point out that what the Bill does simply is this: it only 
legitimizes what is already happening. There already are business 
places such as the big chains who are staying open seven days a 
week. This Bill does nothing other than legitimize that kind of an 
operation, although I submit it talks about six days. 
 
The point that needs to be noted — and it's a very serious 
shortcoming in this legislation — is this: that the Bill provides no 
new tools and no new legislative powers to municipalities to be 
able to enforce any by-law that they pass. They are caught, Mr. 
Speaker, in exactly the same situation that they are in right now 
where they may set the  

number of nights or the number of days of opening, and they will 
be challenged, and this legislation gives them no further power to 
be able to deal with that kind of a challenge. 
 
So what is going to happen, Mr. Speaker, is that the SuperValu's 
and the similar kinds of stores are going to continue to challenge 
any by-law that the cities or the urban municipalities pass, and the 
government in this legislation failed to deal with that question. 
And that's one of the problems that the municipalities deal with. 
And the minister shakes his head, and he's going to talk about the 
increased penalties. That's not the issue; that's not the issue. 
 
The penalties do not decide whether the challenge can be upheld 
or not. And I simply say to the minister that he has done nothing to 
provide the municipalities with the tools or any new legislative 
powers to be able to support the by-laws that they pass if they, for 
example, in Regina chose to go two days instead of one, or two 
night openings instead of one, or three night openings instead of 
one. And that is a very serious shortcoming of the Bill, besides the 
other three items which I have raised. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that there are many people concerned 
about the six days. They include people who are in business, 
particularly small-business people. They also include a lot of 
people in the general public. And I would like the minister to 
consider whether, maybe, it would not have been, and still is, 
possible to look at the possibility of reducing it back from six to 
two or three, which is probably, in the view of a lot of people, 
something that would have met with some attraction. 
 
The city council of Regina, and I know other municipal councils, 
Mr. Speaker, were asking for an extra day or an extra night. That's 
what the requests were. The mayor of Regina is quoted in the 
paper today, in which he said the government has done nothing 
else here but simply taken the problem off their backs and put it on 
the backs of the municipalities without giving them any power to 
be able to act and back up any by-laws that they may pass. And 
that's really what the intent, on the part of this government, is of 
this Bill. 
 
So I say, Mr. Speaker, having raised these concerns, there are 
other people in the community and other organizations and 
business people as well as working people, who are raising these 
concerns. They have been making phone calls and, in fact, I have 
received several letters, and it's only been a day. I want to say that 
it is only appropriate that they have an opportunity to be able to 
respond to the legislation and, therefore, at this time I beg leave to 
adjourn this debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 
Bill No. 45 — An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 

1984 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Is the minister ready to introduce his officials? 
 
  



 
June 18, 1986 

 

2085 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I'm pleased to introduce Mr. Jim Anderson, 
who's with me from Urban Affairs today. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I don't have many questions 
on this Bill. I indicated in second reading that we were supporting 
the Bill, but I would like to ask the minister one or two questions. 
 
I note, Mr. Minister, that in the explanatory remarks or in some of 
the information that was provided, you made reference to that this 
request was made by the city of Saskatoon and by a particular 
church in the city of Saskatoon. Can you tell me whether you or 
your department has been in contact with other municipalities, 
including the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, 
and what their response was to this provision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes. The urban municipalities association, 
Mr. Taylor, and I discussed the matter. We have had no 
complaints from them, if that was what your particular concern 
was. I know that the churches in Saskatoon, together as a group, 
approached the city council there and were discussing the issue. 
I'm not sure exactly which church was playing the lead in that 
particular process. I did meet with the mayor in Saskatoon to 
discuss the matter with him. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, what was the response by the 
city council of Regina, and Moose Jaw, and Swift Current? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I believe Regina was opposed to any change 
whatsoever. We have heard nothing from Swift Current or Moose 
Jaw. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well that's interesting. I was not aware of 
that. You're saying that Saskatoon supported it, Regina opposed it, 
and you went and proceeded with it anyway. Can you explain the 
rationale for that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well it's a desire on the part of our 
government to ensure fairness in equity in the treatment of 
religious organizations here in the province of Saskatchewan. One 
would not want to be discriminatory, and it's our desire to ensure 
fairness in taxation for those organizations. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I don't object to that, Mr. Minister, but you 
seem to be continuously, on the part of your government, not 
paying any attention at all to some communities. And in Regina 
the Minister of Finance has been critical of the city of Regina; you, 
yourself, have been in estimates, and here again, no consideration 
given to the views of the city council of Regina. Did you 
personally meet with the council or representatives of the council 
to discuss this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — They did not request a personal meeting with 
me. They simply forwarded their objection by letter. In this kind 
of an instance, one has to decide what is the best thing to do from 
a province-wide perspective. It so happened that the city council 
here was  

in opposition; the city council in Saskatoon was in favour. 
 
I think, when you take a look at the broad question, you would 
have to agree yourself that it is a matter of fairness of taxation 
here, as it respects religious organizations in the province, that the 
best move to make is in fact the decision that we are taking with 
this particular amendment. 
 
It may very well be that there will be those people who will be 
opposed to it for one reason or another. One expects that you are 
never going to make decisions that everybody is going to agree 
with. That's, of course, not the role of government, to try and make 
decisions that everybody agrees with. It's to make decisions that 
are proper and fair. And that's what I am attempting to do and act 
in a responsible fashion as it relates to the religious organizations 
in our province. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, as the Minister of Urban 
Affairs, and particularly as a member of the legislature who 
represents a constituency in the city of Regina, one would have 
thought that you would have at least offered to meet with the 
officials, or the elected officials in the city of Regina. 
 
I really find it quite incomprehensible that you, as a sitting 
member in this city, knowing that the city fathers in this 
community were concerned with the legislation . . . I'm not sure 
very strongly concerned; I suspect a meeting may have explained 
some things, and the whole thing would have been quite 
appropriately dealt with. 
 
But you chose — and I really find it hard to believe because I've 
always thought you to be a fairly active member — but you chose 
not to even as much as offer to meet with the council of the city of 
Regina, a city in which you represent a constituency. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, can you tell me how much you think, or 
do you know how much lost revenue will result in the city of 
Regina and Saskatoon and Moose Jaw as a result of this 
legislation? 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I believe in Saskatoon the figure is 25,300, 
which they are willing to forego by virtue of their support in this. 
In Regina I believe it's $8,100; Moose Jaw, 6,800. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, how will this amendment 
now apply to the property? Is it only on church property which is 
the church, or will it apply in the event if the church builds an 
office complex? How broad is it? Can you give a short description 
to the House, or definition to the House, on how broad the 
legislation will be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The wording of the Act is not changing at all. 
It remains the same from what it was previously. We're talking 
about land — if I can read the actual clause it says that: 
 

10 square metres of land for every one square metre of occupied 
building space used as a place  

  



 
June 18, 1986 

 

2086 
 
 

of public worship; 
 
So the space we're talking about is the same as it was under the old 
two acre provision. The definition of the building is not changing 
at all. 
 
Mr. Katzman: — Mr. Minister, just a point of clarification. I 
believe in the Saskatoon situation that they refunded the money to 
the churches even though they paid it and got it back, and 
therefore they were in agreement with this legislation to make 
things much simpler for everybody. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes, the member from Rosthern is correct. 
The city council in Saskatoon, they were collecting the taxes 
because they had to, but then they were rebating them back to the 
churches because they wanted to do that. And they are quite 
strongly in favour of this particular amendment. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 46 — An Act to amend The Court of Appeal Act 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister like to introduce his 
official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Yes, Ron Hewitt is with me from the 
Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to ask the minister whether or not he can 
advise me whether the amendments here have been in fact cleared 
with the bar association, and in particular, can you advise whether 
it has passed through the rule committee which is established by 
the benchers? 
 
My understanding is that the amendments that you have been 
pursuing and also some of the changes in the rules of court have 
not, in fact, gone through the benchers; that is, the rules 
committee. That's the information I have, and I'm wondering 
whether, indeed, you have submitted these amendments. Can you 
advise whether the amendments came to you essentially, drafted 
by the benchers themselves? 
 
But my information, in checking it through, whether they were 
satisfied with what was proceedings, is that it did not, indeed, pass 
through their rules committee, and I was wondering whether that 
information is accurate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — These particular changes are not 
proclaimed until the rules are presented and considered. The 
changes suggested came from the Court of Appeal itself. The 
consultation took place with a number of senior counsel who 
practise in that court. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I guess I ask you the simple question that I 
put forward to you. Why wouldn't you have submitted it to the 
benchers? They have various committees set up precisely to take a 
look at it, and then you could come to this legislature and say, it 
has gone  

through and it is passed. 
 
I don't know why you would want to be putting in an amendment 
indicating: "No appeal lies from a decision pursuant to subsection 
(1) except where permitted by the rules of court," and ask us to 
indeed pass that without having said that here are the proposals, 
here are the changes in the rules of court, members of the bar. You 
have a legislative body, the benchers have. Have you submitted it 
to them? 
 
And you say you haven't; I just don't understand it. And in 
checking with one of the benchers indicates that it did not pass, in 
fact, through their rules committee. And so I ask you: is there any 
. . . Do you think you have done enough consultation — because 
that leads me to the next question — and why wouldn't you have 
submitted to the benchers, in their committees, which deals with 
that review of legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well I follow the normal procedure that 
we've been accustomed to, and the process you indicate, I'm not 
accustomed to. In fact, the clause you read is in law now. The 
Court of Appeal has requested some changes. We did our 
consulting. The lawyers that practise in this area will have a 
chance to provide their opinions, and we will be interested to 
recognize their views, and that's the process we follow. 
 
It's not unusual; this is how it's been done previously. I'm not sure 
what the member's getting at or if he simply misunderstands our 
intent on this particular Bill, but I could assure you that there 
certainly is no intent to pass a Bill which wouldn't be to the benefit 
of everyone who practises in the area in Court of Appeal cases. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I told you, Mr. Minister, that I contacted a senior 
member of the bar in Regina who's a member of the executive of 
the bar association of Saskatchewan, a bencher, and he indicates, 
in discussing it with fellow lawyers, that they do not in fact agree 
with the provision set forth in the amendments. But what is your 
answer to it? 
 
And I can tell you which one, and that's in respect to section 4 at 
subsection (2), where you're indicating: 
 

". . . no appeal lies to the court from an interlocutory decision 
of Her Majesty's Court of Queen's Bench for Saskatchewan 
except by leave as provided for in the rules of court". 

 
And I don't know whether it's sufficient to go merely to the Court 
of Appeal and have the justices indicate that they would like these 
particular changes. I would have thought that you'd get a 
consensus with the bar as well as the justices in order to . . . You 
say, later they will have an opportunity to have input. Well it 
seems to me, once you pass the legislation, and that's the process 
that we're going through, it's kind of late to start having input. 
 
So all I ask you is, I don't know where you got your . . . what 
consultation you had, but I can tell you that I've contacted, and I've 
taken the time to contact — and I thought you would have come 
forward here and indicated what consultation you've done — but 
I've contacted, in respect to that particular section, a senior  
  



 
June 18, 1986 

 

2087 
 
 

member of the bar and a member of the benchers. And they 
indicate that they feel that it would not be the right route to go. 
 
They indicate that — and I'm talking about section 4 of your Act 
here, and subsection (2) — they say, why should you characterize 
this as a lesser remedy, in that leave is required now. And they 
refer particularly to such things as an interim injunction, and 
saying that you should have the right to pursue without leave the 
right of appeal if you're turned down by the Court of Queen's 
Bench, to in fact go straight to the Court of Appeal, rather than 
having to wait, if it's refused at the Court of Queen's Bench, 
waiting until the full disposition, because interlocutory, I believe, 
refers to the interim decision. 
 
And certainly the example that we discussed — and I discussed it 
both with Saskatoon and Regina lawyers — was their concern, 
and the example they used was in respect to an interim injunction. 
And they say, why shouldn't you continue to have that particular 
right? 
 
And so I guess I ask you, Mr. Minister those are the concerns that 
I bring to you, and I would ask you how thorough your 
consultation was, and why you find it so compelling to move, 
particularly with allowing only an appeal from interlocutory 
procedure, interlocutory decision, by leave of the Court of Appeal. 
 
By the way, in talking to some, in respect to some of the . . . The 
courts are somewhat restrictive already, they say in Saskatoon, 
some of the lawyers that are dealing with it. But in Regina, I can 
tell you that they indicate that they felt that it would not be 
particularly a step forward so far as . . . and the example they use 
is the interlocutory . . . or the interim injunction. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well I want to assure the member that our 
intention is to duly consult the . . . You have to remember that the 
clause that you quoted is already being done in practice. What it 
does, it confirms in legislation what's being utilized because of 
common law — the procedure that's utilized today. 
 
We have consulted with Court of Appeal lawyers who practise a 
great deal in the Court of Appeal in both Saskatoon and Regina, 
and I haven't heard the opinion that you just gave me. However, 
having said that, I want to make it clear that because of the 
proclamation date, the fact that the lawyers will have a chance to 
review the rules, that consultation process continues. 
 
I am intending to communicate with the law society president, as I 
do on other occasions, and I feel that if there is a difficulty, the 
difficulty will become known to us. However, the intent of the 
legislation is to be sure that, for example, as I indicated in my 
opening comments, we don't appeal for the sake of delay. And 
we've had some of that happen on occasion. I think the public, as 
well as the courts themselves, feel strongly that that shouldn't be a 
way to utilize the valuable time of the Court of Appeal. So that's 
really the motive behind this direction, which is really confirmed 
in case law already and in procedure. So we intend to proceed. 
 
I'll take your comments under advisement, and we'll  

continue consulting with those who we haven't yet talked to. 
However, I'm sure the president of the law society will bring it to 
my attention if the people in his organization feel that there's 
something wrong with any part of this particular Bill. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I don't want to dwell on it any further. I just want 
to raise those particular concerns. I would ask and appreciate if the 
minister, in fact, would follow up. I don't want, you know, 
amendments for the convenience of the Court of Appeal because 
of the restraint due to the heavy load that they have. And therefore 
I'd ask you to follow that up just in respect to section 11, where I 
mentioned also — and then we can proceed through — where it 
says: 
 

"No appeal lies from a decision pursuant to subsection (1) 
except where permitted by the rules of court". 

 
Now I take it that no appeal lies from a decision — a decision 
there, I take it, is not the decision involving the major matter 
before the court, but a matter which is incidental to the main 
matter that is before the court. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — This involves more minor matters such as, 
for example, filing the appeal book, and so on. That's the intent of 
that particular section. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 45 — An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 

1984 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 46 — An Act to amend The Court of Appeal Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 59 — An Act 
respecting the Establishment of Ambulance Districts and 
Boards, the Licensing of Ambulance Operators and 
Emergency Medical Personnel and the Provision of 
Ambulance Services in Saskatchewan be now read a second 
time. 
 
  



 
June 18, 1986 

 

2088 
 
 

Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 58 — An Act 
respecting The Saskatchewan Pension Plan and Providing for the 
Payment of a Minimum Monthly Pension be now read a second 
time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, we are again discussing the 
Saskatchewan pension plan, and there are a number of remarks 
which I would like to address to the House with respect to it. 
Some of them are by way of indication of items which I would 
like to ask in committee of the whole and wish to give the minister 
some advance notice of my concerns in some areas. 
 
I deal first with the relationship of the Saskatchewan pension plan 
with the federal government and with the federal income support 
programs and the federal taxation measures. 
 
We have had no indication, so far as I'm aware, that the federal 
government will approve the Saskatchewan pension plan as a 
registered pension plan, and this will be of great importance to 
citizens who may wish to become part of the plan. If they now 
pursue their pension security by way of a registered retirement 
savings plan, they, of course, have certain tax advantages by . . . 
They can defer taxes in effect by having RRSP, and one can with 
any registered pension plan. I would expect that this would be a 
registered pension plan, but I would invite the minister to deal 
with that issue either when he closes the debate or in committee. 
 
I am also curious as to know whether or not the provincial 
government's contribution to an individual's Saskatchewan 
pension plan account would be held to be a taxable benefit in the 
hands of the contributor. Clearly, if this is not a registered pension 
plan, it is, in all likelihood, a case where the provincial 
contribution would be deemed to be income in the hands of the 
person receiving the benefit. This is perhaps a point which need 
not be totally disposed of at this time but will need to be dealt with 
and the results made known before citizens are asked to elect 
whether or not they contribute to the Saskatchewan pension plan. 
 
The other point is one which I alluded to earlier in my remarks, 
and it deals with the citizen standing with respect to his guaranteed 
income supplement entitlement. We all are aware of the fact that 
the federal government operates a comprehensive, a universal old 
age security program which is called OAS (old age security) or the 
pension plan. For people with lower incomes there is a 
supplementary plan called the guaranteed income supplement, and 
if one has outside income, one disentitles oneself to the guaranteed 
income supplement paid by the federal government in part or in 
whole. If a single person has an income of $1,700 a month, 
thereabouts, he is not entitled to any guaranteed income 
supplement; and for a couple — something over $2,000, as I recall 
the figures, but I'm not now dealing with the figures, and they're 
not germane to my argument. 
 

I will wish the minister to deal with this point to the extent that he 
can, because it appears to me that it is entirely possible that this 
pension plan will operate so that the citizen will put in some 
money of his own, and the provincial government will put in some 
money of its own, or that it gathered from taxpayers, and the result 
will be that the participating citizen will not be entitled to old age 
security, plus guaranteed income supplement. I should make that 
clear — will not be entitled to the guaranteed income supplement. 
And this would be very unfortunate. 
 
The guaranteed income supplement is something paid for by the 
federal government and by federal taxpayers and goes to persons 
with limited incomes in all 10 provinces of Canada. It would 
surely be unfortunate if the Saskatchewan government set up a 
pension plan which had the effect of meaning that the 
contributions of the citizen of Saskatchewan and the 
Saskatchewan taxpayer would disentitle the citizen to the benefit 
of the federal guaranteed income supplement. And we would have 
the situation where Saskatchewan taxpayers would be paying 
federal taxes, but needy persons in nine provinces would be 
getting the benefits from the guaranteed income supplement and 
not in the province of Saskatchewan. That indeed would be 
unfortunate. 
 
I know that the Premier appears from time to time to take the view 
that it doesn't matter whether we get any money from the federal 
government, notwithstanding the fact that we have pressing 
financial needs. We heard him argue that in another debate and on 
another occasion and outside the House, when he says, when 
pressed about the situation with respect to established program 
funding or federal transfers, he remarks that, well, we're keeping 
up the spending on health care in Saskatchewan. Suppose that to 
be true. He seems to make no distinction between whether or not 
the money is coming out of the pockets of Saskatchewan 
taxpayers or coming out of the pockets of all of Canada's 
taxpayers. And I think that that makes a very real difference. 
 
Here we have another instance where it may well be that the 
policies of this government are going to mean that the 
Saskatchewan taxpayer is going to face even bigger deficits, and 
the Saskatchewan taxpayers will not get the benefit of taxes they 
pay to the federal government because our citizens would be 
disentitled to the guaranteed income supplement. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, that the minister will deal with this when he 
deals further with this Bill, either in his closing remarks or at the 
committee stage. 
 
All of us I think would agree that a provincially based pension 
plan like this Saskatchewan pension plan is a poor second-best to a 
federally administered plan — a poor second-best because it lacks 
a great deal of portability. The situation with respect to this 
pension plan will be that a person will be able to contribute to it 
and get some matching contribution from the provincial 
government, but if he or she should move to Alberta or Ontario, 
there would be no corresponding plan, and his pension provisions 
would cease at that time. 
 
When I say cease, I don't mean that he or she would lose the 
money. The money in the Saskatchewan pension plan  
  



 
June 18, 1986 

 

2089 
 
 

would continue to accrue and may well produce a small pension 
when the participant seeks to retire. But there's no way that he or 
she could have a continuous pension protection the way that a 
person can have with the Canada Pension Plan when he or she 
moves from province to province. That aspect of portability is 
important; it's not decisive, but we would all agree that a federally 
administered pension plan which was portable from province to 
province would be preferable. 
 
(1530) 
 
It's also true, I think, Mr. Speaker, and this is going to be a key 
part of the submission that I make, that the voluntary nature of this 
plan will mean that inevitably it will not be taken up by some of 
the people who need it most. 
 
There are many discussions in Canada and have been many 
discussions in Canada about pension plans. A recent clipping from 
the Leader-Post indicated that the Ontario and Quebec 
governments are moving towards home-maker pensions likely to 
be involuntary, in conjunction with the Canada Pension Plan. And 
that, Mr. Speaker, has been the nature of discussions over the last 
several years — a way to get home-makers into the Canada 
Pension Plan so that they would have portability and a way to 
have their premiums paid. Because by and large, these 
home-makers do not have resources of their own and cannot 
necessarily command the resources of their spouse in order to get 
the contributions made. 
 
This is a serious shortcoming of the Saskatchewan pension plan as 
presented in this Bill, and is in no sense a substitute for the 
inclusion of home-makers and other persons without income in the 
Canada Pension Plan. That would be very much preferable to 
having the Saskatchewan pension plan, and I believe all of us 
would agree with that. 
 
This is not to suggest that this second or third best may not be a 
useful start, but it is to suggest that it is very much less preferable 
than having the Canada Pension Plan changed in the way that has 
been discussed, but hasn't yet come to pass, and I don't think will 
come to pass with the current federal government. 
 
I want to underline, Mr. Speaker, that from a practical point of 
view, the Saskatchewan pension plan will not be of use to many 
who are most in need. The government would have people believe 
that this scheme is primarily designed for the benefit of 
home-makers who will make long-term contributions to the plan, 
and also to people with low incomes and low-income workers 
who are in shops that do not have in-house pension plans. 
 
But when we think of that, Mr. Speaker, we will know that many 
of the shops that don't have pension plans and pay low wages have 
employees with low incomes. That will not surprise us. And 
employees of that nature with that level of income frequently find 
it very difficult to make a contribution of $300 per year. And I 
suspect that in many, many cases, particularly if they're part-time 
employees, it simply will not happen. 
 
Theoretically, the pension plan provides a vehicle; in practical 
terms, I suggest that in many, many cases it will  

not happen. And the reason will be because there will always seem 
to be some more pressing need, more pressing demand on that 
$300 for the 30-year-old housewife than the question of what's 
going to happen to her when she's 65. And I think that that's going 
to be the problem. 
 
I think that members opposite will know, and all of us know, that 
when somebody is pressed for income, particularly if they have a 
small family — and by definition this problem will arise for the 
most part with respect to home-makers who are home and not in 
the work-force, and they overwhelmingly are people with families 
and usually small families — and in those circumstances, I suggest 
to you, Mr. Speaker, that in practical terms there will always seem 
to be a more pressing need for the $300 than providing pension 
security for that particular home-maker 30 or 35 years hence. 
 
And I think in many ways it's almost a cruel deception to suggest 
that the government will be prepared to provide $300 in taxpayers' 
money for such people when he will know that the situation will 
be that they will not be able to take up that offer on behalf of the 
taxpayer. 
 
And that same minister has, for many of them, taken away $230 of 
their property improvement grant — which was a lump sum 
payment that might have been directed to this pension plan — and 
he has levied a flat tax which has a significant impact on the 
income of somebody who is making a relatively modest income. 
 
So I suggest that the ordinary low income family will obviously 
have less disposable income than they would have had, had the 
property improvement grants been continued and the flat tax not 
been applied. And that will be one further reason why there will be 
a lesser take-up of contributions to the Saskatchewan pension 
plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we're not entirely flying blind on this. While there 
have not been pension plans of this kind launched in Canada in 
recent years, and perhaps never, there have been a number of 
voluntary pension plans launched in other countries, particularly in 
Europe. And the take-up by lower income people has predictably 
been low. And therefore I think that we ought not to expect that 
the take-up in Saskatchewan will be significantly greater for lower 
income people. 
 
I am sure, Mr. Speaker, the take-up for some of the people who I 
will refer to in a moment, will be substantial. Why not? When you 
can invest your money at the current rate of interest and have the 
province put in an equal sum of money to invest for your benefit at 
the current rate of interest, that looks pretty good. 
 
If you can invest . . . put in your $300 and get 10 per cent in 
interest and know that the province is going to put in $300 so 
you're effectively getting 20 per cent interest, that's a pretty good 
deal. And for those who can command some free resources, 
certainly they will take advantage of it. 
 
Let me give you a couple of examples, Mr. Speaker. I will cite 
some examples of what might be thought of as typical  
  



 
June 18, 1986 

 

2090 
 
 

Saskatchewan families. Two — a man and wife, both working — 
one makes, say, 27,000 and one makes 35,000 a year. The 
Saskatchewan pension plan will be of no interest or benefit to 
either of them since each of them will be disentitled by reason of 
the fact that they make the maximum contribution under the 
Canada Pension Plan. 
 
Now let's suppose another family. We've got a low income earner 
and a non-earning spouse, some smaller children, and a 
non-earning daughter, age 20, who is a full-time student. This 
family, I suggest, will not be able to afford to have any of its three 
members participate in the Saskatchewan pension plan. The low 
income earner will have some contribution to the Canada Pension 
Plan. The non-earning spouse, I suspect, will not be able to find 
the $300 spot cash; nor will the non-earning daughter who goes to 
university. And I suspect . . . or a student; perhaps technical 
institute. I suspect that in that family no one of them will take 
advantage of the Saskatchewan pension plan. 
 
Now change this a bit, Mr. Speaker, to make that person a high 
income earner, a non-earning spouse, and a non-earning daughter, 
still age 20 and still a full-time student. In that case, Mr. Speaker, 
the high income earner will not be eligible, but the non-earning 
spouse will be, and the non-earning daughter will be, and I predict 
that both would take advantage of the plan. 
 
And so we will see, in effect, a subsidy coming from the public 
purse to the spouse of the high earner and to the 20-year-old 
daughter of the high earner — the 20-year-old daughter is a 
full-time student — but nothing going to the spouse or the 
daughter of the low-income earner. I suspect that that will be the 
result. And I think that that is, in a sense, perverse because we are 
directing our attention and our dollars to the persons who do not 
need it most. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a case of the concern of the government 
opposite being directed to people in an income bracket who ought 
not to be our primary focus of concern. The minister puts this 
forward as a piece of progressive social policy and as part of the 
overall policy of his government, of championing progressive 
social policies. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't see it that way. This government has, at 
a time when the consumer price index has increased by 20 per 
cent, has increased minimum wage by 6 per cent. We have a 
government which has significantly cut back on many health 
services — mental health services, occupational health services, 
the children's dental program. And we've seen waiting lists in 
hospitals grow. 
 
With respect to social services, we have seen the implementation 
of a welfare reform which has, at least in my judgement, 
victimized the unfortunate, and which has been roundly 
condemned by social and church groups province-wide. And last 
year we had this government supporting the Mulroney plan to 
de-index the pensions of senior citizens. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, the record of this government is not one of 
championing progressive social policies. And this  

pension plan, while useful in some limited respects, will not serve 
to make the social policies of the government opposite essentially 
fairer and directed to the people who need it most. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is one group of people who I think need our 
concern and need our assistance more than most of the people who 
will be assisted by the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, and I am 
referring particularly to those people between the ages of 60 and 
65 who do not have a retirement income and who have inadequate 
income from the work-force. And there are lots of those, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In some cases, the worker who is in the work-force is older and in 
ill health and not able to earn an adequate income. In some cases, 
in most cases for that age group, the person is a spouse, and the 
spouse who was not the ordinary bread-winner of the family unit 
in the days when family units were composed largely of one 
working spouse and one non-working spouse. 
 
What we're talking about, Mr. Speaker, is widows out there whose 
husbands have died when the husband was 59 or 60 and the 
widow was 59, and they just don't have enough income. 
 
And I think that that group of people . . . I would say the group 
between 60 and 65, who do not qualify for the old age security 
pension, who do not have a Canada Pension Plan because they 
weren't in the work-force very much, who do not qualify for 
guaranteed income supplement — because those are basically 
programs for people aged 65 and over — and who do not qualify 
for the spouse's allowance, and a good number of people between 
60 and 65 do, but we've still got a gap in there. 
 
And it is the proposal of our caucus and our party that we ought to 
address that group of people — that needy group of people — as a 
first claim on the welfare of this legislature, a first claim on any 
moves that we make to ameliorate the problems of people, 
because they simply don't have enough income in their old age. 
We say that's what we ought to be aiming at first. 
 
Our policy is that the first priority should be to deal with people 
with grossly inadequate incomes in the bracket between 60 and 
65. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that fair-minded people across the 
province will say, yes, that's first priority — not the Leader of the 
Opposition's daughter, not first priority — but persons who are 
between the ages of 60 and 65 and don't qualify for the spouse's 
allowance — that's first priority, and I think that's one we ought to 
turn to. 
 
A couple of final points, Mr. Speaker. There is another problem 
with this Saskatchewan pension plan, and that's its administration. 
It is going to be administered by the government opposite. The 
government opposite is going to take the taxpayers' money and 
keep it, and look after it — look after it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1545) 
 
It's hard to believe that this government would have the nerve to 
say to the people of Saskatchewan: send in your  
  



 
June 18, 1986 

 

2091 
 
 

money to us; we will look after your money; we know how to look 
after money; we know how to run pension plans; trust us — trust 
us. Our friends — our friends in Pioneer Trust have demonstrated 
their competence in dealing with trust investments. 
 
The minister in charge of . . . the Minister of Revenue and 
Financial Services, he has demonstrated his commitment to 
leaving money in pension plans by reaching his hand into the 
teachers' pension plan and taking our $30 million. 
 
Here is the government which not only has purloined $30 million 
out of the teacher's pension plan, but has had five consecutive 
deficit budgets — $2 billion of deficit — constantly looking 
around for money, and saying now to the people of Saskatchewan; 
send us your retirement savings and we will look after them; you 
can trust us — you can trust us — you can trust us. 
 
Well I think the people of Saskatchewan know who they can trust 
with respect to management of funds. They know who they can 
trust with respect to looking after funds and not squandering 
money. They will know — they will know — that any 
government that says: send us your money; it's safe; 30 years 
hence your money will be sent back to you — I'm afraid far too 
many people in Saskatchewan will say, thanks but no thanks — 
thanks but no thanks. 
 
But however, Mr. Speaker, this problem will not concern them 
long. This problem will not concern them long because when the 
Saskatchewan pension plan is enacted, the government which 
introduced it will not be administering it for many months. The 
government which introduced it, if, as, and when they decide to 
face the electorate, will be retired — if that's the word for the route 
which is about to take place — and there will be a new 
administration, a new administration which will administer the 
plan properly. So while that criticism is valid at this time, it will 
not be valid 6 or 8 or 9 or 10 months hence, or at least a year 
hence, since the constitution prevents any greater delay. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, this pension plan is a start. It's a start. It's not 
where we should start because it doesn't deal with the people who 
are most needy, but it is a start, and it will provide a basis upon 
which a proper pension plan can be erected. 
 
I very much hope, Mr. Speaker, that we would be able to get a 
federally administered pension plan. I very much hope that, and if 
that were the case, then I know that the Saskatchewan pension 
plan would be melded with it or disbanded in a way where 
participants would not lose money. I know that all of us feel that 
that is the best way to deal with pension legislation, but we do not 
yet have a federal plan, and this one, however flawed, will provide 
some sort of basis. 
 
I have every reason to believe that there will be changes to 
administrations both provincially and federally before long, and 
we can get at the job of constructing a proper pension plan which 
provides the greatest benefits for those who need it most and 
provides administration which is, in the minds of the public, 
reliable and  

competent. 
 
And accordingly, flawed as it is, I will be supporting this Bill, but I 
will be saying that this Bill is not good enough. It does not offer a 
sufficiently good pension plan for the people who need it. It offers 
more to those who don't need it than to people who do need it, and 
this Bill therefore will be changed and will be improved just as 
soon as this province has a new government, which day cannot 
long be delayed. 
 
Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with a great 
deal of pleasure that I rise today to speak on and support the 
legislation that is before this House with the Saskatchewan 
pension plan. Contrary to the previous speaker, Mr. Speaker, I will 
try and restrict my remarks to the pension plan and, most 
particular, its impact on women, because I think that is significant 
and it deserves some attention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill has been perceived by many people, men 
and women, from right across this province from all 
constituencies, as being fair and being long overdue. There's been 
a lot of studies and committees and task forces and submissions 
and more studies. And of course there's also been a lot of talk 
promises but no action. 
 
I believe it was approximately 1971 when there was promise made 
— 1971, 15 years ago . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who was in power then? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The New Democratic Party was the one that 
put the promise forth of pensions for home-makers. Well since 
that period of time, Mr. Speaker, there has been several 
submissions by several groups, political parties, and of course 
governments, as it relates to pension plans. 
 
It was about 20 years ago that the council of women, the National 
Council of Women, first began to lobby the federal government. 
And of course in our own province the lobby began on 
government from our own provincial council of women for the 
pension plan. 
 
The National Council of Women, Mr. Speaker, basically said one 
thing, and that was: for the acceptance of the principle that women 
working in the home and the community on an unpaid basis are in 
fact making an economic contribution to society and that society, 
through its governments, should recognize that value. Mr. 
Speaker, this argument has been made over and over again since 
that time, and it had fallen on deaf ears despite its simplicity. 
Perhaps that was one of the problems — the simplicity. 
 
Some would defend the lack of action in this area on the basis that 
pension reform is exceedingly complex and costly. And as 
anything goes, if you don't support it and you don't agree with it, 
of course you can find more arguments against it than what you 
can for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government said it was time and it was  
  



 
June 18, 1986 

 

2092 
 
 

overdue. It was time to recognize in a very concrete way that 
home-makers do make a valuable economic and social 
contribution to society, and that home-makers, like everyone else 
in our society, have a right and a responsibility to provide for their 
own economic security in retirement. 
 
I, for one, Mr. Speaker, am confident that the Saskatchewan 
pension plan meets the expectations of many women. In 1983, Mr. 
Speaker, there was a submission to a task force at the federal level 
by the Federated Women's Institutes of Canada. Mr. Speaker, that 
particular institute is basically made up of rural women. In their 
submission they stated that they favoured a pension plan which 
provides for equality to all Canadian citizens regardless of sex, 
colour, or national origin. And their members felt very strongly 
that the value of work in the home must be recognized as being as 
valuable as that performed for financial gain. Mr. Speaker, we on 
this side of the House agree with that position. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan pension plan is much more 
than a pension plan for home-makers. It is designed to extend 
pension coverage to the people who are now under-represented in 
pension plans, and that includes employees of small businesses, 
farmers, self-employed persons, and of course as well as 
home-makers. 
 
A large number of women are employed by small business, Mr. 
Speaker, and many of whom cannot afford a pension plan. Even 
when a pension plan is provided, female employees are frequently 
ineligible because they work part-time or because their 
employment tends to be interrupted by domestic and family 
responsibilities. Mr. Speaker, when you consider that 70 per cent 
of part-time workers in this province are women, the importance 
of them being eligible for pension benefits for part-time workers is 
very clear. 
 
The owners of small businesses, Mr. Speaker, will also benefit 
from the plan. And once again, women's role as active contributors 
to the economy is made clear by statistics which show that half of 
Saskatchewan businesses are owned and operated by women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, historically the major role of women has revolved 
around her primary duties as wife and mother; and it is long 
overdue that society and government recognized that everyone has 
the right to security through a pension plan. And in fact, 
individually we each have the responsibility. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, more importantly, it is long overdue that we 
recognize women first as individuals, regardless of their chosen 
profession, regardless of her husband's profession or what his 
financial status may be. 
 
There are those who would argue — and some inside this House, 
Mr. Speaker — that this Bill will be most advantageous to those 
who need it least. Those who would argue that way fail to 
recognize that more than ever before women are faced with 
changing personal situations, roles, and attitudes. Private pension 
plans don't help many women who the member opposite would 
classify as in a good financial position. 

Mr. Speaker, over half the single, widowed, or divorced women 
over 65 in Canada receive no income — absolutely none — from 
private pension plans. A woman does not automatically receive 
her husband's pension after he dies for a very simple reason: he 
may not have had a company pension. Mr. Speaker, only 44 per 
cent of Canadian workers participate in a company pension plan. 
Of those who do, only 45 per cent have a widow's pension option. 
Those widows who do get a pension from their husband's 
employer usually only collect half of what their husband would 
have received. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in other dismaying statistics, divorce for 
example, it tells us that upon divorce, the man sees a 76 
improvement in his financial status, while the women experience a 
46 per cent decrease. 
 
Because the pension plan is based on personal income, Mr. 
Speaker, rather than family income, this plan will recognize 
spouses as individuals and not as chattels, as some people would 
perceive them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today I have listened to arguments about whose wife 
should be in it, whose daughter should not be in it or should be in. 
And I wonder where the rationale comes from the arguments as 
they were presented. I believe that, if a woman has no personal 
income, that in fact she should qualify — not based on who she's 
married to — but on the personal income. I also believe that the 
time has come that somehow governments have to encourage our 
young people to take an active interest in pension plans at an 
earlier age than what they have done in the past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan pension plan is in keeping with 
this province's reputation as an innovator. It is also in keeping with 
what this government sees in our people — their strength and their 
dignity, male or female. We believe it is an opportunity for those 
who have previously not had access to pensions, and it is a way of 
recognizing the value of the work that women have chosen to do 
when they remain at home in raising their children. 
 
For those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the pension 
plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1600) 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to speak 
on this bill because I think it is one of the keystones of our budget 
and of the throne speech. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Of your platform. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — Yes, and probably of our platform. And I think 
that what is important, although it touches many people — the 
small-business man, the farmer, people who are working part-time 
— it is particularly significant in that it supports the role of the 
home-maker. 
 
It is not unprecedented for governments at every level to subsidize 
career choices of women. They subsidize the  
  



 
June 18, 1986 

 

2093 
 
 

career choice of a woman going out of the home through, often, 
tax deductions for child care expenses; they subsidize the day care 
where the child may go; they have often programs to accelerate 
women up the career ladder that may not be available to men. And 
these may or may not be positive and be popular; that's not what 
we're discussing today. 
 
But in doing this, it is often the home-maker, who is living on the 
income of her husband, who is short-shifted. The husband must 
pay for, provides the tax base that these other benefits come from. 
So this policy recognizes the home-maker as a viable career 
choice and one, I'm sure, that no matter how long we go, people 
will choose and choose very willingly. It is saying that, as a 
home-maker, you have a right to the type of security that 
government gives other people in other career choices. And I think 
that is why this Bill will deserve great popularity. 
 
And we recognize that the Premier of this province clearly 
recognizes choice, not coercion, in the tax system. People have 
said that continually that both levels of government have been in a 
direction in which the tax breaks or the government sponsors 
would go to women who choose a career out of the home. And 
many women do that, and many women do it in and out . . . for 
some time, and they go back into the work-force, and then they 
may raise a family or be off for a few years and go back again. 
 
And this pension plan is such that they will not have to suffer 
losing pension benefits. They can opt for the part-time job outside 
of the home. They can opt for two or three years in the 
work-place, two or three years at home, and so on. And so this 
gives a flexibility that has not been provided when government 
cuts up the taxpayer-based economic pie. 
 
For this reason in particular, I will be most certainly supporting 
this pension plan. It is also very important to small-business men 
and small-business women. It is often said that when you have the 
right to own a business, you have a right to do without all those 
benefits that may be even given to you or your employees. And so 
many small businesses really are not making a large income when 
they tally up the net base, so that they do not have the security, 
although they're the risk-makers, the risk-takers, and they may be 
providing jobs for two or three people. 
 
Also, of course, often they cannot provide benefits that, if you are 
working for a government at a high-paying government job in 
Regina, that you just don't have those same kind of benefits. So 
this is helping those people that have been untouched by the 
benefits plans. It's fairness for home-makers, for risk-takers in the 
small business area, for farmers and farmers' wives. And for these 
reasons I most certainly will be supporting the Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 
have a few short comments I want to get on the record regarding 
the Saskatchewan pension program. I believe that the 
Saskatchewan pension plan that has been introduced here in the 
legislature is very likely the most important piece of legislation 
we've dealt with this  

session, and is in fact a Bill that will be talked about and looked at 
as a piece of legislation that was forward-thinking and very 
intelligent, for many, many years to come. 
 
I found it rather strange and rather, frankly, upsetting that the 
Leader of the Opposition and the members of the opposition 
skated all over the place and made it very clear that they're 
opposed to the Bill. They quite frankly have made it clear in any 
reading of the Leader of the Opposition's comments, make it clear 
that they're opposed to this Bill although, as he indicated, he won't 
have the courage to vote against it. But I would hope that the 
people in the public and the press would certainly report his 
comments as he said the, because the only conclusion that can be 
drawn from them is that they're clearly opposed to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe it was 1980 when the federal government 
did a green paper on pensions. A number of the things that were 
talked about in that were: who are the poor, and what's the impact? 
And what we find in Canada — and Saskatchewan would be no 
different — is that most of the elderly poor are women. And that is 
the case, Mr. Speaker, because women have traditionally followed 
their role as mothers and home-makers, and although we see a 
change away from that to some extent now, their generations 
before us followed that. Their one opportunity, their one hope for 
security in their later lives, in their retirement years, was that the 
husband they had chosen would either have a pension or be 
successful and would be able to liquidate his assets and live off of 
that income. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we're seeing a change away from that now, but 
certainly we still see that within the general population of people 
who are employees, 60 per cent are not covered by pension plans 
— in the general population — and of all of the working women 
in society, only 40 per cent are covered by pensions. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what the Saskatchewan pension program does 
is make an allowance for these people to get into a pension 
program which will guarantee that down the road, when it comes 
time for them to retire, that they will have some security and be 
able to live a life of dignity and not a life that's dependent on 
government hand-outs, as the people opposite would have. 
 
In addition, it encourages people to plan, young people in 
particular. And you would know well, as anyone who has ever had 
a mortgage, the value of money as it accumulates its compound 
interest over time, and that's what makes pensions work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we could encourage young people in the 18, 20, 25 
age bracket to begin to be concerned about such things as life 
insurance on themselves and for their families and pension 
programs, we would see a significant reduction in the cost of 
social programs to governments at all levels. And the 
Saskatchewan pension program encourages people to focus their 
thinking on the long run. 
 
Now I know that the men opposite never think in terms of that. 
They like people to be dependent firstly; they don't  
  



 
June 18, 1986 

 

2094 
 
 

want them to be independent. They don't like people to think for 
themselves. They want them to believe the NDP rhetoric and 
garbage that they spew out. And, Mr. Speaker, frankly they would 
like to be in control of everyone's life, which we've seen time and 
time again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, women should be valued in their right — and clearly 
women are going to be the major benefactors of this pension 
program — but they should be valued in their own right as 
individuals, and the Saskatchewan pension program allows that to 
happen. 
 
For the Leader of the Opposition to stand up and suggest that a 
woman is a chattel of her husband, and if that husband happens to 
have a good income, the wife doesn't need a pension, is absolutely 
Draconian. I couldn't believe that I sat here in the legislature and 
heard that, because he may have a good income, his wife shouldn't 
have any and his wife should continue to be dependent upon him 
and she shouldn't be allowed to have her own source of income. 
That is such backward thinking that I just . . . it amazed me to hear 
a man of that stature suggest that sort of thing. 
 
He went further and he said that his daughter was 18-years-old and 
why should she have the opportunity to have this pension. Well I 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, why shouldn't she? Why shouldn't she be 
encouraged to plan for an independent future and a self-sufficient 
future? And, Mr. Speaker, who is to say that that 18-year-old 
daughter may not meet someone and get married. And, Mr. 
Speaker, who is to say that they may not have a family — three or 
four children perhaps — and that one day, if she's a home-maker, 
her husband may get killed. And if he hasn't provided for himself, 
she will need that income. But he says, no, she shouldn't need it. 
That is thinking out of the Middle Ages, Mr. Speaker, and 
certainly that's all we get from those people. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition made a couple 
of comments about trusting people with their money. He said, 
would the general public send in their money to a pension plan 
that the government will match in some measure, and have them 
administer it, and have there be a fund to pension down at the end 
of line. He said, would they trust them. He said, oh, you could 
trust the NDP to do that. Well, Mr. Speaker, the NDP have 
unfunded liabilities in the pensions that they administered to the 
tune of about $3.7 billion because they pulled out money, or they 
didn't put their share in and used it to fund other things. 
 
They said, oh, you can trust them with your pension plans. Well 
their pension plans of people like teachers in this province, of 
people like public employees, are simply holes in the ground — 
holes in the ground that masquerade as uranium mines and potash 
mines because that's where they invested their pension. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province deserve independence, 
they deserve the right to plan their own future, and they deserve to 
be able to do that with confidence, and they can do that with this 
government. And we have shown through the introduction of this 
Bill that this will be a positive piece of legislation for the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan, and it goes  

without saying that I will be supporting the Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Extension of Sitting Hours 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if by leave of the 
Assembly I could move: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3, this Assembly shall on 
Thursday, June 19, 1986, meet from 10 a.m. until 1 p.m., and 
on Friday, June 20, 1986, from 2 p.m. until 5 p.m., and from 
7 p.m. until 10 p.m. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to ask leave to 
introduce guests. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to invite all members 
to say welcome to a group of young people from the forestry 
capital of Saskatchewan, and indeed of Canada — Prince Albert, a 
favourite city of mine. There are 46 students, grade 6 and 7, that 
are visiting us here today in the legislature. I'd like all members to 
join me in welcoming these special people to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1615) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Provincial Secretary 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 30 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. Sitting on my right is 
Harley Olsen, Acting Deputy Provincial Secretary; and in the seat 
behind him is Elizabeth Smith, director of financial services, from 
Revenue and Financial Services. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I thought you'd never recognize me. 
 
In respect to the expenditures in the Provincial Secretary's office, 
Mr. Minister, one will note that there are but three votes, three 
items: executive administration, provincial inquiry centre, and 
expenses of the office of the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
I note that in respect to two of these in this here large portfolio that 
you carry, that in item 3 the expenses of the office of the 
Lieutenant Governor is exactly the same as the previous year and 
exactly the same number of person years. 
 
  



 
June 18, 1986 

 

2095 
 
 

I note also that in respect to the provincial inquiry centre that the 
same number of persons are employed — 8.4. And I note that the 
total expenditure for the provincial inquiry centre has, in fact, 
decreased. So that leaves us with one essential item, a magnitude 
of an increase which I think deserves some inquiry. 
 
I take a look at the expenditure here, executive administration in 
the office of the Provincial Secretary. And I find that in 1985-86 
there were 6.5 people, and in 1986-87, person-years is 11 — an 
increase of 4.5 person-years. 
 
But even more significant, Mr. Minister, is that the salaries in 
1985-86 were 174,884; in 1986-87, 410,000; for an increase of 
$235,000, or 177 per cent increase. In other expenses, if you can 
believe it, in 1985-86, the total expenses were 31,640; and today, 
the 1986-87 estimates has increased to 205,950 — an increase of 
174,310, or an increase of 550 per cent. One hundred and 
seventy-seven per cent increase in salaries for personal services; 
an increase in other expenses of 550 per cent. And the total overall 
allocation of subvote is 198 per cent increase — $409,690. 
 
I guess the question I want to ask is: what are the new 
administrative duties in this department which in fact necessitated 
under administration such a huge increase of taxpayers' dollars 
being spent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, the very eloquently 
phrased question of the hon. member, my friend and colleague, the 
member for Quill Lakes, I will attempt to answer by simply saying 
that the cabinet office in Saskatoon is now under the Provincial 
Secretary, and that accounts for the additional positions you see 
there. 
 
In addition to that, the office of the Provincial Secretary, the 
administrative costs of that office, was absorbed prior to the recent 
cabinet shuffle by the Department of Economic Development and 
Trade. Since I no longer have that department, the administrative 
costs of running the office of the Provincial Secretary has to be 
picked up by the Provincial Secretary. 
 
So that is essentially the additional costs. There's one other small 
additional item and that is the Deputy Provincial Secretary has 
been seconded to Expo — that's Marge Jermyn — and she's been 
seconded to Expo to work on V.I.P. services at Expo. I now have 
an Acting Deputy Provincial Secretary in Harley Olsen, and so 
that's a small additional cost as well. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I wonder, in respect to the executive 
administration, the 11 persons that are listed here, whether the 
minister could in fact — to speed up the matters — give a list of 
all of those persons relating to administration, their particular 
positions, and the salaries that they are being paid. I need that 
information. We can speed it up if you can provide that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Send a copy over. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — No, I'll read it to you. I want it on the 
record so there's no mistake. The names are as follows: Marj 
Jermyn; Marj Jermyn is the Deputy  

Provincial Secretary, and a very good one. Her annual salary is 
$49,620. She was seconded to SaskExpo January 1, 1986, and she 
will be there until Expo closes down. 
 
Ron Larson, $64,000; Dianne Leib, 22,488; Jim Martyn. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Jim who? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Martyn, 47,316; Joanne Rossiter, 24,444. 
Oh, yes, and we have an additional one here. I'll send his name 
over, and the reason that I'm reluctant to put it on record is, while 
he's in a position, he's on permanent disability, so I'll send his 
name over to you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — The number that . . . The individuals that you 
gave me in respect to personal services under the executive 
administration is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 people, and then you said there's 
someone that's disabled that you're going to send across. 
 
An Hon. Member: — One. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — One. Okay, so that's 2, 4, 5, 6. Can you give me 
the rest of these birds that you're hiding in the office of the 
administration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I neglected to name the people in the 
Saskatoon cabinet office, and this is as of March 31, 1986; a 
Karen Banner, and E. Maze — M-A-Z-E . . . Z for you. And, of 
course, the Acting Deputy Provincial Secretary came since March 
31st, that date that we're talking about. There's one position that's 
vacant. And we have a Kairnes, and I don't know where he is or 
what he does. Oh, Cheryl Kairnes, yes, a summer student in my 
office. Olsen you've got. The Karen Banner that was in the 
Saskatoon office is now in my office on a temporary basis, and 
you've got Maze. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In respect, you've assumed taking over the 
staffing of the cabinet office in Saskatoon, but then you indicate a 
couple of people here in respect to the cabinet office, and then you 
indicate that they're now in your office. Well you said Karen, and 
then . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — She's here on a temporary basis. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — . . . and then a student you said is in your office? 
Which ones of these birds here, of these people, do you have in the 
cabinet office in Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I think you're being a little disrespectful 
calling these find people birds. But I'm prepared to tell you who 
these . . . I'll tell you who the fine people in my office are. 
 
In my office today I have Harley Olsen, who is the acting deputy 
Provincial Secretary. I have on a secondment from Justice, Doug 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Do you want me to send one of my 
people over to write these down for you? Okay. I have Doug 
Moen, on secondment from Justice. Doug Moen, on secondment 
from Justice. Doug Moen is a fellow that talks with your staff 
every day relative to the workings of this legislature. In addition to 
Doug Moen we have Joanne Rossiter — you've got that name, you 
were given it a while ago. In addition to Joanne Rossiter is a 
Dianne Leib . . . (inaudible interjection) . . .  
  



 
June 18, 1986 

 

2096 
 
 

She's been around for a long time. And Cheryl Kairnes, summer 
student in my office. And that's . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Yes. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Who's in the cabinet office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay. I'll tell you who's in the cabinet 
office, Karen Banner, who is permanently positioned in the 
cabinet office but is temporarily in my office this week. Okay. 
You got that? I don't want to confuse you. And E. Maze in the 
Saskatoon cabinet office. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In respect to the salaries that are being paid, you 
seem to forget that I had asked that you not only give the names of 
the individuals but the salary that's being paid. Could you provide 
us with a list of the individuals, the amount that they're being paid, 
and also the position that they're occupying. 
 
(1630) 
 
That's really what we're looking for, and I don't know why it's so 
difficult to get this information. So could you complete the, at least 
reading off there if you're not embarrassed, as to what is being 
paid? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I'll send this over. And the last name on 
this list is the individual that's on permanent disability. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — All right, interesting information. I can 
understand why you were not particularly ready to disclose this 
year. I have a Mr. Olsen, special assistant to the minister, $67,680; 
assistant to the minister — $67,680. This is for this big 
Department of Provincial Secretary with three subvotes, one 
subvote being the provincial inquiry centre, the other being the 
expenses of the office of the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
I'll tell you, that the deputy minister here in salary, April 1, '85 
received $45,881. And the salary on the June 1, '86 is 49,620 — 
get those from 45,881 to 49,620; percentage change or increase is 
8.15 per cent. Treat their friends pretty good. One ministerial 
assistant, increase of 3.54 per cent. Three of them down at the 
bottom — no indication as to the amount of increase whatsoever. 
 
I think what we have here, Mr. Minister, is part of the political 
organization of the Progressive Conservative Party, that's what it 
is. This is the Tory organization paid for by the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. Here we have an increase of 6.5 to 11 — number 
of people employed. He indicates that they took over the cabinet 
office in Saskatoon, but it so happens that all of these people are in 
the minister's office. And there is no doubt that what is happening 
here is a very major increase in expenditure. And what is 
happening is that the taxpayers are paying for a number of 
political organizers in the Provincial Secretary's office. This is the 
obvious conclusion that one can come to. 
 
I'd like to know whether during the cours of the year the minister 
had any expenditures in respect to advertising; whether he can 
give also in respect to any travel expenses associated with the 
Provincial Secretary's office. 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — While my people are digging that up, I 
think I should just respond to the allegation of all of those 
wild-eyed political advisers I have in my office. I want to talk 
particularly about two, one of them being Marj Jermyn, the 
Deputy Provincial Secretary, who happens to be seconded to 
Expo, who you are suggesting is so wildly overpaid. I suggest to 
you that that particular lady is very much underpaid and has made 
a very significant contribution to the civil service of Saskatchewan 
in the short time that she has been there. 
 
The other one that I just want to set the record straight on is the 
Acting Deputy Provincial Secretary, who is there for a short time 
and may go on to bigger and better things in a time sometime in 
the future. But this fellow's name is Harley Olsen, and I want to 
talk a little bit about this guy. 
 
He has a master's degree in economics. His major subjects were 
agricultural policy, production economics, and I can go on and on 
and on. Awards and scholarships: well the Hadley Van Vliet 
memorial scholarship, Hantelman scholarship, honours tuition 
scholarship, research grant from the Saskatchewan Department of 
Agriculture, and so on. 
 
Work experience — here's one that you'll find interesting. Well at 
one point he was chief of staff and ministerial adviser to the Hon. 
Lorne Hepworth. Prior to that, he was the chief of staff and 
ministerial adviser to the Minister of Agriculture, the Hon. Eric 
Berntson. Prior to that, he was vice-chairman of the land bank 
commission. Prior to that, he was executive director of the Farm 
Ownership Board. I didn't know all of this. Prior to that, he was 
acting director of the Farm Ownership Board. Prior to that, he was 
a research officer to Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Board. Prior 
to that, he was a research economist for the Saskatchewan 
Department of Agriculture. That was way back in August of 1974. 
 
To suggest that this professional individual is in any way 
politically motivated is a suggestion completely without 
foundation. He worked in a professional capacity for Edgar 
Kaeding and Hon. MacMurchy and several others before I got 
here, an I expect he'll be working in a professional capacity for 
many, many more Conservative governments after I've gone, and 
maybe a couple of others after that. But just to set the record 
straight, I thought I would put that on the record. 
 
Now, to answer your question on advertising. Okay, the new 
numbers, when the prefix changed in Centrex from 565 to 787, the 
inquiry centre, there was some advertising done to inform the 
people of Saskatchewan of the change in number for the inquiry 
centre, and the cost of that was $18,969.04. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Is there any travel associated by staff or the 
minister in respect to the Provincial Secretary's office, in or 
outside of the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, as Provincial Secretary, 
my grand total travel expenses were $781.32. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Inside or outside? Any other travel expenses 
associated with any of the officials? 
 
  



 
June 18, 1986 

 

2097 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The total travel expenses of the 
Lieutenant Governor are $13,472.92; and of the remaining people 
that have travelled in Provincial Secretary, $779.08. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In respect to the Provincial Inquiry Centre, I note 
there that there has been a decrease. Same number of people, 8.4 
person-years, but there has been a cut-back in the amount for 
personal services and a cut-back also in the other expenses. Are 
the same people there? Has there been a cut-back in their 
particular wages that you're paying? Why the decrease in both 
instances? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I'm told that the new telephone system 
just simply costs less. So it's a function of more efficient operation. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And in respect to the Provincial Inquiry Centre, 
can you indicate from your statistics whether there has been an 
increase during the past year over the previous year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Inquiries, that number? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Inquiries, yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — There's a slight increase in number of 
calls over 1984 — 0.37 per cent. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Just in respect to staff, I was wondering what 
duties are carried on by a R. Larson, at 64,548. I can understand 
having an acting deputy minister, Mr. Olsen, at 67,680. What is 
the position of Mr. Larson in the Provincial Secretary's office? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — He does a variety of things for me in my 
function as Provincial Secretary and Deputy Premier, including 
things like communications, etc., etc. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well could you outline what particular duties that 
he is required to carry out in respect to your duties as Provincial 
Secretary? Could you be more specific in respect to the duties that 
he would have to carry out on your behalf and assist you in respect 
to the Provincial Secretary's office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well you can understand that the Deputy 
Premier doesn't have a budget. So all of those things that the 
Deputy Premier does in his role as Deputy Premier have to be 
funded from some place, and it's funded through, in this case, the 
Provincial Secretary. It used to be funded, when I was in 
Economic Development and Trade, through Economic 
Development and Trade, and prior to that, through Agriculture. 
 
And so those things . . . You know, I get lots of people that want to 
meet with the Deputy Premier, want to . . . you know, have 
problems with government, etc., etc. . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Yes, I knew that would puzzle you, but those are the kinds of 
things done by Mr. Ron Larson. And, you know, since Provincial 
Secretary is the only budget I have, that's where he's paid. 
 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Vote 30 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, I've already sent across to 
the hon. member a copy of an erratum on the Supplementary 
Estimates (no. 2) for fiscal year ending March 31, 1986. I'd like to 
table that at this time. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I move, seconded by Mr. Andrew, the 
member for Kindersley, the Minister of Economic Development 
and Trade: 
 

That the following erratum which corrects vote 30 of the 
Supplementary Estimates (No. 2) for the fiscal year ending 
March 31, 1986, which has been tabled in the committee of 
finance, be adopted. 

 
Due to an administrative error, the following correction should be 
made: the supplementary estimates of the Provincial Secretary, 
vote 30, page 12, the details should read as follows: 
 

Further amount required, item 1, executive administration, 
subvote 2, $63,520; item 2, Provincial Inquiry Centre, 
subvote 5, $7,160; total for Provincial Secretary, ordinary 
expenditure, to be voted, $70,680. 

 
Mr. Koskie: — Just in respect to executive administration, there 
was an over-expenditure of 63,520. I wonder if you could give an 
explanation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes, that, Mr. Chairman, was when a 
cabinet shuffle came — it was part way through the last fiscal year 
— and so the administrative cost of running my office now fell to 
Provincial Secretary rather than Economic Development and 
Trade. And in addition we assumed responsibility for the 
Saskatoon cabinet office February 1, back into the previous fiscal 
year. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Provincial Secretary 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 30 

 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 30 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 50 

 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, we went over the water 
corporation yesterday quite thoroughly, and apparently it's just a 
different way of funding the water corporation to other Crown 
corporations, as SaskTel and SaskPower get their money from the 
users, and this is the way the  
  



 
June 18, 1986 

 

2098 
 
 

corporation gets their funds to disperse. So with that, Mr. Minister, 
unless you have some comments, we're prepared to let this go 
through. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I don't know if I entirely understood the 
question, but Sask Water is kind of unique in that it's a utility in 
one sense, and it also provides a service in another sense; so that 
there are grants from Consolidated Fund to Sask Water, and it also 
does generate revenue from rates. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 50 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Revenue and Financial Services 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 18 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister please introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have to my 
immediate left my deputy minister, Keith Laxdal; to my 
immediate right, Brian Smith, who is with the pension benefits. 
Over there we have Bill Van Sickle, executive director of 
administration division; Len Rog behind me, who is director of 
revenue policy and monitoring branch; and Gerry Kraus, who is 
the provincial comptroller. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder if the minister could . . . I'll just 
ask a few routine questions. I wonder, could you send your 
personal staff, a list of them, with the salary increases that have 
occurred in the last year across to the committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Yes, I'll send it over. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, while you're at it maybe you 
could send across the executive of the department as well. That 
would include deputy, if there is such an individual, ADM, and the 
executive director. Here again I would like you to include their 
salary and any increases that would have occurred since January 
1st of 1985. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Yes, I'll send that over. Maybe we could 
move along until we get a page here to bring it across. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, this is a department. I see you 
have a staff of five people, some of whom are secretary or clerical 
help. Still, Mr. Minister, this is your only department, your only 
function. While the department's important, the role of the minister 
is minuscule. This is not an area which has . . . Well it's true. This 
is not a department which requires great ministerial talent or time. 
The department, like some others, basically run itself. 
 
Mr. Minister, what on earth do you need a staff of five people for, 
with the Department of Revenue, supply, and  

services? I really am curious, Mr. Minister to know how on earth 
you keep that number of people busy when all you have for 
ministerial responsibility is revenue, supply, and services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Well frankly, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the 
question. We've taken over a great deal of work in terms of the 
Saskatchewan pension plan, which is going to increase. We're 
doing other things. I would acquiesce to your suggestion it's a little 
rich. There's some transition going on there. Some people are 
leaving as others come in, and what you've seen is the overlap, and 
that's the explanation for it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well I relate to comments of the former 
member from Thunder Creek, who commented in his book on the 
overblown staff, on the large staff numbers, paid, as I think it's a 
direct quote, "mind-boggling salaries." 
 
I really wonder, Mr. Minister, for a government that preaches 
restraint, which cannot find fresh food for northern Saskatchewan, 
which cannot find sufficient food for the people of Regina indeed 
— when you see the food banks in operation, you see the truth of 
that statement — with that kind of approach to the public, how on 
earth do you justify a staff like that? I just don't believe they can 
possibly be kept busy in a department like this. 
 
Again I tell you, Mr. Minister, that the department is important. 
But the minister plays a very minor role in the department. It is, by 
and large, a bureaucratic function that this department carries out. 
 
I don't believe, Mr. Minister that your staff have a whole lot to do 
with the Saskatchewan pension plan. I just don't believe that. I 
think your department does that. I suspect, if these people do 
anything during the daytime, what they do is spend time in North 
Battleford and the Battlefords attempting to get you elected, and I 
can see why that would take five people. That indeed is a 
challenge. But running this department, Mr. Minister, is not a 
challenge, and I just don't see how you keep a staff that size busy. 
And I certainly don't see how you justify it. 
 
(1700) 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Mr. Chairman, I've explained the situation to 
the member. You know, possibly when the NDP were in power 
certainly the bureaucracy ran the world. It may very well be that 
I'm a more active minister than they ever saw in their time. 
 
With regard to his comments about the situation in terms of my 
standing politically in North Battleford, I'll match polls with the 
NDP any time. And frankly, the member from Shaunavon is 
worried about there being an election called; I'd be willing to put a 
side bet on which one of us will be back. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Do I take it, Mr. Minister, that the first two 
named are stenographic staff; the last three named are ministerial 
assistants, or what was once called an executive assistant? 
 
  



 
June 18, 1986 

 

2099 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Morin: — That's correct. And within the ministerial 
assistant, as I indicated, there is some transition. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — In brief terms, would you tell me what on 
earth three ministerial assistants do when they are the ministerial 
assistant to the Minster of Revenue and Financial Services? 
Would you just go through those and give me a description of the 
duties of those three. Because, apart from getting you elected in 
North Battleford, and I can see that would be a challenging chore 
which would take the full time of any army of people, I frankly 
just don't see what they do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Mr. Chairman, the staff in my immediate 
office handle a number of inquiries from people, and we have 
many. We have taken taxes off of things such as clothing, and 
that's generated a great deal of correspondence and inquiries. 
We've had other items, which the members opposite are well 
aware of, that have generated correspondence and inquiries and 
telephone calls, and that's what they do. Now if they want, you 
know, a breakdown of what they do on a daily basis, minute by 
minute, frankly I can't give you that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want a job description for the three of them 
because I don't think you can give me anything that looks like a 
job description for these three people. I don't think they have a job 
description because I don't think they spend much of their time in 
your office. I think they spend most of their time out of the office 
doing political work. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — We don't have job descriptions here with us. 
We can provide them to you if you like, but . . . 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, the . . . Mr. Minister, let 
me give you some assistance with parliamentary process. You're 
the minister. You got elected; you're the minister. I ask you the 
questions. I don't particularly care to ask these people what they 
do. I wanted you to give me a job description because I don't think 
you got one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — I just told you that I'd send you over a job 
description. I just gave you a verbal one, and if that's not fine, we'll 
send you over a written one. I told you we don't have one here 
with us right now. Do you want one in writing, or don't you, or are 
you a little hard of hearing over there? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — No, my hearing is fine, but I don't believe that 
with your own personal staff you don't know what the job 
descriptions are. Mr. Minister, these people report to you, not to 
your deputy. If you don't know what the job descriptions are, then 
I am darn sure that they don't know what their job descriptions are, 
and I'm darn sure you're wasting a good deal of money on their 
staff. 
 
I could hear you fine. But I think, Mr. Minister, if this is your 
personal staff, you ought to be able to give me a fairly crisp job 
description for these three people, and so far all I've been getting is 
a lot of nonsense. I ask you, Mr. Minister, to deal with the 
questions and save the nonsense for someone else. 
 

Hon. Mr. Morin: — I have explained to you that they do on a 
daily basis: handle inquiries from the general public that are 
related to the different areas that the department handles. They 
deal back and forth on such things as the pension program; and as 
required, they deal with the general public as they approach our 
office for either clarification on matters, information on matters, 
that type of thing. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well all I can say is that you, Mr. Minister, 
are living proof of the truth of the comment of the former member 
from Thunder Creek, when he said that one of the problems that 
ministers had was their staff were far too big and had no idea what 
they were supposed to be doing. You, Mr. Minister, haven't given 
me a job description. I gather you don't know what a job 
description is. I think that's a fair conclusion from your comments. 
If you cannot properly define what your staff are supposed to do, 
then I'll tell you, it is a foregone conclusion that your staff aren't 
going to know what they're supposed to do. 
 
If that description you gave me is supposed to keep $8,000 per 
month worth of talent busy, then all I can say is they're some of 
the slowest people in Christendom when they go about their jobs. 
That wouldn't keep a good secretary busy, much less three 
executive assistants. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to know whether or not any of these people 
who are run ragged with these duties, I want to know whether or 
not any of them got any pay increases in the last year to assist 
them in carrying out these onerous tasks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — I believe you asked if there had been any 
pay increase. I believe we provided that to you. I believe we sent 
that over to you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I don't . . . Yes, I'm sorry. It's 
the second page. Mr. Minister, I'm wondering why the pay 
increases of 4.3 per cent. It's more than what the public service 
got. It's not 12 per cent, but it is more than what the public service 
got, and I'm wondering how you arrived at that figure of 4.3 per 
cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — The standard increment. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well all I can say is the public are becoming 
increasingly disillusioned about this government. You certainly 
seem to have had prior access to some of these documents you're 
giving me. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you tell me whether or not any of these staff 
have a residence outside the city of Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Chris Dekker has a resident outside of the 
city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Let me guess. It might be in the north-west 
corner of the province. Am I close? Tell me where he maintains a 
residence outside the city of Regina. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Mr. Dekker has recently come into my 
employ and has not completed his move to Regina. 
 
  



 
June 18, 1986 

 

2100 
 
 

Mr. Shillington: — From where — on the record. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — From North Battleford. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, I am really curious to 
know what an executive assistant to the Minister of Revenue and 
Financial Services does in North Battleford. I suppose I might be 
able to think of something they might do in the city of Saskatoon 
— but in North Battleford, Mr. Minister, it is so patently obvious 
your staff are working to get you re-elected. I can see why you 
need a small army of people to do it, but the public aren't supposed 
to be paying money for political organizers. You're supposed to 
pay for those yourself. 
 
You are supposed to answer constituency complaints and do your 
political organizing on your own. Of course your constituency 
secretary may assist you with constituency complaints. 
 
You, Mr. Minister, have a ministerial staff in North Battleford 
whose sole function seems to be getting you elected. And I 
wonder, Mr. Minister, if you'd care to justify that, or are we simply 
going to go on to some other boondoggle that you're engaged in. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — As I indicated, Mr. Dekker has recently 
come into my employ. He will be coming down to Regina, and we 
are in the transition. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well he's been in your employment for four 
months. What's the problem? I seem to recall seeing a bus coming 
from North Battleford to Regina in the last four months. I don't 
know what the problem is. Why, if Mr. Dekker is prepared to cash 
a pay cheque worth $2,300 a month, why doesn't the individual 
move to Regina where I presume his duties are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — I indicated that that will be happening, that 
the transition is in place. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, how in the name of Heaven do 
you justify paying $2,300 a month to a third executive assistant, 
with the ministerial duties being as minuscule as they are, when 
the person doesn't even live in Regina? If it weren't a waste of 
close to $10,000, it would be amusing to see you try to justify it. 
Mr. Minister, he's had four months. Do I take it that probably 
some time after the end of October the individual may find other 
employment? Is that also a fair conclusion, that some time after 
the election your staff may once again be reduced to two 
ministerial assistants? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — I've indicated to you that we're in a midst of 
a transition. We have people who work in my office who are 
going to other duties, and we have brought some people in, and we 
have a bit of an overlap now. 
 
Now what Mr. Dekker may or may not do in the future is hardly, I 
think, relevant. He will be coming down to Regina to be part of 
my staff here. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, would you give me a 
crisp description of what this individual does from 8:30 in the 
morning till 5 at night. I'm really curious to see how he fills his 
hours in North Battleford, five days a  

week, for the last four months. Just give me an average day in the 
life of Chris Dekker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — I have him reviewing the operation of the 
department so he's familiar with it. We're having some . . . as you 
may be well aware, there are some problems in taxation in the 
north-west corner and the west side of the province, on the border, 
and he is looking into those matters. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — And those are the types of things that he's 
doing. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And that comprises the list of duties for Chris 
Dekker for the last four months. Tell me, does Chris Dekker need 
an office to carry out these functions? How much floor space does 
this man need to carry out these onerous duties? Just give me an 
idea of what his office looks like in North Battleford. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Frankly, I have him working out of my 
constituency office. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I knew darn well you did. That's why I asked 
the question. 
 
Now you got Chris Dekker, who's making $2,353 a month, more 
than the vast majority of his constituents make, I'd say. You have 
Chris Dekker making $2,353 a month, who has no office space, 
who has no duties that you can give us, because you haven't 
described any duties apart from some taxation problems in the 
north-west corner of the province. Mr. Minister, I'm wondering 
what his qualifications are. What did this man do to attract your 
attention? What's his background? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — . . . his office. I suppose that what we could 
do is go out and rent space for him. You know, he's there and 
we're using space that's there and . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . .Mr. Dekker has a Bachelor of Commerce degree in finance, 
with honours in marketing and general business. He's a high 
school graduate. He was formerly employed with the LEDA group 
as a market research and financial analyst, involved in 
development, review, and editing of corporate policies and 
procedures with the overall goal to enhance economic 
development in the region. And prior to that he was with Canada 
Packers in Edmonton. Prior to that he was sales representative for 
North West Broadcasting, and prior to that he was a news reporter. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Tell me, does this gentleman . . . Is he able to 
fit into this terribly onerous day, is he able to work in any other 
employment during the day; is he otherwise employed, or is he 
keeping body and soul together on $2,353? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — He's not otherwise employed. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Is it an order in council, Mr. Minister, or is it 
a contract? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — I understand he's appointed in the same 
fashion as any other ministerial assistant. 
 
  



 
June 18, 1986 

 

2101 
 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Let's get an answer. There is no consistency 
in the way that ministerial assistants are appointed. There's 
different ways of doing it. I want a specific answer, Mr. Minister. 
 
(1715) 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — He's appointed in the same fashion as all the 
other ministerial assistants in my office. I understand the lady who 
looks after this sort of thing is down, and if there's a more formal 
answer, we'll get it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Are you serious about this — you don't know 
how your own personal staff were hired? Is that supposed to be a 
serious answer? Mr. Minister, this is something you've got to 
know. Mr. Minister, it is very, very difficult to believe you don't 
know how your own personal staff are hired. I mean, good 
heavens! You may not hire the staff of other departmental 
members, but you do hire your own department staff. You've got 
to sign it, I assume. 
 
So I ask you again, Mr. Minister, how was he hired? Come clean. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — There's no coming clean to be done. I mean, 
we've answered your question. Now if there's a . . . Certainly we 
hired him. And if there's a form or a . . . you know, you have a 
special name for something, we're finding out, and that's the . . . 
You asked the question; we're finding out. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, how long is it going to take you 
to find out? because I really am curious about this individual. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — The contract, apparently that's entered into 
under the ministerial regulations. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The contract. Mr. Minister, what were the 
terms of the contract? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Apparently the contract deals with salary, 
and apparently it's basically the same regulations as under the 
Public Service Commission, and they can be terminated at will. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I'm delighted to know that it's 
in the standard form. We've never got a standard form or contract 
for executive assistant, so maybe you'd like to help us out by 
giving us one now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — I expect, you know, it's at pleasure. I haven't 
got a copy of the actual contract here. But it's at pleasure, and he 
can be dismissed at will. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I ask you what the terms of the 
contract are. I'm not asking you what you're expecting. What 
you're expecting is obviously something quite different than what 
you're getting, because you're woefully unprepared for these 
estimates. So would you tell me, Mr. Minister, what the terms of 
the contract are so that we may know what exactly it's going to 
cost us when you are no longer a minister. So, Mr. Minister, I ask 
you to tell me: what are the terms of the contract? 
 

Hon. Mr. Morin: — Well I've told you. The terms of the contract 
are his salary, normal benefits, and he is employed at the pleasure. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, this is a waste of time. We 
have spent a half an hour here today and have not got the most 
rudimentary information out. I rise on a point of order, Mr. 
Chairman. It's past 5 o'clock. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:21 p.m. 


