


















































December 15, 1986


  
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 December 15, 1986 
 
 

221 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Gainers Proposed Bacon Processing Plant at North 
Battleford 

 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a 
question to the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Economic Development Corporation, and it deals with the 
arrangements between Sedco and the Alberta millionaire, Peter 
Pocklington, and his companies. 
 
Can the minister tell Saskatchewan taxpayers just how much 
money has been spent to date on the Gainers bacon processing 
plant at North Battleford? The press reports quote Mr. 
Pocklington as saying that the plant has cost $6 million. How 
much of that was his money, or Gainers, and how much of it 
came from Saskatchewan taxpayers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, in regard to that, so that I 
wouldn’t be giving any information that wouldn’t be absolutely 
correct, I will take notice of the question and bring back the 
required information to the member. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would 
the minister also take notice of a question dealing with whether 
or not the land and buildings for the project at North Battleford 
were contributed by Sedco, or whether they were purchased 
with loans provided or guaranteed by Sedco? And can you 
indicate whether or not the government has signed any 
documents with Gainers or Pocklington, and whether or not you 
propose to table those documents in the legislature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I will report back to the member as much 
information as I can find regarding this. As I said previously, I 
want to be exactly on the money on these figures, and I’ll report 
back to you at my earliest convenience. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the same 
minister. Certainly the people of The Battlefords are anxious to 
see the bacon plant open. There have been a number of delays 
in the start-up time, and there have been great speeches in this 
Assembly from the government members about the plant which 
has yet to turn out one pound or one slab of bacon. And I was 
wondering if the minister could tell us today, Mr. Speaker, 
when can we expect exactly for the North Battleford bacon 
plant to begin operation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think that would be better directed to the 
Minister of Economic Development and Trade, and he would 
be prepared to reply to your question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
understanding with regards to the Gainers project in North 
Battleford is that there was some delay primarily driven by an 
inability to purchase and have the equipment installed in the 
North Battleford plant. The most recent update I have had is 
that they are soon to  

begin the hiring process for the people in the North Battleford 
area, and it’s expected that the plant would be in production 
early 1987. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
alluded to some of the problems in the plant opening, and I was 
wondering if you’d expand a bit on that and give us a summary 
and kind of an outline for the reasons the plant is not, as of this 
date, open. 
 
There are a number of rumours going around. One is that there 
are not enough pork bellies available to feed the plant. It 
requires 50,000 pork bellies a week to operate at full capacity. 
The companies that manufacture the equipment are not willing 
to give them on credit to Gainers to put into the plant. Therefore 
there’s a bit of a cash flow problem there. 
 
We also hear that they are waiting so that they can decide 
whether or not replacement workers from the Edmonton 
operation will come over to take jobs in the plant in North 
Battleford. So I was wondering if the minister, Mr. Speaker, 
could just sort of summarize and outline the reasons as to why 
that plant hasn’t opened to date. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I indicated to you in my previous 
answer that there was some problem having the equipment 
installed and being able to get the equipment in time to put it 
there. I think it’s dangerous for us in this Assembly to try to 
respond or speculate on every rumour that might happen to 
exist in North Battleford. 
 

Provincial Economic Statement 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct a 
question to the Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, since your 
March 26th budget it’s become very clear that the estimate of 
the revenues were deliberately and greatly exaggerated and that 
the estimate of expenditures were equally underestimated. 
 
Mr. Minister, in view of this, and in view of the fact that you 
and your government have added tens of millions of additional 
dollars to the expenditures of the government, will you be 
providing Saskatchewan taxpayers and potential investors in 
Saskatchewan with an economic statement to update the March 
budget, and will you be providing that statement in the next few 
days? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I will be supplying to the people of 
Saskatchewan an economic statement, and also some proposals 
as to responses by the Government of Saskatchewan. It will not 
be in the next few days. I expect it sometime early in the new 
year. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I thank you for that 
information. I think it’s important that it be provided as soon as 
possible, this financial update, because in your budget you 
indicated that the deficit would be $389 million for 1986 and 
1987. Mr. Minister, that assumed oil prices at $20 a barrel U.S. 
Can you tell this House and the public of Saskatchewan what 
your new projected deficit for 1986-87 is going to be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We will be . . . in the economic  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

222 
 
 

statement be able to give a more definite statement at the third 
quarter of the year, which is basically December 31st, and one 
major reason for leaving a financial statement and economic 
statement until some time in January. However, let me assure 
you that any financial statement will not have the disparity 
between actuality and projections as the one made by the hon. 
member when he was provincial treasurer, where he predicted 
an average growth rate of revenues in the province of 
Saskatchewan of 15.5 per cent per year from 1980 until 1990. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. And the 
minister should be reminded that even in his white paper, tabled 
in July, it showed a surplus of $139 million in the last year that 
this party was a government on the other side of the benches. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, you and your Premier have 
been able to find $20 million for the Peter Pocklington 
operation. In the throne speech it is indicated that the resource 
companies are going to get tax breaks again. In light of that, Mr. 
Minister, can you now rule out tax increases in the next year’s 
budget, and have you rejected increases in either the flat tax or 
the sales tax in your forthcoming budget. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, obviously, budget planning will start 
some time in January or February, as it is often done. We have 
not begun the budget planning for the next fiscal year at this 
time, but let me indicate to the hon. member that the historical 
practice in this province has been that the Minister of Finance, 
at the chosen date, announces the budget and announces any tax 
increases or tax decreases. That’s not to say that that obviously 
is fixed in stone, but that that has been the tradition. 
 
I don’t think the hon. member would ask me, in his capacity as 
a former Finance minister, to break budget confidentiality, and 
if that’s what he’s asking, I’m a little bit surprised. And I don’t 
think the leadership campaign is off to a very good start if that’s 
the request. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, it is worthy to note that the 
minister has refused to deny a tax increase. Now, Mr. Minister, 
by way of final supplementary, your infamous tax grab, the flat 
tax, expires at the end of December of 1986 by law. Its 
reimposition would result in a double income tax, once again, 
for 1987. Can you, Mr. Minister, assure members of this House 
and the Saskatchewan taxpayers that you will not reimpose the 
flat tax by ministerial order in the new year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the member is partially correct when 
he indicates that it expires December 31 of this year. However, 
to indicate a tax grab we, and obviously the people of 
Saskatchewan, because you attempted to make a political issue 
. . . As a matter of fact, if I recall, the New Democratic Party 
said it was going to be one of the main issues in the last 
provincial election. The public obviously made a decision. And 
we have indicated to the public that we believe that the flat tax 
is a major step  

towards reforming the tax system in Canada; that we believe 
that a simplified and fair tax system is a fair directive of tax 
reform. And yes, we will be continuing the flat tax. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. You 
have indicated that to have two income taxes for Saskatchewan 
rather than one is to simplify the system. Would the minister 
explain how a regular income tax and a flat tax is a simpler 
system than having one regular income tax? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well as we’ve made it abundantly clear, we 
believe that a flat tax system is a farm more simplified and far 
more effective form of personal income tax form. We expect 
that as the tax reform debate continues in Canada that we will 
move to a much simplified and probably a flat tax system 
perhaps with one, two, or three different rates. I might advise 
the hon. member – I’m sure though I’m giving him information 
that he already knows – that the province of Manitoba is also 
considering a flat tax. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 
minister has spoken of a past practice. He will know that the 
past practice has indicated that an economic review would be 
published in December. Do you propose to publish the 
economic review in accordance with past practice? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — With the risk of being repetitive, knowing 
the rules, Mr. Speaker, I will have to give the hon. member the 
same answer that I gave the critic – the finance critic – and that 
is that we would expect it sometime early in the new year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. Does the 
minister not acknowledge that his last economic review was 
published in December and can he offer any reason why this 
economic review should not be published in December except 
that you do not want to file it when this House is in session? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, that’s not the least bit correct. The fact 
is that the hon. members opposite know you’ll have ample 
opportunity to debate the financial situation of the province at 
any future session. You had an ample go at it last year; the 
public made their decision. I suggest to you that it is not good 
enough in the economic circumstances – and I freely 
acknowledge that oil prices have dropped, potash prices have 
dropped – and that not only will the public want to know that 
information which is obvious to the vast majority of the public, 
but I think they will want to see some concrete responses form 
the government of what to do about it. And we will be putting 
those proposals forward. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister has spoken 
of past practice. He will know that past practice has been to 
table Public Accounts in December. Will he  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

223 
 
 

make the Public Accounts available to the people of 
Saskatchewan before the end of this month, or will he hide that 
information from the public in Saskatchewan because it reflects 
unfavourably on his stewardship of the finances of this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well it’s my understanding that the Public 
Accounts are not yet ready. But I am not aware, I’m not aware 
at any time in the province’s history when Public Accounts 
have been tabled that the opposition has failed to use the Public 
Accounts to get their particular message across, whether it be 
within the session, whether the legislature is sitting, or whether 
the legislature is not sitting. 
 
So to argue that because the Public Accounts may not be 
available when the House is in session and, as such, that the 
public will not have access to them, I think is not correct. And I 
believe the hon. member knows that, that there is ample time 
for public scrutiny when the Public Accounts are tabled. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will you give 
an undertaking that you will file the Public Accounts, make 
them public in December or January, and not withhold them 
from the public as you did on one previous occasion, you or 
your colleague, into March, almost one year after you closed 
your books? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — My recollection of the time when Public 
Accounts were submitted referred to by the Leader of the 
Opposition, that the opposition of the day was able to call 
Public Accounts to the public’s attention; were able to make 
their criticisms of government expenditure in their rightful role; 
that they were able to ensure or have press scrutiny of the 
Public Accounts; that the public was fully informed as to the 
Public Accounts, no matter when they were tabled. 
 
If that is not the case, then obviously at the time the opposition 
wasn’t doing its job. 
 
Canadian Wheat Board Payments 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question for the 
Premier in his capacity as Minister of Agriculture. The Premier 
will know that a delegation of farmers is today travelling to 
Ottawa to raise in the national capital certain concerns having to 
do with the lack of Canadian Wheat Board final payments for 
the last crop year and the issue of cross-subsidization between 
different pools for different grades. 
 
I wonder if the farmers, in making this particular journey for 
this particular reason, have the Premier’s support, and would he 
join in an all-party resolution of this House to indicate that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m aware of the 
wheat growers’ trip to Ottawa. I have here – I won’t read it 
unless the hon. member wants me to – a letter to the Hon. 
Charlie Mayer with respect to my request to have  

that payment made on the pool with respect to the top grades. 
 
I certainly support the wheat producers. I met with the members 
of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool not that long ago and said that 
I would argue hard and lobby to receive the funds so that we 
could make sure that the pools get paid out. At the same time I 
reminded them that it might mean some changes with respect to 
the operation of the Canadian Wheat Board and we should look 
at that very carefully and understand it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m on record in the ministers’ office in 
Ottawa supporting the farmers in their concern. And I certainly 
would be supporting it here in the legislature, or any place else 
for that matter. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. The Premier 
made reference to possible amendments in legislation to deal 
with this situation, specifically the Canadian Wheat Board Act. 
I wonder if the Premier sees it desirable to deal with this 
situation on a one-year basis, the particular problem that exists 
with respect to the last crop year, or would he be in favour of 
pursuing permanent amendments to the Canadian Wheat Board 
Act to prevent this kind of cross-subsidization problem from 
occurring again in future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s a question I 
believe that the farmers of western Canada are going to have to 
address, that is, how the board operates and how it markets and 
how it pays for the commodities that it has to deal with. 
 
Increasingly, I believe farmers want to be paid for what they 
grow. But at the same time we’ve had a system for years which 
would allow the pooling and the cross-subsidization, if you will, 
and one grade would subsidize another. We separated out the 
durum payments from the spring wheat payments and had 
separate pools, and farmers liked that. 
 
Today we’re asking them to grow high quality grain, and at the 
same time, as a result of what happened last year, they didn’t 
get paid for it. So they’re saying, where are the incentives for us 
to grow the kinds of grades and the quality that the world 
customers want? 
 
So while I support this payment to producers because of the 
inequities of last year, I would be in favour of looking at 
changing the system in the future if it meets with the general 
approval of farmers, and I have a great deal of respect for their 
view, to at least move towards more payment for the actual 
commodity that you grow so that you can have a direct link 
with what the world market wants. 
 
And if it wants number one, you should be paid for number one, 
or at least move towards that. And if farmers could see that 
system operate within the Canadian Wheat Board system, I’d be 
glad to support them. 
 

Senior Management of Saskatchewan Forest Products 
Corporation 

 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

224 
 
 

minister responsible for the Sask Forest Products Corporation, 
and it has to do with a member of the senior management of this 
public company, a Mr. Ernie Lawrence. 
 
When the Weyerhaeuser corporation took over ownership of the 
Big River sawmill in September, did Mr. Lawrence remain as 
manager of the sawmill or did he move to another position with 
SFPC? And if so, what is his current position with this public 
corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be going somewhat by 
memory, but my belief is that Mr. Lawrence did not remain as 
manager of the Bodmin sawmill at Big River. I’m not sure 
where Mr. Lawrence is working now of if he’s still within the 
Sask Forest Products, but I would take notice of the question to 
give a more detailed answer for the member. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. If Mr. 
Lawrence has left SFPC, can the minister also explain why he is 
still receiving his full salary today? And can he also explain this 
cheque I have, dated November 13th of this year, by which 
SFPC paid more than $3,600 on Mr. Lawrence’s behalf to ship 
used machinery from his former home in Terrace, B.C. to his 
current home in Canwood, Saskatchewan. Can you answer that, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’m not sure what the status of Mr. 
Lawrence is but, as I said, Mr. Speaker, I will take notice of the 
question and I’ll come back with a more detailed answer in 
terms of the current status of Mr. Lawrence as it relates to Sask 
Forest Products. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. When our 
party first exposed the extravagant spending habits of SPFC 
management last year, such as the decision that SFPC should 
pay for monthly grocery bills, cable TV bills of the 
$120,000-a-year general manager, the members opposite 
promised to clean up their act. 
 
Mr. Minister, what steps did you take to clamp down on such 
extravagant expenses, and why wouldn’t you catch a $3,600 bill 
for shipment of personal machinery from Terrace, B.C. to 
Canwood, Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, I will take 
notice of the members’ question. But I also would add that I 
will not be responding to statements of supposed fact by the 
member. We’ll take notice of the question. I said I would give 
the status of Mr. Lawrence as it relates to his employment with 
Sask Forest Products at the earliest convenience. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I have 
the documents here. They’re not supposed documents; they’re 
here. And, Mr. Speaker, I would ask also that the hon. member 
from across answer to the reason that we have before us here an 
invoice for $00 shelled out to an Ontario firm for two parkas for 
management people in SFPC (Saskatchewan Forest Products 
Corporation). Also, I would like . . . I have here an invoice for 
the purchase for a set of seat covers, and I  

would like to know, Mr. Speaker, were they mink lined? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would say that first 
of all, the Sask Forest Products Corporation has been operating 
very well in recent months. There’s no question about that. 
There’s no question it’s been operating very well recently. One 
of the major installations of it is now out into the private sector 
and operating well, as well. 
 
I would say to the member, as I have done, that I’ll take notice 
of the question. I obviously, as minister responsible, don’t get 
involved in the purchase of – I believe he talked about parkas 
and seat covers and whatever. I don’t get involved in that, but if 
the members of the New Democratic Party opposition want that 
to be the substance of questions in question period, I’ll take 
notice of the question and get the details on those questions. 
 

Water Rights Related to Grasslands National Park 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister 
responsible for the Saskatchewan Water Corporation. In 1981, 
Mr. Speaker, an agreement was signed between the province 
and the federal government towards the formation of a 
grasslands national park. Since then things have moved very 
slowly and it seems the latest hitch in the progress is a dispute 
between the Saskatchewan government and the federal 
government over water rights on the Frenchman River. 
 
Can the minister please explain why Saskatchewan has taken 
the unprecedented position that it must continue to control the 
water rights along the Frenchman River, even after the creation 
of a grasslands national park? And will the minister soon see 
that this dispute is settled so the park can go ahead? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’d like to thank the hon. member for that 
question. Yes, it has been a prolonged negotiation. But I think if 
the hon. member realizes that the water rights and the right to 
the land that the water flows through is extremely important to 
our province . . . and I don’t think that any corporation should 
get involved with the negotiation that would give away those 
rights. 
 
So we are still looking at it. The department has worked long 
and hard, and I think soon we will reach a conclusion. But until 
that conclusion is to the benefit of our province, I hope and I 
trust that we will continue to wait and work so that when it is 
signed, it will be our benefit, not the benefit of others. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 6 – An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical 
Care Insurance Act 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
  



 
December 15, 1986 

225 
 
 

 
SPECIAL ORDER 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Martineau. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, may I once again congratulate 
you on your election as Speaker of the Assembly, and may I 
also congratulate all the new members that have taken their 
seats in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Before I begin my remarks, Mr. Speaker, on the throne speech, 
I want to thank the people of Saskatoon Nutana for the faith that 
they have placed in me to be their representative in this 
legislature of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to approach my duties, Mr. Speaker, with as much 
principle and honour as possible. And if the members opposite 
deal with the challenges of governing our province in a manner 
that is fair and reasonable, then, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be an ally to 
the members opposite. However, if they don’t, if the rights of 
any individual or group is threatened, then, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be 
a critic. I think, Mr. Speaker, that this is the kind of 
representation that people in my constituency want, and this is 
the kind of representative I hope to be. 
 
I also, Mr. Speaker, want to thank the hundreds of workers who 
helped me get my feet in this Legislative Assembly. Without 
their support and countless hours of volunteer work I would not 
have been able to have taken my seat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the constituency of Saskatoon Nutana is not unlike 
many other older neighbourhoods in urban centres across 
Saskatchewan. Many younger families have moved into the 
area because housing has been affordable. The area is one of the 
more beautiful areas of Saskatoon. I think it’s fair to say that 
Nutana is undergoing a transition from an older retired 
population to a nice mixture of senior citizens and younger 
families. People in Nutana, Mr. Speaker, come from all walks 
of life. There are blue-collar workers, teachers, nurses, senior 
citizens, labourers, small-business people, students, and, of 
course, the unemployed. We also have our fair share of retired 
farmers. 
 
Nutana is also fortunate to have a very fine business district on 
Broadway Avenue. It’s an exciting area with businesses owned 
by local people who daily make a contribution towards the 
well-being of our community. We have a repertory theatre that 
is locally owned and known to show some of the world’s finest 
films. The Broadway Theatre is also know the province over as 
the home of the nationally-acclaimed Saskatoon Soaps. 
 
We have, Mr. Speaker, young business people who have 
decided to venture out on their own to establish restaurants, 
book stores, adult and children’s clothing stores, speciality food 
shops, furniture and electronic shops and the like. I look 
forward to working with the Broadway merchants as they move 
ahead to revitalize the  

Broadway business district. Once the redevelopment process is 
complete, Broadway will be an even more exciting part of our 
community. 
 
What a contrast, Mr. Speaker, between the small merchants on 
Broadway who have made a real contribution to the city of 
Saskatoon, owner/operators who volunteer their time and 
money to community endeavours such as Big Sisters and the 
Crisis Nursery, and the absentee landlord-owning chain 
supermarkets and malls, who, with callous disregard for 
community standards routinely break city by-laws so that they 
may maximize their profits at the expense of their own 
employees and our own local merchants. 
 
Of course, as in all ridings, Nutana has its fair share of 
churches. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that there are 25, to be exact. 
St. Joseph’s Catholic Church on Broadway has long been a 
beacon for many residents on the east side of the river. There is 
also St. James Anglican Church, Second Street United Church, 
Augustana Lutheran Church, Ebenezer Baptist Church, and for 
those of Ukrainian backgrounds, St. Peter and Paul Ukrainian 
Catholic Church located on 10th Street and Munroe. We also 
have Saskatoon’s only synagogue, the Jewish Community 
Centre on McKinnon Avenue. The centre provides an important 
place for Jewish people to come together to practise their 
traditions and beliefs. 
 
I would be remiss, Mr. Speaker, if I didn’t mention the work of 
the Seventh-Day Adventists who operate the only nursing home 
in Saskatoon Nutana. There the very fine staff carry out the 
day-to-day tasks of caring for the sick and the elderly in our 
community. 
 
I could go on at great length about the many important activities 
of the residents of Saskatoon Nutana, but time won’t permit. It 
is, however, in the context of this background of the people that 
elected me that I must come to grips with this throne speech and 
what it ultimately means for the people of my community. And 
I say “my community,” Mr. Speaker, because I have lived in 
that community – Saskatoon Nutana – for more than 12 years. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, I want to be an ally to the government. 
And when they do the right thing, I want to commend them. 
And so therefore I must commend the government’s recent 
steps to establish a drug rehabilitation centre for young people 
and their families. The lack of a facility in Saskatchewan has 
long been a personal concern of mine, and I will watch with 
interest as the Minister of health proceeds to implement this 
program. 
 
I urge the minister to proceed with a great deal of caution, 
however, because in order to have an effective program, the 
philosophy and objectives must be clear. There must be 
adequate numbers of staff and the staff must be properly 
trained. The program must have the support of the various 
interest groups. 
 
Particularly when I think of interest groups, I think of the work 
of PRIDE (Parent Resources Institute for Drug Education Inc.). 
The people at PRIDE were instrumental in raising substance 
abuse as a public issue. They’ve had  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

226 
 
 

real-life, family experiences with drug-addicted young people 
and they have a number of recommendations that might ensure 
an effective strategy to deal with this important public issue. 
 
I might also add, Mr. Speaker, that the government would do 
much to enhance its credibility in this area if they would move 
quickly to move alcohol advertising from the print and 
electronic media. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the lack of hospital funding in this province is also 
a serious public issue. The extent of this problem is reflected in 
the fact that hospitals, particularly in Saskatoon and Regina, 
have recently formed hospital foundations – foundations whose 
sole purpose it is to provide funding for both capital and 
operating expenditures. 
 
Saskatchewan hospitals, Mr. Speaker, have gotten themselves 
into the lottery business. Hospitals can no longer afford to 
survive on government funding alone. We now have hospitals 
in this province which regularly send out requests for donations 
to former patients. And we even have hospitals that are 
considering implementing a preferred service idea – preferred 
service meaning that those that are rich get extras. 
 
What we are looking at, Mr. Speaker, is the possibility of a 
two-tiered health care system, one for the rich and one for the 
not so rich. This possibility, Mr. Speaker, is immoral. It goes 
against the grain and fibre of Saskatchewan people – the same 
people that fought for and struggled for to pioneer the first 
universally accessible health care system in North America. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s time for the PC government, who 
steadfastly proclaimed since 1982, however, that they support a 
publicly funded health care system, to publicly fund it. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, there are a large number of senior 
citizens living in Nutana. And as I went door-to-door in the 
election campaign, it became increasingly evident to me that 
those senior citizens were beginning to think that the health care 
system was failing them. Mr. Speaker, people in my riding are 
waiting for up to a year for hip replacements and cataract 
operations. This wait is frustrating and, in many cases, very 
painful. 
 
The throne speech last week referred to the need to devote 
appropriate resources to improve the quality of life for senior 
citizens and support their desire for independence. Mr. Speaker, 
there are a large number of people waiting for this quality of life 
and this independence that was referred to, but they need a 
government that will put its money where its mouth is. I would 
urge the members opposite to act now to reduce the huge 
hospital waiting lists. Why not put more staff and resources into 
Saskatchewan hospitals? Let’s reduce those waiting lists. Let’s 
create job opportunities for health care workers and reduce 
stress in the health care work place. Let’s put the care back in 
health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Atkinson: — That’s what the people want, Mr. Speaker, 
and that’s what they told us in the election campaign. 
 
On a similar note, I was extremely disappointed by the lack of 
commitment in the throne speech to improve home care 
services. Not only do we have the largest hospital waiting lists 
in Saskatchewan history, but we now have waiting lists for 
home care. Mr. Speaker, if this government was truly interested 
in supporting the elderly’s desire for independence, they would 
have announced a substantial increase in funding for this vital 
service. A lot of rhetoric, Mr. Speaker, a lot of talk about 
support for senior citizen independence, but no action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would now like to turn to a number of other 
important issues, issues that were raised in the election 
campaign, issues that the members opposite must have heard 
about in the election campaign, but issues that the throne speech 
failed to address. Mr. Speaker, two of the most pressing 
problems that the people of this province face are the 
repercussions of unemployment and the crisis in agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I, like a number of other people across the 
province, listened carefully to hear how the PC government 
propose to tackle unemployment. I know that the members 
opposite like to trot out the statistics that indicate that 
Saskatchewan has the lowest rates of unemployment in the 
country. And those figures may make the members feel warm 
and good inside, but it does little for the men and women who 
are facing unemployment; it does little for the men and women 
who are presently on social assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the unemployed in this province waited with 
anticipation, they waited for this government to outline its job 
strategy proposal. Instead of announcing a job strategy 
proposal, we heard veiled references to cut-backs and lay-offs 
in the public services. What we heard, Mr. Speaker, was no 
hope for the unemployed and new fears for those with jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the public is not adverse to creating jobs with their 
tax dollars. They would rather have people working than sitting 
on social assistance. They want young people to look forward to 
decent jobs, meaningful jobs, and jobs that benefit all. If there 
was one message I heard in the election campaign from young 
people, it was that they wanted a future. They did not want to sit 
on social assistance. They wanted the government opposite to 
take their concerns seriously. Unfortunately, this throne speech 
didn’t do that. 
 
The other thing that I heard in the election campaign which the 
throne speech didn’t deal with is the plight of the older 
unemployed worker. And, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency 
there are a lot of them. They are those people who are not yet 
ready to retire, but they’re finding it very difficult to find 
employment. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the throne speech 
didn’t come to grips with their plight. I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
fair to say that the people in Saskatoon Nutana don’t like 
give-aways to Peter Pocklington; they don’t like the give-aways 
to Weyerhaeuser. They do want action and, unfortunately, the 
members opposite chose not to do that. 
  



 
December 15, 1986 

227 
 
 

Mr. Speaker, as I went door-to-door in the election, I met a 
large number of people who are victims of low wages and 
unequal opportunities. The people I’m thinking of in particular 
are women. Women in this province are waiting for action by 
your government. It’s time that equal pay for work of equal 
value was introduced. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I would urge the members opposite to move 
quickly in consultation with the public sector to implement this 
pay concept. The women of this province have waited for too 
long; it’s time for action. 
 
Another issue that I heard referred to over and over again in the 
election campaign was the minimum wage, and the fact that it 
has not been increased often in the last five years. In fact, I 
believe it’s only been increased once. And although the 
Saskatchewan inflation rate has risen 30 per cent in those last 
five years, the members opposite saw fit to only increase it by 6 
per cent. And as a result, Mr. Speaker, minimum wage earners 
have seen their purchasing power decreased significantly. 
 
Most minimum wage earners are women, and many minimum 
wage earners are single parents – single parents that, although 
they have full-time jobs, rely on day care subsidies for their 
children, live in subsidized housing, and receive wage top-ups 
from Social Services. I realize, Mr. Speaker, than an increase in 
minimum wage must parallel market conditions, but surely, 
surely we could afford to bring minimum wage up to the 
poverty line. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the most disappointing aspect 
of the throne speech was the lack of will on the part of your 
government to address the issue of poverty. I think it’s an 
absolute disgrace and outrage that in the so-called bread basket 
of the world there are people going hungry. I think it’s sad that 
food banks have become the order of the day. And, Mr. 
Speaker, all you have to do is go into the Saskatoon food bank 
at 9 o’clock in the morning, and you’ll see children and women 
lined up to get some food because they don’t have enough to 
eat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, probably the most distressing action that the 
members opposite have taken in the last term of office was their 
so-called welfare reform. Mr. Speaker, what this government 
did in the name of reform was to create a category of people, 
and they’re called “single, unemployed employables.” 
 
Single people, many of whom are young people, have seen their 
welfare decrease by over 40 per cent. The maximum amount of 
money you can receive as a single, unemployed employable is 
$345. Well I want the members opposite to tell me how 
anybody lives on $345 in an urban centre in Saskatchewan. 
How do you feed and shelter and clothe yourself? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you – you don’t do it. No wonder 
we have food banks and higher crime rates. No wonder we have 
no hope. I know this, Mr. Speaker,  

because I’ve talked to unemployed people, and I’ve taught 
young people who are living on social assistance of not $345 a 
month, Mr. Speaker, but $235. 
 
(1445) 
 
What kind of a society do we have when the government we 
elect is unwilling to represent this portion of the population and 
treats them with such disdain? It’s time, Mr. Speaker, that the 
PC government opposite stop blaming the victims of their 
economic policies as being unskilled, lazy, cheaters, and all 
those other stigmas attached to being poor. It’s time that the 
members opposite started treating those among us who suffer 
the consequences of their policies with more dignity. I would 
urge you to get rid of the unemployed employable category and 
take into consideration the real cost of feeding a family and 
putting a roof over your head when setting levels of social 
assistance. I think it’s time you did the right thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I think it’s time, Mr. Speaker, to attack the 
real problem, not the victims. It’s time to put forward a job 
strategy to enable people to get back to work. We can do that by 
creating staff positions in hospitals. We can do that by creating 
more staff positions in home care. It’s time to adequately fund 
day cares. It’s time to give real support for family-owned small 
business. 
 
Now let me turn to another crisis, Mr. Speaker, and the crisis 
I’m referring to is that facing farm families. Mr. Speaker, 
members of my family have farmed in this province for the past 
80 years. My parents and brother and his families farm in the 
Springwater community, and my sister and her family farm in 
the community of Smuts. 
 
Food production in Saskatchewan is a vitally important issue 
and part of our economy. If we believe in the maintenance of a 
strong rural community in our province, then farm families 
must continue to be the producers of our food. But that 
arrangement is clearly threatened by present circumstances and 
by the lack of an adequate response form the Tories in Ottawa 
and the Tories here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Each year, Mr. Speaker, approximately 1,000 farm families 
leave the land and are not replaced. Part of this is accounted for 
by farmers retiring and neighbouring farms getting bigger. And 
that process is bad enough. But increasingly, farm families are 
being forced off the land by bankruptcies and foreclosures. 
 
And what has the Tory response been? Well, federally the PCs 
have stretched their creativity to the limit and produced a rural 
transition program which pays a pittance to financially 
hard-pressed farmers to get off the land. The rural transition 
program pays $1,500 to cover a farm family for the first month 
so that they can move into interim accommodations. There is 
also some job counselling and personnel counselling and 
subsidy payable to an employer who will hire the farmer for 26 
weeks. This is a real genuine Tory response to farm families 
being forced off the land. The federal PCs are jumping in to 
hasten up the process to aid the  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

228 
 
 

depopulation of rural Canada. This, Mr. Speaker, I find 
deplorable. 
 
And the response to the problems hasn’t been much different 
here in Saskatchewan. The members opposite had announced in 
the throne speech the extension of The Farm Land Security Act 
and the counselling and assistance program as if that will be the 
total solution to the problems farm families are facing. 
 
I want to, Mr. Speaker, speak for a moment about The Farm 
land Security Act. As of November 30, 1986, the Farm Land 
Security Board had received 840 notices of a lender’s intention 
to foreclose. The foreclosure involved 713 farmers. Of that 713, 
497 cases have been completed; 218 were resolved by 
negotiations between the farmer and the lender, leaving 279 
cases. And of those 279 cases the board expressed no opinion or 
made no representation in 92 cases. In 132 cases the Farm Land 
Security Board wrote a report to the court favourable to the 
banks, and in only 55 cases did the board report to the court in 
favour of the farmer. 
 
That’s quite a record of achievement isn’t it, Mr. Speaker. In 55 
cases out of 840, the Farm Land Security Board helped the 
farmer fend off foreclosure, and the rest was either no help at all 
or actually assisted the banks grab the land. 
 
And when you add to that abysmal record the fact that The 
Farm Land Security Act does not protect from foreclosure 
things like farm machinery, livestock, stored grain, bank 
accounts, or crop insurance cheques, no wonder we really have 
to be sceptical about the legislation. 
 
The statistics associated with the counselling and assistance 
program are even more depressing, Mr. Speaker. You will 
remember that program. That’s the one where panels of farmers 
come to the home of a financially hard-pressed farmer and grill 
the farmer for details concerning personal financial matters. 
Then the panel often denies its support for a loan guarantee. 
And even in the rare case that a guarantee is recommended by 
the panel, the lending institutions are under no obligation 
whatsoever to arrange a loan. This is another genuine 
Conservative farm program, Mr. Speaker. If you’re well enough 
off, the finances are there, but if your farming operation is just 
about to go under, the Devine-designated programs will not be 
of any help at all. 
 
I, and a good many others who are concerned about the debt 
and viability problems of average and smaller farmers, had 
hoped the throne speech would contain something in reference 
to at least halt the disappearances of family farms. 
Unfortunately, this was one area where we were much 
disappointed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish that the members opposite had chosen to 
implement something like debt readjustment board where 
farmers who are experiencing difficulty in paying their loans 
and interest payments could have gone to the board and had 
their debt readjusted. Unfortunately the members opposite 
chose not to do this. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, my family, Roy and Betty  

Atkinson, and in particular my parents from Springwater, 
Saskatchewan, have given me a number of different values. One 
of the most important values that they’ve given to me, Mr. 
Speaker, is the value of service, not to serve myself in 
particular, or a few special-interest groups, but to serve other 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this throne speech does not serve the interests of 
the average person here in Saskatchewan, and therefore I won’t 
be supporting the throne speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Saxinger: — Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne 
presented to the legislature by the Lieutenant Governor spells 
out clearly that the Progressive Conservative government 
believes that Saskatchewan people must have opportunities to 
achieve their goals and hopes for the future. The Speech from 
the Throne states the direction the government will take in 
building Saskatchewan over the next four years. 
 
I’m proud to speak in favour of the motion for the support of 
the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week when I rose for the first time to speak on 
a motion on the human rights, I neglected to say my 
appreciation for your election. At this time, Mr. Speaker, may I 
join with others who have said to you how pleased we are that 
you have been selected as our Speaker of this legislature. You 
have our confidence and our respect, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say thank you to all the people of Kinistino who 
worked so hard to get me elected. The Kinistino constituency is 
a pie-shape in size. The beautiful South Saskatchewan River is 
the north-west boundary from Aberdeen, St. Laurent, Batoche, 
St. Louis, and all the way up to Fort à la Corne, which is north 
of Kinistino. 
 
Our industries are small business and, of course, farming. The 
farm purchase program provided low interest rates for farmers. 
The protection of the loan program provided 6 per cent loans to 
help farmers plant their 1986 crop. The Progressive 
Conservative government brought in The Farm land Security 
Act to protect farmers from losing their land. 
 
This government also introduced the natural gas program which 
helped save up to 60 per cent on heating costs. I personally had 
hooked up a grain dryer to natural gas and my expense of 
drying grain went down to about 35 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Saxinger: — The farmers of Kinistino really appreciate the 
deficiency payment announced by the Premier. They also 
appreciate the Premier’s hard work for obtaining the deficiency 
payment. With programs like this the people of Kinistino 
constituency are proud of our Premier as a Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
As MLA I am proud to serve the people of Kinistino 
constituency which is rich in historic sites and events. Louis 
Riel, as president of a provisional government at St.  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

229 
 
 

Laurent, headed up a short but important rebellion. It ended 
with the fall of Batoche and the capture of Riel. By this time a 
very important impression had been made on Canadian people. 
The Canadian government recognized the claims of the Métis 
and gave them title to their land. The rebellion showed the 
increasing importance of the Northwest Territories, and were 
given representation in the government. Most important, it 
stimulated a national feeling of Canadian unity. Today, the site 
of the battle of Batoche receives thousands of visitors every 
year, including school children and tourists from all over 
Canada and the world. 
 
As MLA for Kinistino constituency, I believe I was elected to 
this legislature because the people of my constituency wanted a 
Progressive Conservative government on October 29th. I wish 
to extend to the Premier and the ministers of the government 
my personal congratulations on receiving a second mandate 
from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the main objective of the Speech from the Throne 
is to set the course of building Saskatchewan, building the 
economy, building our agriculture sector, building tourism, 
building small business, building our education system, 
building our province in every way possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, creating new jobs, opportunity for all people, is 
important to this government. More people at work means a 
greater confidence in our future. That means more investment, 
Mr. Speaker, the PC government’s commitment of job creation 
is spelled out clearly in the Speech from the Throne. It says that 
through the Saskatchewan Builds program we can expect this 
government to create new jobs in agriculture, small business, 
and tourism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Buy Saskatchewan program created extra 
employment in the Kinistino constituency. Commercial 
Industrial Manufacturing (CIM) in Humboldt employees from 
20 to 40 people. Over 20 per cent of their work is building pole 
standards for Sask Power which, prior to 1984, were 
manufactured outside the province. Hoffman Manufacturing in 
Middle Lake is a supplier of laminated glass arms for Sask 
Power. It employs eight people. This firm was established in 
1985. 
 
Sorenson Manufacturing from Birch Hills. A couple of young 
fellows who had a little welding shop, they built a machine to 
galvanize ground rods. They supplied 20,000 ground rods to 
Sask Power and SaskTel this fall. They hope to have a contract 
for 40,000 to Alberta in the near future. Prior to 1986, ground 
rods were manufactured in Ontario and Manitoba only. They 
also have a contract with Sask Power for 500 transformer 
hangers which up to now were imported from Tennessee, 
U.S.A. They are also working on 120,000 feet of galvanized 
conduit which is going to be used on the heavy oil upgrader. 
 
Those above items came to be from the promotion of small 
business by the PC government. 
 
In tourism alone there will be a five-year, $50 million program 
to develop the tourism and hospitality industry. May I quote 
what the Premier had said about this  

program. 
 

This is not the time for standing still. This is a time to 
believe in ourselves, to believe in strengthening our 
province. 

 
I agree with the Premier. The tourism and hospitality industry 
will be a very important facility for this province to provide 
essential training for our people and to fill new jobs in the 
tourism industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Builds program will encourage 
new jobs in the new business communities. Six thousand new 
jobs are anticipated. Mr. Speaker, we are now on the way to 
build a very strong, stable and growing economy in this 
province. 
 
I support the government’s commitment of strengthening our 
education system. Just a few weeks ago I performed my first 
official duty at the opening of the newly renovated and 
extended school in Birch Hills. The cost of this project was a 
quarter of a million dollars. And it’s a fine facility for a small 
town like Birch Hills. 
 
The education of young people and training people for the 
work-force is important. I believe that buildings such as the 
Northern Institute of Technology in Prince Albert will be an 
asset to the people. It will enhance the opportunities for young 
men and women of this province. Education builds for the 
future. It is a sound investment of tax dollars and we are 
keeping up with an every-changing world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to put on the record my views about the 
health care system in Saskatchewan. We in Saskatchewan have 
the best health care system in North America, and I’m sure 
every member of this legislature will agree that we in 
Saskatchewan are proud of our health care system. 
 
In 1983 I was fortunate to take part in forming the Lions Eye 
Bank of Saskatchewan Inc. The Department of Health was very 
co-operative with grants to establish a lab and for removing 
corneas. Prior to 1982 most transplant patients had to go out of 
the province to receive a cornea transplant. 
 
Our chapter president, Cliff Warden, was going blind and had 
to receive a cornea transplant and had to go to New York, and 
the cost was $9,000. The same transplant in Saskatchewan is 
less than 2,000. Mr. Speaker, since 1983, 1240 people have 
received the gift of sight through cornea transplants in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
On behalf of the Lions Eye Banks of Saskatchewan, I would 
like to take this opportunity to thank the government and the 
former minister of Health for the help and co-operation that he 
gave. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Saxinger: — And I am sure the Lions Eye Bank of 
Saskatchewan will continue to get the support and co-operation 
from the new Minister of Health, the hon.  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

230 
 
 

member from Meadow Lake. 
 
The Speech from the Throne says that this government will 
work at new and meaningful ways to build our health care 
system. Mr. Speaker, it was a PC government that put an end to 
extra-billing. It was the PC government that established a major 
five-year program for health care facility construction and 
renovation. 
 
At the all-candidates debate a week before the election, the 
NDP candidate for Kinistino constituency was quested about 
the six-year moratorium on the nursing home program, and he 
stated that it was just a rumour, just a rumour they had the 
moratorium on the nursing homes. Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
read a letter from the minister of Social Services, and it’s dated 
July 11, 1977, and it’s addressed to the administrator of the 
Cudworth Nursing Home, and it states: 
 

Thank you for a letter on June 21, 1977 requesting 
approval of a 12-bed extension to your home. I feel I 
must draw to your attention first the fact that our 
government has placed a moratorium on approval 
and/or construction of any additional special care 
home beds in this province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this was signed by Herman H. Rolfes. Oh I am 
sorry, it’s the hon. member from Saskatoon South. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a PC government which started building 
nursing homes again. In Kinistino constituency since 1982, very 
much needed new nursing homes were built in Birch Hills and 
Middle Lake. Also extensions to nursing homes in Kinistino 
and Wakaw. A 27-unit enriched housing project in Middle 
Lake, connected to the nursing home, is ready for occupancy 
very shortly. Mr. Speaker, the next four years in our health care 
system will receive the same priority, and I support that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my constituency I listen carefully to what 
people tell me. The people are always concerned about where 
the tax dollars go when it comes to government administration. 
The message they give me is that they want the government to 
take a look at organization of departments and government 
agencies, as well as Crown corporations. That is why I’m sure 
my constituents will welcome the announcements from the 
Speech from the Throne that there will be a reorganization of 
Saskatchewan government. The new department of human 
resources, labour and employment is an example of building an 
effective government. Mr. Speaker, big government does not 
necessarily mean good government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have every reason to believe that the election on 
October 209th was a turning point in Saskatchewan history. I 
have every reason to believe that the people of Saskatchewan 
wanted Premier Devine’s government to have another term. Mr. 
Speaker, as a Progressive Conservative MLA I have every 
confidence the next four years will be even better years for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speech from the Throne gave me every reason to believe 
that it says it will continue building in agriculture. It says it will 
continue building the economy. Most  

importantly, it offers all Saskatchewan people the same kind of 
excellent programs that they have come to expect from a PC 
government. Mr. Speaker, you and all other members of this 
Legislative Assembly can appreciate the honour and pride any 
MLA has in being called upon by their constituents to serve 
them in the legislature. I, too, have that same sense of honour 
and pride in being elected to this legislature. I look forward to 
building a better Saskatchewan, as part of the government 
caucus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I came to Saskatchewan 32 years ago, and I am 
honoured and proud to call Saskatchewan my home. Last 
summer I spent some time in Europe. Unemployment has 
increased up to 300 per cent in some areas. Grain and what 
prices are at an all-time low. Yes, they are suffering from the 
world-wide recession. We, in Saskatchewan, have been hit by 
this world-wide recession, but because of good economic 
policies from this government we are doing much better. 
 
I want to work with our Premier to build a better Saskatchewan, 
to make Saskatchewan a good province to live in. That is what I 
believe my job as MLA for Kinistino is – to make a better 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to support the motion in the support of 
the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, we have guests in the 
Legislative Assembly here, guests of the MLA from 
Cumberland. They have come to us from Southend Reindeer. 
There are 11 adult students, along with their instructor, William 
Dumais, who are taking the upgrading class. They have come to 
take a tour of the Assembly and will be meeting the MLA from 
Prince Albert-duck Lake. And I would ask that the members 
join me in welcoming them to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Martineau. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure 
you will know it to be very true, Mr. Speaker, when I tell you 
that I’m very pleased to be here. It’s been a long time – 11 years 
– since a duly-elected Liberal MLA won a place in this 
Assembly. I’m honoured to be fulfilling that role and I trust, 
Mr. Speaker, that I will be able to make a useful contribution. 
 
I want to congratulate you, sir, and your deputy, upon your 
election to your high offices in this House. You are the 
custodians of the democratic traditions of this place, and I know 
all members will want to wish you well. 
  



 
December 15, 1986 

231 
 
 

May I also take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate 
the cabinet upon their various appointments, and all members 
upon their successful elections. This is going to be an 
interesting and, I hope, a productive legislature for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I have the honour, sir, to represent the rural constituency of 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, a constituency with a very proud and 
colourful heritage. It is one of those special few constituencies 
that the so-called political pundits like to watch because it is 
always exciting and the results there can often be a forerunner 
of things to come. 
 
The people of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg take their politics very 
seriously. We are blessed in that constituency with vigorous 
campaigns and with high voter turn-outs. And may I pause here 
for a moment to pay tribute to my two opponents in the last 
campaign, Mr. Engel and Mr. Fancourt. I have been through a 
number of elections. I know what it is to win, and I know what 
it is to lose. And the latter is not very pleasant. I want to 
congratulate both Mr. Fancourt and Mr. Engel for their efforts – 
I have the greatest of respect for both of them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Our contest was a hot and furious one, Mr. 
Speaker, as is usually the case in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. But it 
was also clean and honourable, which I’m proud to report is 
also the usual case in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 
I want to thank the people of my constituency for the 
confidence which they have placed in me. With every ounce of 
energy that I can muster, Mr. Speaker, I commit myself to 
pursuing the goals and objectives of the people of 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg – what they believe to be important. 
Having been associated with that great part of Saskatchewan in 
a very personal way for nearly 20 years now, I have a pretty 
good feeling for what those aspirations are. They include a 
much stronger and more healthy agricultural sector as our 
economic life-blood. They include prosperous, attractive local 
communities offering an appealing quality of life in rural 
Saskatchewan. They include thriving small businesses and new 
economic development opportunities, in addition to agriculture, 
that will provide some decent measure of diversification and 
new meaningful local jobs, especially for young people. 
 
And that is why, Mr. Speaker, the much maligned power plant 
expansion at Coronach is of such great importance. It offers, or 
it could offer, hope and opportunity in an area that desperately 
needs it. I will have some questions for the Premier on this 
subject in due course; suffice it here to say the Coronach area 
has been bitterly disappointed by government decisions not to 
proceed with further development of the SPC project at 
Coronach. They had every right to expect that development, and 
yet they saw it snatched away from them, and they are left to 
suffer the painful, empty consequences without even the 
courtesy of a fair and decent hearing. 
 
And the vote results on the 20th of October, Mr. Speaker, 
reflect the depth of feeling on this subject in the Coronach 
district. When you isolate those polls directly affected,  

both rural and urban, you will find clear evidence of profound 
disenchantment with this Conservative government. Between 
1982 and 1986 the Liberal vote in the Coronach district 
increased by a full 59 per cent, the NDP vote declined 
marginally by 11 per cent, but the Tory vote virtually collapsed 
– 50 per cent of those who voted PC in that district in 1982 did 
not vote PC again in 1986 – a full 50 per cent. Now that is a 
powerful message which I hope the Premier will choose not to 
ignore. 
 
The aspirations of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg also include the 
pursuit of a better standards of public services, like nursing 
homes, services to seniors, hospitals, schools, highways, and so 
forth. 
 
On highways, for example, much of the provincial network in 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is in deplorable condition. It is worse 
than just uncomfortable or inconvenient, Mr. Speaker; it’s 
downright dangerous. It’s a matter of public safety, and I’ll be 
pursuing that subject with the Minister of Highways, the 
member from Melfort. 
 
With respect to hospitals and nursing homes, I’m going to do 
something the Premier says opposition members never do, so 
maybe I’m about to make history, but I do want to thank the 
government for the commitments made this fall to both 
Gravelbourg and Lafleche for the construction of new, 
improved hospital and nursing home facilities. These are 
urgently required in these communities. 
 
I would hope the government might just be able to do a little bit 
better than putting them on the sixth year of a five-year 
construction program, and I will be examining that with the new 
Minister of Health. But for now I simple want the minister and 
his predecessor and the government to know their 
announcements so far for Lafleche and Gravelbourg are 
appreciated, and we do say thank you; both communities are 
looking forward to these new projects with great anticipation. 
 
My comments on this subject, Mr. Speaker, are some indication 
of a very real difference between the two parties represented on 
this side of the House. For my part, I do not intend to adopt an 
approach in this legislature that is incessantly negative. As an 
opposition member I have a duty to scrutinize and to criticize 
what the government is doing, and I will do that job with 
vigour, but always with a larger and constructive objective in 
mind. 
 
I will bear in mind, Mr. Speaker, that no party is always right 
and o party is always wrong. No party has the market cornered 
on virtue. Sitting in this legislature, it is sometimes easy to lose 
sight of that truth. I listen to government members praising 
themselves in the purplest of prose for their wonderful 
achievements as they define them. I would think, Mr. Speaker, 
that every chiropractor and physiotherapist in Saskatchewan 
could be pressed into service putting all their joints back into 
position after all of their self-congratulatory back-patting. 
 
(1515) 
 
To listen to the PC members, there is doubt about it;  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

232 
 
 

they’re perfect, and how could anybody be so stupid as to 
disagree? But then, Mr. Speaker, I think of 40,000 
Saskatchewan people unemployed. I think of food banks. I 
think of those who live in poverty this Christmas with little 
hope for 1987. I think of those on lengthy waiting lists trying to 
get into hospitals and nursing homes. I think of the deprivation 
that is a daily fact of life in northern Saskatchewan. I think of 
farmers in the 1980s, facing the prospect, perhaps, of losing the 
land that their fathers or grandfathers somehow managed to 
hang on to through the 1930s. I think of young people losing 
hope for the kind of education and job opportunities they 
thought Saskatchewan could offer to them. The reality, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, shows this government is, in fact, far less than 
perfect. 
 
And then I listen to members of the NDP opposition. They lost 
the election, but they claim their own version of perfection none 
the less. They make the argument that they are the sole 
spokesmen in Saskatchewan for all human and kindly virtues. 
They are the exclusive custodians of righteousness, according to 
them. 
 
But then I think of the chronic shortage of long-term carte buds 
in nursing homes for Saskatchewan senior citizens, and it began 
when the NDP were in government. I think of cut-backs and 
underfunding in our universities; that, too, began when the NDP 
were in government. I think of deteriorating hospital services, 
understaffing, and long waiting lists. It all began when the NDP 
were in government. I think of the crunch on the family farm; 
that, too, began when the NDP were in government. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, this Progressive Conservative government 
opposite has not solved these problems, but those in the NDP 
who now wax sanctimonious should recall the origin of these 
issues, and a little more humility just might be in order. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the throne speech as a blueprint for 
this legislature’s program. I must say to you that I am 
disappointed in the document. While it does include some 
measures that are worthy of support, on balance it conveys 
more of a sense of drift than a sense of clear purpose and 
direction. After you get past all of the historical references and 
the self-serving back-patting, what are you left with? The 
answer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is: not much. 
 
Before I wade into some discussion of what’s missing and why 
I cannot endorse the throne speech, I would want to note and 
acknowledge those points that I welcome and approve. They 
include the new emphasis on preventative health care; the 
initiatives with respect to alcohol and drug abuse; the references 
to tourism, including a tourism and hospitality institute; some 
new focus on research and possible research institutes 
associated with the grains, biotechnology, potash, and uranium 
industries; and a Saskatchewan entrepreneurial institute. 
 
But beyond these specific measures which are themselves still 
highly theoretical, where’s the substance in the throne speech? 
Whenever the document got close to dealing with something of 
concrete importance, it either threw up its hands in the face of 
international circumstances or it promised some vague process 
of  

ongoing consultations. And that’s just not good enough. 
 
Let’s take agriculture, an industry and a way of life that is 
fundamental to Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, as an example. There 
were lots of words in the throne speech about agriculture, but 
precious little action. 
 
A couple of expected housekeeping measures to extend existing 
programs were re-announced but, beyond that, the only concrete 
item was the encouragement of Saskatchewan manufacturing of 
farm chemicals and fertilizers to reduce farm input costs. And 
last week we learned that the one specific proposal on the table 
in this regard, the ammonia plant connected with the Co-op 
upgrader in Regina, was not in fact going to proceed. That is a 
pretty bad start on a program which is in itself pretty thin and 
vague. 
 
There was no commitment to pursue a new, workable 
international grains agreement with some decent minimum 
world price guarantee. There was no support for tax changes 
that might convert some of the farmers’ current tax deductions 
in to more beneficial tax credits. There was no plan to make 
generic farm chemicals more available in Saskatchewan . There 
was no announcement of any public inquiry or investigation 
into chemical costs. Nor was there any mention of a 
Saskatchewan farm chemical corporation such as Liberals 
proposed during the election – a joint venture between 
government and farmers to establish a farmer-owned and 
farmer-controlled new enterprise in Saskatchewan that would 
assemble the market clout of farmers and break the stranglehold 
of large chemical corporations. 
 
There was no action on farm land taxation; nothing to alleviate 
the burden of farm debt; no bold new steps to ensure stable, 
affordable, long-term farm credit. All of these things, Mr. 
Speaker, were missing from the government’s agricultural 
program. 
 
The second area in the throne speech that is a cause for 
disappointment is the government’s continuing weak-kneed 
approach in federal-provincial relations. They have given no 
indication in this document of any courage or any backbone 
when it comes to dealing with Ottawa. 
 
In November we saw how deeply it cuts when the Premier of 
Saskatchewan contents himself with being a cheer-leader or a 
mouthpiece for Ottawa. I’m referring to the CF-18 affair, the 
federal contract for servicing Canada’s new jet aircraft. A 
decision from Ottawa was supposed to be forthcoming last 
April. But for some mysterious reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it 
was delayed, delayed for seven months while the Mulroney 
government admittedly interfered to skew the bidding process – 
they admitted it. They intervened on purely political bases to 
cause a western bidder from Manitoba to lose so the contract 
could go to central Canada. 
 
Here in the West, Mr. Speaker, we do not have very many 
established industrial enterprises that could even sit down at the 
bidding table and be in the game when big tenders of this kind 
are being decided. But in the case of the CF-18, we not only had 
a western firm that could competitively enter the race, that firm 
was the best in the  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

233 
 
 

country. It bid and it won, only to have the contract snatched 
away by the politics of Brian Mulroney. And to add insult to 
injury, our Premier in Saskatchewan gratuitously entered the 
debate to side with Ottawa and to betray western Canada. 
 
In the November 3rd edition of the Globe and Mail he attacked 
Manitoba and he supported this blatant federal discrimination 
against western Canada. And I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

In a taped statement, Mr. Devine said Ottawa has done 
enough for the West under Prime Minister Brian 
Mulroney and Manitoba should not complain. 

 
And look at what he cited in that article, Mr. Speaker, as 
evidence to support his incredible proposition. The Premier 
mentioned drought relief, flood payments, farm fuel taxes, and 
deficiency payments. And let’s examine each one of those in 
turn. 
 
On drought relief: the 1985 payments to grain producers were 
delayed for many, many months, and then when they finally 
came they amounted to only a minuscule amount per acre. And 
the payments intended for livestock producers never in fact 
were received at all. Instead the money was intercepted and 
absorbed by the provincial treasury. 
 
On flood payments: in 1984-85 the Mulroney government 
slashed the proposed payments in half, providing only 50 per 
cent of the funding for flood relief committed by the previous 
federal government. 
 
On farm fuel taxes: for 18 months the federal PC government 
increased the level of taxation on farm fuels, then made a big 
show of removing some of that taxation only after they had 
already extracted their pound of flesh. And farm groups have 
calculated that indirect taxes on energy and farming still amount 
to some $10,000 per year for the average Saskatchewan farmer. 
 
On deficiency payments: the Premier knows that the major 
impetus which brought forward some announcement by Ottawa 
on this subject was purely and simply the fact than an election 
campaign was under way in the province of Saskatchewan this 
fall. Without that campaign, no federal announcement would 
have seen the light of day. It was obviously tossed together in a 
state of political panic. The details released last week show the 
federal commitment to deficiency payments has been 
substantially watered down – watered down geographically, 
spreading the total figure across the entire country; and watered 
down in terms of timing, spreading the money through two 
governmental fiscal years, thus delaying the benefits coming 
into the hands of farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all those things considered, the Premier might 
want to think twice before he sings the praises of Brian 
Mulroney in Saskatchewan. He might think twice before he 
attempts to defend the indefensible. He might also remember 
that his same Mulroney government is in the process of slashing 
the budget for the federal Department of Agriculture by as 
much as half a billion  

dollars. They’ve cut their funding for farm credit by another 
three to $400 million. They’ve increased a number of federal 
taxes and fees charged to farmers, and they’ve placed most of 
their emphasis on a program designed to encourage farmers to 
quit. 
 
That seems to be to be hardly the kind of evidence that the 
Premier would want to use to defend the federal government’s 
iniquitous CF-18 decision. It would have been more appropriate 
in this throne speech for the Government of Saskatchewan to 
signal a more aggressive and more determined line in future in 
dealing with the Government of Canada. But of course, it 
wasn’t there. 
 
Also missing from the document was any clear strategy for 
Saskatchewan ‘s economic diversification. Oh yes, there was a 
good deal of talk about the need for diversification. There was 
even an admission on the part of the government that they had 
not been successful in achieving that objective. But other than 
the continued plundering of the provincial treasury, there was 
no game plan for how to alter this sad historical Saskatchewan 
deficiency. 
 
In the Liberal Party we have offered some useful suggestions 
which the government might want to take up, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but it didn’t. To use just one example, I would refer to 
our ideas for the creation of Saskatchewan capital investment 
bonds. This would be the creation of a new financial instrument 
in this province to generate new revenue from new sources for 
new economic development purposes, something more creative 
than just raising taxes or running a deficit. I won’t belabour the 
details of that ideas at this point. I’ve discussed the ideas at 
length on many other occasions. I simply mention the idea 
today as one example of an imaginative new approach that 
might be taken to tackle the challenges of diversification in 
Saskatchewan. But imagination and creativity are not apparent 
characteristics of this particular throne speech. 
 
Also missing from this document, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was any 
substantial mention of issues of particular concern to 
Saskatchewan women. Since the Premier is just freshly back 
from the recent first ministers’ conference in Vancouver where 
these issues figured rather prominently in the discussions, I’d 
have thought that this throne speech might at least refer to some 
agenda in this regard, but it didn’t. No reference to child care, 
no reference to affirmative action, no reference to employment 
equity; nothing meaningful at all. Not even a statement of 
principle, and that is another case of blatant omission. 
 
Before I conclude my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I want to touch 
briefly on two themes that figured prominently in the election 
campaign because of the type of campaign conducted by 
Saskatchewan Liberals. One of those themes is the need for 
fiscal responsibility in this legislature, the crying need to put the 
financial house of Saskatchewan back into some semblance of 
proper order. And the other theme is political integrity, cleaning 
up the processes by which government works in our province. I 
won’t belabour these points today, but they are of vital 
importance, and we know a large percentage of Saskatchewan 
people agreed with the Liberal  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

234 
 
 

campaign on these two central concerns. You can see that in the 
doubling of our popular vote and by the fact that we now have 
an elected voice in this House. 
 
(1530) 
 
Furthermore, the opinion polls taken during the election showed 
a full 75 per cent of Saskatchewan people were cheering us on 
during the campaign and wanted us to do well. Our issues of 
fiscal responsibility and political integrity moved way up in the 
public’s ranking of important concerns. We must have had 
considerable impact when you consider that this throne speech 
indicates the PC government is acknowledging now, for the 
first time in four and one-half years, that these issues have to 
receive some attention. 
 
What kind of attention remains to be seen, but at least the issues 
are now on the table. At least there is some reference to higher 
ethical standards in public life. At least there is some expression 
of concern about this government’s $2 billion deficit and the 
fact that Saskatchewan’s credit rating has been devalued on 
three consecutive occasions in the past 18 months. That sorry 
state of affairs cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan $300 per 
minute in interest charges alone, and the international bond 
rating agencies have forecast that debt services charges against 
Saskatchewan could increase by 97 per cent in the next two 
years. That, Mr. Speaker, is very serious. It indicates that our 
province is in a very precarious financial position. The 
government blames all of this difficulty on international 
circumstances beyond its control. That convenient 
rationalization is only partly correct. It is not by any means a 
total explanation. For example, it does not account for this 
government’s blatant penchant for outrageous mismanagement 
or its misplaced priorities or its wasteful extravagance upon its 
own self-indulgence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as this legislature unfolds, I will continue to 
highlight these concerns and I will present some ideas for how 
they ought to be addressed. If we fail to come to grips with this 
set of issues, we will burden our province with four critical 
costs: a higher tax burden right now; deferred future taxes for 
our children to pay; rising dead-loss interest charges, and 
perhaps more important, a severe cost in terms of lost 
opportunities. We should remember that every dollar that we 
allow to be frittered away through bad management, or 
mistaken priorities, or sheer waste is a dollar that won’t be 
available for the things that really matter in Saskatchewan life. 
 
With respect to political integrity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I’ve 
already indicated in this House in question period, I will be 
pressing the government to move in three areas beyond the 
vague but welcome comments, is so far as they go, contained in 
the throne speech. 
 
I will call upon the government to curtail the tool of patronage. 
A start can be made in this direction by rendering important 
government appointments subject to a public review process to 
put patronage under a microscope and expose it to the light of 
day. 
 
I will call for a properly defined and properly pursued tendering 
process for the distribution of all government  

contracts – a process that would be open and competitive and 
accountable and fair. And I will call for a drastic reduction in 
the blatant abuse of taxpayers’ money for political advertising 
at public expense. 
 
In this legislature, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we should dedicate 
ourselves to the principle that low standards do not have to be 
accepted as inevitable in Saskatchewan. The abusive practices 
of government can be cleaned up. The steps which I have 
mentioned would move us in that direction. They would not 
only make government in this province more honourable and 
more respectable, they would also save many millions of 
precious tax dollars every year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I come to this legislature as a new member 
determined to try to make a positive contribution. As I begin 
this new job I recall with pride those former MLAs from my 
area who have previously represented the Liberal Party in this 
Assembly in the recent past: from the Gravelbourg district I 
think of the Hon. Mr. Culliton and of Lionel Coderre; from 
Assiniboia-Bengough, as it used to be called, I think of Sam 
Asbell and Alex Mitchell; from Notukeu-Willowbunch I think 
of Karl Klein and Jim Hooker, and from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg I think of Mr. Roy Nelson. I will 
endeavour to maintain their high standards. 
 
I will also endeavour, Mr. Speaker, to maintain the tradition and 
the heritage of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party. Our party was 
the first political movement to be organized in Saskatchewan. 
Indeed, our founding convention was held in 1905, just a short 
time before Saskatchewan itself became a province. This makes 
the Liberal Party Saskatchewan’s most senior political 
institution. 
 
Throughout the years, Mr. Speaker, our party has in fact won 
more elections, elected more members, and formed the 
Government of Saskatchewan more often and for longer than 
any of our competition. We have played a vital role in building 
our province, and we are grateful for the opportunity to take a 
hand in shaping Saskatchewan’s future. 
 
As I resume my seat, Mr. Speaker, I want to close by thanking 
all members of the Assembly for the warm way in which they 
have received me into this House. I also want to thank some of 
the so-called old-timers around this place who have been 
helpful and courteous in helping me to get started in my new 
responsibilities on behalf of the people of 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — It gives me great pleasure to join in 
the throne speech debate today on behalf of my constituents in 
Saskatoon Mayfair. Before I being, I would like to congratulate 
the new Speaker through you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the fact 
that you have been selected to hold this office. Although each 
brought his own style and personality to this office, the fairness 
and impartiality of the position has remained constant, and I am 
confident that you and the Speaker will continue this tradition, 
making our legislature a place that all members can  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

235 
 
 

respect. 
 
I also wish to congratulate my colleague from Saskatoon 
Eastview and Pelly for the excellent jobs that they did in 
moving and seconding the Speech from the Throne. 
 
As well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to congratulate all 
new members of the legislature on both sides of the House. 
 
It is indeed a special honour to address this Assembly for the 
first time, and I want to thank the electorate of Saskatoon 
Mayfair for providing me with the opportunity to do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like at this time to share a bit of 
information with you about my constituency. Saskatoon 
Mayfair is the largest riding in the province, with approximately 
22,000 voters. Small business, manufacturing, and agriculture 
play significant roles in the economy of the area. As a result of 
our government’s initiatives within the small-business sector, 
tremendous growth has occurred during the past five years. The 
employment opportunities provided have benefitted not only 
my constituency but all of Saskatoon and, indeed, the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Since over 60 per cent of the total manufacturing for 
Saskatchewan takes place in Saskatoon, and much in Saskatoon 
Mayfair, it is obvious that my area contributes significantly to 
the overall provincial economy. 
 
Last week’s announcement with regard to the deficiency 
payment is good news to the farmers living in my area. During 
the campaign many farmers expressed to me their concerns 
about declining farm income and indicated their appreciation 
for the positive steps taken by this government to protect the 
family farm. 
 
The same feeling was also expressed to me by the business 
people in Saskatoon Mayfair. They understand that for every 
dollar the Saskatchewan farmer receives, it translates into three 
for the Saskatchewan business community. On behalf of my 
constituency, I am proud to say that this announcement 
re-confirms our Premier’s ongoing commitment to agriculture 
and the priority it holds with this government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, my constituency has more small 
businesses, over 1,300 in total, than any other riding in the 
province. Small business has been the major generator of 
employment over the last decade. Our government recognized 
this important role by creating a small business interest 
reduction program. This program protects the livelihood of over 
380 businesses in my constituency alone. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a large number of seniors living 
in Saskatoon Mayfair, some of the pioneers who helped develop 
this great province of ours. Many times they have told me how 
happy they are with the initiatives taken by this government on 
their behalf to ensure that they can live in comfort. They list the 
heritage program, the increase in income supplement, seniors’ 
information bureau, chiropody program, home care programs, 
seniors’ home repair program, just to mention a few. Our  

government applauds these individuals of courage and 
conviction and promises to always stand by them and continue 
the tradition of making Saskatchewan a place to be proud of. 
 
As well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government has contributed 
to those at the other end of the spectrum, our children and 
youth. It’s a well-known fact that education is one of the 
corner-stones of this government. In Saskatoon Mayfair, 
construction of several new schools has taken place: St. Peter’s 
Catholic School, Sister O’Brien Catholic School, Brownell 
Public, Silverwood Public, Marion Graham Collegiate, and 
Bishop Mahoney High School. New schools are also under 
construction in Dundonald and Silverwood. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this is certainly in keeping with our commitment to 
education. 
 
At this time I would like to recognize the contribution of the 
previous member for Saskatoon Mayfair. His commitment and 
dedication to the betterment of the constituency made many of 
these projects possible. 
 
The residents of Saskatoon Mayfair have been well represented 
in the past and have received many benefits from this 
government. To these same people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say 
thank you. It is my intention to communicate with them and to 
listen to their concerns and suggestions and work hard on their 
behalf. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I now want to spend a few minutes talking 
about Saskatoon, one of the fastest-growing cities in Canada, 
and list some of the many benefits it has received during our 
government’s first term in office. To start with, funding for the 
new multi-purpose arena, a project that’s creating over 200 new 
jobs and a centre for cultural and recreational excellence; over 
$200 million on hospital construction for St. Paul’s and 
University hospitals; construction of anew City Hospital to 
begin in 1987-88; our five-year special care home program is 
setting new records of construction with 433 new beds in 
Saskatoon alone. The Parkridge Centre, a 240-bed complex, is 
the largest in Saskatchewan history and will be opening in the 
spring of 1987. A new $78 million, world-class college of 
Agriculture building at the University of Saskatchewan, total 
value around $12 million; a new science research unit at the 
college of Medicine; refurbishment of the Western 
Development Museum; support to the expansion of 
Intercontinental Packers, Saskatoon’s largest private employer; 
$42 million worth of school construction and renovations; over 
10,000 Saskatoon families were protected by the mortgage 
interest reduction program; 1,500 increased day-care spaces 
since 1982, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Over 1,200 new jobs have 
been created through the employment development program of 
Social Services. 
 
What did the previous administration ever do in 11 years to get 
people off welfare? From November ’81 to November ’86, 
there are 15,000 more people working in Saskatoon. To date, 
over 18,000 Saskatoon residents have been able to renovate 
their homes as a result of the Saskatchewan home program – a 
boon to the building supply industry and to the trades and jobs, 
Mr. Deputy  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

236 
 
 

Speaker – many, many jobs. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatoon is an exciting and vibrant city 
which enjoys strong economic growth. In an across-Canada 
survey last year, Saskatoon’s economic rating rose from 16th to 
eighth. Saskatoon has also been noted as one of Canada’s most 
picturesque cities. The Meewasin Valley Authority has 
contributed significantly to its beautification. The Meewasin 
Valley trail and park are only two of the projects completed to 
date in the restoration of the river banks. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government has made a major 
commitment to the citizens of Saskatoon and all Saskatchewan 
residents. My commitment is to continue this tradition of 
co-operation to ensure that Saskatonians receive maximum 
benefit from government programs, whether they be to assist 
with the development of new services, creation of jobs, or 
further protection for families. 
 
And now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to take some time to 
bring the legislature up to date on the progress and the future 
direction of the Department of Science and Technology, for 
which I am responsible. 
 
In the overall strategy presented in the throne speech, Science 
and Technology forms only one segment, but a crucial one, as 
new technologies will open the door to the future. The member 
for Saskatoon Centre may not agree with me. She says we don’t 
need the high-tech industry; it’s a waste of money. But I don’t 
agree, Mr. Speaker. There’s a growing need today as never 
before, and I’m sure that the majority of the people in 
Saskatoon Centre would agree with me as well. 
 
In mid-1983 a long-term science and technology strategy was 
announced by our Premier. It recognized that the formation, 
foundation of economic and industrial development in 
Saskatchewan would depend on how well the province could 
develop, transfer, and utilize technology. 
 
(1545) 
 
On January 1, 1984, the Department of Science and Technology 
was established, and it began working to maximize the benefits 
of advanced technology for the people of Saskatchewan; 
because this strategy continues to generate social and economic 
benefits, our government will continue to back its commitment. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition made mention of cutbacks or 
closures in the high-tech industry – says we need to spend more 
money in manufacturing. He neglected to say anything about 
the industry’s growth in number of businesses, revenue, or 
employment. I’m sure that the hon. member opposite 
understands the nature of this industry, the fact that there are 
many risks involved in the innovation of new technology. Both 
domestic and international markets and the life span of a 
product are uncertain. 
 
And with regard to spending more money in manufacturing, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the high-tech field, from November ’84 
to November ’86, 71 firms have  

received commitments of assistance from my department 
totalling nearly $5 million. Now this may be insignificant in 
itself, but if one considers the amount of federal research and 
development moneys that are triggered by this support, it is 
fairly significant. 
 
The Hon. Leader of the Opposition also says that there hasn’t 
been any expansion in manufacturing since 1982 – fewer jobs. 
Well let me say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that since 1982 the 
number of advanced technology firms has quadrupled in this 
province, and the number employed has doubled. And if present 
trends continue, another 50 firms will be established in 
Saskatchewan during the year 1986 –87. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — As a result, Saskatchewan is 
currently ranked in the top three provinces in Canada in 
advanced technology sales and is in a position to attain national 
leadership in biotechnology, agricultural, value-added products, 
and communication. The opening of international borders, 
improved transportation and communication have all signalled a 
rapidly changing market-place. 
 
This new world economy based on information and knowledge 
suggests we must improve our competitiveness in order to 
provide future opportunities for our people. This is going to 
mean changing the way in which we educate our youth. We’ll 
have to upgrade the training of our work-force in universities 
and technical institutes. That is another reason why our 
government has placed a high priority on education. 
 
As the international market-place rushes toward the 21st 
century, Saskatchewan is ready. A new era of technology is 
already established, led by new tech companies with head 
offices in Saskatoon, encouraged by the establishment of 
facilities such as the Saskatchewan Advanced Technology 
Training Centre at Kelsey Institute. On the university campus 
SED Systems is participating in a new manufacturing research 
and development complex at Innovation Place which represents 
the single largest and most diversified technical research centre 
in western Canada. Now I might add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
that facility will be opening officially in the latter part of 
February or early March with something in the neighbourhood 
of 325 to 350 employees being housed in that one building. 
 
The Saskatchewan Research Council’s Innovation technology 
transfer program has met with great success. Many smaller 
manufacturers operating in rural and urban locations, as a result 
of this program, have been able to develop new products for 
farm implements. 
 
We’ve also seen accomplishments in the area of advanced 
instrumentation, remote sensing, and robotics. Our province has 
come a long way since 1982, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have 
significantly expanded Saskatchewan’s economic base through 
the Saskatchewan Builds program. And now the Saskatchewan 
builds program will provide the means to do even more. 
  



 
December 15, 1986 

237 
 
 

During the election campaign the Premier announced intentions 
to spend an additional $50 million on programs to help small 
business equip themselves with new technology. This is a 
further example of our government’s foresight and ingenuity in 
understanding the relationship between new technologies and 
the business sector. This initiative will have long-term results 
for the people of Saskatchewan. Areas needing government 
support have been and are being identified and programs 
developed. And these programs will reflect the needs and 
expectations of Saskatchewan manufacturers, the research 
community, and the business support sectors. We feel that these 
initiatives build on the solid record of achievement in our 
advanced technology sector and our government commitment to 
build for the future by diversifying the economy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, because we are a government with 
leadership founded on the principles of individual initiative and 
moral responsibility, I believe it is time we exploded some of 
the myths the members opposite espouse. They like to proclaim 
to anyone who will listen that they are the party of the little guy. 
They constantly argue that only they can protect people. They 
think they have a monopoly when it comes to caring. 
 
Well in truth it is the Progressive Conservative government that 
is the party of the individual in Saskatchewan. It was our 
government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which removed the tax on 
gasoline. It was our government which fought to save the farms 
of thousands of Saskatchewan farmers. It was our government 
that introduced the farm purchase program which resulted in 
over 5,000 young farmers starting up or expanding their 
operations. And it’s been our Premier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
who has led the charge to get additional federal support for our 
farmers in time of need. Last week’s announcement is just 
another example of that. 
 
These are only a few ways in which our leadership and policies 
have helped Saskatchewan people. Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
1982 the people of this province, in their infinite wisdom, saw 
fit to elect a PC government, a government which is a builder 
and not a buyer. On October 20th the Saskatchewan people 
renewed this mandate. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am very pleased with the throne speech. 
Opposition members claim the throne speech only talks about 
the past. Well I say to them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that our 
government is proud of its past achievements and even prouder 
of what it will accomplish in the future. 
 
If the members opposite would have read the throne speech 
with an open mind they would have noticed initiatives such as 
legislation to organize urban development corporations to 
mobilize local initiative and capital; $50 million to assist small 
business to equip itself with new technology; a tourism and 
hospitality institute; expanding tourism opportunities; venture 
capital program for labour unions; equal access to credit for 
women and small business; enhanced Indian economic 
development programs; a new department of human resources, 
labour and employment to ensure the  

interests and needs of people are foremost; the establishment of 
Saskatchewan entrepreneurial institute and the expansion of the 
youth entrepreneurial program, giving young people the 
opportunity to obtain the expertise and business experience. 
 
Changes to the elementary and high school curriculum with 
special emphasis on reading, communication, mathematical 
skills and computer technology. 
 
Extension of The Farm Land Security Act. Payment to the 
production loan program will be extended for one year. A 
review of the tax structure for the oil and gas, potash and 
uranium industries. Removal of unnecessary regulations 
affecting small business and the public. And legislation to 
guarantee nine and three-quarter per cent mortgages for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Under the leadership of our Premier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
people have developed a sense of pride and optimism in our 
province. This sense of pride and optimism was expressed all 
across Saskatchewan during Heritage Year, and all across 
Canada and the world at Expo ’86. We know that people from 
one end of Saskatchewan to the other believe that we can be 
first class and hold our own with the rest of the world. Until 
1982 Saskatchewan was the world’s best kept secret. This was 
unfortunate because we have so much we can be proud of in 
this province. 
 
In closing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say that I’m confident 
that the measures introduced in this throne speech will 
strengthen our faith in the leadership of our Premier and this 
government – a leadership based on pride and optimism; a 
leadership of which we can all be proud because it recognizes 
the importance of individual people throughout all parts of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting the motion to adopt 
the throne speech. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today to deliver 
my first speech to this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, please convey my 
personal congratulations to the Speaker and to yourself for 
being elected to this position. Your position is a role that must 
be performed in a patient, fair, and above all, firm manner. Mr. 
Speaker, please accept my best wishes in the fulfilment of your 
duties to the legislature of Saskatchewan. 
 
I congratulate each and every member here, most especially the 
members newly elected and sworn in to serve as legislators of 
this Assembly. I know all members of this legislature will agree 
that it is an honour to be given the responsibility to serve the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
For my family and friends, for my constituents in Prince Albert, 
and for me, this is a special occasion. I wish to express my 
heartfelt thanks to the people of Prince Albert constituency who 
have placed their confidence in me. 
  



 
December 15, 1986 

238 
 
 

Through the exercise of their democratic right they have 
appointed me to serve in this legislature on their behalf, and I 
am proud to be here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — In this my first speech, I want to introduce 
you to the constituency I represent. The constituency of Prince 
Albert is located wholly within the city limits of Prince Albert. 
More specifically it is that portion of Prince Albert east of 
Central Avenue and bounded on the east and the south by the 
city limits and on the north by the Saskatchewan River. 
 
Our population is made up of young people, people with 
growing families, and an increasing number of senior citizens. 
We have people of varied ethnic backgrounds. Ours is a 
growing constituency, Mr. Speaker. In the past four years, over 
500 people from 18 countries have immigrated to the Prince 
Albert area, and many of them reside in the constituency of 
Prince Albert. Many people have moved into our city from the 
surrounding rural areas and from the North. 
 
Our citizens, through their elected local officials, have had to 
plan carefully to meet the needs of a growing population and to 
meet the new demands placed on our schools and public 
services. We have had to build a new water treatment plant in 
Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. It cost $6 million — $4 million of 
which had to be borrowed. The city was expecting assistance 
from the provincial government to do this. The city deserves 
assistance from the provincial government for this much needed 
facility. When the city made application for assistance they 
were refused. They were refused, even though the city of 
Regina received assistance for its filtration plant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our residents believe in fair and equitable 
government. They believe the Government of Saskatchewan 
should have a universal strategy to deal fairly with all urban 
centres when it comes to supplying basis needs like good water 
and sanitary sewage treatment. We look to the correction of that 
type of haphazard management during this term of office, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Your government through its last term of 
office reduced the emphasis on revenue sharing with urban 
municipalities. This was not the request of our city. In fact, our 
city needs an increase in revenue sharing. Since 1982 the 
provincial government grant to the city of Prince Albert has had 
an increase of less than 2 per cent per year. Yet at the same time 
the mill rate has increased by seven mills, an increase of 12 per 
cent. If this government had practised sounder fiscal policies, 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Prince Albert and the administration 
would not be faced with such massive mill rate increases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my constituency of Prince Albert, and indeed in 
other urban ridings, by far the most devastating problem 
continues to be the plague of unemployment. During the last 
term of office of your government, the unemployment nearly 
doubled. It was disappointing,  

therefore, Mr. Speaker, to hear that in the throne speech it made 
no commitment to those many unemployed. This government is 
refusing to take responsibility for correcting this malaise of our 
economic system. If there was any single thing, Mr. Speaker, 
that the government and the people of this province wanted this 
government to do, it was to provide the willing and the skilled 
workers of this province the opportunity for good steady jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — In the ‘60s and ‘70s the unemployment was 
of a temporary nature. We are now into a new type of 
unemployment. The permanent shut-down of industrial and 
labour-intensive jobs has resulted in permanent job losses. In 
our province, the operation of existing primary and secondary 
industries requires now fewer and fewer jobs. As a result, we 
were seeing unemployed people using up all of their available 
unemployment insurance benefits with no success in finding 
jobs. We are seeing people forced to apply for social assistance 
just to feed their families and survive. They see no dignity in 
being forced on social assistance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, there are people who have found 
themselves in a cycle – form work to unemployment insurance 
to social assistance to a minimum wage job long enough to 
qualify for unemployment insurance again and then back onto 
social assistance. That is ample testimony, Mr. Speaker, that 
your government’s patchwork substitute for real jobs has failed 
miserably to meet the needs of workers in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are seeing in Saskatchewan a growing number 
of young people who cannot find a first job. We are seeing 
young people pushed through job training programs. They 
complete them successfully and yet are unable to get into the 
job market because there are no jobs there. Mr. Speaker, this 
government should acknowledge the unemployment problem 
and they should be taking active steps to improve it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to address the changing needs in our health 
care system in Prince Albert. Prince Albert is considered one of 
the seven regional health centres of our province. We have two 
hospitals in our city which provide secondary health care but 
there is a growing need for tertiary treatment. Mr. Speaker, 
when an elderly constituent of mine who has had a thorough 
diagnosis and is in constant pain has been told that she must 
wait for over four months to have surgery performed on her hip, 
I think that is too long. I think that’s too long to wait; that’s too 
long to wait in pain, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when your government conducts its review of the 
changing requirements of health services, as you are committed 
to do in the throne speech, I request the expansion of 
specialized hospital care such as orthopaedics be included in 
your plan for Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hospital centres in Saskatoon and Regina are 
overloaded. We have an increasing number of seniors who need 
hospital care now and in the immediate future. Every year the 
list grows longer and longer. Without a  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

239 
 
 

commitment from this government to diversify health treatment 
facilities in this province so some of the specialized procedures 
can be done in regional centres like Prince Albert, the waiting 
list will continue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Pineland Home Care Centre was incorporated 
in Prince Albert in 1981. Every year since then this organization 
has faced a demand for ever increasing service. The growth rate 
for services delivered in the budget last year was 21 per cent. 
Your government’s financial assistance has not met that need. 
As a result the levels of service had to be reduced. I would 
sooner, Mr. Speaker, that you would reduce the cost of your 
bloated Executive Council to save money than to reduce the 
level of home care available to my constituents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — We are all aware of the need for a 
comprehensive health care system which includes hospitals, 
clinics, nursing homes, home care, dental services and the like, 
all with trained professional and support personnel. Of 
particular interest to me, Mr. Speaker, is the co-operative health 
clinic in Prince Albert and its satellite clinic in Canwood. It is 
of interest to me because I feel it could well serve as a model of 
health care delivery. When you compare the total per-patient 
medical costs provincially with those at the clinic, the clinic 
comes out ahead. This co-operative health clinic saves our 
province $200 per patient per year, while providing excellent 
health care. 
 
That $200 annual per-patient saving is worth a close look by the 
Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker. It is accomplished by 
providing more facilities in the clinic and thus sending fewer 
patients into hospitals. It is a type of health care delivery that is 
efficient and cost effective. But more important, Mr. Speaker, it 
is responsive and caring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Prince Albert, like others throughout 
the province, are proud of the school system they have 
developed. Year after year, school boards, administrators, and 
teachers, have learned how to meet the needs of more and more 
children. 
 
One of the greatest challenges is to provide meaningful 
experiences for children from homes living at below the poverty 
level. With the commitment of the school board and the 
government in 1980, the community school program was 
launched. We have four designated community schools in 
Prince Albert. There are six in Saskatoon and eight in Regina. I 
consider the community school program to be a major 
breakthrough in the education of the last decade. These schools 
have helped elementary students stay in school and succeed, 
where the traditional system was unable to. School staffs and 
parents are enthusiastic about our community schools. 
 
I believe there is a need to extend the concept of this program in 
Saskatchewan, yet I am told that the government has cut the 
position of a community school advocate at the provincial level 
and has not increased the funding for community schools. I 
believe that to be a mistake, Mr. Speaker, and I bring it to the 
attention of the hon. minister in hopes that he will take action. 

The second big success story in education of the past decade 
has been the expansion of our community college program. For 
people in my constituency – the Prince Albert community – the 
Prince Albert community college has provided a variety of 
services including community interest classes, adult upgrading. 
It is serving as a delivery agent of university classes. It is a very 
flexible system, responding remarkably well to community 
needs, and we are proud of that system. 
 
It is through the community college that residents of Prince 
Albert are now able to take up to two years of university 
classes. Our city and surrounding district would welcome a 
commitment from your government to establish a permanent 
university centre in Prince Albert. We are a city of 34,000 
people, and the nearest degree-granting university is at 
Saskatoon. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, because of the underfunding of our 
universities by this government, university tuition has become 
prohibitive. To add to the costs of tuition and books, students 
from Prince Albert and other small centres must consider board 
and room if they move to Saskatoon and Regina. These 
additional costs make it impossible for many potential students 
to enrol at one of the campuses. 
 
So if this government would commit itself to opening a 
permanent university centre in Prince Albert, many more 
students could afford post-secondary education. 
 
This fall the Northern Institute of Technology was opened in 
Prince Albert. Work started on the institute in 1981 when the 
architectural consortium of Moore Tomporowski and Taylor 
were hired to draw up the plans. There are over 500 students 
enrolled in the institute today. The people of Prince Albert are 
pleased that the plans for the Northern Institute of Technology 
were honoured and expanded and were not ravaged the way the 
development of communities in northern Saskatchewan were 
when you came to office in 1982. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a financing squeeze is facing the rural school 
districts in this province. A few years ago the Conservative 
government decided to cancel the home owners’ grant. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, that grant was an incentive for many rural 
taxpayers to pay their taxes early. Now, because the home 
owners’ grant is gone, and because the Department of 
Education does not make early pay-outs to rural school districts, 
these districts are forced to carry extended lines of credit in 
their banks. The interest charges on those lines of credit could 
otherwise be spent on better educational services for our 
children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You have been petitioned by rural school districts to advance 
school funding earlier. You have been petitioned by the home 
owners of Saskatchewan to reintroduce the home owner grant. 
The fact that you have done neither shows that this government 
is not responsive to rural Saskatchewan education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, in 1980 the Government  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

240 
 
 

of Saskatchewan committed itself to a major review on the 
directions of education in Saskatchewan schools. Extensive 
series of consultations were arranged province wide. Thousands 
of hours were spent in compiling community views regarding 
the direction our educational system should go. 
 
When your government took over in 1982, the process was 
midstream. The then minister of Education, showing foresight, 
committed her department to continue the job. A Directions 
report was produced. It contained a goal statement and an 
implementation plan – a blueprint for education of our children 
in Saskatchewan, a blueprint which resulted from six years of 
consultations with parents, students, and educators. 
 
I mention this, Mr. Speaker, because the throne speech makes 
no reference to carrying out this innovative plan. In fact, what 
the throne speech does say is the curriculum will be reviewed, 
that the K to 12 curriculum will concentrate on the acquisition 
of basic reading, communication, and mathematical skills. This 
statement in the throne speech concerns me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It concerns me because it refers only to one small aspect of this 
very comprehensive report. It concerns me that the government 
may have decided to abandon the thrust of the Directions 
report. We do not need to regress to the 16th century to 
rediscover the three R’s. The three R’s have been discovered, 
affirmed, and rediscovered over and over again. 
 
This blueprint Directions recognizes their importance and 
builds extensively upon it. This Directions report deals with the 
education of our children for the year 2000. In order for our 
children to survive and lead productive lives in the 21st century 
we must be forward thinking, Mr. Speaker. I strongly urge the 
Minister of Education to follow through on the Directions 
blueprint and the processes that it has initiated. 
 
I conclude my remarks then, Mr. Speaker, today by wishing 
you, wishing the members of this Assembly, and the people of 
Saskatchewan, a happy Christmas and a joyous New Year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is certainly very much my pleasure today to enter into the 
debate on the first session of the 21st Legislature. And firstly, 
Mr. Speaker, allow me to join with my other colleagues in 
congratulating you on your election to Speaker and, as well, to 
the Deputy Speaker on your election. It is with a great deal of 
respect and a great deal of regard that I do offer you my 
support, and I want to wish you both very, very well in your 
new duties and your new responsibilities. 
 
I would also at this time like to congratulate all members of the 
legislature on their election or re-election, whichever the case 
may be, and I’m certain for the new members that they will find 
their time in the legislature here most rewarding. I would 
further like to extend my congratulations to the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview and as well the member from Pelly on their 
very good  

reply on the address to the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the constituents of Melfort, I want to express 
my deepest appreciation for the support, the confidence, and the 
trust that they have placed in me in re-electing me for the 
second term as the MLA for the Melfort constituency. 
 
My re-election, of course, brings with it a great deal of 
responsibility and a responsibility not only to the people of my 
constituency but, I believe, a responsibility to the entire 
populace of this great province of ours. And very humbly, Mr. 
Speaker, I accept those responsibilities, and I pledge a 
continuation of service to the people of this province . . . a 
continuation of service to the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by serving the people in a manner which you 
listen to them, you act on their concerns and make yourself 
available to these people who have needs from our government, 
we will do very, very well, Mr. Speaker. No doubt, Mr. 
Speaker, the Melfort constituents, like the constituents 
throughout Saskatchewan, understood that it is this government 
that has, over time, kept very, very close to the people . It is this 
government, Mr. Speaker, that understands the plight of the 
Saskatchewan farmer, and it is this government, Mr. Speaker, 
that has come through with programs to assist our agricultural 
industry. Mr. Speaker, our government recognized the need for 
lower interest rates for our home owners. We listened and we 
responded and quire frankly, Mr. Speaker, that is why we were 
re-elected. 
 
(1615) 
 
My first term as MLA for the Melfort constituency was a very 
rewarding one, and I have been rewarded, Mr. Speaker, many 
times by constituents for simply doing my job. A solitary 
farmer who comes up and says thank you, thank you for the 
help that has been given to farmers, whether it’s through 
drought assistance, whether it’s through a deficiency payment, 
whether it’s through a low-interest loan. Those types of thank 
you’s, Mr. Speaker, make my job most satisfying. 
 
I feel a great deal of satisfaction when I know that our Premier 
has effectively responded to farm issues with other innovative 
approaches. And I speak of the $200 million agricultural 
development fund. I speak of The Farm land Security Act 
which provides relief to farmers who are facing foreclosure; the 
drought assistance program; the production loan program; the 
deficiency payment; and on and on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could talk at great length. I could talk at great 
length about the programs and the policies that this government 
has enacted over the last four or five years, but I don’t think it’s 
necessary, Mr. Speaker. I think that the representation in this 
Legislative Assembly really speaks for itself. I believe that the 
farmers of Saskatchewan have accepted our programs and our 
policies with a great deal of respect, Mr. Speaker. And once 
again I feel that the representations that we have here in the 
legislature from virtually every rural constituency in this 
province, with the exception of two, really speak for 
themselves. 
  



 
December 15, 1986 

241 
 
 

This legislature, Mr. Speaker, will be reintroducing The Farm 
Land Security Act and The Farmers’ Counselling and 
Assistance Act, and a few other pieces of legislation that are 
really needed today, Mr. Speaker. And it’s with a great deal of 
pride that I sit here and watch those legislative proceedings go 
through first reading, second reading, and on down the line, Mr. 
Speaker. And I know that these programs will be accepted, not 
only by the people in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but all 
the people in this great province of ours. 
 
I am reminded, Mr. Speaker, every time I drive to Regina and I 
pass the junction right at Dafoe, Saskatchewan that leads down 
to the town of Wynyard – and there at that junction is a great 
big bulletin board. And I see that every time I go to Regina and 
every time I come back from Regina. And that bulletin board 
has a big slogan on it, and it says – and it’s by one of those 
chemical companies – its says, Farming Feeds Us All. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is just positive reinforcement for the 
programs and the policies and the thoughts and the wishes and 
the desires of this government. When I read that sign and I stop 
and think, what does it really mean? Well, Mr. Speaker, it 
means exactly what it says. Farming does feed us all in this 
province, and I believe that the people in urban centres realize 
that. I know that every dollar that a farmer gets is taken and it’s 
spent. It’s not spent on the farm – he’s got no place to go on the 
farm to spend his money – he comes to town, and there is what 
we call in economics a multiplier effect. And when a farmer has 
a dollar, I think in the vast majority of cases he spends virtually 
all of it and sometimes a little more. So, Mr. Speaker, the 
programs and policies that we have had with respect to 
agriculture have impacted not only on rural Saskatchewan but 
on urban Saskatchewan as well. I think the people of the 
province have accepted those programs and policies and are 
very pleased with what we have done. 
 
I’d like to update you a little bit, Mr. Speaker, on some of the 
goals and some of the objectives we have as a government as it 
respects agriculture. I think any person who has conducted any 
amount of business in his life knows that you have to have 
certain goals and you have to have certain objectives. One 
specific one that I would like to touch on a little bit, that I think 
is of significance to all people in Saskatchewan, is the goal for 
the production of farm chemicals. 
 
The Premier has stated on a number of occasions – it’s been 
stated by members of this government – that by, I believe 1991 
or thereabouts, our goal is to have approximately 50 per cent of 
the farm chemicals that are used in Saskatchewan actually 
produced right here in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here is a prime example, a prime example of our 
government’s policy to build Saskatchewan, to diversify 
Saskatchewan, to provide jobs, to provide opportunities for 
people right here in our province. For too long, Mr. Speaker, 
that diversification has taken place in eastern Canada. We’ve 
paid the freight on products both ways, and the jobs have been 
primarily in eastern Canada. Here, when we reach this goal of 
producing half of the farms chemicals in our province —has 
such  

profound impact on the whole economy – Mr, Speaker, it’s 
really quite a thing when you stop and think about the impact 
that it has. And here, Mr. Speaker, is where we are attempting 
to tie the great strength that we have in agriculture with the 
opportunities and jobs that may present themselves to the 
people in the cities. And, Mr. Speaker, as I said before, the 
people in both urban and rural Saskatchewan, I think, believe in 
what we are trying to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are just a few of the initiatives that have 
been started by our government, and I know in the long run they 
are going to pay off very, very handsomely. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as far as business goes, I have chatted with a large 
number of business people during the election campaign, of 
course, and prior to that, and certainly following the election, 
and I can say, Mr. Speaker, unequivocally, that the business 
people in Saskatchewan are pleased with the record of our 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a great . . . a great feeling for the people in 
small business. They are indeed one of the backbones of our 
province. I believe that they provide the gas and the oil that 
fuels this economy of ours. Small-business people have 
benefitted under our government’s direction from low interest 
loans; from industrial incentive plans; from venture capital 
programs. And these types of programs are encouraging 
businesses to go out and expand and encourage investment. 
And when you have businesses expanding, when you have 
businesses investing, you’re going to create jobs and you’re 
going to create opportunities. 
 
One of the main planks in the campaign, one of the main issues 
in the election of October 1986, was jobs, and it was 
opportunities. Well, Mr. Speaker, our programs with respect to 
small business have been doing exactly that. We have been 
trying to provide jobs and provide opportunities for people in 
this province, and I believe that the endorsation . . . the 
endorsation that we have had by the small-business community 
of this province is proof positive that those programs are 
working. 
 
Too many times, Mr. Speaker, we hear the opposition talk about 
the PCs and their affiliation with big business. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I think you could go around this province of ours and 
you could talk to virtually every small-business man in the 
province. I wouldn’t want to guess what the percentage would 
be that would be happy and very pleased with our programs, but 
I would suspect it would be very, very high, Mr. Speaker. I 
would suspect that the support that the NPD has for small 
business would be very, very minimal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit about a leadership role 
that our government has taken, and it is the program that we call 
Buy Saskatchewan. I would like to cite a very specific example 
and an example that I am very, very proud of – an example that 
this government is very, very proud of – that is a prime example 
of how we are providing more opportunities and more jobs, not 
for big businesses but for the small businesses throughout this 
province. The example is – and it’s one of many. It’s one of 
many. The example is the Saskatchewan Power Corporation 
and its record of purchases from small  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

242 
 
 

businesses in this province. 
 
I understand, Mr. Speaker, that prior to 1981 – and I would 
remind the members opposite that that was when the New 
Democratic Party was in power – prior to 1981 less than 50 per 
cent of the goods and services that were bought by Sask Power 
were bought outside the province, in eastern Canada or in 
Manitoba, or I’m not sure, maybe even in the United States – 
but less than half. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since this government has come to power, today 
the Saskatchewan Power Corporation buys in excess of 75 per 
cent of its goods and services from Saskatchewan people. Mr. 
Speaker, this is the program we call Buy Saskatchewan. I find it 
very, very strange when just the other day members of the NDP 
party attacked my colleague, the minister in charge of SaskTel, 
for some small, relatively insignificant purchase that had to be 
made, that had to be made for good reason outside of the 
province. So, Mr. Speaker, this is a prime example. 
 
This is a prime example, Mr. Speaker, and I want the public of 
Saskatchewan to know. I want them to realize exactly how the 
members opposite take things out of context. They twist them, 
they take a small example from a single point in time and they 
don’t tell the public of the overall programs. They don’t tell the 
whole picture. They cited a specific small example of some 
$50,000 worth of telephone equipment that, by no fault of ours, 
had to be bought outside the province. But they failed to talk 
about the overall policy of buy Saskatchewan that we have. 
They failed to point out that prior, in their term of office, half of 
the goods were bought outside the province. In our term of 
office more than 75 per cent are bought from Saskatchewan 
people, providing jobs and opportunities for people right within 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to turn to the Department of Highways. And I can quote 
more examples. I’m extremely proud of the record that we have 
in the Department of Highways with respect to the Buy 
Saskatchewan program. I can tell you that since 1984 more than 
$1.5 million worth of maintenance equipment that was 
previously bought outside of the province, $1.5 million worth of 
maintenance equipment that was bought in Manitoba, or in 
Ontario, or in Quebec, is now being purchased right there in 
Saskatchewan. We are actively pursuing the manufacture of 
other products that we are using in the department. 
 
I can tell you that some examples are rotary grass mowers and 
hydro drums that are used for both summer and winter 
maintenance are items that we are attempting to have 
manufactured in Saskatchewan. I can give you a list of quite a 
few that we are manufacturing in Saskatchewan right now today 
that, prior to our term of government, were being purchased 
outside the province. 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, you may have had the opportunity 
to read the Leader-Post just a few weeks ago. There was a very 
nice story in there, Mr. Speaker, and I think a lot of people 
probably read the news article, but it’s a firm right here in 
Regina – right here in Regina. It is a subsidiary of Degelman 
Industries Ltd., a place called Hylar Precision Machine. And 
that manufacturing plant, Mr. Speaker, has already sold, I 
believe it’s 10 or more highway speed snow-ploughs. 

They manufactured them right in here in Saskatchewan, 
provided jobs for people in Saskatchewan. Prior to our 
government, Mr. Speaker, we were buying those snow-ploughs 
outside the province. And that is just a single example. 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, I can tell the members of the 
opposition, and I can tell the people of Saskatchewan that 
today, in my department, the Department of Highways and 
Transportation, we are purchasing goods and services, 
manufactured items in places . . . They are being manufactured 
in places like Archerwill, Saskatchewan, in the good north-east; 
places like Swift Current, Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, Regina, and 
Yorkton. 
 
I can say, Mr. Speaker, that this Buy Saskatchewan policy is 
helping those companies produce for our department things like 
snow-ploughs, sweeper brooms, truck boxes, chemical 
spreaders, equipment trailers, road compactors, and the list 
could go on and on. Mr. Speaker, I am very proud of this 
government’s initiatives to Buy Saskatchewan. 
 
The members opposite can say, oh, if we were in power, if we 
were in power we’d be buying this and we’d be buying that. 
And I remember, one of the new members just the other day, 
Mr. Speaker, was in here and he was listening to one of the 
members of the NDP talk about some particular subject. This 
was a new member. He had not even probably been in the 
legislature more than a day or two. And he heard members of 
the NDP saying, well, if we were there we’d be doing this or 
we’d be doing that. He very innocently asked me – he said, well 
that’s so strange; those people had 11 years in a row to do those 
types of things, and why didn’t they? 
 
There’s so many of those examples, Mr. Speaker, where the 
NDP stand up and say: well, if we were there, we would do this; 
or, if we were there, we would do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is that hypocritical, sanctimonious attitude, 
taken by many members on the opposite side, that has caused 
them to lose their credibility – caused them to lose their 
credibility, Mr. Speaker, because they had their turn; they had 
their day. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they were not concerned about buying in 
Saskatchewan. They did not have the record of buying in 
Saskatchewan that this government has, and it is one that I am 
very, very proud of. It fits in so well with our theme of build 
Saskatchewan, diversify Saskatchewan, and provide jobs and 
provide opportunities for the people in this province. And it’s a 
program, Mr. Speaker, that we have met with great success in, 
and I am certainly very, very proud of our Buy Saskatchewan 
policies, and especially with those two departments, being the 
departments of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and the 
Department of Highways and Transportation. 
 
I could give you a dissertation on the other departments, the 
other Crown corporations that are buying Saskatchewan, but I 
think those two examples – I think these two examples – should 
serve as proof positive that our program, Buy Saskatchewan, is 
genuine, it’s working, and it is providing jobs, and it is 
providing opportunities. 
  



 
December 15, 1986 

243 
 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, there are many, many 
other examples of economic activity that are taking place in our 
province that I think at least bear mention. And they all fit in 
with our program to build and diversify Saskatchewan. We 
could talk about the Weyerhaeuser purchase of the Prince 
Albert pulp mill. And I want to make it perfectly clear . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . yes, I would be very happy to talk 
about that particular project. 
 
(1630) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I‘ll quickly just run through a few, and then 
we’ll have some comments that the hon. members on the other 
side may be particularly interested in. And I will talk about the 
diversification and the building of this province as it respects 
the Weyerhaeuser corporation and the new paper plant there 
that’s going to create more than 250 jobs. I will talk about the 
Gainers plant in North Battleford, an expansion there that’s 
going to create more than 200 jobs. I will talk about the Phillips 
Cable plant in Moose Jaw that’s going to create some $7 
million in investment, create 40 news jobs. I will talk about the 
expansion of Intercontinental Packers in Saskatoon that’s going 
to create at least 70 jobs, and I’ll talk about a large number of 
other projects. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the point that I want to make – the point that 
I want to make, Mr. Speaker, from the snickers opposite, from 
the comments opposite, that there is no question, there is no 
doubt that the members of the New Democratic Party are 
absolutely in total against these projects. And let me make that 
perfectly clear. 
 
Here is the distinction, Mr. Speaker, that the members of the 
New Democratic Party are against the Weyerhaeuser 
corporation’s investment in the paper plant. They are against 
expansions in the meat processing industry. They are against 
the manufacturing of cable right here in Moose Jaw, 
Saskatchewan. They are against the manufacture of 
snow-ploughs and hydro drums and maintenance equipment. 
They are against virtually everything that stands for creation of 
economic activity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know why. I don’t know why, Mr. 
Speaker, when the number one issue, the number one issue in 
the election of October 1986, was jobs. 
 
And I talked to many, many constituents and they agreed – yes, 
you know we would like to have more jobs in Saskatchewan. 
And, Mr. Speaker, in just a matter of moments after I chatted 
with these people and listed some of these things that we were 
doing, they say, you know, you’re on the money. You know, 
Mr. Speaker, those constituents said, yes sir, we want 
Weyerhaeuser corporation and we want Intercontinental 
Packers and investments in Phillips Cable, and on and on down 
the line. 
 
I will say little more about that, Mr. Speaker, other than to 
re-emphasize the point. And I want the public of Saskatchewan 
to know and I think they really should know, Mr. Speaker, that 
there is a big difference between the New Democratic Party, 
what they stand for, and what the Progressive Conservative 
government stands for. You  

men and women on the opposite side of the House are against 
these projects. You are in turn, and when you are – and let me 
remind you – when you are against Weyerhaeuser and all these 
other projects, you are against jobs and opportunities. And for 
the life of me, Mr. Speaker, I can’t understand why. I can’t 
understand why. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ‘d like to talk a little bit about another program, 
another program that the NDP are against, and it is the 
mortgage rate interest reduction program and the home 
improvement program that have been initiated by our 
government. Mr. Speaker, those programs are working so well 
that we are literally flooded with thousands of applications. And 
in turn, with the thousands of applications for home 
renovations, goes thousands and thousands of jobs. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that program was well accepted by the people of 
Saskatchewan. It was well accepted. 
 
I had the opportunity on the weekend to be visiting some of my 
constituents. Some of them are in the plumbing business. Some 
of them are in lumber. Some of them are in the electrical 
contracting business. And, Mr. Speaker, I heard stories of 
people who said, you know, I had to add two people to my staff. 
And these are small businesses, Mr. Speaker. I had to add two 
or I had to add three people to my staff. Mr. Speaker, that is an 
excellent program. 
 
The NDP opposition will stand up and say, well you took the 
home owners grant away. Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
compare those two programs. I’d like to compare it. There was 
the program, the home owner’s, that you sent in your 
application and you got $200 back. But, Mr. Speaker, there was 
no direction for that money. That money could have been spent 
on frivolous items. I don’t think that money actually created any 
jobs. 
 
Here is a program where not 230 or $300, but a program of 
$1,500 that is going directly into the expansion of jobs for 
Saskatchewan people. And who would argue with that, Mr. 
Speaker? I don’t think there are very many others than the 
members of the New Democratic Party. 
 
The New Democratic Party, they had an announced program of, 
I think it was $7,000 or something, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, you’re right. I don’t know how that 
program actually was to have taken effect. But, Mr. Speaker, I 
can tell you that it was not accepted by the people of 
Saskatchewan on October 20th. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, saw through that 
program. A program that’s saying, here’s $7,000 free. We 
didn’t know who qualified – whether only 7 per cent of the 
people would qualify or if you had to live beside a 7 Eleven 
Store to maybe get it, or just what the details were. It wasn’t 
announced by the members of the New Democratic Party. And I 
ask, why wasn’t it announced, Mr. Speaker? It wasn’t 
announced because they were afraid to reveal the details of it. 
The people on October 20th saw through that program, Mr. 
Speaker, and they elected a government that had given to the 
people a responsible program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s nice to say, here $7,000 free. But I ask you, 
what is more responsible – giving someone $7,000  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

244 
 
 

free or perhaps giving someone $1,500 providing it is matched? 
 
And the leader of the Liberal Party is one who has paid a lot of 
lip service to being fiscally responsible. Mr. Speaker, I think 
that program is very fiscally responsible. Not just free. Here’s 
$7,000 if you happen to qualify in this narrow range. But here’s 
$1,500 as long as you put up another $1,500. It’s a program, 
Mr. Speaker. That has been well accepted and I am proud, Mr. 
Speaker, to stand on the government side of the House that has 
programs such as that. 
 
Another program that’s very similar in vein is, of course, the 
mortgage interest rate reduction program, that for the next 10 
years young families throughout this whole province will never 
had to go to bed at night worrying about the excessive interest 
rates that were there in the years 1979 and 1980. For 10 years, 
Mr. Speaker . . . and I want the public of Saskatchewan to hear 
this as well as the members of the New Democratic Party, 
because it is a point that bears re-emphasizing. For the next 10 
years, Mr. Speaker, no family in the province of Saskatchewan 
will have to go to bed at night wondering if the interest rates 
will jump up to 17 or 18 or 19 per cent because they will be 
protected to 9.75 per cent for 10 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP, the New Democratic Party in the months 
prior to the election came out with a program saying, and I 
forget . . . it was 7 per cent or something, for seven years, for 7 
per cent of the people. Mr. Speaker, the general public of the 
province of Saskatchewan saw through that. And do you know 
why they saw through it, Mr. Speaker? Because in the years 
1979, 1980, when interest rates were 17, 18 and 19 per cent, 
was there any help there, Mr. Speaker? Was there a bit? No, 
there wasn’t. There was not one iota of help for those families 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the general public in Saskatchewan on 
October 20th saw through the members of the New Democratic 
Party who said, okay, we’ll jump on the band wagon now and 
we’ll give you 7 per cent interest. But they never said who 
they’d give it to. The people had confidence in the Progressive 
Conservative members, Mr. Speaker. The people’s confidence 
showed up in the re-election of this government and it is a 
government that I am very, very proud to be associated with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit 
about senior citizens – senior citizens, Mr. Speaker – and I have 
a good number of them in my constituency. We have a good 
number of level 1, level 2, level 3 and level 4 homes. Mr. 
Speaker, I take a great delight in chatting with those pioneers. 
 
As a matter of fact last night, Mr. Speaker, I rode in here from 
Melfort on the bus and I had a constituent of mine who is 83 
years of age – 83 years of age. And we had a delightful visit on 
that . . . It was a four-hour bus ride. It was a little longer than I 
wanted but we had a delightful visit – a man who is 83 years of 
age; very, very independent yet; and just a model senior citizen. 

Mr. Speaker, I asked that senior citizen . . . He was not an 
overly political person at all. As a matter of fact I don’t even 
know how the man voted. But I said to him – his name is Jim – 
I said, Jim, what do you really think, what do you really think 
of the last four years? Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you one thing. 
That senior citizen who was on a limited income appreciated 
very much the $500 senior citizens’ heritage grant program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I met many seniors throughout the campaign. I 
remember meeting an elderly lady on the street. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What was her name? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Her name was Elsie Gustafson. And as 
a matter of fact, as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I went up to 
shake her hand. She didn’t know who I was, Mr. Speaker. She 
says, I don’t know which party you’re with, but if you are with 
the party that provided the heritage grant program, she says, and 
Grant Devine, she says, I am with you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, those pioneers, those 
senior citizens went through some very, very difficult times. 
But, Mr. Speaker, the point to remember, they never gave up. I 
don’t think they whined and they cried as some across the floor 
continually do. But, Mr. Speaker, they never gave up. They had 
that moral fibre, Mr. Speaker, that is so essential. And, Mr. 
Speaker, their expressions of hope and determination are very, 
very evident when they tell me about stories about their 
grandsons or granddaughters who are attending university 
because they can get a low-interest loan from the Government 
of Saskatchewan at 6 per cent. And, Mr. Speaker, here again in 
the days when interest rates were 18, 19, and 20 per cent, was 
there any help for students at low interest rates? No, there 
wasn’t, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I again want to emphasize that there is a real 
difference. There really is, Mr. Speaker. Our government has 
paid attention to the protection of the real families; the 
protection of senior citizens with a heritage program; the 
protection of students who want to attend university and have a 
low-interest loan; the protection of the farmers who wan t a . . . 
who were given a 6 per cent operating loan, and close to a 
billion dollars was handed out, Mr. Speaker, that’s an awful lot 
of money. Close to a billion dollars handed out to farmers at 6 
per cent interest. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think when I . . . I’d like to just revert back 
a little bit to the farm program, and I’d like to talk about the 
billion dollar deficiency program. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
remember being in a debate in the middle of the election, and I 
talked about the billion dollars that would be coming to 
Canadian farmers, and there was a large number of NDP in the 
audience, I’ll admit. And, Mr. Speaker, there was some 
scepticism. There was members of the New Democratic Party 
that said, oh, you’ll never get that money. And that rumour 
filtered throughout in an awful lot of places. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, did the farmers believe it? They believed 
Premier Grant Devine. They had confidence in  
  



 
December 15, 1986 

245 
 
 

Premier Grant Devine and they had confidence in the 
Progressive Conservative Party to get the job done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think 
anybody ever said that it was enough money. I know that the 
farmers of Saskatchewan could use more. But there is one 
fundamental question that we ask, and this question has to be 
addressed. If it was not for Premier Grant Devine, would that 
billion dollars have come? If Allan Blakeney, or any of the 
other leadership contenders now, if any of the . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
I am sorry, Mr. Speaker. I realize that we are not to use 
individual’s names. I will certainly apologize for that. I am 
sorry, Mr. Speaker. If the member from Elphinstone or if the 
member from Saskatoon Riversdale or if the member from 
Regina North East were leaders of this province, Mr. Speaker – 
if they were premier, could they have gotten a billion dollars? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to get very serious about this. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, I think the general public knows that not a single 
nickel would have come had it not been for Grant Devine. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like turn now to a little 
bit of information in my own department, some very, very 
serious information. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I would firstly like to 
compliment the people that work with me in the Department of 
Highways. I can say, Mr. Speaker, that the people in the 
Department of Highways – any success that I have had as 
minister – any success that I have, I want to share that success 
with the people, the very, very professional people in the 
Department of Highways, and they do deserve an awful lot of 
credit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to list a few of the accomplishments . . . 
and there’s one thing, Mr. Speaker, that this government has 
been genuinely concerned about, and that is the safety of the 
travelling public. And it’s a very serious matter, Mr. Speaker. 
I’d like to talk a little bit about some of the programs and some 
of the policies implemented by this government, and we look at 
the Lights On For Life program; the school bus – safety arm on 
school buses; numerous small scale improvements. And there’s 
literally hundreds of small scale improvement that we have 
made: putting up a flashing light here; putting up an extra stop 
sign there; putting in a better guard-rail along a bridge or along 
a curve, and there’s hundreds of those types of examples. 
 
(1645) 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the real proof is in what were the results. I 
would like to quote to you, Mr. Speaker, how these programs 
and policies have been working to save lives and to reduce 
injuries here in the province of  

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, there has been a significant decline 
of major accident categories in the past four years, and this is 
even though the number of drivers, the numbers of vehicles, 
and the distance travelled has increased significantly. For 
example, Mr. Speaker, the number of deaths have declined from 
262 in 1981 to 214 in 1985, which is an 18 per cent decrease. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that there’s nothing more important 
about my job than safety. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — And, Mr. Speaker, I’m not about to say 
that the members of the New Democratic Party are not for 
safety; I’m sure they are. They are just as good a citizen that 
way as we are. But, Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize once 
again a reduction in deaths of about 18 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other accomplishments have of course been in the 
regulatory reform that we have had in the Department of 
Highways with respect to the trucking industry. I have come to 
the office of Minister of Highways and Transportation at 
probably one of the most exciting times in the history of our 
province when it comes to regulatory reform. 
 
You will know, Mr. Speaker, that presently before the federal 
parliament are reforms that are lessening the regulation, 
lessening the burden on the small businesses, especially as they 
relate to trucking and air and other transportation sectors. I can 
say, Mr. Speaker, that these regulatory reforms that we in the 
province of Saskatchewan have made are going to decrease the 
costs for shippers. And in turn, Mr. Speaker, there will be more 
competition. And it is something . . . Competition, Mr. Speaker, 
is something that a Progressive Conservative government 
believes in. 
 
I don’t know what the position of the members of the New 
Democratic party is when it comes to competition, but I can tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, that our government is for competition. 
Competition is good, Mr. Speaker, and with these regulatory 
reforms we will reduce the costs to shippers, and this will have 
significant impacts on especially the agricultural sector. Mr. 
Speaker, I have in my office an awful lot of correspondence 
from shippers throughout the province, and especially those in 
the agricultural implement business who are very, very pleased 
with the reforms that this government has taken as it respects 
regulatory reform in the trucking industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other accomplishments in the 
Department of Highways with which I would like to touch 
upon. I can tell you that tourism in general is something that our 
government has been very, very strongly supporting and 
encouraging. I would like to announce to you that a major 
tourist route which is called the Can-Am route – it runs from 
the Mexican border all the way up to Lac La Ronge – has been 
put in place. And I am very proud of a fellow from my home 
town, Mr. Speaker – his name is Mr. Bob Twanow and he is the 
Can-Am route’s very first president. And, Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to take this opportunity to congratulate Mr. Twanow on his 
election to the Can-Am International Highway Association. 
  



 
December 15, 1986 

246 
 
 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, here is another step that is encouraging 
tourism. And it is something that they tell us . . . The experts 
say that by the year 2000 or so it may well be the number one 
industry in North America. Well, Mr. Speaker, our government 
has been actively engaged in promoting tourism. And we look 
at the throne speech and the announcement of a tourism 
institute. Mr. Speaker, nothing could be more on the money. 
Nothing could be more in step with today’s needs, wishes and 
desires than that. Mr. Speaker, I know that when the year 2000 
comes that Saskatchewan will be in the forefront as it respects 
tourism. Mr. Speaker, it will be in large part due to the efforts 
of this administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do have a great sense of pride when I know that 
this government’s efforts have reached the people in my own 
constituency. And I know, Mr. Speaker, as any politician who is 
worth his salt does, that it is the people of your own 
constituency that you have to keep close to. Those are the 
people who elect you; those are the people who put the bread 
and butter on the politician’s plate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll speak of some of the programs that have 
affected directly the people in my constituency. One I am 
particularly pleased about is the new Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan. Mr. Speaker, here is a program that impacts on farmers, 
on small-business employers and employees, on the 
home-makers. These are a large number of people. Mr. Speaker, 
never before in the history of this province had there been a 
pension plan for those groups in society. And the question bears 
asking: why not? The question bears asking: were members of 
the New Democratic Party during their terms, their number of 
terms, were they really concerned about the real families? Were 
they really concerned about protection of these individuals? 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think not. I think not. 
 
I can remember, Mr. Speaker, sitting in front of the television 
set and seeing reams and rolls of films and footage that had the 
family of Crown corporations. Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m certainly 
proud of the Crown corporations that we have. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m an awful lot more proud of the real families in 
Saskatchewan. I’m an awful lot more inclined, Mr. Speaker, to 
protect the real families in Saskatchewan, and the Saskatchewan 
Pension Plan is a program that does exactly that. No longer, Mr. 
Speaker, will there be any need for any person to retire below 
the poverty line. Mr. Speaker, I believe that the results of the 
October 20th election are proof positive again that the public in 
this province of ours were pleased, were happy with a 
government that cared, a truly compassionate government that 
cared and provided pensions for all. And, Mr. Speaker, once 
again I’m very pleased to be part of that government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, my Melfort constituents 
have gone through some hard times just like the rest of 
Saskatchewan, the rest of Canada, and the rest of the world. 
But, Mr. Speaker, it has been this government that has 
responded to their concerns. Mr. Speaker, that is why we are 
here. Mr. Speaker, that is why I stand before you and the public 
of Saskatchewan today in this forum. 

Mr. Speaker, we are not here to buy farm land; we are not here 
to build empires; we are not here to build bureaucracies, and we 
are not here to set up state controls. We are here, Mr. Speaker, 
for a second term because as a government I believe that we 
understand the concerns and, indeed, the very nature of our 
people. The fact that this government has had the compassion to 
listen to the everyday individual, if you like, and respond to 
their concerns is a situation that again makes me extremely 
proud. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan on October 20th voted for more of 
the same. Mr. Speaker, they gave us another mandate and they 
said, keep up the good work, Mr. Speaker. I realize, Mr. 
Speaker, that we may have had our trials and our tribulations in 
the first few months and perhaps the first few years of office 
but, Mr. Speaker, being in government is much similar to an 
individual starting out in the work place, and there is no 
substitute for experience, Mr. Speaker. Experience as long as 
you learn from mistakes, as long as you can judge the situations 
as they come up and respond to the needs of the people as they 
want. Mr. Speaker, I believe that our government has done 
exactly that. I believe that our government in their second term, 
Mr. Speaker, will gain even more of the confidence and gain 
even more, the trust of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk for just a few minutes about our 
Premier. Mr. Speaker, we talk about a man with vision. Mr. 
Speaker, I sometimes get influenced fairly easily. But, Mr. 
Speaker, there is no person that I know who has had a more 
profound impression upon me or made a bigger impact on me 
than our Premier. 
 
Our Premier is truly a man of vision. Mr. Speaker, he has led 
the Progressive Conservative Party to a second term in office. 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that he has done an exceptional job 
of leading the Progressive Conservative team to power and to 
victory in not easy times. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would tend to think in the good old days, as 
some people call them, of the 1970s, and there were some good 
some years there, but I would tend to think, Mr. Speaker, that 
those times were relatively easy times for politicians. And I say, 
Mr. Speaker, when we have a man like our Premier who can 
lead us through these difficult times, Mr. Speaker, he bears the 
backing of an awful lot of people. 
 
I sat here with a great deal of pride, Mr. Speaker, and listened to 
the Premier give his reply to the Speech from the Throne just 
the other day. It was a tremendous speech, Mr. Speaker. As a 
matter of fact, it was so good I’m going to have a video tape 
take of it, a recording taken of it, and I know that the seniors in 
my constituency who do not have cable television, I know that 
they will want to listen to that speech because it was a good 
one, Mr. Speaker. And I believe that if every person in the 
province of Saskatchewan could have heard that speech alone, it 
would have reinforced and reaffirmed their position curing the 
1986 election, and they would have known beyond a question 
of a doubt that they made a good decision. 
  



 
December 15, 1986 

247 
 
 

Mr. Speaker. This government truly cares about the family 
farm. This government truly cares about the family business 
and the families throughout this province. And, Mr. Speaker, 
the general public in Saskatchewan, with the co-operation of 
their government, I believe are finding a better way to live. Mr. 
Speaker, this latest Speech from the Throne once again 
demonstrates that this government will continue to emphasize 
the importance of listening to, responding to, and protecting the 
people who elected them. 
 
It is with that thought in mind, Mr. Speaker, that I fully endorse 
the attitudes and initiatives outlined in this government’s throne 
speech. And I want to say that I, myself, have a renewed 
confidence and faith in Premier Grant Devine and our 
government. 
 
Without question, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the Speech 
from the Throne. And without doubt, Mr. Speaker, I will not be 
supporting the amendment. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, being very near to 5 o’clock, I would beg 
leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


	ORAL QUESTIONS
	INTRODUCTION OF BILLS
	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS

