


















































June 2, 1986 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 2, 1986 
 
 

1623 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Education 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 8 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have just a 
few questions this evening. I know that there was some discussion 
earlier about the education development fund. I just wanted to 
know, Madam Minister — and I made a note of it and I wondered 
whether I had made the correct note — you said you had 45 
projects approved under the education development fund. Was 
that last year — I guess it would be — or is it this year? Give me 
the total number of projects approved. 
 
And if you would, while you're consulting with your officials, can 
you undertake to give me a list of the projects that have been 
approved, so that I can have them. I don't need you to give them to 
me orally right now, but if you can hand them over some time, I 
would appreciate that. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The number 45 that I had given you this 
afternoon had to do with projects that were geared to the drop-out 
factor. Out of the total EDF (educational development fund), it 
was 714 projects. And yes, I will send you a list of those projects. I 
don't have it here tonight, but we'll get it for you. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. I wrote you a letter on February 
18th, in which I essentially asked those questions. I asked how 
many proposals were approved in 1985. Was that the 714? 1985? 
Okay. And then I asked for a list of the projects approved and their 
location, and I was hoping you might have them here as a result of 
the letter. But then maybe your staff hasn't forwarded it to you. If 
you would check that, I would appreciate it. 
 
Another question: what criteria, Madam Minister . . . I'll just wait. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I'm not sure what letter you are referring to, 
that you sent. It is my understanding that we in fact did send some 
information to you, arising out of the '85 budget. the projects to 
date, totalling 714, is up until March 12th of 1986. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. Well please check in your 
office because I do not have a reply. But if you undertake to give 
me that information, that would be just great. 
 
Madam Minister, what criteria are applied in approving the 
projects? What kind of criteria do you apply? I know it's not meant 
to fund continuing or existing projects. That's been said by 
yourself and by some of your officials. Can I ask: what are the 
criteria that are applied? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the fund is broken down into 
three categories, those being: learning resources; efficiency grants; 
and the education  

improvement initiatives. It is under the last category that there is a 
set criteria — approximately six of them: implementing school 
effectiveness, development and further strengthening of basic 
skills, the preparation for life under such things as consumer 
education and career counselling, workplace readiness — those 
types of things would fall under that category; also the drop-out 
prevention and attendance improvement, gifted education 
programs, and community responsiveness are the six points of 
criteria under the EDF. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Would the payment of salaries of school 
librarians or librarian assistants qualify for funding under the 
education development fund? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — There is no reason why it couldn't. I am 
aware of a couple of divisions that in fact are paying a salary to a 
person to co-ordinate various aspects over the five years of the 
EDF. What we have done is ask boards to keep in mind and to 
work into their plan — if, in fact, they are hiring people on it — 
what you do at the end of the five years, because it is a five-year 
fund. And we haven't dealt with it any longer than the five years to 
this point in time. 
 
So they could conceivably hire a library person. I'm aware of some 
that, for instance, have a program co-ordinator that they are doing 
through the education development fund. There are others that 
have hired a gifted education consultant. But all of those are on the 
understanding that at the end of the five years they must show how 
they are going to fit into their overall system, or delete the 
position. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I assume, Madam Minister, you have 
assured yourself that no education development fund money is 
being used in some school divisions to make up for the shortage of 
funds because of lack of operating grants and lack of other 
revenues to pay for regular operating costs. Can you assure me 
that that is not happening? Have you taken steps to make sure that 
it's not happening? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all I have a fair 
amount of faith in the honesty of people. And being that the 
process we went through in setting up the EDF was one of in fact 
consulting with boards and directors before the finalization of the 
program took place, leads me to believe that that in fact is not 
happening. 
 
I don't see a need for it. When I look at the grants over the last 
couple of years, they have in fact been meeting the needs of school 
boards. Granted, we are always going to have some where 
regardless of whether the operating grant is at 5 per cent or 10 per 
cent, due to things like reassessment or assessment, or declining 
enrolment, they will have less operating grant than what they 
might have had the year before. But no, I don't see school boards 
using this fund to pick up their ongoing operating costs. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, I hope that's the case, Madam 
Minister. Can you tell me: at what level are the decisions on grant 
applications or project applications made? Are they made at the 
regional superintendency level, or do they all come to the 
department centrally, or do they all come  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1624 
 
 

to your office? Where are these decisions made? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The decisions are made at the regional 
director's level, except for a few where there's been a question 
mark as to whether in fact it fits under the criteria or any of the 
three categories that are outlined. And in that particular case it 
comes to a central committee within the department. But by far the 
majority are made at the local level with the regional director. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — When you provide me with the list of 
projects — what I mean by list is the list and what the project was 
for, as you've undertaken to do — can you also break it down by 
some marking system or something, those projects which had to 
come to the central level because there was some uncertainty 
about them? Can you let me know at that time what they were as 
well? I don't need it now but I would appreciate having it. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — We don't keep, first of all, a list of those. 
We get approximately one to two every month, and the regional 
directors, all of them as a group, sit on the central committee and 
deal with the issue. 
 
And then it is up to the individual regional director from that point 
to take it back and deal with it with the local director of education 
and/or the school board. 
 
But we don't keep that central list. 
 
It's been a question of clarification, sometimes, of the criteria. I 
will use the example of alcohol and drug education. Can that in 
fact fit under the criteria? And the question was yes, it could 
through guidance and counselling. But we do not keep a list. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — So you have no way of knowing which 
projects were referred to the department proper, then. Is that what 
you're telling me? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well we have a list of the total number of 
projects that have received approval, but we do not keep a specific 
list for those where there has been a question mark of not fitting 
into the criteria. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Madam Minister, I find that rather 
peculiar. You stand up in the House and you tell me what the 
criteria are. And I think that's quite adequate. 
 
You say that in that criteria all of them don't get processed at the 
regional level, but some are forwarded to a central committee. I 
asked you if you can give me a list of those that are forwarded to a 
central committee. You say no, you don't keep a list. 
 
I really have to question the kind of record keeping you obviously 
must be keeping. I know that you have far, far more efficient 
officials in your department than you're indicating. I know that 
they're good people. I know that they know what's going on. 
 
I'm surprised that you would not be able to provide me with the 
answer, which I think they obviously are giving you, because any 
department of government that has to be publicly responsible to 
the taxpayers' money who cannot provide information as simple as 
what kind of  

applications are made for a program that's sponsored by that 
department, and channelled to a special committee — which is 
quite legitimate I would suspect — if you can't tell me what they 
are, then I say that your program is being mismanaged. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, why can you not provide a list of those 
projects which at the regional level could not be approved, and 
therefore were directed to a central committee, which I didn't 
know existed, but which you have offered up in this House as 
something that does exist? Why is that record not kept? 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, let's be clear what we're 
talking about. We are talking about issues as opposed to the 
individual projects. A question will be raised, for example, within 
the Saskatoon region, if in fact pre-kindergarten children would 
qualify under the EDF. And it is that issue that is then brought 
within discussion, within that particular group of the regional 
directors, within the central committee. I don't find it unusual at all 
not to have a list of those that have come forward when we're 
talking about a dozen to a dozen and a half. I don't find that 
unusual at all. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I don't think any end of questioning 
will get information out of Madam Minister, so I will move on. I 
find it unusual. You initially said projects were referred to the 
central committee; now you're saying it's kind of a check list, that 
some things are clarified. I don't know exactly whether you know 
what's going on, but obviously you're trying to avoid answering 
some of the questions. 
 
So therefore let me get to some very specific questions and see if 
you can be of some assistance to us. I want to ask about the 
Directions program, the Directions report. How much did the 
whole directions project cost the government of Saskatchewan? I 
mean the committee that did the work, the printing that was done 
— how much has that cost the taxpayer up until now? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, as I recall the direction study 
was approximately $350,000 from 1981 when it was put into place 
until . . That includes the curriculum review that took place, and 
then the Directions in 1984. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you very much. Madam Minister, 
$350,000 — that included public meetings; that's all related costs. 
Okay. We will have to cross-check that with the Public Accounts 
over time. 
 
Earlier, one of the members from Saskatoon asked you some 
questions about the core curriculum project that's around. I simply 
want to put on the record a concern which has been expressed to 
me, and I know that it has been also expressed to you from various 
sectors. 
 
It's fair to say that a consultation process is something that's 
necessary and I know that that's taking place. There are some 
people who, I might add, are questioning the process from a lot of 
points of view, including whether adequate information is 
provided beforehand so that  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1625 
 

adequate consideration of the recommendations can be done. 
There are those who have raised that. There are those who have 
indicated that it's essential — I think most people have indicated 
— essential that there be a sufficient period of consultation. 
 
I think I have heard you say, Madam Minister, that no decisions 
on any of these proposals have been made, and I will accept that. 
But I would like to know from you, what is your target date? How 
long are you proposing that these consultations take place before 
you begin to make some final decisions? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, there was a four-month 
public phase in process, which it still is. The phase is there until 
June 20th, at which time there will be a conference on core 
curriculum with invited participants that were at a symposium a 
year ago, plus the list will be expanded, of people to be there. 
 
At the core conference we will be looking at the feedback that has 
come in, the written responses — letters, that type of thing — and 
we will be asking the group to see what is possible and what isn't. 
Over the summer months we will be compiling that and we would 
hope that we would have in place a final decision for November. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — It seems obvious from that, that therefore 
proposals would not be implemented in the '87-88 school year, if 
you're not making decisions until into the year. 
 
Are there any staff that you have employed in the department, 
either on contract or any other way, that are geared to the 
implementation of the core curriculum? Do you have staff that has 
specifically been put into place to deal with the whole matter of 
the core curriculum? If so, how many and what's their function? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, we don't have anyone 
specifically working on what the member from Regina North East 
said, and that is the implementation of core curriculum. We 
haven't accepted, and that's still open for public consultation, so 
there is no one in terms of the implementation of it. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — So therefore are you saying you have taken 
people who in the past had been working in other parts of the 
department, doing other things, and you've put them into the unit 
that's dealing with the core curriculum, handling all the 
consultation, doing all this, or don't you have anybody doing that? 
You must have some people doing that. All I want to know is: 
how many people do you have in your department now doing the 
work that's necessary to do what you're doing with the core 
curriculum proposals? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we have two people 
who have been devoting some time within the policy and planning 
branch. And those two people are also supported by two or three 
other staff persons who have responsibilities in other things other 
than the directions and the public consultation on core and that 
type of thing. So I could say two full time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Two full time with three additional  

so that's about five people. I heard you say. Is that right? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — There's two full time, Mr. Chairman, 
devoting all their time to the curriculum, the studies, and the 
public consultation. From time to time they are supported by other 
staff members who have other responsibilities that they do during 
the day. So there's two full time, and if you wish, two or three 
periodically. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, just a comment on the 
whole core curriculum. One of the concerns which I have had 
personally as a critic for the Department of Education, and I know 
many others have, is the proposal that the format or the amount of 
English language instruction would be reduced very dramatically. 
I hope that during this consultation — and I suspect it will because 
many people have become rather concerned — that during the 
consultation there will be some considerable discussion about that 
proposal and that your assurance that no decisions will be made 
until at least November are of some assistance both to me and I'm 
sure to others who may be interested in the answers that you're 
giving here today. 
 
Of concern also has been the comment that somehow there's going 
to be a brand-new concept and that English will be something that 
teachers will consider in all other subjects as well as the subject of 
English. I object to that because I think teachers, by and large, 
have always considered the question of English, whether they are 
history or social studies teachers or science teachers and so on. 
Any teachers doing their job — and most teachers do — would be 
taking that into consideration. 
 
So the idea that somehow you have to address the whole question 
of English in other subjects is not introducing any major new 
component to the curriculum. Maybe there can be the kind of aide 
and the resources made available that will make it possible to do 
that even better. And whenever we can improve, certainly we 
should be looking at improving. 
 
But to insinuate, as I think the report has done, that English has not 
been taught in other subject areas because somehow teachers have 
ignored the whole question of how good the English is, I think is 
an unfair commentary that has been made through this process. 
And I hope that that will be addressed rather seriously, and I hope 
you will pay particular attention to the concerns that are being 
expressed about the teaching of English and the proposal that it 
should be cut back as a subject, as the core curriculum proposal 
indicates. 
 
Unless you have a comment, I'll proceed to the next question. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member's concern 
is not unlike that of many others, parents included, and I think I 
have consistently stated my concern in a few areas. 
 
I guess the interesting thing out of the entire process is that it has 
in fact been open for people's opinions. And if there's been 
anything good out of the whole process, it has been an increasing 
awareness of what our children are being taught in the school 
system and in fact what  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1626 
 
 

parents ultimately expect out of the public school system. 
 
I have given my assurances publicly, and I will give so again 
tonight to the member from Regina North East, and that is that we 
are serious about this public consultation. And very serious 
consideration will be given to what the people have to say and any 
changes to be made from there on in. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Is this June conference open to the public in 
some form? Are you having delegates? Will you send me an 
invitation? How are you arranging the conference, and who will 
take part in it? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the conference is set up in 
the very usual manner, and the member may very well be familiar 
with it. The Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation will be inviting 
members. The Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, the 
league of educational administrators, the home and school, has 
been asked to send lay people. There will also be representatives 
from business, labour, and industry, through various organizations, 
the University of Saskatchewan, the University of Regina. We 
also have some students coming that were chosen through their 
respective school systems, and the educational council, and of 
course the core curriculum advisory committee. Along with that is 
— the advisory group on secondary language also will have a 
representative in attendance, and of course some of the officials 
from Saskatchewan education. Along with that we have asked for 
parents that are interested in the core curriculum to give 
consideration to attendance, as we have through the home and 
school association. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Just turning 
to some more specific questions. Can you — I assume you have it 
with you because I think you probably anticipated that we would 
be asking — can you provide me with a list of your personal staff, 
their salaries for 1985, and their salaries for 1986? 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Would you like it verbally or would you 
like it sent over? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Madam Minister. We've had 
other ministers who've provided the salaries for 1985. Do your 
officials have that with them? What were these people's salaries in 
1985? And if you don't have a specific salary, can you tell me 
what were the increases of their salary over the past year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well the ones before you, you will see no 
increase. First of all, Mr. Ray Finlay is on a year's leave of absence 
from the school system, and I have had that every year, a teacher 
from my constituency that works with me. And Miss Bonnie 
Staples just started last September, I think it was last — in there 
somewhere. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Are you saying therefore that this was the 
salary for all of these people in 1985, throughout all of 1985? As 
you see there have been no increases. That was my question. Is 
this the salary that these people were paid in 1985 as well as 1986? 
 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Bonnie has moved in classification — took 
over another position in my office, and so her salary was 
increased. Mr. Finlay's does not change and he started in August 
of '85. Does that answer your question? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — That's two people. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — You want the secretarials? It is 4 per cent. 
That's right. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, was that 4 per cent for 
1986 or 4 per cent for 1987? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I don't believe my 
information is complete tonight. It was 4 per cent for two, Clark 
and Saunders, and I do not have the completed information for 
Doris Boyle. So I will have to get that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — That's fair enough. Here's what I would like 
you to provide me. I have here a list of your staff as you have them 
employed at the present time, with their present salaries. I would 
like to know what their salaries were in 1985 — what their salaries 
were in 1985, the amount of any increase in salary during 1985, 
throughout that whole year, and if there has been any increase in 
salary during 1986, and if so, how much? And I'm quite prepared 
to have you provide that to me soon, at another date. But I would 
like to have that information. And if you can give me the 
undertaking to do that, I will proceed to the next item. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I said I would give him that 
information. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Can I 
therefore now ask you the salaries of . . . to provide me; and you 
don't need to do it orally, but you can send them to me. I would 
appreciate having the salaries of — you can send them across —
- of your deputy, your associate deputies, and executive directors, 
and the increases that may have been provided in 1985 and again 
in 1986. And if you are prepared to send that over to me either 
now or tomorrow, that would be quite adequate. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can certainly send 
over the deputy minister's office. I do not have a list of the 
executive directors within the department. Yes, I will. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Will you be sending over that information 
you do have now, with the page? And just a reminder that I'm not 
only asking for the salaries, I'm also asking for what they were in 
'85 and I'm asking for the increases for whatever reasons that may 
have taken place during that period of time. Thank you. 
 
Madam Minister, can you also provide me with, for the last fiscal 
year, an updating of the trips that you have taken as a minister of 
the Crown outside of the province, outside of the country, if any; 
who went with you on your trips, and the purpose of those trips, 
and the costs incurred with those trips. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I would be more than happy 
to send the member the information. I can tell you that he will be 
sorely disappointed if he's looking for a  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1627 
 

long list of out-of-province travel. There was maybe one, maybe 
two during the year, and it would be with the minister of education 
council and will probably show Ottawa or Toronto. But I will send 
it to you. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. You will provide me . . . I 
assume your officials took notes on the list of requests that I made. 
I appreciate that. I really do know that you're not as widely a 
travelled minister as some of your colleagues, Madam Minister. 
But it is a question that I still think I need to ask because there are 
many trips that a number of ministers have taken which for 
obvious reason I think the public has to be somewhat concerned 
about. 
 
But if you will provide me with that information, I am quite 
satisfied that I will be able to take a look at it, and add it to the list 
of all the other trips that other ministers have taken. 
 
I'm quite ready, Mr. Chairman, to proceed on the subvote by 
subvote. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Item 4 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, curriculum development 
with core curriculum proposals and other kinds of work — and 
there's always social studies project which I'm personally quite 
familiar with and did at one time do quite a bit of work in it as a 
class-room teacher — but I notice that there is here a reduction in 
staff and a reduction in total budget. Maybe it has been transferred 
to some other vote. But can you explain to the committee what the 
reduction is here? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, while it shows I believe it's 
about three person-years, there were no programs deleted, and I'm 
well aware of some of the emphasis on curriculum right now. 
However, I would remind the member once again that we are not 
yet into development or implementation of core curriculum. 
Reductions were brought about by reduced expenditures in 
contractual services and travel. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, you'd indicated earlier 
that you're going to make some substantive decisions on core 
curriculum in about November. Are you saying that you're not 
proposing to do anything after that in this fiscal year that we are 
now considering? You have cut back in some services, contractual 
services. I'm sorry, but I don't quite follow your argument here. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, what I'm saying is that 
first of all the decision has not been made on what we are going to 
accept. And when we get to that point, when the decision is made, 
if in fact there are major changes then the department could very 
well have to have a hard look at the expertise level and the staff 
component within the department. But I'm not about to jump in 
until we have finished that phase of consultation and a decision is 
taken as to what is going to be done. 
 
Item 4 agreed to. 
 

Item 5 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Education services. Can you tell what 
reductions here are all about? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The reductions under that category are due 
to, first of all, personnel service reductions. It includes personnel 
changes such as casual. Telephone charge reduction amounted to 
about 10,000; contractual services, reduction of 12,950. And there 
will be a deletion of one person-year when a vacancy comes due. 
 
Item 5 agreed to. 
 
Item 6 agreed to. 
 
Item 7 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, special education needs 
some particular attention, and during our consideration of your 
estimates, you have made reference to it several times. But I notice 
in spite of that there is a fairly substantial reduction. And I'm 
wondering how do you say that you're putting special emphasis on 
special education and at the same time providing less money in 
this budget than you had in last budget. 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the difference in dollars — 
most of it is due to the fact that we have one fewer blind student 
going to Ontario to the school down there. And of course there's 
portion of travel for a blind student to he Ontario residential 
school. The other thing that is not in here this year — last year we 
had budgeted for $30,000 to do some in-service work on gifted 
education, and this year we are doing that through the education 
development fund. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, let me just point out that 
for special education, other expenses, you're spending one-third of 
what you decided to spend on the Reuben Mayes advertising. Now 
I say to you: what kind of priorities are those? If those are 
priorities that deal with the interests of our young children in 
mind, then I say those are the kind of priorities that our 
educational system does not need. 
 
You've got $300,000 to give to your favourite advertising agency 
so that the advertising agency does very well, thank you. You have 
one-third of that for special education for our children — children 
who have unique problems. One would think that that's where any 
sensitive government would be putting more money to meet the 
need. 
 
I say to you that that is not the kind of priorities that our 
educational system needs. When you increase your budget overall 
by over $2 billion . . . And you do it because at the snap of a hand 
and apolitical whim you can find $300,000 — no questions asked 
— to run some television ads, put up some billboards, and to run 
some radio clips. But you don't have the kind of money you ought 
to have to deal with the special needs of the children in our 
schools, who attend our schools, and who  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1628 
 
 

should have some of those special needs addressed. 
 
One has to question those priorities, and I question them. And I do 
it on behalf of those people who are affected by your negligence. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if the member from 
Regina North East, after a period of time as Education minister 
and minister of Finance, has not learned how to read a blue book, 
perhaps it's about time he did. 
 
When he refers to the kinds of money that's being spent on special 
education, he either doesn't know or he has chosen to give another 
figure, and has totally neglected the fact that approximately 
20-million-odd dollars go into operational grants for special 
education students. The subvote that we're dealing with has to do 
with the administration of the department, within the department, 
and those staff people that are assigned to special ed. It isn't the 
total amount. The member knows that. 
 
Item 7 agreed to. 
 
Item 8 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — How many students are enrolled in classes 
in the correspondence school? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The figures that I have are for '85, the 
enrolment figures for the correspondence school. They're not 
completed until the end because you get people coming in mid 
year. There's 2,854 adult students and 4,226 school-aged students, 
for a total of 7,080. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — How many instructors do you have in the 
correspondence school to handle this enrolment of 7,080? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the correspondence school 
employs 35 staff. One is the principal, one assistant principal, 23 
permanent teachers, one temporary teacher, six permanent support 
staff, one temporary accounting clerk, one casual clerk, and one 
temporary research officer. 
 
Item 8 agreed to. 
 
Items 9 and 10 agreed to. 
 
Item 11 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I suspect this is the wrong place to ask the 
question, but you will refer me, I am sure, to where I should ask it. 
Madam Minister, in the official minority language office, do you 
also provide any financial help or consulting help for the teaching 
of other languages, whether it's Ukrainian or German or what not? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, Mr. Chairman, we do not through the 
OMLO (official minority language office). 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Where is this provided? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The issue of other languages is dealt with in 
the curriculum development branch. 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Can I just, with your indulgence, Mr. 
Chairman, ask the minister: how many consultants do you have 
dealing with other languages in the curriculum development 
branch or wherever you put them? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I'm not sure if we're talking person-years or 
people. Two and one-half sounds rather odd if we're talking 
people, but they inform me it's 2.5. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — On the official minority languages, there is 
a rather substantial increase in funding. Is it because of . . . Well 
I'll ask you: what is the new thrust that is going to be happening 
here? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure if I would 
define it as a thrust, but what we've been trying to do is bring 
materials and curriculum — resource materials — up to date by 
offering a greater variety in the second language. And what you 
see before you is an accessing of federal funds that has always 
been there but just hasn't been taken advantage of. And there's 
$539,000 that is totally federal reimbursable for development 
support on the learning resource materials. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, can you tell me, because 
I know that there has been a growth of French instruction 
throughout Saskatchewan, the French language instruction — is it 
the experience that there is a shortage of qualified teachers? 
School boards are looking for teachers, Saskatchewan trained 
teachers, and they are unable to find adequate numbers — is that 
what the experience is? And what do you foresee to be the 
situation in the next two or three years? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, I think it's fair to say that we have a 
shortage in that particular area due to the increase in interest on 
particularly French immersion. And what we did, in December of 
1985, OMLO met with STF, LEADS (locally employed 
administrators, directors and superintendents), SSTA and the two 
universities, along with the Department of Education, to lay out 
some of the problems that boards were facing, and what STF saw 
in the universities as being reasonable and an action plan to 
address the problem. 
 
And there was basically three areas that they saw as being able to 
address right away. One was increased bursary support. The other 
one is increased French teacher bursary support and a bilingual 
expansion at the University of Regina and the University of 
Saskatchewan. And hopefully that will address some of the 
difficulties we're having with it. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I hope it 
leads to some success because with the developments that have 
been taking place, and the enthusiasm that has finally come about, 
I think it would be regrettable if not enough teachers were able to 
be located and could not meet the demand that's out there. Any 
positive efforts that are instituted to try to make sure that there is 
an adequate supply, I know would be welcomed and I would be 
the first to encourage it. 
 
Go ahead, Mr. Chairman. 
 
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1629 
 

Item 11 agreed to. 
 
Items 12 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 16 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, I would be quite satisfied 
if you would just simply provide it to me, through a page, or if you 
don't have it with you then tomorrow, a list of the educational 
agencies, organizations, associations, and institutions that you are 
funding this year, and the amount of the funding that you have 
budgeted for, for each. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I'll send that tomorrow. 
 
Item 16 agreed to. 
 
Vote 8 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Education 

Education Development Fund — Vote 64 
 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 64 agreed to. 
 
(2000) 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Education 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 8 

 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 8 agreed to. 

 
Supplementary Estimates 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Education 

Education Development Fund — Vote 64 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 64 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will keep my 
remarks brief and simply say a thank you to the member from 
Regina North East and to the officials with me tonight. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. May I extend, 
on behalf of myself and my colleagues also, our appreciation to 
the officials in the department who have been here to provide the 
minister with the answers so that we could look into these 
estimates. Certainly I will be looking forward to receiving as 
expeditiously as possible the information which I have sought, and 
I have the assurance from the minister that I will be getting 
quickly. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Highways and Transportation 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 16 
 
Mr. Chairman: — — The next item of business then is the 
estimates for the Department of Highways. Before we begin I 
would ask the minister to please introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
I'll begin first of course by introducing my officials, and then I do 
have several remarks concerning the budget for Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
Seated to my immediate right is Mr. Jack Sutherland, deputy 
minister for Highways and Transportation. On my left is Bill 
McLaren, chairman of the Highway Traffic Board. To the right of 
Mr. Sutherland is Merv Clark, associate deputy minister of 
Highways and Transportation. Directly behind Mr. Sutherland is 
Myron Herasymiuk, executive director of operations. And behind 
Myron and to his immediate right, is Dennis Belliveau, director of 
operations services branch. Directly behind me is Al Schwartz, 
executive director of administration. And in addition, we do have a 
number of officials seated at the back of the Chamber who will be 
assisting us during the review of the estimates. 
 
Before I get into a little preliminary talk on our budget, I would 
like to say that in my short tenure as Minister of Highways over 
the last, less than six months, I have been very privileged to work 
with these gentlemen and the other gentlemen and women in the 
Department of Highways and Transportation. And I do want to 
stand here this evening and publicly say how very, very impressed 
I have been with the professionalism of the staff in Highways and 
Transportation; with the dedication and the sincere efforts that 
they have put forward during my time as minister. And I do want 
to very much compliment these people on the fine work that they 
have done. 
 
At the outset, Mr. Chairman, the estimates that we are considering 
for the department do represent a very substantial investment in 
one of our province's largest public assets. The total investment in 
our provincial highway system is now in excess of $3 billion. And 
I would say that that is a sizeable investment and one that 
members sometimes lose sight of when considering the issues of 
the day. 
 
This particular year's budget represents the government's 
continued emphasis on protecting and maintaining this investment. 
it also represents this government's continued efforts to expand 
and diversify the Saskatchewan economy by providing a safe and 
reliable highway system. This year's total budget is estimated at 
$312.6 million, and nearly 88 per cent of this budget we are 
reviewing represents a direct investment into our highway system. 
And, Mr. Chairman, I believe that that is a noteworthy figure that 
really does deserve recognition. 
 
Mr. Chairman, that concludes my remarks and I do look forward 
to the review of these estimates. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Lusney: — — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr.  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1630 
 
 

Chairman, listening to the minister's opening remarks, I certainly 
wouldn't question the professionalism of the officials that he has 
with him. But I think one would have to question the previous 
minister of Highways and the condition that he kept the highways 
in, and maybe the present Minister of Highways, because I haven't 
seen anything change on the highways. There's just as many 
pot-holes out there as there was before. You go out on the 
highway, and I don't know if this minister drives or flies, but I can 
tell you I drive down those highways and so do a lot of other 
people in this province, and they certainly have been having some 
problems trying to dodge the pot-holes on it. 
 
The former minister used to be called the minister of golf, 18 holes 
to the mile. I don't know what we can call this minister. We're 
going to have to increase that golf course to a little more holes in it 
because it's even worse than it was before. 
 
He says he's going to do a lot of good things in this year and I 
think it remains to be seen. We've heard this story for the last four 
years and now it's going to be going on the fifth, where all the 
good things that were going to happen. We're going to see the 
double laning of all our highways, or at least the major highways 
— the No. 1 and the Yellowhead. We haven't seen that happen 
yet. He was going to get so many highways — not first class, I 
wouldn't say — what this government seems to call world class. 
And God, I hope that world class doesn't mean full of pot-holes on 
it because that's exactly what we've had over four years. 
 
(2015) 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I hope you come up with a new phrase for 
highways, not world class. Let's just get those highways into good 
driving condition and I think the people will be happy about that. 
And forget the world class because that is certainly not what 
they're looking for, or at least what they got they weren't looking 
for. 
 
Mr. Minister, there's a number of questions that I certainly would 
like to ask you. One of those would have to be, Mr. Minister, as I 
mentioned, the state of the highways and what it's really costing 
the taxpayers of this province, the public that uses those highways. 
And if you look at the TRIP (the road information program) 
report, and I'm sure you've looked at that one and so have your 
officials, it indicates just what it is costing each individual in this 
province to drive on the highways in the condition that they're in. 
And just about everybody in this province in the construction 
industry agrees that a little more money should be put into 
highways, and that somehow this government certainly is not 
doing the job that should be done concerning our roads. 
 
Mr. Minister, they indicate that it's costing each individual about 
$119 a year more to drive on the highways since you've been in 
government — $119 a year. when you add that up with the total 
population that uses the roads, we're looking at something like $74 
million each year that it's costing the public of Saskatchewan to 
drive on your roads. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, this is something the public certainly 

 isn't used to, and something that the public won't accept. You've 
gotten rid of all the highway equipment. You said you were going 
to give it to the private sector and those roads were going to be in 
the best shape ever. Mr. Minister, I wouldn't have minded you 
getting rid of the highway equipment if you would have kept the 
roads in the condition that you said they would be in, regardless of 
who you use to keep them in that condition. 
 
And the minister from Moosomin says, who cares? Well, Mr. 
Minister, let me tell you, that member from Moosomin says, who 
cares? Well I think the people on those highways, every one that it 
cost $119 a year, or some $74 million in total — Mr. Minister, 
those are the people that care. And that just proves the arrogance 
of this government. This is the way they have dealt for four years 
with the public, and this is the way they're going to deal for the 
next year or until the election is called. Nothing has changed, Mr. 
Chairman. Nothing has changed at all. Four years. We've got a 
government that's just as arrogant as they were the day they gained 
power. 
 
And we certainly don't see anything improving in this province; in 
fact, we see a deficit that's the highest ever. It's a deficit that 
nobody even wants to talk about any more. They hate the thought 
of having to pay that money back one day. And I'll tell you, the 
population that's talking about it today is saying that they're not 
going to be paying it back, but their kids are going to have to be 
paying it back, and that's what hurts even more. That, Mr. 
Minister, is the problem, and that is the concern. That is the 
concern of the people in this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, TRIP says that you should be building more roads. 
You've made a good number of announcements. You've made a 
number of announcements — or at least I shouldn't say you did, 
but the former minister did. He made a lot of announcements 
regarding what they were going to do on highways. He announced 
an additional $10 million after the last budget was passed, $10 
million for highways, that he was going to be spending, and that 
was supposed to be additional money, Mr. Minister. Then he 
announced another something like $55 million, and that was 
supposed to be spent for highways, and that was all new money 
that was going to create more jobs and improve our highways 
system. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, could you just give me, Mr. Minister, the 
details of how much money you spent on highways in 1985, total 
— what you budgeted for, what your actual spending was, 
including the extra 55 million, or I should say 65 million, that the 
minister announced after the last budget. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 
referred to a number of different issues in his previous comments, 
and I will attempt to address a number of those comments. 
 
Firstly, I would like to talk about the TRIP Canada report, which is 
a report that has been developed by the Canadian road builders' 
association, and I just certainly want at this time to compliment 
them on their efforts in reporting what their opinions are of the 
condition of the highways. In addition, the Saskatchewan road 
builders have played their part in helping with that TRIP Canada  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1631 
 

report. I might add that they have received a great deal of 
co-operation from our department, which I think really shows that 
our government and our departmental officials are co-operating 
with the road building industry to make a better highway 
transportation system for this province. 
 
Now the member opposite refers to some specifics regarding how 
many dollars it is costing each taxpayer to drive along our 
provincial highways. I would like to make one very, very 
significant point at the outset. And I think the members opposite 
should realize, and I think that the people of Saskatchewan should 
and I believe that they do realize, that as far as the operating costs 
of a vehicle go, they were reduced significantly, significantly by 
the removal of the gas tax that was in place under your 
administration — a 20 per cent tax on every single gallon of 
gasoline that they burned in their automobiles. So I think that that 
point should not be forgotten. It is a very, very significant point 
that one of the major, major tax breaks that the people of 
Saskatchewan have seen under this administration was the 
removal of the gas tax. I am very proud to stand here and say, that 
was a significant cut, and I don't think that there are many people 
who would deny that that has put more dollars in their pockets. 
 
Now if we want to move on to the discussions regarding the added 
vehicle costs of having roads that are not absolutely smooth, yes 
indeed. I think any person would admit that if a road is not as 
smooth as it could be, that yes, there are additional costs 
associated with operating that vehicle. 
 
The question becomes as how do you really quantify that. And it is 
very, very difficult. It is very, very subjective when you start 
saying it's costing a taxpayer $70 or $120 or whatever it is per 
year. So I think that that is a point that I would make to you, that 
we're dealing with something that is somewhat subjective. But 
given that these statements have come out, given that these 
statements have come out, I think it should be pointed out to the 
members opposite that in relative terms, the Saskatchewan 
highway transportation system is in very, very good shape. 
 
I'd like to make a comparison. If you want to use those dollar 
figures, I could indicate to you that part of that report, part of that 
report indicated that Saskatchewan's paved highways were costing 
each motorist $70 a year. 
 
Now let's compare that with what your friends, your NDP friends 
in Manitoba, are paying. That report — and you failed to mention 
that, that the costs of Manitoba drivers is something in the 
neighbourhood of $113 per year. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I don't think . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . The Minister's obviously answering the question. But I don't 
know if we should get into comparisons with other provinces. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — All right, Mr. Chairman. I'll certainly . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Chairman, on a point of order. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 

Mr. Birkbeck: — Well, because I want to differ with what you 
think. 
 
I believe, Mr. Chairman, you know, that what you said was that 
you didn't think that he should get into comparisons. The only 
way, Mr. Chairman, that the Hon. Minister of Highways could 
draw any kind of comparison with this administration versus an 
NDP administration is by way of comparisons. And that's what the 
minister's doing. 
 
And if it's necessary for you to make some ruling or check it in the 
book, I sure would be encouraged if you would do so and let the 
minister proceed to answer the questions. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Comparisons that anybody makes are allowed 
as long as the comparisons are relevant to the topic. If the 
minister's comparisons are relevant to the topic he is permitted to 
make the comparisons. Otherwise I will rule them out of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Perhaps I was not explaining as best I could the actual 
comparison. And what I was attempting to explain was the 
comparison between TRIP Canada's report, which is a report that 
encompasses all of the whole country of Canada, and it includes 
every province across the country. And what I was comparing — 
that within that report, with that report the general condition of the 
highways of Saskatchewan compare very, very favourably with all 
those across the whole country. 
 
I'm not about to stand here and say we have the absolute best 
highways in North America. But in relative terms, and I think that 
this is what we have to look at, I think it'd only be fair and 
reasonable to say: how is Saskatchewan doing vis-a-vis other 
provinces in Canada? And I would say that in Saskatchewan, here, 
on a number of different topics, Saskatchewan is a leader. We are 
doing very, very well in many, many areas. And in highways I 
would have to make the statement that we are doing relatively well 
compared to other jurisdictions in our country; and I would say 
especially well, especially well when you compare us with the 
province of Manitoba which is a province that I'm sure is very, 
very near and dear to the NDP's heart. 
 
I believe that that should sufficiently address most of your 
questions, the hon. member. You did also ask me the amount of 
dollars that were spent on highways in 1985. The figure there was 
$216.5 million. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, could you just repeat those figures 
again for me please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, I'd be happy to. 
 
In TRIP Canada's 1984 report, the condition of Saskatchewan's 
paved highways were costing each motorist $70 per year. This 
figure compares favourably with $113 in Manitoba and $97 in 
Ontario. 
 
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1632 
 
 

Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, I see that you prefer to make a 
comparison with other provinces rather than comparing what this 
province, what the roads in this province were like previous to '82 
and what they're like now. And I think that's what we have to look 
at. 
 
I don't care, Mr. Minister, if other governments are making the 
same mistake as you are. I think the travelling public of 
Saskatchewan has been used to good highways in this province, 
and I think they're entitled to them. What you should be doing is 
trying to keep those highways at least in the same condition that 
they were when you took office. But that hasn't happened. What 
we see now are highways that need rebuilding, highways that are 
nothing but pot-holes. 
 
And this isn't just something that I'm saying. I've had a phone call 
this morning from a person that was on the highway over the 
weekend. And I see the members are all hollering now because 
they don't want to hear the truth; they don't want to hear what the 
public has to say. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, this one individual over the weekend, he 
happened to wind up wrecking his car on the highway —not 
wrecking it in total, but doing damage to it — where he asked me, 
who does he contact now to get it fixed; is it the Department of 
Highways, or who should he go after? Well, Mr. Minister, I 
advised him that he better get after SGI; let them sue Department 
of Highways for the repairs on that vehicle. That's what they 
should be doing. 
 
I don't think that the travelling public, because of the negligence of 
this government and this minister, should be having to pay lawyers 
to try and sue a government. They've got an insurance policy for 
it; that's the direction they should be going. And I can tell you, Mr. 
Minister, if that individual doesn't get satisfaction, I am going to 
be on your back as well as the SGI minister's back too. 
 
Because the public of Saskatchewan has been paying for four 
years now — and that, I think, is a very conservative figure that 
TRIP Canada has used, because there are many people that are 
using a lot more, Mr. Minister. That's what's really happening in 
this province, and you should be out there putting more money 
into highways, trying to get them repaired. 
 
(2030) 
 
You talk about the gasoline tax. You neglected to answer the 
question that I asked you, as to how much you did spend in 1985 
on construction of highways; but, Mr. Minister, you talked about 
your gasoline tax. Every minister in this government talks about 
the gasoline tax. They've been doing it for four years. The Premier 
talks about nothing but the gasoline tax. 
 
That saves an average individual, maybe 150, maybe $200 for 
travelling — depends how much you travel. A lot of people 
wouldn't save $100 for the amount of travelling that they do on the 
highways. Mr. Minister, those are the facts. That is what's really 
happening. You save somebody $100, but then they wind up 
having to pay 119 for repairs on their vehicles. That's what your 
gasoline tax did. That sure saved them a lot of money, Mr.  

Minister. And yet you continue to go out there trying to deceive 
the public and saying that somehow they saved so much money 
with that gasoline tax. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, they really didn't, because it's costing them a 
lot more to drive on our highways today than it has in the past. 
And that gasoline tax sure didn't save them any money. If you'd 
have kept the roads in good condition along with that gasoline tax 
reduction, then the public would have saved some money. But 
when you look at what happened out our highways, there is 
nothing that they are saving, and they know it. And I don't know 
why you're wasting your time talking about the gasoline tax all the 
time, because it certainly doesn't help the public. 
 
You may get up in this House, Mr. Minister, and you can go out 
there and try to preach to the public, and try to make it appear as 
though they are buyers at your auction sale, and somehow you can 
lead them on. Well, Mr. Minister, you can't lead the people of this 
province on; they're not at an auction sale. They know what's 
happening because they're travelling on those roads, and you can 
talk all you like; it isn't going to change their minds because they 
experience it every day that they drive out of their yard and onto 
those highways. 
 
Mr. Minister, how much did you spend in total on highway 
construction last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, if the members opposite, 
while I'm answering my question would care to listen to the 
answer, I'm sure they will get it. And I previously stated that in 
1985 the total highway budget was $216 million. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much was the actual spending on 
them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I will repeat that again. The actual 
spending, for the third time, was $216 million in 1985. I hope that 
sufficiently answers your question. If you would like me to repeat 
it again, I will. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, I think I should address some of the comments 
from the hon. member. And the hon. member is trying to make a 
case that the highway system is falling apart, that the sky is falling 
in; the typical doom and gloom scare tactics of the NDP. And I 
say that the only reason the members are doing that is to get the 
general public upset and try and gain some political points, only 
by a very, very gross exaggeration. 
 
And I've already stated that I will not deny that we could use more 
money in the highway budget. I will not deny that there are some 
roads that are in desperate need of repair. But I would say that 
within the budget that we have in this fiscal year, that the vast 
majority of pressing issues will be addressed. I think we have 
come to a relatively good amount of money to spend on our 
highway system, and contrary to what the member is saying, our 
highways are not falling apart. 
 
I will state again that there are some specific examples in specific 
areas that do need attention. I have directed my officials, and I 
believe they have done a very, very good 
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1633 
 

 job of assessing all of the highway needs in our province. They 
have many, many professional engineers on staff who are very, 
very well acquainted with the highways we have in this province. 
They go out and spend a considerable amount of time and a 
considerable amount of effort in assessing where should the 
dollars be spent, how can they best be spent. And I would 
compliment the department on spending the funds available in a 
very, very judicious manner. And I believe that with this 
continued type of an emphasis we will continue to improve our 
highways. 
 
And I want once again to state that the member opposite who is 
trying to indicate that the sky is falling in, that the highways are all 
just terrible, is simply exaggerating. A gross exaggeration. 
 
I will not stand here and brag and say yes, we've go the greatest 
highways in the country, because that is not the truth. That is not 
the truth. There are areas that need repair, and I believe that we are 
doing an excellent job, an excellent job of addressing the highest 
priority needs within the context of our budget. 
 
Now the member for Shaunavon wants to get into something that 
is off the subject and I'm not here to debate with him. If he'd care 
to stand on his feet I would be very, very happy — I would be 
very, very happy if you would like to enter into the debate on that 
particular matter. 
 
Now once again, Mr. Chairman, I want to reiterate some of the 
comments made by the member opposite. He's talking about that 
they would put the gasoline tax back on, or they would take it off. 
I really don't know where they stand. I do know that in 1982 they 
stood against taking the tax off of gasoline. And I believe that the 
general public of Saskatchewan said, no, we are for taking the tax 
off of gasoline. That is what we have done, and I believe that the 
general public in this province have very, very well received that 
major tax concession. I would like from the member opposite at 
some time a clear and concise statement of where exactly do you 
people stand on that issue. 
 
I believe that that would sufficiently address your remarks, sir. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, you quoted that you spent 216 
million actual in your budget. Now I'll ask you for a breakdown of 
that later on. 
 
Last year, you had in your budget estimated 206 million; you 
spent 216. but after that estimate, Mr. Minister — and I have here 
a news release that says, "Ten million dollars added, the minister 
of Highways, Jim Garner." This time he announced another 
announcement: 55 million in road building programs, including 35 
million went to construction tenders and 20 million for industrial 
road development. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, this minister, the former minister announced 
an additional, something like $65 million that I don't see 
anywhere. What happened to him? How much of that $55 million 
actually got spent? You're talking about 206 million estimate, 216 
actual, and about 270 or  

so that the minister, the former minister, said he was going to be 
spending on highways. What is the actual figure? What happened 
to that 65 million that the minister announced? Is it just that he 
expected an election that he made that announcement, or what 
happened to it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, I find it rather amusing the 
member's method in which he goes about using figures. And I'm 
certainly not about to stand here and say that I'm an expert on 
figures, but I have spent a fair bit of time in working with figures, 
and I would like to outline to the member opposite that your 
question was: how many dollars were spent in 1985 in the 
Highway budget? 
 
Now I indicated to you that it was $216 million. Now that would 
be broken down, sir, by a budgeted amount of $206 million. In 
August of 1985, as I recall, there was what they call a special 
warrant or additional funding that was put in place to the amount 
of $10 million. And I think it would be fairly easy to calculate that 
the 206 that was budgeted plus a $10 million additional warrant in 
August of 1985 would add up to $216 million. Now you may 
correct me if I'm wrong on that, sir, but that's the way I was taught 
mathematics in school. 
 
The member opposite has also referred to the $55 million that was 
announced by the previous minister, and yes, I will deal with that 
particular issue. The $55 million represented what we call a winter 
tender schedule. And every year in the history of the department, 
as I understand it, or at least for a good many years, in the winter 
months a winter tender schedule is announced, and this past year it 
was $55 million. Those funds indeed do come out of the following 
year's fiscal budget. 
 
Now the member opposite, who is perhaps not as familiar with 
this department as some, is probably still wondering about how 
that works or why you would announce a winter tender schedule. 
Well, for the member's information, over the winter months there 
are some certain types of projects that the contractors can do and 
can get ready for, and that is simply the reason. So we give 
advance warning or advance information to our good friends in the 
road building industry. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Mr. Minister, don't talk to me like you're 
talking to someone in the auction ring. Mr. Minister, I know 
perfectly well how the department tenders, the way they've always 
tendered. The only problem is with the ministers, not with the 
department. The problem is with the ministers and what they say. 
 
And this minister goes . . . or the former minister, and I suppose 
this one won't be much different. But the former minister did say 
that the new road construction program, which Garner said is new 
money, not designed for road building in previous budget —new 
money he come up with — will create 3,000 new jobs. There'll be 
575 jobs created with 20 million winter works project. Now this 
minister announces some new money, $55 million, that's going to 
create these 3,000 new jobs. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What 3,000 was that? 
 
Mr. Lusney: — That's a good question. The member from  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1634 
 
 

Moosomin says, what 3,000 jobs? Well I certainly question what 
3,000 jobs, and even the member from Moosomin questions that. 
It just proves that the former minister was not telling the truth. He 
was making announcements, and saying that there's new money 
coming in, new jobs going to be created, the way this government 
always does. They do that in every department. In every 
department they continue to do that. Mid year they get up and they 
announce and they re-announce. 
 
Here the minister announced $55 million worth of work that was 
for '86-87. But he goes out in '85 and says, here's new money that 
we're putting in, new money that's going to create 3,000 new jobs. 
Well, Mr. Minister, that was a total falsehood because that was not 
new money; it was money that was going to be in the '86-87 
budget. That's what he was announcing. But that's not the way he 
says it's going to happen; it was new money that was put into place 
that somehow he found in 1985 out of that budget. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I know he wasn't telling the truth. You know 
he wasn't telling the truth. So don't go trying to smooth it over 
somehow, trying to make it look as though this has always 
happened in the department. What's always happened in the 
department is exactly that. But that's not always the way the 
ministers used to handle it — in announcing all these new jobs and 
new money that they found. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you break down, out of that 216 million that 
you've been talking about, what amount was spent on capital 
projects in constructing highways. And I suppose we can go down 
the list of grading and surfacing. What was spent on all of the 
areas — the grading, the surfacing, the capital money, and 
whatever you spent that 216 million. How much was . . .  
 
We could use the two, I suppose, to begin with; and that's in the 
grading, the surfacing. And I suppose you can . . . You don't even 
have it on this year's. There was some that were oiling; I believe 
you had oiling before. You don't have any oiling on this year, but 
could you just tell me what you spent? You had it in last year's 
budget, if I'm correct, or in last year's project array — oil 
treatment, surfacing, and grading. What were the expenditures on 
those? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, I'll try my best to answer in 
as much detail as I can. In general terms, for your information, the 
capital amount that was spent in the capital budget in 1985 was 
$104.4 million; in maintenance was $83.4 million; administration 
was $28.2 million; for the total of $216 million. 
 
For a further breakdown, and I'm not able to give it to you 
precisely as you asked, but I hope this will suffice. Under the rural 
surface transportation, the breakdown is: construction, 63.5 
million; rehabilitation, 18.76 million; for a subtotal of $82.2 
million. Associated works, which would include bridges and 
landscaping, miscellaneous items — that adds up to $16,470,000; 
for a total rural surface transportation budget of $99 million. The 
remainder of the budget would go to things such as urban  

surface transportation, air transportation, etc. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, could you tell me, are you going to 
be announcing $55 million come fall, just before the election, 
same as the previous minister did, in some new money? Or do you 
expect in this year's budget that you'll be dealing only with what 
you have in the budget and that any winter works contracts will be 
let as winter works contracts for the following year? Or I guess the 
simple question would be: are you going to be dealing with the 
budget as it's put forward, or are you going to be making 50 and 
$60 million announcements, as the former minister did, over and 
above what's in this budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to reiterate a 
few comments that I made. And it has very, very much been a 
tradition that in approximately October of any given year that a 
winter tender schedule is announced. 
 
And I would like to go into that a little bit further with you. The 
reason why a winter tender schedule would be announced in 
October of a given year is to give the construction industry some 
idea of the amount of work that is going to be available early in 
the year. Now if you know a little bit about the construction 
industry, you would understand that these business people do have 
to make business decisions as to whether buy additional 
equipment, as to whether hire additional men, keep them on over 
the winter. And I don't think that it would be fair not to announce a 
winter tender schedule. 
 
I would reinforce my former comments by once again saying that 
this is a very, very standard practice. It happened for years under 
your administration; it is not any political gimmickry as you 
would attempt to try and make the public believe. But rather it is a 
very, very business-like practice that gives to the construction 
industry an idea of the initial amount of work that is going to be 
available to them. 
 
Now naturally when you announce a winter tender schedule, the 
contractors are not going to be able to go out and start paving or 
grading in the month of February or March, but there are some 
associated works that they can begin with. So once again the idea 
of announcing a winter tender schedule is one that has followed a 
long precedent in the Department of Highways, and we will 
continue to maintain that precedent. And I do not believe that that 
is an unreasonable method or procedure. 
 
I think, if you are indicating that one should not let a tender 
schedule out in the winter months, if that is what you are 
indicating, I would respectfully suggest to you that you bring that 
up with the road building industry, and I do not think that they 
would concur with your suggestions that a winter tender schedule 
is not a reasonable procedure or a reasonable practice to follow. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Mr. Minister, I see you've had some good 
training from the other ministers. You tend to avoid the question 
and get onto something that you would like the public to believe 
other than what's really true. I certainly was not suggesting that 
there shouldn't be any winter tendering. As I said, this was the 
practice of the department in the past. They've always done winter  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1635 
 

tendering. The only thing I did object to is the way the minister 
announced those winter tenders and all this new money and new 
jobs that were going to be coming up. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, none of that was really true. You don't want to 
answer that question directly and I understand why. And I guess I 
can't hold you responsible for what the former minister said, so I'm 
not going to pursue it because it can't say that you said that. And 
it's pointless for me to get you to answer for him. 
 
What I'm saying, Mr. Minister, is, and all I did say is I hope that 
you're not going to be using the same kind of media tactics that the 
former minister did in trying to announce something that's just 
regular, that happens every year, and trying to make it sound just 
as though this was a lot of new money that he found somewhere 
and he was going to create so many more new jobs with it. And 
that's all that the former minister did. He didn't really do the work. 
Hopefully you will be doing a better job at it this summer. Do a 
little more work and less advertising in the paper, and put some of 
that money on the highways, and we'll get some better roads, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I'd like to get onto possibly another . . . We should 
stay on the same area. Tell me how many cubic metres of dirt was 
moved by the contractors in '85? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — That would be, as I'm informed, just over 
nine million cubic metres of dirt was moved by contractors in the 
year 1985. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Mr. Minister, if I'm correct, that's been a 
steady decline from '82, and previous to '82 where, I think, there's 
been a lot more moved, running in the 10, 12 million cubic metres. 
You've seen a decrease in the last few years, Mr. Minister. 
 
Has the cost of the roads increased . . . How miles . . . or how 
many kilometres . . . I think I've got to get off the miles and the 
yards and get into the kilometres and the cubic metres. How many 
kilometres of roads have been constructed for the dirt .  . that has 
the nine million cubic metres of dirt that has been moved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Respecting your former question of the 
number of cubic metres that was moved by earth excavation 
contractors, the precise figure would be 9,846,000 cubic metres. 
That did represent 347 kilometres. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, how many kilometres of roads 
were resurfaced? And maybe go through the other one, the oil 
surfacing — how many were resurfaced; how many were oiled? 
Do you have a list that you can send me down that would indicate 
all the work that was done: how many cubic metres of earth has 
been moved, how many kilometres were oiled, how many miles 
were oil treatment, how many were surfaced? Give me the whole 
list. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, we'd be happy to provide that 
information. I'll just direct my officials to go out and take a quick 
photocopy of it and send it across to you. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — While your officials are doing that, Mr.  

Minister, we'll just carry on then. Could you indicate to me how 
many of the contracts were tendered? Were they all tendered? 
Where there any contracts given by proposals rather than tenders? 
Could you tell me how the contracts were handled? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, in general terms, the vast 
majority of the work done by the private sector is contracted out 
on a low bid tender system, and that is where a very, very 
significant amount of our dollars are spent. 
 
Regarding your question of work that had gone untendered, if you 
like, yes, the department has had a policy for some time that on 
very, very small jobs they are handed out, and we do try to spread 
that work around as much as we can to give as many contractors 
in the province a chance at doing some relatively small dollar 
work. In round figures, I believe that the policy states that any 
work that is in excess of $50,000, invitations for proposals, or 
tenders if you like, are submitted. But work that is under $50,000, 
we call that day labour work. It's worked on a set hourly basis for 
whatever type of machine, or whatever type of work that is done. 
And those are only for small jobs that are under $50,000. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, seems to me in the estimates, it 
used to be work under 10,000 that would sort of be grouped 
together, and nobody really questioned what was being done. The 
50,000 isn't a large figure; there's no doubt about it. 
 
Could you give me a list of the contracts that went out under the 
$50,000 and who got some of those contracts? The major ones, the 
large contracts, could you give me the successful contractor that 
got the job, and what job it was on? The name of the contractor 
and the job that he was successful on in his tender? And group 
together the others in a separate one that were under the 50,000. 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, it would take some time to prepare 
that list. If you'll kindly have the patience, I'll direct my officials to 
get to you a list of the contracts that were let, the successful .  . 
well, all bidders and the successful bidders. Of course, the member 
might realize that that is certainly public information. These 
tenders are open to the public in certainly a very traditional and 
above-board manner, and we have absolutely no problem in 
providing you with that information. 
 
As it respects the list of day labour work, if you like, the work that 
has been under $50,000, that was conducted by a large number of 
contractors throughout the province. That is a list that is very, very 
long; very, very detailed. It would take some time to prepare such 
a list on all the individual day labour works that were done in the 
past year. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — You will, however, send over eventually — it 
may not be tonight — but later on send over the list of all the 
successful contractors — the large ones. The small ones, I 
understand you have some problems with that because there'd be a 
long list, so we'll dispense with that. But give me the large 
contractors and their names and the  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1636 
 
 

contracts that they were successful in. 
 
Mr. Minister, I noticed on the list you sent over here, pavement C 
and oil treatment not available. What's the reason for not having 
the number of kilometres in those? The kilometres are there, sorry. 
 
Mr. Chairman . . . could you give me the cost per kilometre of the 
roads that you have here. And we'd go on the cost of excavation, 
the cost of the sub-base, and the pavement and oil treatment — 
what it costs per kilometre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, I'm informed that per 
kilometre, as you had asked, to oil-treat a single kilometre of 
highway is in the neighbourhood of $40,000 on average; to 
conduct the grading or the earth-moving for a kilometre of 
highway is $105,000; and to apply a pavement on that is about 
$75,000 on average. If you'd like the information on the costs to 
grade and pave a four-lane highway, you're looking at a very, very 
high cost today of $270,000 per kilometre of four-laning, and that 
would include both the grading and the paving. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
want to start off by asking you, regarding the stretch of road 
between Big River and Green Lake, I wonder if you can indicate if 
a contract has been given out for the clearing of the right of way, 
and if so, to who that contract was awarded to, and the number of 
miles or kilometres that are involved in that clearing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, I'm informed that on that 
road from Big River to Green Lake you were looking at 
approximately 15 kilometres. That contract has been tendered, the 
work has been completed, and that was done last winter. You had 
also asked about the specific contractor's name. I'm sorry we do 
not have that name handy with us. You may be informed, though, 
that it was a local contractor who was awarded the contract. It was 
a contractor from the town of Big River, as I understand it. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I'm assuming the contract would be for less 
than $50,000, is that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — No, I'm informed that it was a public 
tender, so it in all likelihood was in excess of $50,000. It was 
indeed a public tender. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, is that just for the clearing of 
the bush on that right of way that you're speaking of — 15 
kilometres of bush — and it would be in excess of $50,000 for that 
contract? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — No, the contract was indeed tendered, and 
I do understand that it was done at a very reasonable figure. And 
I'm sorry; I was mistaken; it was significantly lower than 50,000. 
It was in fact somewhere in the neighbourhood of $20,000. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — And you're quite certain of the kilometres, 
that the contract was for to clear the bush out of only 15 
kilometres? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, we're quite confident of that. 
 

Mr. Thompson: — Is that 15 kilometres . . . Or is that spot 
kilometres, or is that all in one spot? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — The contract encompassed the entire 15 
kilometres, and I guess it would be just whatever clearing was 
deemed necessary. I couldn't tell you the exact number of 
kilometres that needed clearing, but the contract did encompass 
the full 15 kilometres. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay, I'll leave that. I think you maybe 
should check that out. I'm sure there's a lot more than 15 
kilometres from one end to the other that bush was cleared out of. 
Could you tell me if there's going to be a contract given for any 
dirt-moving on Highway 55 between Big River and Green Lake 
this summer? And if so, could you tell me when that is going to be 
tendered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes. I'm informed that that particular 
project is being done by the government crew up in that area. It is 
15 kilometres or thereabouts, and the work started there, I 
understand, last week. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — That is work on dirt-moving, is that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, earth-moving. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — So there's 15 kilometres of road that will be 
constructed between Big River and Green Lake this summer. On 
the first 11 miles that was built north of Big River on Highway 55, 
could you indicate if you're going to pave that 10, 11 miles this 
summer or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I'm informed that on that particular stretch 
of highway it is under an oil treatment right now. And no, I'm 
sorry, it will not be paved this year. It's certainly one that I'll take 
notice of, and when the traffic requires, we'll certainly look at 
giving it a full pavement. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I just want to say that 
most certainly the traffic warrants that stretch of Highway 55 
between Green Lake and Big River being constructed. When we 
left government in 1982, we had that 10 miles already oil-treated. I 
want to indicate to you, Mr. Minister, that that 10 miles of road 
north of Big River was already oil-treated. Now we're five years 
later, we have about six to seven miles oil-treated. You've actually 
gone backwards and have taken the oil treatment off of it, and 
you've got about four or five miles of gravel in there now. 
 
And I just say that that's a very important piece of road between 
Green Lake and Big River, and I just think that you should 
rearrange your priorities and there should be a paving job done in 
that first 10 miles that have been put in there and have been under 
oil treatment since 1982 — since 1981, I might add, Mr. Minister. 
 
And the 15 kilometres of construction that you're putting in there 
this summer — moving dirt for 15 kilometres — I think that the 
folks in Big River and in that area most certainly expected a lot 
more of that done. And I'm surprised that the member for 
Turtleford hasn't been in touch with you and trying to get that 
piece of road done, because it is a very important link between 
Green Lake and Big River and Prince Albert. 
 
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1637 
 

And I would just ask you, Mr. Minister, to reconsider that and get 
some pavement put on that first 10 miles because the longer it's 
left the less oil treatment we have and the more gravel we have on 
that piece of road. 
 
I want to now turn to Highway 965, the formerly highway 101 
which you have renumbered 965, and a petition that has come in 
from citizens in the Jans Bay, Canoe Lake, Cole Bay area, signed 
by a number of individuals, a large number of individuals in that 
area asking that some improvements be done on that road this 
summer, as that is a very important piece of road. And I might 
add, Mr. Minister, it's a road that's in good shape, but it's an old 
road. It's narrow and it's very crooked and with a lot of hills in 
there, and there's been a lot of fatal accidents over the last few 
years. 
 
(2115) 
 
The last fatal accident was on December 14 of 1985, in which 
there was two lives that were lost and another individual who was 
seriously injured in that. That's the latest fatalities on that piece of 
road. And, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you have acted on that 
petition in any way to start some construction or redoing a part or 
a portion of that road from 155 into Cole Bay. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I do recall receiving 
the petition that you're speaking about. And we did indicate that 
there is no planned construction in our program this year. 
 
I'm always saddened to hear of any traffic fatalities and I will ask 
for a full report from my officials on any fatalities that happened 
along that road. 
 
I could give you a good deal of assurance that we will make a 
special effort to increase our maintenance on that road this year, 
and do whatever we can for this year, but it is not in the project 
array for any major construction. But I'll certainly take your 
comments as being very genuine and I can assure you that it will 
be viewed in the context of all highway construction in the fiscal 
year 1987-88. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you indicate 
if there is going to be any money spent on engineering work on 
that piece of road from Highway 155 into Cole Bay in this fiscal 
year that we're debating. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — We do not have our complete array, if you 
like, of engineering works that will be done for the following 
year's program. I am informed that we are at present working on 
that and in the next month to two months we should have many of 
our design work projects finalized. And I can simply say that we'll 
certainly give your request any consideration that we can. But 
right tonight all of our design works for the ensuing year are not 
complete, so no, I couldn't give you any indication right tonight. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You indicate that 
the engineering work and designs for the fiscal year are not 
complete yet. I would ask you, Mr. Minister, to take that petition 
that you got from the citizens in that area, Canoe Lake, Jans Bay, 
Cole Bay area under  

consideration and I would ask you to instruct your department to 
do some engineering work on that piece of road. The road was 
built many years ago, and I might add that the maintenance on that 
road is good. It's a good road and it was a good road for the time 
when it was built, but it's outlived its purpose now. It's a very 
narrow road and winding and hilly. And I would ask that you put 
some money into the engineering for that piece of road as I think 
it's very important, and I know the folks up there think it's 
important that that road does, is completely rebuilt. It's a road that 
is used not only by local people, by the tourist operators. There's 
tourist facilities in there, and school buses, a number of school 
buses, go from all the three settlements into Beauval on a daily 
basis, back and forth, and there has been some near mishaps with 
school buses. And it's not a long piece of road, but I would 
appreciate if some engineering work was started on that this 
summer. Did you want to respond to that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I'll simply do whatever I can to see if we 
can possibly get some engineering work done. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Could you indicate if in this summer, if you 
are going to finish the last 10 miles of road on 155 just south of La 
Loche. Could you indicate if that's going to be oil-based? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, it will be completed. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Could you indicate when the crews will be 
starting to work on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — We're hopeful that that work crew will be 
in there within the next month or so, and I'm sure that you can 
appreciate that that will of course depend on the weather. But we 
would estimate it to be in the next month. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I now want to ask 
you, Mr. Minister, if there are any plans for any engineering work 
or construction on Highway 909 and 914 — 909 being to Turnor 
Lake and 914 being the road from Beauval to Patuanak. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — No, right now within our plans, we do not 
have anything finalized on those roads, so there is no design work 
that is in the works right at present. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
there has been a number of times during the last couple of years 
that correspondence has come in from the citizens of Fond-du-Lac 
and Stony Rapids in the Black Lake area for an all-weather road 
from Carswell Lake; that's where the road ends right now, from 
Carswell Lake to Fond-du-Lac and down the south shore to Stony 
Rapids and hooks up with the Black Lake road. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if there are any plans to carry out any 
engineering work or any construction planned to put that piece of 
road in. I think that more so now that the power line is going to be 
built on the north shore, that that road becomes more feasible 
because there's going to be a lot of material that's going to have to 
be hauled in for that power line and, of course, there's the new 
schools that are being built in Fond-du-Lac. Could you indicate if 
there's  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1638 
 
 

any work going to be done on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes. In that whole area of the Lake 
Athabasca region, we have very, very recently finished a study, 
and that study was done in conjunction with our department and as 
well Indian and native . . . IANAC — I'm sorry, I'm not familiar 
with the term; you probably are — but we have done a study 
together with that group representing the people of that area. It is a 
comprehensive study of the transportation needs in that area. We 
are at present reviewing it, but no final decisions as of right now 
has been made. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Would you release that study once you've 
gone over it? Is there any chance of me getting a look at that study, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — We don't actually have the detailed final 
report. The report that we have right now is, I guess, what you 
would call a preliminary report. We are still working on getting a 
final draft or the final recommendations from that report. Once we 
do, we would naturally consult with IANAC, and providing they 
have no problems with releasing that, I don't think that would be a 
problem though, and I'm confident that we could release it to you. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I now want to turn to a request 
that has come to your department. And I know you'll be meeting 
with the mayor and his councillors from La Loche shortly, on the 
road that would link up Fort McMurray, Alberta, and La Loche, 
Saskatchewan — a link-up that I think is very important. And my 
colleague from Meadow Lake yesterday indicated that he fully 
supported that road now from La Loche to McMurray. 
 
And when one takes a look at the map and you take a look at the 
last Alberta crossing, Alberta-Saskatchewan crossing, and it's 
down at Grand Centre, and there is many, many miles of 
Alberta-Saskatchewan border with no access and no crossing. And 
I think that when you take a look at the tourism possibilities and 
the economic possibilities that a link-up between Fort McMurray 
and La Loche is going to mean to communities such as Meadow 
Lake, North Battleford, and Big River, and Prince Albert — down 
the two lines, and of course not to mention the importance that it 
will mean to La Loche and the west side. And especially since this 
government has now announced a new wilderness park which is 
right beside La Loche and we have 35,000 population in Fort 
McMurray and it would tap all that northern Alberta from 
Edmonton, and bring it into Saskatchewan, and down to Meadow 
Lake and Big River and Prince Albert and North Battleford, and I 
think give a great lift to communities such as La Loche and 
Buffalo Narrows and Ile-a-la-Crosse and right down the line. 
 
And I'm very pleased to find that the hon. member from Meadow 
Lake indicates from his seat that he fully supports this link road. 
And I know the two members from Prince Albert, for sure, both 
support that; and the member from Prince Albert, himself, 
indicates his full support for that. Mr. Minister, it looks like you've 
got unanimous consent over there to announce that piece of road 
tonight,  

Mr. Minister, if you so desire. 
 
But I think it's an important link between Alberta and 
Saskatchewan. It's the only part of the province that we don't have 
a link-up in the North. As you know we have a link-up with Flin 
Flon and Creighton on the north-east side. But when you take a 
look at the west side, we have that void there where there is just no 
crossing. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Minister, I would urge you to give a favourable response to 
the mayor of La Loche and his council when you do meet them. I 
know that there'll have to be commitments on both sides — the 
Alberta government and the Saskatchewan government — and I 
know that there's going to have to be engineering work carried out 
to determine the best possible route up in that area that will bring 
the best results to everyone concerned. 
 
I did attend a meeting in Fort McMurray with the west side 
mayors and their councils, along with the mayor of Fort 
McMurray, and they had the support of the member of the 
legislature in McMurray and the member of parliament. They 
were not at the meeting but they indicated their support. And of 
course, the mayor and the council of Fort McMurray, they were in 
full agreement. 
 
I think now it just takes a commitment by both the Alberta 
government and the Saskatchewan government, and in particular 
the Department of Highways from the both governments, to make 
a commitment to start the engineering work on what I would 
consider an economic boon for both Saskatchewan and Alberta 
and a real asset for north-west Saskatchewan by going ahead with 
that link-up between La Loche and Fort McMurray. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I certainly 
share with the member opposite the concern for the many benefits 
that would accrue to that particular connecting link between 
Saskatchewan and Alberta. I would like to comment that the 
northern advisory council, for instance, has met with a number of 
different groups in Buffalo Narrows and a few other places. 
Respecting the meeting that you attended with politicians and 
other government officials in Alberta, we are still awaiting further 
discussions with them. I do look forward to meeting with the 
representatives from La Loche. I believe it's next week. 
 
Without question, there are a number of benefits that would accrue 
for such a link. I do want to commend the member opposite for his 
endorsation of it, and I believe that you did give a very good 
exposé on the many benefits that would accrue. So yes, indeed, it's 
a piece of road that we'll be giving serious consideration to and 
we'll just have to wait for further discussions. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I just want to get 
one thing straight. Did you indicate that you wanted to meet 
further with the northern advisory council before you made any 
decisions or did I hear wrong there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — No. We already have. We've asked for 
their input and the minister in charge of the northern advisory 
council has informed me he has met with them. I  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1639 
 

don't know that he'll require other meetings, but it is certainly 
input from such groups as that that really will be taken into 
consideration. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I thank you for that 
response and I know that the community of La Loche and the west 
side there are going to be quite pleased to hear the type of support 
that they're going to get on that piece of road. And as I indicated 
before, I know it's going to take co-operation between not just one 
government, but two governments, because it's an important piece 
of road to both provinces. And I thank you very much for that 
co-operation. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I just 
have a couple of comments about highways. My first one would 
be that I was wondering if you knew that Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
has some highways down there — if you're aware of that fact? 
And is there another constituency, is there one constituency 
besides mine in Saskatchewan that didn't get one mile of grading 
or paving or resurfacing, or anything? You know, you look at your 
highways array, and Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is not on the list — 
not on the list. 
 
And I'd like you to take a look at last year and see how much we 
got last year; and I'd like you to look at the year before, see what 
we got the year before. And with the fourth year with that kind of 
work, you'd think that you would take a Highways' budget of say, 
105 million, you divide it by 35 constituencies, and that makes $3 
million a riding, times four ridings — you owe me 12 million 
bucks in our area. You know you're getting behind, sir. And it's 
not that the roads are good. 
 
I'd like to ask you another question and have your officials show 
you a map, and show me another town in Saskatchewan the size of 
Coronach — say 1,200 — that has the kind of access roads that 
Coronach has, either from the east or the west or the north. 
 
I went down to a board of trade meeting, and I gave this story to 
your predecessor, the member for Wilkie. I said, I sat at that 
meeting with the people down there and they moved a motion that 
the highways coming into Coronach from either way — they 
moved this motion saying that it wasn't fit. And they sent a letter 
to Mr. Garner, the former minister of Highways and member for 
Wilkie. they sent a resolution to him saying that those roads that 
are just oiled grid roads really, they took the grid roads, pulled 
them into highways and oiled them, and that's all Coronach has. 
And they said they weren't fit for heavy truck traffic. And then 
somebody moved an amendment to that resolution and took the 
word "heavy truck" out of the amendment. And then it read that 
that road wasn't fit for traffic. You know, to pave it and then have 
short little hills on a narrow road like that, and the kind of traffic 
that's on when construction takes place . . . 
 
I'm wondering what your five-year plan is. Let's per chance say 
that you guys would get elected again. You know, I dread to think 
that that could happen, but let's say it would. What is your plan for 
rebuilding the highways leading to Coronach either from the east 
or the west or north? The south doesn't matter because it's just a 
short little piece down there. That's one concern I have. 
 

Now there's a new little piece of road at Coronach when they built 
the causeway over between the water when Cookson Reservoir 
was put in. And while you're looking at Coronach and the area, 
I've had it drawn to my attention a number of times that that is a 
pretty serious crossing in the winter-time when the snow's blowing 
and all. It's just graded up and the ice isn't very thick on the one 
side especially, because of the warm water that is injected into 
there. It's not only fog going up over the road, but because of a 
lake on the side and the snow blowing there, the suggestion is that 
some kind of protection would be put at least on one side. And I 
wonder if you'd consider that. 
 
Those are the two major concerns they have down there: number 
one, that you just haven't decided to grade or build any roads. Not 
that we don't need roads there; I think the concern there is as great 
as anywhere in Saskatchewan. But to spend 105 million and for 
the second year in a row to get a goose egg — and the third and 
fourth years were just about as bad — it doesn't pay to talk about 
1.3 or 2.3 miles of grading, or a little patch-up work that you've 
done since you're in office. 
 
No. 2 was upgraded close to Assiniboia and the No. 13 Highway 
had a little bit of recapping right close to the junction of No. 2. But 
that's all the roads I can brag about since your friends took office. 
And I think it's a pretty serious, pretty serious omen on an area of 
Saskatchewan that's in a heart of the south country, that has a lot 
of things going for it and a lot of potential for development down 
there. And one of the big ones should be that more of the roads 
should be graded up and resurfaced. 
 
So the first question basically is, what's your plan for the future? 
It's not on the highway array this year, but have you considered 
doing some grading there, just a little bit at least? 
 
You know, it would make the constituents feel a lot better and 
would give your candidate down there at least a Chinaman's 
chance. You know, the time the Tory candidate runs really bad, I 
lose an election. I have lost down there when the Tories just about 
lost their deposit. And so I'm kind of worried that your 
government not doing anything could cost me an election this time 
around. You know, you should do a little bit. Would you consider 
at least a little bit so that that constituency be recognized as being 
part of the program? 
 
But according to my numbers I think there's about 35 ridings that 
have rural highways in them —might be a little more. but if there's 
35, 3 million a road is . . . 3 times 35 is 105, and that's about what 
your highway construction is. So I think I'm not being 
unreasonable — not being unreasonable by saying that over the 
last four years $12 million would have been about right for my 
riding. 
 
And where are we at? You know, look up four years for me if you 
want to, and tell the House what you've done in that area in four 
years. And I'm sure there's not another riding, there's not another 
riding that can boast that kind of a record, saying that their 
highways were forgotten. I don't know if you divided by 
constituencies. I wish you  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1640 
 
 

would, because that would paint a pretty good picture for us in 
saying how much catch-up you're going to have to do down there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Okay. yes, Mr. Chairman, I have a 
schedule before me that has a number of figures on it here. I can 
appreciate the member's concern about having some specific work 
done in his constituency. And we'll certainly be assessing all of 
our needs very, very shortly, of course, for the next fiscal year. 
 
Respecting the amount of money that has been spent in your 
constituency, I can say over the last four years, in total, between 
capital and maintenance, we have spent in the neighbourhood of 
$11,851,000. Now that's partly capital and partly maintenance. 
That would be broken down by, I think, four for capital and 
around eight for maintenance. So I wouldn't agree that you have 
been totally left out at all. 
 
I think we've done a reasonably good job of assessing the needs in 
the entire province and making our priorities and doing the work 
that is the most pressing. I'll certainly consider your requests on 
the specific roads that you talked about within the contest of our 
next budget in '87-88, but I think you have been reasonably well 
treated. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I don't . . . like my colleagues say, there's not a big 
problem for the long term. In this short term, as far as this year, it's 
not an expensive item to do some kind of a cable or some kind of a 
marking device on one side of the causeway that's going across by 
Cookson Reservoir, just going east of Coronach. Would you take a 
look at the need there? People that use that road to drive back and 
forth to work on a regular basis have drawn it to my attention, plus 
a nurse that crosses that road on a regular basis going to work. 
And she said it's impossible . . . if the snow's blowing just close to 
the road, it's impossible to see where the grade is. And with no 
kind of a marker on either side it's pretty scary, especially when 
you know that the ice isn't very thick there. 
 
If it were a normal lake that freezes over like normal lakes would, 
it wouldn't be so serious, but because of the ejection of hot water 
in the cooling water into the lake there, that section right there 
where the current goes through isn't very thick ice. In fact I've seen 
it open. And besides that, when the warm water . . . When it is 
open, you've got fog across that area there. So I seriously 
recommend, or wish you'd consider putting some poles in with a 
cable or something like that, along one side of it at least, so that 
then, with a little reflector on those poles, people would have a 
pretty good idea as to where the edge of the road is. 
 
So that's one aspect of it that I think a specific thing that won't 
need to wait for a budget, surely, out of the 12 million that we 
should have gotten. If it's 4 million construction, then you're 
counting what was paid for on a road that was let and tendered to 
resurface No. 2 likely, or surface the original surface on the new 
No. 2 going down south. Or was there a new contract that was let? 
If it was, my memory isn't that good. There might be a little bit — 
$4 million sounds like too much over four years. I don't think there 
was a penny spent on grading. 
 

My dad used to talk about a pair like that — when your 
construction and your maintenance is a real pair, as a horse and a 
rabbit. Because the construction portion was very small and your 
maintenance isn't overdone either, you know. That's a big riding. 
it's close to 100 miles across at the south end, and between 40 and 
60 miles deep. It covers a lot of area. In that area we've got a 
potential clay processing for Kaolin going in down there in the Fir 
Mountain area that was going to put more stress and strain on the 
roads that are there. 
 
(2145) 
 
And I think that the idea to put an oil surface down on the roads 
that are there wasn't bad to get us by for a while. But as the traffic 
increased and as the towns grew, there aren't too many towns 
around that have gone from 350 to 1,200 people in such a short 
time. And particularly Coronach is my worst road. 
 
There are other small roads I could get into, but I think that the 
numbers speak for themselves. And if you would multiply those 
numbers out by the average and how many constituencies that are 
in the province, you wouldn't have a $105 million budget. You 
know, you take 105 times 4 is 400 million. And you take 4 times 
30 is 120; so you spend a quarter of what you've done in the other 
constituencies in that area down there. And it's not an area like 
generally around Saskatchewan. 
 
When I travelled through your area for example, Mr. Minister, 
with all due respect to your constituency, but the roads by far are 
in better shape and in better grades and wider shoulders, and better 
ditch slopes and all. The general condition of the roads in the 
northern third of the province — you know what we'd say north is 
from the No. 1 going north — are an awful lot better than they are 
from No. 1 going south. 
 
And I don't want to speak for all my colleagues, or even get into 
debate with our highways critic here; but I think the numbers 
should be switched around where you're spending twice as much 
in some of the areas that need roads worse than others, to do some 
catch-up and get the roads in shape. 
 
I went to a meeting. I went to a meeting when I was first elected 
and it was a rodeo and I was down to open up the rodeo in Wood 
Mountain, and I told the people down there, in my first term in 
office, you won't be able to get to Wood Mountain on a gravel 
road. And at that time there was no paved roads going anywhere 
near Wood Mountain. And you know in four years the roads have 
been oiled and been paved. But those roads were just taken into 
the highway system that were grid roads. We're to the place now 
where those roads need to be regraded and some money spent on 
them and brought up to a highway standard. So I think it's . . . Get 
your officials to take a good look at the map and just see how 
badly it was coloured when they marked the highway array up for 
you the last time around. I think you neglected the centre key of 
the province. 
 
If you look at Saskatchewan and you think of 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg down at the bottom there, that's the 
foundation of the province. When the foundation  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1641 
 

crumbles, the whole province will fall down. And I think this is 
maybe why your party's in trouble. 
 
When they had all the jokes and stories about the condition of the 
roads — there's nothing to be proud of, Mr. Minister. There's jokes 
about the roads being so many holes per mile and that you could 
play golf on them or whatever, so many pot-holes per miles and 
all. And that hasn't improved very much. I think the whole theory 
to privatize maintenance and let a lot of that maintenance work out 
to the private sector isn't really working for you, you know, isn't 
really working that good for you. I think you made a big mistake 
selling off some of that equipment, and it's costing you more and 
you're getting less for the buck. 
 
I think you should have re-evaluated that and take another look at 
it because it's going to cost an administration an awful lot of 
money to replace some of that equipment that you've given away. 
It's pretty serious. It's a pretty serious millstone you've got hanging 
around your neck as far as Minister of Highways. 
 
I think if you can give me a commitment that you'll look at that 
causeway and if you can get it into the Highway array it'll be 
pretty hard for our next minister of Highways to say we're not 
going to do that because of those plans. So do me a favour and get 
it in there so I have less of an argument with my colleague from 
Pelly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well I'd certainly give you a commitment 
to look at that causeway that you speak about and any other 
particular projects that you'd like to see in your constituency. I 
would ask you, just so I don't forget, if you wouldn't mind 
dropping me a short note just outlining your main concerns and 
perhaps a letter or two from a constituent if you indeed have them. 
I'd certainly be happy to look at that. 
 
Regarding some of your other comments about your 
dissatisfaction with the privatization of a part of our department, 
well, that is certainly a contentious issue between your 
government and our government. And I think that that has 
happened, of course, a number of years ago, and it was a decision 
that we made. We did not make that decision lightly or without a 
great deal of thought. 
 
And it is our contention that, indeed, it was a positive move in 
many, many respects, and we will stand firmly by that decision. I 
can appreciate that the members opposite, with particularly their 
philosophy, would not agree with any work going out to the 
private sector. So I can understand why you are in disagreement 
with it. 
 
I would hope that you would respect the philosophy of our 
government, which is a philosophy that we do like the word "free 
enterprise." We do like to see as much free, competitive enterprise 
go on in our province. And I think the public of Saskatchewan 
have accepted the fact that in many, many instances the private 
sector is able to do things more efficiently. 
 
And I believe that that was part of the mandate that we had, when 
we were elected as Progressive Conservative government, to 
review all expenditures by governments and to make decisions, 
where we could farm out work to  

the private sector, to go ahead and do so where reasonable. And I 
believe the decision made in the past was a reasonable common 
sense decision that has worked for the betterment of all the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, you just 
finished telling my colleague, the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, how reasonable you intend to be. Seems 
to me I heard something similar from the former minister. When 
they get into that chair it seems that they're always willing to be 
reasonable. And they're going to try to provide the highways that 
are necessary, and the public with good roads, and they're going to 
be fair and honest with everyone. And they're even going to try 
and deal with some of the problems in the opposition 
constituencies. 
 
The member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg said that his constituency 
has been one of those left out, and he wasn't sure if others were. 
Well, Mr. Minister, it seems that there are others, especially from 
the opposition side. And if you look at the constituency of Pelly, 
I've been trying to get some roads into that area since '82, or since 
this government got elected, and every year, they ignore it. Now, 
Mr. Minister, when I ask for a road, I don't ask for a road for 
myself. I ask for a road that the taxpayers of this province are 
entitled to because they're paying their taxes. They are entitled to it 
as much as anyone else. 
 
There has been a road in that constituency — and that's not the 
only one but I'll mention the one, No. 8 Highway — that was not 
on the project array. It was on the long-term planning, the 
five-year planning of the department to be rebuilt about three years 
ago. There has been nothing happen on there. In fact, that road is 
getting to the point now where the crews can't even keep up 
patching it any more. It just got to where there's nothing but holes 
and soft spots in it. They patch it up today; it's knocked apart 
tomorrow. They've got a stretch of road to look after there, and 
there's no way they can possibly maintain that road properly. 
 
Last year, there were sections of it that were gravel. The public 
complains about the number of windshields they've been getting 
broken there. That's costing not only the taxpayer money but it's 
costing SGI money. It's costing the government. So in turn it 
winds up costing the taxpayer in two ways: through what they 
have to pay in their deductible, plus what SGI has to pay which 
eventually comes out of the taxpayer anyway. 
 
Mr. Minister, why do you tend to ignore some constituencies to 
the point where you won't put anything up? And then you'll get a 
candidate in that constituency that'll get up there and say, if I get 
elected in here all the roads are going to get built, we'll give you 
anything you want. Well, Mr. Minister, those stories the people 
heard in 1982, that if you got elected, everything was going to be 
fine, people wouldn't even have to work any more. They would 
get everything they want. That seems to be what's going on. I find 
that happening in Pelly constituency right now, where that 
candidate is saying that if he gets elected, I tell you things are 
going to be so good there that the people are just going to have 
everything they like and they won't have to worry about  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1642 
 
 

finances or anything else. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, anybody that would go to that length, that's 
just absolutely absurd. I don't see anyone that would believe that. I 
don't even understand anyone making statements like that. I know 
there are some areas in that constituency particularly that have 
been ignored by this government for four years, like they have 
been in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and some other constituencies. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, why don't you put some of those constituencies 
on your project array, look at some of those roads, and look at the 
serious condition that they're in, and what the public has to put up 
with driving over them. Get some of those constructed. 
 
I see it's not on the project array again this year. So, Mr. Minister, 
could you tell me why that one road at least is not on the project 
array? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the 
member's comments regarding that specific road, and you're quite 
correct, in this fiscal year the road is not on the project array. But 
the member opposite suggests that I should get out and look at 
some of the highways. I do want to inform the member opposite 
that this coming summer I do intend on having a good tour of a 
number of the parts of Saskatchewan. I have been fortunate that in 
the past while I have done a great amount of driving and have 
covered various parts of the province. I can give you a very, very 
firm assurance that I will be out to the Pelly constituency and I 
will personally inspect that particular stretch of road which you 
refer to. And within the context of our budgetary process and our 
project array for the coming fiscal year, your specific request will 
certainly be given good consideration. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Mr. Minister, I'm pleased that you're going 
to be coming into Pelly constituency during an election year and 
possibly making some promises that you're going to be building 
some of those roads again. Nothing more than promises, because I 
can say, Mr. Minister, you're not likely to get into another budget. 
Your term . . . you're into the fifth year now; you have no mandate 
really, to govern. You should be calling an election, but you're not. 
You're talking about a sixth-year budget. Well, Mr. Minister, what 
are you going to build in your sixth-year budget? Why don't you 
tell us what you're going to do in this budget for this year, what 
you're going to do with some of those roads. Don't come into my 
constituency and promise something for '86-87, and tell your 
candidate, yes, promise all you like. Why don't you do it in this 
year? You're into your fifth year now. Why don't you build some 
of those roads? 
 
But that's not in there. You're saying you're going to do it in future 
budgets. Well, Mr. Minister, that's nothing more than election 
promises, election promises that people aren't going to believe any 
more, because I can tell you, after the next election, those people 
of Pelly can be sure that we're going to build a road for them, 
those roads are going to get constructed, and it won't be by a 
Conservative government either. 
 
Mr. Minister, you can do all the promising you like when you 
come down there. I don't think the people are going  

to believe you any more after the four years or the fifth year that 
you're into your term and still nothing constructive being done in 
that area. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you tell me what the cost of sand-sealing is 
per kilometre? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I believe the term you referred to was 
sand-seal, or seal coat, as we call it, is synonymous. The average 
cost per kilometre would be in the neighbourhood of $3,000 per 
kilometre. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Three thousand per kilometre. Mr. Minister, have 
you let any contracts for '86-87 for some of the sand-sealing, or 
seal-coating? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Approximately eight contracts have been 
tendered. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Could you tell me — you've let those tenders and 
they've been awarded. Could you let me know what contracts for 
the seal-coating have been awarded, who got it, and what the 
amount per kilometre was? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — We do not have that information right 
handy with us, but I'd be very happy to have it sent to you very, 
very soon. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, if you've awarded the contracts, 
why wouldn't you have those figures with you? We're into this 
year's estimates, and I find it a little difficult to understand why 
you wouldn't have those figures here. I'd like to have some of 
those figures; I'd like to know what you've let those contracts for; 
who received them and for how much. You're saying it's 3,000 a 
kilometre. I'd like to know what the contracts were. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, we simply do not 
have that information right with us. I think we've tendered 
something in excess of 100 contracts already this year. We don't 
have that information with us, but I'll have it for you first thing in 
the morning. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would have hoped 
you would have had it here, but if you'll have it here in the 
morning. I guess that will have to do then. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you tell me how much the opening of the 
Borden bridge cost? I know it wasn't you that opened it, but could 
you give me the cost of the opening of the Borden bridge? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — The cost of that opening was $21,260.99. 
So for round figures — $21,000. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Mr. Minister, it seems to be quite a costly 
opening. What did you have — dancing girls and all at that 
opening, or what? To open up something like a bridge that seems 
to be a rather expensive opening. Could you tell me what really 
was involved in that cost? What did you have there that cost the 
money? Was it food; was it entertainment; what was it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite has 
asked what precisely was at the opening.  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1643 
 

And I think it would be very, very interesting information and 
valuable information for the public of Saskatchewan to know that 
at that opening I understand there were in excess of 10,000 people. 
I was absolutely aghast at the number of people who showed up 
for that opening. And I believe that it would be very, very much of 
a testament to the fate that those people had waited many, many 
years for that particular bridge to be opened. And it really showed 
the support of the people in that area who showed up en masse, in 
excess of 10,000 people, and it was a very, very successful event. 
I'm sorry that I myself was not able to attend it, but people were 
very, very happy at that event. It was one of the oldest bridges; it 
has a great deal of historical significance, as you may well know. 
And it certainly highlights the importance of the Yellowhead 
Route as one of our major highways in this province. So the event 
was very, very well attended. 
 
And yes, indeed, we spent a considerably number of dollars there 
to advertise and to promote the opening. I can give you a 
breakdown, that there were a number of advertisements placed in 
various newspapers, the advertisements. And there was a special 
commemorative issue of a newspaper in the Star-Phoenix, and that 
was in the neighbourhood of $14,000. 
 
They did rent a number of large tents that were at the opening. 
They had balloons, and buttons, and ribbons, and banners, and 
photographers, and there were a few dignitaries there who were 
paid an honorarium to come to the opening. So I have nothing but 
praise for the opening. It was very, very positive. There were some 
minor distractions there that day, but notwithstanding that fact, it 
was a very, very successful opening — an opening of a major 
bridge with which this government is very, very proud. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Mr. Minister, I see you got a hardy round 
of applause from your colleagues on the expenditures of an 
opening. Mr. Minister, I think that is the kind of waste that has 
been prevalent within this government, waste that I think one 
could say, costs a lot of money. 
 
Your advertising through every department has increased 
substantially. It's been excessive in most cases. Advertising that 
could be used rather to build roads, to build more of those bridges, 
and spend less on the advertising and the opening. Mr. Minister, I 
think the public would appreciate that a lot more if you would put 
more money into our highways, that we could see some benefits 
out of it, rather than just wasting it on big hoorays like you usually 
do in this government. 
 
Mr. Minister, in your airport assistance program, could you tell me 
what was spent in last year? Well I should maybe go back to 
Public Accounts, and that is the only thing that I have any 
reference to, and that's a year old. It's in '84-85 yet. So it's almost 
not relevant when we do get to go through it. But it indicates there 
some spending in certain constituencies for airports. Could you tell 
me what you did spend in '84-85 and in '85-86 on airport 
assistance? 
 

I notice in your estimates this year you've got a little more money 
put in for air transportation. You've actually doubled it to 
$800,000. Could you tell me what was spent in the previous two 
years and for which airports they were? What the expenditure was 
for, and at what airports in '84-85 and '85-86. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — The amount that was spent on airport 
assistance was $307,923 — that's in the year 1984-85; in the year 
1985-86 is 218,000. 
 
You may be aware that the detailed list of where those moneys 
were spent will be available to you in the Public Accounts for 
1984-85. For the year 1985-86, we're just in the process of 
compiling that list for the Public Accounts documents, and I 
would ask that if you could possibly just wait and review that in 
Public Accounts. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — For '84-85, I can see the minister doesn't want to 
give me the details of it. it's not an awful lot that he spent in '85-86 
— 218,000. 
 
Mr. Minister, in '84-85 you have about 104,000 that was spent at 
the Carlyle airport — that's in the Deputy Premier's riding. And 
you've also spent something like 91,000 in the former minister of 
Finance's riding in Kindersley. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, it seems that you've spent the money in 
non-directional beacons. Could you just tell me what that 
expenditure was for in those two ridings, Kindersley and Carlyle? 
— in the Carlyle airport, and the other one's in the riding of 
Kindersley. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, in answer to your question, at the 
Carlyle airport I understand the moneys were expended on 
pavement; and in addition an NDB. And not to be confused with 
the NDP; that is a non-directional beacon, a navigational aid for 
pilots. In Kindersley it was pavement. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, could you tell me what your policy 
is regarding the non-directional beacons, and what is the cost of 
those beacons? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — The cost for a non-directional beacon, and 
of course it may change slightly from year to year, but in round 
figures to install a non-directional beacon is in the neighbourhood 
of $25,000. And that expenditure is certainly shareable by 
different classes of airports. And that policy has been a policy with 
the department for a good many years. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Are you going more into installing these beacons, 
Mr. Minister, now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, we judge each case on its own merits 
and where warranted. And given sufficient funding, we'll certainly 
be installing them wherever we can. 
 
(2215) 
 
I think that we have to look at the province overall and see how 
many of these non-directional beacons are necessary. We do take a 
look at different geographic  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1644 
 
 

areas, and we do try and have a certain number of them within all 
geographic areas. And I think the north-east of the province is well 
served. I know we have one in Melfort. The north-west of the 
province is well served. Different areas — we're talking about the 
south-west down here has received one. So we do try and have as 
many of those as we can and spread them out geographically so 
people who are flying throughout Saskatchewan can home in to 
that navigational aid. 
 
Mr. Engel: Navigational directional aids are necessary when you 
have nothing to aim at. Even if you'd have one beyond, you can 
get there. Like to get to Maple Creek you aim at Medicine Hat and 
you'll find it. You know what I mean, because you have a good 
one at the Hat and at Swift Current. But when I'm talking about 
south-west, I was thinking in Gravelbourg or Shaunavon or 
somewhere when you get off the beaten path, you have no 
navigational aids like that, and so with no help. Because when you 
get south of there there's a wilderness before you get into, far 
enough down to Montana, to the point where you could aim at to 
get to a certain location. So I think it's important that you take a 
good look at Assiniboia or Shaunavon, particularly those two I'm 
thinking of. Gravelbourg has a radio station there which helps 
immensely, and so does Weyburn. 
 
But I think if you take a good look at some of the areas like that 
. . . And talking about airports, I'd like a group from Assiniboia 
would love to talk to you about a problem they're facing with 
upgrading their facility because it is on an old airport base. That's 
another question. But on the directional aids one, when you said 
south-west, I thought when did they build one, because I haven't 
aimed at one for a long time, and it's still not there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, I can appreciate your concern, and I 
can assure you that I'll look at all of the non-directional beacons 
we have in all areas of the province, and certainly down in your 
area there may be a real need for one there. I can appreciate it. 
You, I understand, are a pilot yourself, and certainly it would be a 
considerable help to yourself personally. So we'll look at all of 
them in the whole province and try and be as fair and reasonable 
as we can. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, I would like to get into the cost of 
signing. We've seen some of these nice blue . . . I shouldn't have 
said nice. We've seen some of these blue signs out on the 
highways that were probably more than a necessity — just more 
of, I suppose one could say, a quirk of the former minister or the 
government to get these blue signs up when we had signs that 
were totally adequate before. They may have been green and 
white or whatever colour they were — or black and yellow. But 
all of a sudden this government decided they wanted some blue 
signs up. Now, Mr. Minister, could you tell me what the cost of 
those signs were? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, in answer to your question, I would 
inform you that there is a group, and they are called the standard 
of Canadian Council of Uniform Traffic Control devices. And we 
took it under advisement from that group. They did indicate to us 
that, within their standards, they would like to see either blue or 
green signs go up. 
 

We did want to reserve the green signs for the Trans-Canada. We 
have reserved them, the green signs, for that and indeed have 
embarked on a program of replacing some of the signs that have 
been worn out, that needed replacing, with the new blue markers, 
which are fairly standard across the whole country. I can 
appreciate the member's concern that the colour blue may not be 
as aesthetically pleasing to him as it is to other groups, but that is 
the colour we have gone with. I don't think it's unreasonable to go 
with a colour that had been deemed one of the choices by the 
Canadian Council of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, certainly a 
very, very good group that is involved on a daily basis with 
signing type of issues. 
 
You did also ask the cost. And the cost on the primary highway 
system is approximately $110,000. I should point out that, had we 
decided to keep the old signs, it would have been necessary to 
upgrade those signs, and the cost there would have been about 
$25,000. I think it was a rather prudent move, rather than refitting 
or revitalizing the old signs, to install these new signs at a cost of 
about 110,000. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Mr. Minister, I suppose it's a matter of 
opinion whether one would consider 25,000 versus 110,000 to be 
a prudent move. I don't know. I suppose the public again would 
have accepted the $25,000 spent on redoing the old signs, making 
them look good, and spending the remainder on fixing up some of 
the roads which certainly haven't been done. Now again it's, I 
suppose, an opinion of yours that it's better to spend money on 
signs and on advertising and on everything else rather than put it 
into construction. 
 
Mr. Minister, when you gave me the $110,000; was that the total 
cost or was that just for the year of '85? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — The figure that I quoted — the $110,000 
— was the amount that was expended on the primary highway 
system, in the amount, once again, of $110,000. 
 
The member opposite has raised a point that it would have been 
better to spend that money in fixing up the old signs at a cost of 
$25,000 vis-a-vis the decision to purchase new signs at a cost of 
110,000, and that is certainly something that we looked at in our 
decision-making process. But I think a very, very key point is that 
these old signs were nearing the end of their useful life, and had 
we spent 25,000 to upgrade them this year, we'd have to spend 
another $25,000 on other signs in future years. And the cost 
benefit analysis showed that without question it was a more 
prudent to purchase the new signs. 
 
It should be pointed out that these new signs have a useful life of 
somewhere between six and eight years, which is far better than 
simply repainting signs year after years. 
 
So I think if you were to sit down and really analyze it the way we 
did, it was indeed a prudent move that would really save the 
taxpayers money in the final analysis. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, 110,000 on primary  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1645 
 

highways, you said. Was that over the four years? I had asked you 
whether that was in one year or was it over the four, going on the 
five years on the primaries. And were there some on secondary 
highways, too? Do you have an additional cost on secondary 
highways? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — No. The figure that I gave you was 
moneys that were expended not in a single year, but over the year 
1984 and 1985, and that did include the primary highway system 
only . . . (inaudible) . . . on secondary highways. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, you are saying then that you didn't 
spend any . . . You didn't put up any of the new signs on secondary 
highways then. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — No, we didn't do it in 1984 or 1985. We 
will be embarking on a program to continue replacing those signs 
as it is deemed necessary. There will be some more signs replaced 
this coming year. I couldn't give you a figure on how many, or 
where, but the moneys that have been expended were over the last 
two years, and it will be an ongoing program to upgrade and 
replace. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — You indicated that there is going to be some 
signs replaced for '86 — in the '86-87 year. But however, you say 
that you don't have a budget for that at this point; you don't know 
how many are going to be changing, or what your budget is going 
to be for signs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, the amount budgeted in 1986 is in 
the neighbourhood of 100-110,000. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, the first signs . . . again we're 
getting to the 110,000 versus the 25,000, but we got through that 
argument. The first set of 110,000 that you spent in '84-85, I 
believe you said it was — when did you first order those signs? 
Do you order them ahead of time, a year prior, or when did you 
first put in an order for the new signs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, we first ordered those signs in 1984. 
And the order was placed for a number of signs that would be 
adequate for the primary highway system, and they were erected 
over the two-year period. So the signs we ordered in 1984 were 
placed on the primary highway system only over the years 1984 
and 1985. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, could you give me the cost of 
advertising? Your advertising budget, I notice in '84-85 was 
something like - or communications budget was $850,000. 
However, it seems in Public Accounts that you spent quite a bit 
more. Could you give me the actual cost of total communications 
within the department for '85-86? 
 
(2230) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — The total amount spent on advertising in 
1984-85 was $537,400. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — That was total amount spent in communications? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — No, advertising per se. 
 

Mr. Lusney: — Could you give me the figure, total amount spent 
for communications in '85-86? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — The total amount that was allocated to the 
public communications branch, the total amount spent was 
$1,346,068. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, again you budgeted 850 and you 
say you spent $1.3 million, a little in excess of that. And you've 
done the same in '84-85, where you budgeted, I think it was, a 
figure very similar, and you spent a lot more than that. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, could you tell me why there is such an 
excessive amount being spent in communications when you 
budget about three-quarters of a million and then you go into $1.3 
or $1.5 million. Why the over-expenditure in advertising? 
 
And while you're at it, Mr. Minister, could you also give me the 
breakdown on the 537 — I believe we're talking about '85-86, are 
we? You're talking about '84-85. Okay. We can deal with that one, 
and we'll do the same thing with '85-86. Then you may as well 
give me the same figures, the same numbers for '85-86. 
 
In '84-85, when you're looking at $1.3 million, that's quite in 
excess of what you had budgeted for — 537 for advertising alone. 
Could you tell me what advertising companies that went to — the 
names and the amounts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I'll certainly concede 
that the hon. member's comments are correct. There was in that 
fiscal year, certainly, an over-expenditure, some items that were 
not budgeted, or were not contemplated at budgeting time. 
 
I would like to review with you a number of the mostly safety 
programs that were initiated by this government and, indeed, some 
of them were rather costly — I would say that we believe the 
money was well spent — and to outline some of those programs. 
There of course was the school bus stop arm campaign. You and 
all people in most rural communities will be very, very familiar 
with that campaign of stop arms on school buses — I think a very, 
very well received program. 
 
In addition, there was a program called the winter driving 
campaign. We have found from our experience in keeping track of 
the accidents that take place in the province, there are goodly 
number of them take place in the winter-time, and we thought it 
would be a judicious use of funds to start with a winter driving 
campaign. 
 
In addition, we did initiate a program of the 60-kilometre highway 
worker safety campaign — here again, I think, something that is 
fair and reasonable. We do have a large number of highway 
workers out there. I know the people, when they're travelling 
throughout areas of Saskatchewan, do not want to in any way 
endanger the lives of these people who work for our department. 
So there was an advertising campaign there. 
 
We also had a hot-line campaign where we would advertise to the 
travelling public that there is a hot-line  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1646 
 
 

number where they can get information on the general conditions 
of the roads. Especially in the winter-time, that becomes very 
important. Those services amounted to in the neighbourhood of 
280-some-thousand. 
 
There are some other programs here, of course — the annual 
report, the traffic accident information systems annual report. A 
major cost to us, I should add, would be the Professional Driver's 
Handbook. And we're very, very proud of that handbook. I had a 
copy of it here with me. But there's a handbook, and I'm sure the 
hon. member will agree that it is a very, very good piece of 
literature — something that has been copied by many, many 
jurisdictions in Saskatchewan. It is a comprehensive guide to safe 
driving, and it is one that we are rightfully proud of as a 
government. And we have noticed that other jurisdictions have 
been very, very interested in this book. I couldn't give you a list of 
what all other provinces have inquired about it, but there has been 
a number of them. 
 
In addition, we've received numerous compliments from many of 
the people involved in school driver training. And it's just a real 
good advertising piece that I think can — I know, will — turn out 
better, safer drivers. That was — as you can see, it's a fairly thick 
document; it was fairly costly. We didn't budget for it, but I would 
say that it was money that was very, very well spent. 
 
In addition to that, there's a motor cycle driver's handbook — here 
again a safety issue that, I think, will enhance the safety of many, 
many motor cycle drivers; a seat-belt survivor manual; and 
numerous other types of programs, virtually all of them — 
virtually all of them, I can assure you — related to safety. 
 
And safety as a general topic is something that I am very, very 
proud to stand here and say that this government has been 
committed to safety. And I don't think there has been a 
government in the history of our province that has expended the 
type of dollars on safety and awareness campaigns. And we're 
very, very proud of it, and I'm sure you share some of that same 
pride when you look at some of these advertising pieces that have 
been disseminated through the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — That sounded like a nice election speech, Mr. 
Minister. I wish you would have answered the question instead, 
because that would have done a little more good and would have 
saved us some time here. We could have got through with our 
estimates maybe tonight some time. This way we may have to go 
till midnight or later. 
 
Mr. Minister, you can go make all the political speeches you like. I 
know it's an election year. If you like, I can make a speech that'll 
be just the opposite to yours, and one could. You seem to think 
that you can do a lot more good by spending money on 
advertising, on promotions, on everything else. Spend a little 
money on building highways, Mr. Minister. I'll tell you that could 
save a lot of accidents. 
 
Some of the roads and some of the potholes and some of the 
gravel sections on them create more accidents than  

your publications say. That's all you'd have to do, Mr. Minister. 
Spend some of that money in building roads and repairing them, 
keeping them in good condition. That would help a lot more, if 
you want to get into speeches. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I asked you to give me a breakdown of who the 
advertising — the $537,000 for '84-85 went to, and what firms, 
and the amounts. And could you tell me who did the majority — 
or who did the printing on all those pamphlets that you talked 
about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I apologize to the member opposite. I was 
rather wrapped up in the discussion on those safety programs 
because I do feel very, very proud of them. 
 
Your question relating the specifics of what advertising agencies 
were used - I think you're well aware of Dome Media Buying 
Services. Their amount of expenditures through them — and I 
should add that a good portion of that, of course, goes to the actual 
printers in our province — to Dome Media Buying was 
$283,236.71. The other part that went to Dome Advertising per se, 
which is a subsidiary of it, the total cost of that service was 
$174,599.14. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, this would include all the 
pamphlets and all the advertising that was done? The handbook 
and everything else, that was all done by Dome? The driver's 
handbook — all the other advertising — lights on, or whatever. 
Lights On For Life, whoever spent money on that one — that was 
SGI, I believe. But any of the programs that you spent money on, 
Mr. Minister, those are the figures that you gave me? They would 
include all of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — We'll supply you with a little bit more 
detail just as soon as we can get it prepared. But for your 
information I'll cite a couple of examples of probably some of the 
larger expenditures that were made in communication. One of 
them was the official highway map. You'll note that it is a very, 
very colourful highway map this year. I'd like to commend the 
officials in the department, the design artists who are perhaps 
listening tonight, and I'm really proud of that map. That was 
printed by Modern Press in Saskatoon, who certainly are a very, 
very well-known and reputable firm within the province. 
 
(2245) 
 
The handbooks themselves, that was the one here, the fancy 
handbook; it was printed by Midwest printing in Saskatoon, 
another very, very reputable and well-known firm in 
Saskatchewan. It should be noted that both of these large 
expenditures were publicly tendered, and I can assure the people 
of Saskatchewan — I'm sure the taxpayers are always interested in 
having a judicious use of their funds, their tax dollars — and both 
of these were publicly tendered. The printing business, like any 
other business, is competitive these days, and I think we got very, 
very good value for our money. 
 
In response to your questions of any other expenditures, we'll 
attempt to compile a list of other expenditures that were made and 
to whom those moneys were allocated. 
 
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1647 
 

Mr. Lusney: — While you're at that, Mr. Minister, could you give 
me the breakdown of the total 1.3 million for '84-85, and you 
haven't given me the '85-86 figures. You've been going back and 
forth. The 1.3 is an '84-85; the map I think, that you were talking 
about, was probably one that's got your picture on would be an 
'85-86 or an '86-87. I'm not sure which figures you're quoting me. 
Could you just give me a breakdown of which year you're talking 
about when you're giving me your political speech on all the good 
things that you're doing there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — You had asked about the 1986, '86-87 
expenditures, or '85-86 I'm sorry. For the 1985-86 expenditures 
the budgeted amount was 850,970. There was an over-expenditure 
there of 330,000, and the total is $1.18 million. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — To save time tonight, Mr. Minister, could you get 
your staff, the department, to give me a breakdown of the 
advertising and all the other areas that they spent that money on. 
Just give me a breakdown of each one and send it over to me 
tomorrow or whenever. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — We'd be pleased to provide that 
information. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, could you give me a little 
information on some of the departments, or some of the boards 
that you have under your department. The Highway Traffic Board: 
could you give me the names of the people on the Highway 
Traffic Board and their remuneration for the year '85-86? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes. We'll send it over to you shortly. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — While they're looking for that, Mr. Minister, 
possibly you could get them to look at the members that you have 
on the motor carriers committee, what their salaries or per diem 
was. Get for the others also how many meetings they had during 
the year for the amount that they received — if it was 10 meetings, 
or 10, or 15, or 20, or whatever it was — and also of the motor 
carriers committee also. 
 
And could you tell me — while they're looking up some of this 
information, could you tell me: on a traffic safety committee, 
members, did you have . . . is there some kind of per diem for 
them or not? Could you give me a little information on the traffic 
safety committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, we'll provide that information to you 
tomorrow. Regarding your specific questions about the traffic 
safety committee, they are just regular members of the Highway 
Traffic Board, and I understand that there is no additional moneys 
allocated to them for that service. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Are you saying, Mr. Minister, that the Highway 
Traffic Board or the motor carriers committee — you don't have 
that information here with you this evening? You can't send that 
over to me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, we have it and we'll send it  

right over. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Okay, Mr. Minister. Could you give me a list of 
the staff in your office, some of the personal staff you have — 
executive assistants, or special assistants, whatever you may want 
to call them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I'll send it over as well. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, were there any increases for, in '86 
. . . I see you've got June 1 of '86. Have there been any increases 
for your staff since June 1 of '86? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — No, no. That was just yesterday, and I met 
with the staff this morning, but I didn't announce any raises this 
morning. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — You're not anticipating any increases then for the 
remainder of the year as far as your personal staff is concerned and 
your office staff? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well, not as far as I know. I think we have 
to view each case separately, and from time to time we reclassify. 
If some of the assistants take on special duties, there may be some 
reclassification. But as far as any large jumps in salary, no, I don't 
think that we'll see that in my office. I can say that the staff in my 
office works very, very hard, but as far as any large increases in 
salaries, no, I do not anticipate that. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, could you tell me . . . I see on the 
staff, the list that you gave me, the one person that's not there, and 
that was a Vera Nicholas. Could you tell me a little bit about that 
individual? How much was paid to her in the past year, in '85? 
And was she employed by you at all for any length of time or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — For the member's information, Miss 
Nicholas is not working in my office at present. And you may be 
aware that she is away on educational leave. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, is the department still paying her 
educational leave at this point? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, the pay for educational assistance 
runs from August 15th of '85 to August 15th of '86, as you request, 
and that figure is 20,951.26. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — That's the total amount that she gets in that year 
— 20,000; that includes any salary she may get, anything else that 
may be paid for. Is that the total cost to either your office or the 
department's office regarding one Vera Nicholas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, the total amount— and that's in total 
for 1985-86 — is the figure that I've quoted you, 20,951.26. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, after August of '86 is she going to 
be coming back to work in your office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — She may well be coming back to some 
specific department; whether or not she'll be coming back to my 
office or not, I really don't know. I think we'll have to, as I say, 
cross that bridge when we come to it, but I would give you no 
assurance whether or  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1648 
 
 

not she would be in my office or not. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — How could you explain to the public an 
expenditure of $20,000 in educational leave for an employee from 
the Minister of Highways' office, supposedly in the States taking a 
foreign service course, and then you saying that you don't even 
know if she's going to be working in your department . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Well some of your members opposite, a while ago, were 
complaining, asking me if I'm complaining about educational 
leave or if I'm against it or not. The member from Weyburn was 
one of them, whether I'm against educational leave. Well certainly 
I'm not, Mr. Minister, but one would think if you sent someone 
from your office for educational purposes, and you're paying their 
expenses, that you would be wanting that person back. You sent 
them there to get a specific kind of education, one that would help 
you, or help them, in your office. I don't know just what the 
advantage of having a public service course would be to the 
Minister of Highways . . . or foreign service course. 
 
What would a foreign service course benefit an individual, an 
executive assistant working in your office, Mr. Minister? I think 
that is the question the public would have. There's $20,000 gone 
for someone to take a foreign service course, and then you don't 
even have a job for that individual in that office. You may place 
her somewhere else. I think that is a total waste of money; it's an 
abuse of the program that was set up. It was set up to get someone 
from whatever office, or whatever department he may or she may 
be in, to upgrade themselves to do a better job within that 
department, on the job that they are doing. That is what that course 
was set up for. 
 
This is absolutely something that the Minister of Highways has no 
use for, and I can see why you don't, even know if you'll be hiring 
that person back, because you really have no use for someone in 
your office with a foreign service course degree. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, why do you insist, and I'm sure there are 
others within this government that probably did the same . . . I 
shouldn't say you, Mr. Minister. It's the former minister of 
Highways who allowed that expenditure, and I guess put together 
the whole . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, my colleague 
mentioned it something other than what I would certainly say. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, why would you, at this point, agree to 
something like that, or would you even agree yourself. I would 
hope that you would say that you certainly wouldn't, because I 
can't see why any minister of this government would ever agree to 
spending $20,000 for something like a foreign service course for 
an individual which has no need for it within their office. 
 
I could see it if it was from a minister that was dealing with a 
government outside of Canada or outside of North America. I 
could see that minister wanting some of his staff maybe a little 
more knowledgeable in what's happening elsewhere. But the 
minister of Highways, not only did he fly around, but he also 
wasted money in areas  

like education, using a program that was really a good program, 
not . . . I shouldn't say using it. He abused the program that was 
there to provide an upgrading for people that worked within the 
government. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, are you going to be allowing something like 
this to happen as long as you are minister, or are you saying that 
maybe this was an error on the part of the previous minister before 
he resigned, and that you will not be one that would be doing 
anything similar? 
 
(2300) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well, respecting this particular situation, I 
think it very, very important to point out that the contract that was 
signed for this particular individual was not really with the 
Department of Highways per se, but it was more a contract signed 
with the Government of Saskatchewan. It really was administered 
in the past, and still today, through what we call the Public Service 
Commission. For a good many years they have they have had a 
program as it relates to financially assisting people who want to 
better their education, and in this particular instance there is 
assistance available to this individual. She is not required to come 
back to the Department of Highways specifically, but rather has a 
contract with the Government of Saskatchewan. The exact courses 
that she is enrolled in, I would presume, would be very, very 
wide-ranging, would be very divergent, and would provide for a 
very, very broad scope of knowledge. 
 
And with that, we're not saying that this individual will go to any 
one specific department but is committed to coming back to work 
for the province of Saskatchewan, a woman who will have a good 
deal more education and will be better able to serve the public in 
whatever area that we decide where she would like to work. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, that individual was employed with 
the Minister of Highways previously as an executive assistant, I 
believe, or a ministerial assistant, and was there in '84, and was 
there in '85 until the given point in '85 when she decided to take 
this foreign service course in the States. You say that she has some 
type of contract with the government and not with the Department 
of Highways. Since she was employed by Highways, and paid for 
by Highways — what contract is it you're talking about? Could 
you provide me with a copy of the contract that's with the 
government, not necessarily with the Department of Highways? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — My understanding of that is that it's a very, 
very standard form type of contract, a contract that I don't believe 
our government has changed one bit. The contract remains the 
very same contract that was used by the former administration, 
administered by the very same department, the Public Service 
Commission. My department, I'm sorry, does not have a contract, 
a sample of the contract here, but I'm sure if you would ask the 
minister in charge of the Public Service Commission for a copy of 
one of those contracts, he'd be happy to provide it for you. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — If that was a contract with the government — and 
I guess some of your members were saying through the Public 
Service Commission — why, Mr.  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1649 
 

Minister, are you paying the cost out of the Department of 
Highways? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well, quite frankly, I don't have a real 
good answer for that one. I mean, that's simply the way the 
program was set up, and it happened under your administration, 
under many administrations. I suppose what happens is when a 
minister recognizes some talent in a person and decides that that 
person would enhance the image of government and enhance her 
education — fine, he recognizes that talent and educational leave 
is given. And it's not specifically for our department. But I think 
we have to view it within the context of what is good for the 
general will of the people of Saskatchewan. Will this enhance our 
general civil service? And, indeed, better education for women 
will certainly go a long ways, no matter what department they are 
in. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, I noticed you didn't have, as you 
said yourself, you didn't have a good answer for it. Why does 
being paid out of Department of Highways — you just felt that the 
former minister must have recognized abilities and the talents of 
this individual and decided to send her to California, I believe it 
was, or somewhere in the States for a foreign service course, and 
then she would somehow come back to work for the government 
in whatever department. That is sounding a little far-fetched, but I 
guess we'll have to accept your answer since that's all you're going 
to give. 
 
But if you felt that this individual was so exceptionally good in a 
given field, why would the Minister of Highways not say then, if 
the government thought that there was some talent there, say okay, 
there is a department in government where we could use this 
individual and we are going to send her to get a little bit of 
upgrading, additional education in that given field. Somehow it 
seems that I'm sure the government wasn't even aware of what was 
happening; the minister, the former minister decided to take it 
upon himself to send this individual to the States, and now you 
don't have an answer for it, and I'm sure no other department of 
government made any such commitment to send her there. At 
least, they certainly don't have anything in writing; it's got left with 
the Department of Highways. I know you're stuck with it. You're 
paying the bill, and I guess we'll have to leave it there and see 
what happens a year from now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I think I would concur with the hon. 
member that we'll just leave it at that, and I think I advanced my 
arguments, and I'll accept your arguments as well. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — You will be providing me with the motor carriers 
and some of the other questions I had asked for, for tomorrow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, I certainly will be. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, just glancing briefly at the per 
diems for Highway Traffic Board, could you give me also the 
number of meetings they attended for the amount that they 
received in remuneration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — We'll just provide that to you very  

shortly. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 7 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, I see your communications budget 
is down this year. Do you propose this year that you will be 
staying closer to the budgeted figure, or are we going to see 
something doubling like we did in the last couple of years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well, no. And it certainly didn't double. I 
think that's a bit of an exaggeration, but this year I think we'll be 
sticking very, very close to that budgeted amount. 
 
And once again, I want to re-emphasize that the over-budgets in 
the past two years were extraordinary items, and they were items 
of a substantive nature that will last for a number of years. So I can 
give the member my fullest assurance that we will be running a 
very, very tight ship, and we will be sticking very, very close to 
the budgeted amount. 
 
Item 7 agreed to. 
 
Item 8 agreed to. 
 
Item 9 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, I see you've got a decrease of 
people in the engineering division. Is there a reason for it? Are you 
going to be requiring less engineers, building less roads this year, 
or are you going to be hiring engineers from the private sector? 
What is it that you're going to do if you're cutting down in the 
amount of people that you have in that department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — The majority of those difference in 
positions were made up of early retirement situations, or vacant 
positions that we're not filling. And I guess what we're going to 
have to do is just simply require a little bit more productivity out 
of the people that we do have. And we'll just have to run with the 
people that we have. And simply, I would say, they're just going to 
work just a little bit harder for us. 
 
Item 9 agreed to. 
 
Items 10 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 19 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Chairman, maintenance of highways and 
transportation facilities — you've got some 30 people less in that 
subvote. Why do you think at this time, Mr. Minister, that you 
need less people in maintenance when our roads are in such poor 
condition. And as I said before, people are driving over them. 
They're wrecking their vehicles, and yet you're cutting down on 
the amount of people in maintenance. Why would you be cutting 
down at a time like this? You either have to start building roads, or 
you have to keep those maintenance crews out there.  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1650 
 
 

Why the cut-back? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I think the member opposite should really 
be aware of the dollar figures that we are expending in 
maintenance. In 1985 it was roughly 83 million; in 1986 we're 
looking at 87 million, so I think the key significant point here is 
that there has been a increase in the maintenance budget. We're 
looking at about 4.3 per cent of an increase, so the dollars that are 
being spent on maintenance have actually increased. 
 
Now, your question as it relates to the numbers of people. Here 
again there is certainly a decrease in the number of people, and I 
simply have to reiterate again that in all areas of government we 
are looking at ways to become more efficient, and I think that's 
certainly part of our mandate. So what I'm saying here is that we 
are going to be doing actually more work with less numbers of 
people. I don't think many people in Saskatchewan would really 
find any argument with that, so it's an efficiency move. We're 
trying our best to spend the taxpayers' dollars as judiciously as we 
possibly can. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Mr. Minister, you're talking about spending 
more money, and it's true item 19 shows more dollars being spent 
in maintenance. But, Mr. Minister, you lay off 30 people; you're 
spending more money. It certainly isn't evident on the highways 
that that extra expenditure has been doing any good, or that cutting 
back in the numbers of people over the last four years has done 
any good. Our highways are in worse shape, our maintenance is a 
lot poorer than it was, yet you are spending more money on it. 
Could you tell me, since you've cut back on the people, how you're 
going to be spending more money on it? Are you going to be 
getting some of the people from the private sector contracting our 
maintenance in highways, or are you going to be doing all the 
maintenance yourself? Could you just indicate to me what portion 
is going to be done by who. 
 
(2315) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well, quite simply we're providing 
roughly the same level of service through government as we have 
last year. And I think a good portion of what we're looking at here 
is really efficiencies. And there have been, I understand — and 
you'll appreciate that I'm not really familiar with all the technical 
aspects that are being done in the department— but I do 
understand there has been some technological advancements, 
some technological improvements that are adding to our 
efficiencies, and for those reason we're providing the same level of 
service, roughly, as we did last year, and with less people. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, you said, roughly. I suppose maybe 
you should have said you're providing some rough service out 
there on our highways when it comes to maintenance. You're 
saying that somehow you've improved the department through 
some new technology that may be available to the department. 
How is that going to help those people that are out there filling 
those holes on the highway? Are you going to bring a computer 
out in the back of the truck and it's going to fill that hole up with 
the required amount of asphalt and tamp it down too, or how are 
you proposing that somehow the new  

technology has improved the efficiency of the department, and 
these holes are going to get filled without the people there to fill 
them. Is this what you're trying to get people to believe? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I don't think I could get into a great 
dissertation on the real technical aspects of it, but we have noticed 
some improvements in technology as it relates to the application 
of seal coating, as it relates to the application of crack filling and, 
in fact, our line stripe markers. There's new technological 
advancements there. Simply, technically, more efficient type 
procedures that we're using and new equipment to do so. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, when you talk about crack filling, 
I'm having some real difficulty here, Mr. Minister, trying to figure 
out how you can say that some of your new technology is going to 
assist you in filling those cracks. Anything I've seen out on the 
highway, or any crew I've seen out there, they still go out there 
with that oil truck, and they still run that bit of oil in a crack, and 
somebody puts some sand on it, and that's the only way it seems 
that they can fill it, unless now you've got something mounted on a 
vehicle that they can drive down there, and it's going to find that 
crack, it's going to put the oil and the sand in it, where you won't 
require the manpower to do it. I'm just wanting you to try and 
explain that to me, how you can fill those holes or those cracks 
without requiring the manpower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I'm glad the member asked that question; 
I'm sure there'll be a number of people who'll be interested in a 
fairly technical procedure. And as it relates to the filling of cracks 
on our highways, there is a new procedure if you like, a new 
compound. And rather than using other types of materials we've 
used in the past, this new compound is a rubberized type of 
compound that expands and contracts with different weather 
temperatures. And the useful life of it — and this is the key point 
— the useful life of this new rubberized compound is probably 
somewhere in the neighbourhood of five to six years, whereas 
with the old procedure you were looking at doing that every single 
year, or every second year. 
 
It's a relatively new technology. My departmental officials have 
discussed this matter in depth with other departmental officials in 
other provinces. We're very, very proud that Saskatchewan has 
gone to the forefront again and come with a new technology that 
we are using, that in the end— and this is the key point — in the 
end will save tax dollars. And we're proud of this new procedure, 
and it's one that is really very, very cost-efficient. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Mr. Minister, I hope that in the end we're 
going to be able to believe some of what you're saying. You are 
spending more money; you say that somehow you're going to be 
saving money. 
 
We'll see what the roads are like, how much you spend on it, and I 
suppose we'll be able to . . . Well, we'll never have the opportunity. 
I guess, to debate that point with you again nest year. But we may 
have an opportunity to have you somewhere around the area that 
we can bring the question up to you and see just what really 
happened  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1651 
 

in 1986-87. 
 
Item 19 agreed to. 
 
Item 20 agreed to. 
 
Item 21 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, you've removed some 52 people 
out of that department. Now apparently they're going to the 
Saskatchewan auto fund during '86-87. What part of your 
department is really being removed to the auto fund? I note that 
driver and vehicle safety division— you're still going to have 
some there, 17 people. What is being moved to the . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — The people who were being transferred, or 
the part of the department, would be the entire vehicle safety 
services branch. The amount that is allocated in the budget is only 
the portion from, I believe, July — or to July, as I understand it. 
 
Item 21 agreed to. 
 
Items 22 to 24 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 16 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Highways and Transportation 

Capital Expenditure — Vote 17 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, I see you've got a bit of an increase 
in it, in your rural surface transportation budget. I hope that you do 
spend all of it this year. You've spent a little more than what you 
budgeted last year, I believe, in capital projects. You've underspent 
in '84-85. I hope that you do spend all of what you've got budgeted 
this year, Mr. Minister. And I wish that when you put together 
your project array, you would have found at least a small portion 
of that money and, I suppose, an equivalent portion of the money, 
considering how many rural constituencies there are, and brought 
some of that into Pelly so we could at least have some roads to 
drive on, rather than the kind of mess that you've created over the 
last four years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, I can assure you we'll spend all the 
money, and I'll certainly give the member's opposite, his 
constituency, a good deal of consideration. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Vote 17 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Chairman, before we close it off, I'd just like 
to say that I notice there's about 100 people less within the 
Department of Highways this year than what there was the 
previous year, and we've seen that happen under the former 
minister where it kept cutting back; you've had 200 and 300 and 
400, and now there's another 100. There's a lot of people, Mr. 
Minister, out of  

work, that could have been doing something, could have been 
providing a service, could have been paying taxes to this province. 
 
I think in the long run it's maybe more beneficial to employ people 
than to keep them on unemployment or on welfare. I wish your 
government would look at what's happening when you look at the 
welfare rolls and the unemployment rolls, and rather than keep 
cutting back the amount of people that you have working for you, 
try to provide some jobs and make them useful citizens of this 
province, taxpayers of this province, that would improve the 
economy rather than see it going down the way it was been. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Just one point for the member's 
information. Part of the reduction in numbers of people were 
simply a transfer from one department to another, so the numbers 
were not quite as large as you may indicate. So, yes, 50 of them 
were a transfer. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Highways and Transportation 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 16 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 16 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Highways and Transportation 
Capital Expenditure — Vote 17 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 17 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to indeed 
thank, firstly, the officials that have been with me here tonight. As 
I said at the outset, I really wanted to pay a great deal of tribute to 
them for the hard work they have done since I became minister. 
And I was very, very pleased with the dedication, the 
professionalism, and the long hours that they have worked to assist 
me. Naturally, when you have a new minister, he needs some 
guidance for the first few months, and I can certainly say that I did 
get a great deal of guidance from the officials. 
 
In addition to that, there was someone else who I do want to 
publicly acknowledge tonight, someone who was a great help to 
me, especially the first few months of becoming minister, and that 
is my Legislative Secretary, the member for Rosthern. And that 
member was a great help to me in numerous areas, and one can 
naturally appreciate the difficulty a young, new minister has in 
coming in. And it was with a great deal of assistance from the 
member from Rosthern that I was able to make it through those 
first few months, if you like. And I certainly want to thank him for 
all his guidance and assistance, and especially in certain matters of 
very, very sensitive matters where my Legislative Secretary has 
gone out and dealt with a number of issues throughout 
Saskatchewan,  
  



 
June 2, 1986 

1652 
 
 

and I want to publicly say here tonight that I am sincerely very, 
very grateful for his help. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2330) 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it appears the minister 
couldn't get up and say anything. He couldn't even thank his 
officials without making a political speech after he thanks them. I 
can see that the minister is a little different than the former 
minister was. he's not quite as arrogant — maybe not quite as 
arrogant. But he's certainly learning fast, and he's getting much 
like the rest of the government has been. 
 
I'd also, Mr. Chairman, like to take this opportunity to thank the 
officials for the information that they have been giving the 
minister. I'm not sure that he passed on all of that information, but 
I know that the officials certainly gave it to him. But I hope that 
the minister will see to getting some of that information tome that 
I'd ask for in the next day or two. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 11:31 p.m. 
 
 


