


















































June 26, 1986 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 26, 1986 
 
 

2355 
 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Executive Council 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 10 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, I want to 
turn to an area of concern, and we've dealt with it to some extent 
during your estimates, and you didn't have the full statistics. And 
it's really the overall financial health of the agricultural 
community. I have major concerns, and there has been various 
movements on your part in addressing some of the concerns. 
There has been less than adequate, I think, in the federal 
government. But when I look at the recent report that is submitted 
by the wheat pool, the relative health of the agricultural 
community in Saskatchewan is really very frightening. And from 
the statistics . . . And I wonder whether you are in agreement with 
the general finding of the wheat pool findings. They say that: 
 

In doing so, we found that in 1986 there are 36 per cent of 
Saskatchewan farmers facing financial difficulty. 

 
So they're indicating 36 per cent facing financial difficulty. 
 

Seventeen per cent are in moderate financial difficulty, 10 
per cent are in severe financial difficulty, and 9 per cent are 
non-viable. 

 
Now, Mr. Premier, if you have some 65,000 farmers in 
Saskatchewan — and you can give me the exact number; you'll 
have that, but its in that range of 65,000 — and if you look at these 
percentages that are outlined in the report of the wheat pool, the 10 
per cent in severe financial position would be about 6,500; the 9 
per cent non-viable is another 5,950. So that's close to 12,000 
farmers. And then there would be another 11,000 or more with 
moderate financial difficulty. 
 
I think also the Farm Credit Corporation, in their analysis, Mr. 
Premier, has indicated in respect to the farmers dealing with the 
Farm Credit Corporation, they find that while there was a slight 
drop of about from 7,000 to 6,900 in the number of farmers that 
are in arrears in the payments to Farm Credit Corporation, what 
they did find out is that the intensity or the amount of arrears had 
increased very significantly from last year to the present. 
 
And so I want to ask the Premier, as the Minister of Agriculture, 
and having discussed it in your estimates . . . And I don't want to 
take too much time, but this is a new report and I wonder whether 
you are prepared to say that your statistics are similar in the review 
of the general health of the agricultural community. Basically what 
we're looking at, as I say, Mr. Premier, on my interpretation of it: 
10 per cent in severe financial difficulty which would be about 
6,500; 9 per cent at the stage which are included as non-viable. 
 

And I think if they look at the definition of non-viable, and it's 
defined with the wheat pool report, is where the . . . Naturally they 
have a large amount of debt, but also there has been some legal 
actions taken in order to . . . foreclosure action against the farmers. 
 
So non-viable are those what they indicate are those likely to be 
wiped out. It doesn't indicate how soon, but that is the situation. 
We're looking at the situation according to the wheat pool survey 
of some 12,000 farmers — 36 per cent in some degree of 
problems and, I submit, over 19 per cent in severe or non-viable 
position. 
 
I was wondering if the Premier is aware of the report and whether 
his analysis in his department would generally concur with those 
findings of the wheat pool. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I'm aware of the report. 
We've had an opportunity to look at it and review it. It provides us 
with a relatively recent analysis of the farm financial situation. 
One of the interesting parts of it, Mr. Chairman, is that it says that 
7 per cent of the non-viable farmers this year control about 26 per 
cent of the debt and about 5 per cent of the assets, which is saying 
that the debt is relatively concentrated in the hands of a fairly 
small number of individuals. 
 
The average age of these operators is about 33, which suggests to 
me that they have — and to anybody that looks at the information 
— that they have purchased their farm or gone into debt at a time 
when obviously land prices were pretty high and interest rates 
ranged about 18 to 20 to 22 per cent. And this group of farmers 
have pretty reasonable productivity. In fact they're probably one of 
the most productive sectors in our entire agricultural industry. 
They range from about 30 years old to about 45 years old, and 
they're more aggressive, the kind of individuals that have taken 
risk, that have bought land, that have invested in equipment, but 
obviously have been caught at high land prices, and then on top of 
that, lowering grain prices and obviously lowering land prices — 
and at the same time, high interest rates. 
 
So yes, I'm familiar with it. It is along the lines that our own 
research shows, and in fact it backs up much of what I have said 
recently of those who have gone out to invest and purchase, those 
who would be in the neighbourhood of 30 years old to 35, 40 
years old, some of them more aggressive, progressive farmers got 
caught in a situation. 
 
Not to be antagonistic, I would suggest that when interest rates 
were going from about 8 or 10 per cent, and it took a number of 
years to go up to 22 per cent, if somebody had done something 
about it, these young people wouldn't have been in near the 
problems they are today. But obviously they had to go right 
through the peak, and had to go through an election and finally 
find somebody else that would help them with low interest rates. 
 
But I think that the wheat pool numbers are up to date; they're 
certainly current and along the lines that we have seen from our 
own officials. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well taking a look at the 17 per cent which  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2356 
 
 

are in moderate financial difficulty, the 10 per cent in severe, and 
the 9 per cent non-viable, I'm wondering what particular 
assessments have you made; what particular programs you think 
that could be instituted, and whether you have discussed it more 
thoroughly with the federal government in order to see whether 
the Farm Credit Corporation . . . It seems to me that one of the 
things . . . The Farm Credit Corporation became not very effective 
for a number of years in the late '70s and the early '80s; and the 
reason it did was because they did not provide long-term lower 
interest rate loans. 
 
And I'm wondering whether you have been able to discuss with 
the Minister of Agriculture, federal counterpart, in order to come 
up with a method of addressing the nature of the problem with 
those farmers that find themselves in financial difficulty. 
 
I think I agree with you these are . . . It's not a case totally of . . . I 
shouldn't say it's not a case at all of management. It's a case of 
circumstances. 
 
And in life that happens to be what happens to many of us. Some 
are very successful because they make the move at a given time. 
And those who wanted to get into farming at a given time did find 
circumstances similar to what you're saying. 
 
But you have to realize that they were able to go into that because 
the financial institutions made all the money available, over and 
above what the Farm Credit Corporation was doing. 
 
And to have subsidized at that time . . . When a quarter section of 
land came up there was so many after it, as you know. To have 
subsidized interest rates at that time when they were in the rush of 
purchasing and building their estate, not realizing that there would 
be such a dramatic drop in the price of their commodities, and 
such a dramatic increase in some of the other aspects of their input 
. . . 
 
And so I don't think that you can turn back the pages, and say, 
well, you should have been doing this. Because at that time, if you 
will look, you will find that young people were buying a lot of 
land at that time. And the credit was available. And they were 
buying it with those . . . acknowledging those prices. 
 
And so, what I'm saying to you, we have the circumstances right 
now. And what you're looking at is some 13,000 farmers 
potentially being wiped out. And I'm wondering whether you have 
any . . . Have you addressed this particular . . . And are you able to 
announce any approach to addressing this major problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, yes we have, Mr. Chairman, and I 
will just go through the list of recommendations of the task force 
that the wheat pool has just finished. And the task force 
recommendations are as follows. 
 
First, they support the principle of a farm debt review panel, which 
we have already initiated. So they believe that's a good idea, and 
we will certainly continue it, and I have encouraged the federal 
government to do the same. 
 

Secondly, in cases where good relationships exist between the 
lender and the borrower, a debt restructuring appears to be the 
only solution. Well obviously we've looked at restructuring with 
our farm review panels and our counselling assistance panel — a 
complete restructuring — so I have to agree with that. 
 
We go on to look for the task force supports the initiatives of a 
number of provincial governments providing for loan guarantees 
on operating credit to farmers. Well we have got 6 per cent money 
out, about a billion dollars, at $25 an acre. That's precisely what 
we have. 
 
It goes on to say that they recognize that it is not possible to save 
all farmers in severe financial difficulty. Therefore the task force 
supports the federal government budget initiative to establish 
Canadian rural transition programs, so that we're looking at a farm 
assistance line at the transition and so forth. And I agree with that 
and have encouraged that. 
 
The task force recommends getting more equity into the 
agriculture scene as opposed to debt. And I've been talking about 
that for some time in terms of converting some of the debt to 
equity, or looking for various new financial instruments that 
would provide equity over debt. 
 
It also recommends that the Farm Credit Corporation should 
institute a long-term, fixed-rate financing at low interest rates. I 
certainly agree with that, and we've been encouraging the federal 
government to do that, that their farm improvement loans be 
changed, that the government guarantee be provided in an interim 
basis. 
 
We have looked at various kinds of arrangements where the 
government federally and provincially can proceed along the lines 
recommended by the task force. Mortgage rate protection 
programs, obviously that we've introduced. 
 
Number eight, it's recommended that the federal and provincial 
governments consider a mechanism to provide guaranteeing 
privately financed mortgages. Well I already recommended the 
Agribond. I did a release the other day on the cabinet committee 
on farm input costs, and that's one of the things farmers said to us. 
And we've already got it in the mill and we're going to be pursuing 
it. 
 
The task force, number nine, recommends that the government 
policy should provide the appropriate environment to encourage 
longer-term lease arrangement between private individuals 
through Crown leases. Well as you know, we have both been 
selling land and providing better leasing arrangements in the 
public sector to farmers, so that we've already moved in that 
regard. 
 
So, in terms of the wheat pool's report — the hon. member asks if 
we're familiar with it; obviously we're very familiar. The majority 
of the recommendations in the report, we've already picked up on 
and have either done ourselves, or will do or are encouraging the 
federal government to do, or have convinced the federal 
government to do with respect to their 6 per cent money  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2357 
 
 

- cutting costs, setting up counselling assistance programs, 
long-run fixed interest rates, and so forth. 
 
So I believe the wheat pool . . . In fact, we co-financed this piece 
of research with the wheat pool, and so we're familiar with the 
studies. It's consistent with what we've done in the past and it's 
consistent with what we thought we should be doing when we 
were talking with farmers, and it fits very well, as a matter of fact, 
with our cabinet committee on farm input costs. 
 
So yes, we're prepared to continue to do as much as possible to 
help the farmers. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I'll leave that — only to say, Mr. Premier, 
that this is in 1986, these statistics, and we have 17 per cent, as I 
said, in moderate financial difficulty, 10 per cent in severe, and 9 
per cent are non-viable. 
 
Now all I can say is that some action you have taken, there's no 
doubt about that — I give you credit for that — but we are sitting 
here with the realization, Mr. Premier, of approximately 12,000 
farmers with a potential of being wiped out. 
 
And I'll tell you that's what's in place right now, particularly with 
the announcement in respect to the price of grain. The major 
decrease in the initial price is going to, I think, increase the 
realization that many of those with heavy debt will not be able to 
survive. 
 
What I'm asking you then, Mr. Premier, is: why are you not in fact 
pressing, as many of the major farm organizations, for the — 
along with the wheat pool, for instance — for a $2 billion 
deficiency payment? 
 
I don't think it's at all possible for the Saskatchewan farmer to 
compete on a world market when you know yourself that there's 
heavy subsidization in the U.S. and there is even heavier 
subsidization in Europe, in the economic common market. 
 
So I'm asking you . . . We moved a resolution in the House here 
asking the federal government to proceed with a deficiency 
payment, and the records will show that members of your 
government voted against that resolution — a resolution which is 
supported, as I said, by major farm organizations. I don't know any 
other solution. Do you have another solution whereby the 
Saskatchewan farmer can compete against the treasury of the 
United States and the European Common Market with a major 
subsidization? 
 
So I would just like to ask you: one, what the comparison of the 
subsidy that Canadian farmers get relative to the United States and 
relative to the European. I know there is a very much higher in the 
United States and still higher in Europe. I ask you: can you outline 
the degree of subsidization comparison to the Canadian farmer, 
and do you agree that there has to be a deficiency payment? And 
why won't you support it to the extent of the major farm 
organizations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon.  

member and I, and the Leader of the Opposition and I, went 
through this in my Agriculture estimates — the very same 
question — and I answered it in some detail for the Leader of the 
Opposition, and responded in some detail for the member from 
Quill Lakes. 
 
So I'll give you the same answer that I gave you before when you 
asked the very same question. I have supported and I led the 
arguments for deficiency payments. And I read from the articles 
out of Swan River, Manitoba. So I've already done that. And I 
read it and it's public and I've endorsed it and it's there. I can dig 
up the articles and the editorials that said that I did that, so there's 
no point in you suggesting otherwise. 
 
Secondly, the research done by the Canadian Wheat Board says 
that the American subsidy is about $2.63 a bushel — about — and 
the Canadian one is about 80 cents, and the European is over $3 a 
bushel. 
 
Now what I outlined to your leader when he asked me about it, as 
I said, for about every billion dollars that we get in terms of extra 
money from the federal government or others, it's worth about a 
dollar a bushel. So if you add up the things that we've got with 
respect to fuel prices in terms of no tax; domestic price wheat; 
freight rates; elevator tariffs; western grain stabilization payments, 
580 million; fall payments; FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) rates, 
about $1 billion at 6 per cent money; drought payments; flood 
payments; capital gains tax; crop insurance payments; and a 
billion in deficiency payments that we're already requested; you're 
in the ballpark of 2 to $3 billion. 
 
Now at about a billion dollars for every dollar a bushel, you're 
looking at 2 to $3 a bushel. Now I think your leader suggested it 
was fair to add them all up, because you can skin it any way you 
like, but if it's public money that's going into agriculture, we've got 
to compare it. 
 
So I said we'll take some in stabilization because the Americans 
don't have a stabilization mechanism. We'll take some in terms of 
higher priced domestic wheat. That's fair enough. We'll take some, 
about a billion dollars, with respect to export subsidies, and that's 
another dollar a bushel. And we'll put them all together. So 
somewhere between 2 and $3 a bushel in 1986-87 crop year, 
you're going to look at in terms of additional money that either we 
have or I have recommended, or both. 
 
So I've been through it before and I'll go through the numbers in 
more detail if you like. But obviously we've got about a dozen 
things in terms of money, specifics we've recommended from the 
federal government. And they've delivered, and we've requested 
more. And I can give you the newspaper clippings that show that 
frankly we have led the charge on most of these, whether it's 
capital gains or fuel prices and higher domestic price wheat. 
 
I've asked for $11; looks like we're going to get 10; maybe we will 
get 11. Very high interim western grain stabilization payments; it's 
exactly what we got, etc., etc. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Just to be perfectly clear, what you're  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2358 
 
 

indicating here, I take it, is that when you have requested of the 
federal government, you have requested $1 billion towards 
deficiency payments. Is that the figure that you have set and have 
justified that on the basis that some of the previous payments 
represent close to another billion dollars through various other 
programs and therefore $1 billion is what you're asking for 
deficiency payments? Just so we're clear, is that the figure that 
you're asking, and is that the request that you'll put to the federal 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The request to the federal government on 
the billion dollars was to compensate Canadian farmers, western 
Canadian farmers, in terms of the export subsidy on the export 
grain that the American farmer was receiving. And the premiers, 
western Canadian premiers, all of them suggested that a billion 
dollars would be sufficient to compensate for the export subsidy in 
the United States in terms of the programs they have now under 
the farm Bill. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well in respect to the agricultural Bill that the 
U.S. government has put forward in support of the farmers in the 
United States, has any effort been made through the negotiations 
to have that put on the table of the free trade discussions? Can you 
indicate to us whether or not that was in your submission? Have 
you any guarantee from the federal government that it has in fact 
been put on the table, and have you anything to report through the 
federal negotiator whether or not they're prepared to look at it? 
Because the impact of the agricultural Bill that they put through in 
the United States gets progressively worse in so far as 
subsidization goes. There are stages of it, and I understand that if 
it's left in place we have a greater subsidy going to the American 
farmers. So I think it's important that it would be addressed 
immediately in order to put the Canadian farmer not at a 
disadvantage. So is that under discussion, do you know, or on the 
table? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, it's on the table, and we 
said that we don't want to negotiate with the United States unless 
the farm Bill is on the table. But I point out again to the hon. 
member — he's concerned about the U.S. farm Bill and what it 
might do to farmers. When we had interest rates at 22 per cent he 
didn't do a thing for farmers, nor did his cabinet — 22 per cent 
interest rates that got people in a lot of trouble, and a great deal of 
trouble . . .  (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
And he says from his seat that they were making a bunch of 
money. Well you ask him. I mean he won his riding on a recount, 
on a recount and it's a rural riding. As a result 22 per cent interest 
rates . . . And this wasn't in the United States; this was right here in 
Canada. Interest rates were lower in the United States. 
Twenty-two per cent, and he would do absolutely nothing for the 
farmer. He says as he chirps from his seat, oh, they were making 
money. Well I'll tell you, an awful lot of them will tell you that's 
exactly when they got into trouble. Not today at 8 per cent money 
that they can get from us, or 6 per cent from farm credit, or 6 per 
cent or zero per cent through cash advanced — at 22 per cent, not 
a dime for farmers, not a thing. And he can look at me and say, 
what am I going to do about the United States farm Bill? Well he 
had it right in his own grasp and didn't do a thing, and people 
won't forget that. They didn't forget it in '82, they won't  

forget it now, and they won't forget it next year. 
 
So you can come and ask me. I'll tell you, the farm Bill is on the 
negotiating table; that's one of the reasons that we should be 
negotiating. That's the reasons that I'm in the United States. 
 
Most of the reason that people are in trouble, and anybody that's in 
agriculture knows it, is we had to go through 20-some per cent 
interest rates, and it takes you years to get that back. And nobody 
was there to help until we got a chance at it — nobody. So we 
made a difference and we'll still be there and we'll do everything 
we can to change the U.S. farm Bill at the same time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well we can discuss electoral successes. I'll tell 
you, Mr. Premier, I haven't run twice and lost twice. I haven't been 
assigned, as a leader of a party, the best seat that the Tories could 
provide, and you lost — and you lost. 
 
So I think, if you want to stand up and brag about electoral 
success, let us compare. One out of three, that's what you had. So 
you know, you ran twice . . . You ran in a good seat in Saskatoon; 
you ran in the best seat that the Tory party could give you in 
Estevan, and you booted that . . .  (inaudible interjection) . . . He 
brought it up. I'll tell you, if you want to discuss electoral success, 
Mr. Premier, you're a bit of a loser and obviously afraid to call the 
election in fear of losing again. 
 
But let's get into the situation, Mr. Premier. If one takes a look at 
the situation of farmers when we were in office, I'll tell you, the 
net income was better than under your administration. And the 
basic problem that the farmer is running into now is the inactivity 
of the federal Tory government. 
 
I'll tell you, the major competitors of the world, their governments, 
have in fact put together a very substantial support Bill behind the 
farmers. In United States, as you said, a major subsidization of 
$2.63 a bushel; more in Europe; and here, something like 83 cents, 
I believe you indicated. 
 
What I'm saying is that . . . And I'm asking you: have you got a 
commitment from the federal government that they will indeed be 
putting into effect a deficiency payment in order that the farmers 
can make plans for the future knowing what support they will be 
getting? Have you had any meetings in respect and have you got 
any commitment from the federal government that they will in fact 
be putting forward a deficiency payment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — As I mentioned, Mr. Chairman, the 
premiers and the ministers of Agriculture . . . First the western 
premiers recommended the federal government put up a billion 
dollars in negotiating with the United States and be prepared to 
spend that billion dollars in the event that the U.S. export subsidies 
continue. 
 
Secondly, as Minister of Agriculture, I met with the ministers 
across the country, as well as the federal minister; recommended 
the same thing. When we met as first ministers with the Prime 
Minister, I made the same recommendations to him and I also 
wrote him to say  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2359 
 
 

exactly that. At every possible level that I've been able to 
participate — in the western premiers, the ministers of 
Agriculture, in the first ministers, in letters and correspondence 
between me and the Prime Minister — it has been recommended. 
So in terms of provincial access and provincial leverage and 
support of my colleagues, the premiers on either side of me, we've 
all made the same representation. So the hon. members knows 
whether I've made the request and have demanded it — I certainly 
have. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I guess you can say that you demanded it. 
What I asked you is whether or not you got a commitment from 
him; whether in fact the farmers of Saskatchewan can look 
forward. Because what I want to say to you, that I don't know how 
you can be satisfied with the response of the federal government. 
 
Certainly when they had to bail out the banks, it wasn't hard to 
find substantial amount of money. When they wanted to give the 
oil companies a deal — bang! — they had money, and very, very 
rapidly. No problem. Total commitment. I'll tell you, when it 
comes to farmers now, you're hedging. You say you have asked. 
I'm asking you: have you got a commitment from the federal 
government in respect to deficiency payments. Can you in fact 
indicate since the premiers put forward a resolution in requesting 
deficiency payments . . . What I'm asking you, Mr. Premier: have 
you got a commitment from the federal government that they will 
in fact be putting it in, and if so, when can we expect the 
announcement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, you're just wasting everybody's time 
as usual. You expect me to speak for the Prime Minister, and 
when I do you won't accept it. Well I'll give you the commitments. 
If you can sit in your seat long enough to listen to them, I'll give 
you those that we've already delivered . . .  (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Delivered. Not commitments. This is no promise; this is 
action. You want some action; I'll give you the action. I'll go 
through it tonight if you want it all. I mean we've been through this 
before. 
 
We asked to take the taxes off farm fuel from the federal 
government. We asked and we got a commitment. And what 
happened? They provided $80 million because they took the tax 
off farm fuel. How's that? Not only a commitment, but action. 
 
We asked for higher priced domestic wheat, and the committee 
recommends $10 a bushel. That's $200 million from the federal 
government. How's that for commitment and action. 
 
We've asked to have them freeze freight rates, and they said, we 
will do it. That was a commitment and they did, and that's $40 
million. 
 
We asked them to freeze elevator tariffs. Do you know what? 
They committed to that and they did it. They're flat; that's worth 
$10 million. 
 
We asked for a grain stabilization interim payment. They said, we 
will commit to that. What did we get? Five  

hundred and eighty million dollars interim, the largest ever that 
we've ever had in the history of the country. Delivered. 
 
We asked for 6 per cent money in the Farm Credit Corporation — 
delivered and committed. 
 
We asked for a drought payment — $58 million. We asked for a 
flood payment: committed, 14.8. And we asked if the capital gains 
tax would be removed from farm land and they made the 
commitment. And do you know what? They delivered, and that's 
worth $50 million a year to Saskatchewan families. 
 
We asked them to do something on beef imports — subsidized 
imports from the European Economic Community — and they 
said, we will do that. They made a commitment and they 
delivered. 
 
And we asked for help in crop insurance, and there was a $640 
million payment. 
 
Now that in itself is worth well over a billion dollars, in not only 
commitments, but actions. So the member stands there and says, 
well did you get a commitment now to have some more money. 
Well I can only say to him: farmers all across the province asked 
him for help when he was a cabinet minister, and he gave them 
absolutely zero, except land bank — land bank an succession 
duties. That's what he gave them. The NDP death tax and land 
bank, and not one dime to help them with interest rates. And he's 
got the courage to stand in the legislature and say, well have you 
done anything for farmers. 
 
There isn't a farmer out there, no matter what his political stripe, 
who doesn't believe he's never seen such action from a federal 
government or provincial government in his entire life in 
agriculture in this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I'm not sure why the Premier gets up and rants 
and raves. The question was, and I'll ask you again — a simple 
question. 
 
Has the federal government — you've made the request for a 
deficiency payment, and you indicated that the premiers together 
made a request for a deficiency payment. All I'm asking you: have 
you got any commitment from the federal government whether or 
not they will be, in fact, paying a deficiency payment? And yes, or 
no; you don't have to rant. You can if you want, but I'll ask you 
again very quietly whether or not you got a commitment in respect 
to the federal — from the federal government for the payment of a 
deficiency payment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Very quietly, very quietly, to the member 
opposite from Quill Lakes, who is obviously being very polite this 
evening, I'll say it's under serious consideration by the federal 
cabinet. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I take it — serious consideration. Can the Premier 
give his interpretation of what serious consideration means in so 
far as the commitment to the farmers of Saskatchewan? When, in 
fact, do you expect  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2360 
 
 

an announcement, and a final decision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, serious consideration in the 
past, and that's all I can go from, Mr. Chairman, is that they 
seriously considered taking the tax off farm fuel, and they 
seriously considered raising the price of domestic wheat, and they 
seriously considered freezing the freight rates. And they had 
seriously considered freezing elevator tariffs, and they give serious 
consideration to a large grain stabilization payment. 
 
They give very serious consideration to 6 per cent money through 
farm credit; very serious consideration to drought and to flood; 
and very serious consideration to removing the tax on capital 
gains; very serious consideration to stopping the beef imports 
coming in here that are subsidized; very serious consideration to a 
new disaster mechanism; large crop insurance payments; and at 
least 12 out of 12 on that list. Mr. Chairman, they not only gave 
very serious consideration and a commitment, but they delivered. 
 
So I would say when they're giving it serious consideration, and 
they're in negotiations with the United States, and we're designing 
a strategy that the premiers are involved with, the provinces are 
involved with the federal government, that they are looking at 
every single lever that they can use as an international strategy. 
 
And when they tell me they're giving it serious consideration from 
their track record, I believe that that would be the case. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You know, you should really make a record and 
save yourself the trouble of getting up and down because really 
what we're asking you is specific questions. 
 
And the House of Commons is adjourning, I believe tomorrow, 
and I was wondering whether you are expecting, before the House 
adjourns for the break, to have an announcement by the federal 
government. 
 
Or are we likely . . . I think it's important for the farmers of 
Saskatchewan that the announcement be made in conjunction with 
. . . in order that they can properly plan their affairs and know what 
support they have, rather than attempt, as you have done 
consistently, to play politics with the issues relating to the farmers. 
 
And so the House is adjourning and there has been no 
announcement as yet, is adjourning tomorrow, and I would expect 
that the announcement, if it comes, will depend upon the Premier 
calling an election. Someone may have to very well bail you out to 
try to get you elected because you can't on your own, in respect to 
no matter what you have said. You have demonstrated your fear to 
go to the polls, and that's fair enough. 
 
I was wondering whether or not you have taken any steps in 
respect to the comments made by the president of the 
Saskatchewan chamber of commerce, Mr. Boyd Robertson, who 
has indicated the position of the chamber of commerce indicating 
that the $25 per acre operating loan was unfair. "Offering farmers 
$25 an acre operating 

loans at 6 per cent interest is an unfair and inappropriate use of 
government funds," said Boyd Robertson, president of the 
Saskatchewan chamber of commerce and vice-president, I believe, 
of the Royal Bank, and a heavy supporter of the Tory party. 
 
I was wondering whether you have taken any steps, Mr. Premier, 
to take . . . whether you have written to the chamber and asked for 
an explanation or whether you have sat by and allowed the 
president of the chamber and the vice-president of a major bank, 
which I suggest has benefited greatly under your administration, 
whether you have taken any steps in addressing that particular 
issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, this is probably the 
first time — well at least today, but maybe for a long time — that 
the member from Quill Lake and the head of the chamber of 
commerce and, correspondingly, the vice-president in charge of 
the Royal Bank, agree. The last time I was in Ag estimates the 
member from Quill Lakes was absolutely against the 6 per cent 
money. It was a universal program and he said farmers will not 
pay it back and it's unfair, and it wasn't the thing to do. 
 
Now we've got the head of the chamber of commerce who says 
that he agrees with the member from Quill. I can't think of a time 
in history when the member of Quill Lakes has ever agreed with 
anybody in the chamber of commerce, but if they both think that 
it's not a good idea, well fair enough. 
 
I'll tell you one thing, Mr. Chairman, farmers think that it is a good 
idea; they're supportive of it. We've got over a billion dollars out; 
it's the same as the cash advance from the wheat board; it's the 
same as the cash advance we have in the livestock industry; it's a 
universal program; we don't have a means test; we don't draw 
boundaries; and it's a very positive idea. And even if the member 
from Quill Lakes is against it doesn't mean that I won't continue it. 
I will, because I believe it's the right thing to do. 
 
Farmers are . . . Well on the other hand I've had members from . . . 
or the member from Assiniboia Gravelbourg come in and say, 
well, you missed a farmer; you didn't get one of my farmers. And 
it's 99.62 per cent of all the farmers that applied got it. But I 
missed one and you've got the member from Quill who is standing 
up on the other side saying, I don't even think it's a good idea. And 
now he's on side with the bank who's saying, Jeez, that's not a 
good idea. 
 
So we can just put it on the record, because I've got him here from 
the last time he was on his feet in Ag estimates, he's against the 6 
per cent money; you got a banker that says he's against the 6 per 
cent money. The member from Quill Lakes should make up his 
mind. Is he on the side of farmers? I mean he was just after me for 
not helping them. Then I come in with 6 per cent money for 
everybody, a billion dollars out; he doesn't like that. He talks about 
the banker doesn't like it. I guess he's siding with the banker. He's 
against it. First he wants more money; he wants a billion dollars. 
And then he says, well, he doesn't like the 6 per cent money, 
which is a billion dollars. 
 
I'm not so sure the member from Quill Lakes really  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2361 
 
 

understands farming. I'm not so sure that he really understands the 
farm situation, what 22 per cent interest rates can do to a farmer if 
you don't help him; why farmers are so much against the land 
bank. 
 
I don't know that he understands what a debenture means. I'm not 
sure that he really understands economic activity — whether he 
knows all that much about agriculture, prices, financing, markets, 
commodities. I'm not sure. I mean, obviously he's taken three or 
four different positions while he's been in here in my estimates 
alone, whether it's in agriculture or the Premier's estimates. 
 
So I would say, look, if you're against it, fair enough. But we are 
going to continue with the 6 per cent money because it's 
appropriate and it's helpful, and thousands and thousands of 
people in this province have taken advantage of it, whether you 
and the banks like it or not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Oh, a little ranting and raving by the Premier. 
You ask a question and he rants and he raves, but he doesn't 
answer the question. So I'll ask him again: in view of the 
comments made by the vice-president of the chamber of 
commerce which attacked the program of a $25 dollar acre, 6 per 
cent loan to the farmers, have you — that was the question — 
have you, in fact, made a contact with the president of the chamber 
indicating that you are less than pleased with the comments which 
would attack the basic program of assistance to the farmers? 
 
The president of the chamber of commerce says: 
 

Given the competitiveness in the international markets (he 
asked) are we really prepared to take on the world when it 
comes to production costs and prices? There is an unwritten 
law (says this banker) in our province which suggests anyone 
who decides to go into agriculture has the God-given right to 
succeed. 

 
If we believe in democracy and free enterprise and the right 
to win and lose, that right should be applied to all industries 
and all people, no matter what path they choose. 

 
Those are the comments from your friend the banker, the 
vice-president of the Royal Bank, the president of the chamber of 
the commerce, also an organization closely aligned with your 
party. 
 
And I'd ask you . . . the simple question was whether or not you 
made any representations indicating that you did not agree with 
the chamber of commerce attack against the farmers as set out in 
the article. I just ask you that simple question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, the simple answer is, Mr. Chairman, 
that I'm going to provide 6 per cent money whether the banker 
likes it or not, and he knows that. And he can speak for you. 
Maybe he was talking to you. 
 
I note here on June 11, 1986 you described the program  

like this, and you say on page 1895: 
 

Well I'll tell you, this program here doesn't help the people 
. . . 

 
That's what you said about the 6 per cent money. And you said: 
 

You deceive the people . . . You announced the program; 
you said it applies to all farmers. That's what you said. You 
weren't fair. 

 
It only applies to only 99.62 per cent of the people. And: 
 

That's what you've done. And wealthy farmers have gone to 
the banks . . . 

 
Now this is where the banker gets it. He must get it from you. 
 
. . . wealthy farmers have gone into (the) banks, (and) have 
taken this money; and they don't hid the fact, nor are they 
ashamed of it. But they are ashamed to have a Minister of 
Agriculture and a Premier that would put out a program so 
basically unfair. 
 
Well here the member for Quills criticized me a week ago about 
how unfair this was because the farmers go and give it to the 
banks, and he said you designed this program and it didn't help 
people. Then he comes back the next week and he's in cahoots 
with the bank, because the bank is now saying, well that's not a 
very good program, Mr. Premier. And he asks me whether I agree 
with the banks. Well for Heaven's sake, he said it worse than the 
banker. 
 
(1945) 
 
I mean right here in Hansard, the member from Quill Lakes, and 
I'm going to put this in every home in his riding, said that this is 
not a good idea. He lined up with the banks, and he says he's got 
people in his riding who took the money into the banks. And he 
says they may never pay it back, and it isn't fair, and farmers don't 
get . . . Well for Heaven's sake, and this is an NDPer. The member 
from Shaunavon, you've got to talk to your colleague here. I mean, 
this guy is sounding like a capitalist. He's getting right into this. I 
mean, he's sounding like a banker. He doesn't like this program. 
Well I don't know. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I can only say that . . . I can only say, Mr. 
Chairman, that the member, on page 1895, June 11th, said that this 
is only good for the banks, and it wasn't good for anybody else. 
His riding didn't like it. Then he lines up with the banks the next 
week. 
 
I can only say, Mr. Chairman, I don't care what the member from 
. . . if the member from Quill Lakes says he doesn't think 6 per 
cent money for farmers is good, or if the bankers don't think that 
it's good, this government is going to provide 6 per cent money for 
farmers because the farmer thinks it's good. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2362 
 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Well I'm again very surprised with the Premier. 
He seems in his appearance a little wild-eyed. I don't know what 
you've had to eat during supper, but your whole personality has 
changed. I thought we were going to have just a civil discussion of 
some of the problems facing agriculture. And somehow you got 
wound up and you repeat yourself. 
 
I don't know if anybody noticed that here, but you just seem to say 
the same thing over and over and over again. It's a tremendous 
repetition. But I'll tell you I know it by heart now. You don't have 
to say it again . . .  (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, before supper 
he was all right. But I don't know what you had to eat during 
supper, but you seem a little wild-eyed, and little repetitious. So let 
us get on to the major question here. 
 
The concern that I have is, here we have your friend, your friend 
the banker, a major contributor to the Tory party. And look and 
see at the donations that the bankers give to the Tory party. And 
he's blasting the farmers. But I'd like to ask you, Mr. Premier . . . 
here you're bragging in respect to what you've done for the farmers 
who have built this here province. 
 
But I'll tell you, the grants . . . Do you know what? You give 
grants to strangers, out-of-province friends who ran for the Tory 
leadership, like Peter Pocklington. You're prepared to give him 
grants — no repayments. To the farmers who are hard pressed, the 
best you can do is a loan, and interest on that loan. But not to Peter 
Pocklington; you give him straight grants — up to $10 million. 
 
And I'll tell you the farmers are saying, Mr. Premier, they couldn't 
fail as a farmer if they had the deal you gave to Weyerhaeuser — 
that if they didn't make any money, they didn't have to make any 
payments. I'll tell you, the farmers would like that deal. If they 
didn't make any payments, and in fact if they went in the hole, if 
they owed anything, it could be deducted from the amount that 
they owed to the banks. I'll tell you they would like that deal. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Premier, the Tories have two standards — 
for the multinational corporations, and the banks. You know what 
you people have? You know what you have? You have grants and 
bail-outs and gifts and give-aways. That's what you have. 
 
And I'll tell you, to the people who built this province, the best that 
you can do here is to give them a loan, and a short-term loan. And 
all you have done is not address the major problem of some 36 per 
cent of the farmers that are in serious trouble, and I'm referring to 
those 36 per cent that are having basic problems. The $25, I said, 
is not going to solve the problem — $25 program is not going to 
solve the problem of the 36 per cent of the farmers, the 36 per cent 
of the farmers of Saskatchewan facing financial difficulty, of 
which 17 per cent, moderate financial difficulty; 10 per cent are 
severe; 9 per cent non-viable. 
 
I say that essentially what you are doing is . . . no problem 
protecting the banks, no problem protecting the oil companies, no 
problems giving grants and holidays to the oil companies. But 
when it comes to the farmers, you took  

away the property improvement grant and you took away the 
home quarter education rebate. That's what you stuck to the 
farmers, but not to the oil companies. And your Tory cousins in 
Ottawa, they had lots of money, and bang! they had it right away 
— in the millions, in the billions, to bail out banks and to bail out 
oil companies — billions. But they don't have it for the farmers. 
 
And so I think, certainly, Mr. Premier, we on this side are ready 
for an election if you have the nerve to call it. If everything were 
as you said it and you believe the people believed it, you wouldn't 
have hesitated, my friend. You would have called an election. But 
what you have to do is to go around and try to convince again and 
again, but they won't believe you. There's no credibility. And I'll 
tell you, with the Weyerhaeuser deal your credibility is finished. 
People of Saskatchewan say there is no manager — they say there 
is no manager in charge of Saskatchewan. 
 
And do you know what the legacy you gave the people of 
Saskatchewan? You gave them $2 billion on the next generations. 
That's what the Premier, Grant Devine, gave to the people. Ah, but 
there is no manager. You gave the oil companies who raped the 
resources. Of course, of course there's going to be debt when you 
give it to the special groups like the oil companies. 
 
And let us . . . We are prepared to go to the people of this province 
and we ask you to have the nerve and the fortitude to go forward 
and allow the people to be the judge of your actions, of your 
tenure in office. Because I think that the people of Saskatchewan 
are ready to turf you out, in spite of all your rhetoric and all your 
pretence of what you have done. 
 
How can you have a booming society and at the same time indebt 
the people of this province to the tune of over $2 billion — $200 
million in payment on interest alone. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Two hundred million dollars in interest alone. 
And more than that, you have increased the taxes massively on the 
ordinary Saskatchewan people. That's what you have done. 
 
And I'll tell you, take a look at the massive debt, public debt, from 
$3.4 billion to $8.7 billion. That's a great legacy you leave behind. 
You've been a great manager. And I'll tell you, you're prepared to 
put this province into any imaginable debt to try to get elected 
again. That's the danger. And that's why we ask you, Mr. Premier, 
to come clean, to call an election before you destroy this province 
any further with the Weyerhaeuser deal and the Pocklington deals. 
 
I'll tell you, that's what the people are asking for — the Premier to 
have enough nerve to call an election. And you've demonstrated it, 
you've demonstrated it, Mr. Premier. All of your back-benchers 
talk to us and they say, we can't get him to go. He's scared. He 
won't go. And I say to you, Mr. Premier, you can say all you want; 
that everything is fine here in Saskatchewan. But I'll tell you, put 
forward your record and see what the people of Saskatchewan will 
do with you. 
 
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2363 
 
 

And I ask you, Mr. Premier, if all has been so good under your 
administration, why have we had such an increase in the number 
of young people that are unemployed? Why have we had the 
massive increase in the unemployment roll, and on welfare? And 
why have we so many people now not with full-time, 
career-oriented jobs, but so many with only part-time jobs. 
 
This is the legacy of the economy that you have left to the people 
of this province, and surely if you had any confidence, you would 
well have called the election, Mr. Premier. And certainly you have 
been in office now the longest time of any government since the 
Second World War. And it seems to me that you have wasted 
many opportunities and have indebted the young people of future 
generations. And I don't really think it's fair . . . 
 
I can only say, Mr. Premier, I don't think you should be very proud 
of your party, the history of your party, because it only had a short 
history in this province, and that was the Anderson government 
back in 1929-34, I believe. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I wasn't even born then. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Ah, yes, he wasn't even born. But a Tory is a 
Tory, my friend. A Tory philosophy basically hasn't changed. And 
when you look at the . . . We had one Tory government, Mr. 
Premier, and they were afraid to call an election also. And they 
went for five years, the Anderson government. And do you know 
what happened, Mr. Premier, when they called the election? They 
got wiped out completely. There wasn't another Tory to be seen. 
 
And I suggest that you're going to have to wait close to five years, 
and I suggest the people of Saskatchewan will probably give you 
much the same type of treatment because you haven't been much 
better to the people of this province. And the danger as I see it, Mr. 
Premier, the danger of you continuing in office is that you are so 
determined at the taxpayers' expense to stay in office that you will, 
in fact, indeed promise anything and spend any amount of money 
regardless of the amount of debt that is accumulated on the people 
of this province. That is the danger. 
 
And so I ask you, Mr. Premier, if indeed you are confident of 
being re-elected, then there's no need to not, to get, call the 
election. Don't give us the excuse that you have more on your 
platter that you have to . . . Well I'll tell you, if you're confident of 
winning, you can keep that on the platter and get it right after the 
28 days. That's what you could do. 
 
And I'll tell you, the business people and the farmers and the 
working people are saying, call an election, Premier. That's what 
they're saying. When is he going to call it? Why won't he call it, 
they say? What answer? I wonder what answer the back-benchers 
give when they go out or attempt to go out to see their 
constituents? What kind of an answer do you give when the 
people say, why won't that Premier call an election? I imagine you 
have to give some kind of excuse . . .  (inaudible interjection) . . . 
More on the platter all right. I'll say it's more on the platter trying 
to get elected, but not governing for the welfare of the  

people of this province. 
 
And so I say to you, Mr. Premier, the Tories both federally and 
provincially, we know who you're aligned with — with the banks, 
the trust companies, the oil companies. You've given $300 million 
for four years to the oil companies. Your federal cousins have 
given billions of dollars to bail out oil companies and banks. 
Certainly they have. And I'll tell you, when it comes to 
Saskatchewan people, what you have given is increased taxes, 
increased debt, and fewer programs. You've cut back in some of 
the major programs and the social programs . . .  (inaudible 
interjection) . . . You have. Well, okay. Think about them, and you 
have. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Premier, if you're confident, I ask you to call 
an election and let's see what the people of Saskatchewan think 
about your tenure. I'll tell you, Mr. Premier, we're ready. You call 
it and the people will show you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the member from Quill says 
he's ready. I finally figured out why he's getting close to the banks. 
Evidently, they're $400,000 in hole. And he wants me to call an 
election, and he's kind of sidling up to the banks tonight. And he 
says he agrees with the head of the Royal Bank that this program 
is no good, and he's trying to sound like a banker because he's 
$400,000 in debt and he wants the banks to contribute to his party. 
And he's sitting there smiling away. This is the first time that he's 
been able to figure out . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Then he says, I'm not sure people will take 
advantage of all the programs we've initiated. Well I just took a 
quick calculation over there. If we take the member from 
Gravelbourg and we find out — I wonder if he's got access to the 
6 per cent money? Well if he did, and I suspect he did, he got 
$100,000. The member from Pelly, 15 — 1,600 acres, he probably 
got about $40,000. The member from Shaunavon probably could 
get access to about $100,000 at 25 per cent. And the former 
member from Morse probably could get $100,000 on one, and 
$100,000 on two — 53 quarters — I imagine he'd be good for 
$200,000. That's $450,000 a handful of NDPers that picked up 
already at 6 per cent money. And they're saying, oh the bankers, 
by gosh, the bankers are saying this is not a good program. 
 
(2000) 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I'll tell you what, the member from Quill 
said, you know you should have called an election earlier. You 
know, I got calls after my Agriculture estimates, and the member 
from Quills was up, and what they said after the Agriculture 
estimates and after he had got finished, they said, you know what, 
I know why you didn't call the election. You wanted to go through 
your Agriculture estimates because after those estimates you are 
likely to win every rural riding in Saskatchewan after the next 
election. That's what they said, Mr. Chairman, and that will 
include the rural riding of Quill Lakes. 
 
Well if you want to look at bankruptcies, Mr. Chairman, the 
bankruptcies in the province of Saskatchewan are  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2364 
 
 

small compared to either our neighbouring provinces. And if you 
want to get into the history, obviously we can review as I did the 
other day the Regina Manifesto, where they laid out their whole 
program: they're against farmers and capitalists and free 
enterprise; and if it's the last thing they do, that's what they want to 
do. I won't get into it again, but I'm quite prepared to if the 
member wants to get into election platforms. If he wants to run on 
the Regina Manifesto, where everything is in the public sector, 
we'll be glad to take him on because I believe the phone calls. 
 
In the next election we have a very good possibility of winning 
every rural riding in Saskatchewan — and yes, Mr. Chairman, and 
yes to the member of Quill Lakes, I will call an election. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, Mr. Premier, I just want to make one 
comment in respect to that little dissertation. What I want to say is, 
I have never seen such arrogance from any premier in my life. 
Here is a Premier that stands in this legislature and says: because 
what I have done, every farmer must vote for me. That's what he's 
saying. He says he's going to win every seat in Saskatchewan, if 
you can believe it. That's the arrogance of this here Premier — to 
stand up in this legislature, just because he has a huge majority in 
the last House, to say now that he's going to win every seat in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That's what he said. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That's exactly what he said. He is telling the 
people of Saskatchewan, you're going to be voting for me. 
 
Well I'll tell you, there's freedom here yet, and the people of 
Saskatchewan have been eyeing you up, my friend — they've 
been eyeing you up. And I'll tell you, not since the days of the 
Anderson government, because my father told me about the 
Anderson government, the arrogance of the Anderson government 
indicating exactly the same arrogance of this Premier. 
 
History repeats itself, they say. And here we have the Premier of 
this province who has the arrogance to stand in this Assembly and 
say that, every individual rural and city seat I will win because of 
my record, instead of going to the people. What arrogance in such 
a short time. 
 
Here is a man that has never ever entered the Legislative Building 
before he was elected last time; defeated twice at the polls, 
rejected this man who is Premier — rejected twice — and now he 
stands after four years and says he's going to win every seat in 
Saskatchewan. Well I'll tell you, you keep up the arrogance, my 
friend, because the people of Saskatchewan are ready for you. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Premier, your arrogance and the arrogance of the 
other members of your cabinet . . . You say that you have done 
everything right for the people of Saskatchewan. Well I'll tell you, 
there are many people out there that don't agree with you. And I 
say to you, I would ask you to apologize to the people of 
Saskatchewan for the arrogance that you have displayed here — 
that you in fact are going to win every seat in Saskatchewan, and 
you haven't even had the nerve to call  

an election in the usual four-year time or less. 
 
Now that is arrogance — arrogance of the worst type. And I'll tell 
you, Mr. Premier, history will repeat itself and you're gong to be a 
three-time loser. 
 
But you know, some of your leaders have had a great facility of 
staying on; in fact, some of your members here have run a number 
of times. They have a sort of a perseverance, but you'd better be 
ready for perseverance because, I'll tell you, the people of 
Saskatchewan are ready for you. Call the election — but I'll tell 
you, don't tell them how they're going to vote because that's 
arrogance of the worst type. And I'll tell you, you let the people of 
Saskatchewan be the judge. Don't you tell them how they're going 
to vote. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the member from Quill 
Lakes doesn't like to hear that, after he gets finished Agriculture 
estimates, everybody in rural Saskatchewan is absolutely 
convinced that the NDP don't know what they're talking about in 
agriculture, and that's the case. They threw out the land bank; they 
threw out the 22 per cent interest rates; they threw out the NDP 
death tax; and they felt that way in '82 and they feel that way 
today. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I'll tell you that . . . And their research shows, 
as well, that the people of rural Saskatchewan like to see the 
protectionism that we have provided against high interest rates; 
they like to see the 6 per cent money; they like to see all the 
programs we initiated because the other people didn't. 
 
Now he wants to talk about arrogance. Let me read the views of 
the organizers of the NDP. This is in the Commonwealth, April 30, 
1986. And it says this: 
 

The editor: I realize you have problems with the 
Conservative government, but in one by-election, the 
Conservatives won the seat. If they are so bad, how come the 
people voted for and elected the Conservatives? . . . (And 
this is what the organizers say.) Do you know something, the 
voters are so damn stupid . . . 

 
That's what the NDP say about the voters: the voters are damn 
stupid. And then he goes on to say: 
 

So how can anyone possibly educate these lame-brained 
voters? 

 
This is an NDP organizer, April 30th, in the Commonwealth, who 
is talking about the voters. Do you know what the Leader of the 
Opposition . . .  (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the guy's name 
happens to be, and I'll find it here — Steve Dediluke is the guy's 
name, and he's an NDP organizer. You can look it up — April 30, 
1986. And he goes on to say: 
 

I am a professional NDP organizer, and I did have a way to 
change people's minds. 

 
He says, "I have a way to change people's minds." 
 

I believe the main reason why we are more or less at a 
standstill in the popular vote, maybe gain one  

  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2365 
 
 

or two per cent . . . which does not help much, is simply 
because we campaign on issues people are not interested in. 

 
That's what he says that they do. That's an NDP organizer. 
 
And after the last election the NDP leader in Saskatchewan says: 
do you know what? The voters of Saskatchewan made a mistake. 
They were wrong. The voters of Saskatchewan made a mistake 
and they didn't vote for the NDP. 
 
Here's the NDP organizers. They're taught to say this in the 
Commonwealth. They say: 
 

Did you know something, the voters are so damn stupid . . . 
So how can anybody possibly educate these lame-brained 
voters? 

 
That's the attitude of the member from Quills; that's the attitude 
from the member from Shaunavon; that's the attitude of the NDP 
leader over there. Here's their newspaper — and they publish this; 
they like this stuff. This is first class for them. They say that the 
voters are so stupid, and they say that there's no way that we could 
educate these lame-brain voters. Imagine the arrogance of the 
NDP, who lost the last election — lost the last election because 
they didn't help, and they're coming on and saying, oh, the voters 
are so stupid. 
 
Well, I'll tell you what, Mr. Chairman. We'll put this record on the 
doors where the NDP say that the voters are stupid and that they 
are lame-brain and can't be educated, and then the Commonwealth 
will have that editorial all over rural and urban. 
 
Because we listen to people. When people say they want help 
against 22 per cent interest rates, we respond. When they say they 
want something better than land bank, we respond. When they say 
they want a pension program, we respond. When they want 
venture capital legislation for labour, we respond. When they want 
shopping hours extended, we react and we respond and we make a 
commitment, just like the federal government has made a 
commitment — more commitment and more action in agriculture 
in an urban and rural than the entire 11 years of the last NDP 
administration. 
 
I went through the numbers today — the numbers today, and they 
don't even want to listen to the numbers. Population is up; new 
jobs are up; economic indicators over the four years, the last four 
years they were in power. And do you know what they say? Oh, 
well, the voters were stupid. The voters were so damned stupid, 
and that they are lame-brained, and it's impossible to educate 
them. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, the NDP can say that the voters are stupid, 
but we're in a democracy, and we're going to defend the rights and 
the liberties of individuals in this province. And when we call an 
election, we'll find out what the people think of the NDP 
organizers calling people stupid. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Deputy Speaker — Mr. Chairman, 
pardon me. Mr. Premier, I've looked forward to raising a few 
questions with you pertaining to the Indian, the Metis, and the 
non-status people of this province. 
 
I want to read to you a paragraph of a workshop I attended just 
recently, which I concur with. It relates to Indian, Metis, and 
non-status people in this province, and throughout Canada. It says 
in part, and I quote: 
 

After years of paternalism and assimilation policies a 
growing number of Canadians are recognizing the right of 
aboriginal people to self-determination. Paternalism has not 
advanced the interest or served the needs of native people. 
Attacks on native culture and institutions have harmed native 
people and have not brought them within the mainstream of 
our society. 

 
It is important to remember that of all groups within Canada, the 
native people did not chose the new order but had it imposed upon 
them. They were already here. However, provincial, federal, 
national governments' control over all aspects of Indian people's 
lives have been a fact of life throughout our shared history, Mr. 
Premier. The national government has always made economic and 
social decisions for Indian communities that other communities 
have made locally. Not only has this system of central control 
been unequal and unjust, it has been grossly inefficient. Other 
aboriginal people such as the Metis, the Indian, and non-status 
Indians, have lived in a condition of less than benign neglect, at 
the mercy of governments foreign to their communities and their 
culture. The principle of quality demands that they receive a 
measure of control over their own institutions. 
 
Mr. Premier, I am proud to be on this side of the House . . . such a 
small opposition. After reviewing five budget presentations by 
your government and having a government in power going well 
into five years, I have yet to hear a throne speech presentation or a 
policy which relates to the position of the New Democratic Party 
of Saskatchewan. And I read to you, Mr. Minister: 
 

That the New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan 
unequivocally endorses the principles of Indian, Metis, and 
non-status self-government for Canada's aboriginal people. 

 
Just the other day, Mr. Premier, I was doing estimates with the 
Minister for Indian and Metis, pardon me, Indian and — he calls 
his department Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat. I was pleased 
with some of the information that he provided; there is some 
information that is still forthcoming. 
 
(2015) 
 
But I look at the information that was provided, Mr. Minister, and 
I see before me issues after issues that have been neglected by 
your administration, by the Devine PC government. The issues 
before me, and the issues that I have . . . but specifically talking 
about issues that are raised by northern organizations, elected 
officials,  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2366 
 
 

various interest groups, fishermen, trappers, wild rice growers, 
northern outfitters, and other construction workers; and in general, 
people of Indian, Metis ancestry raised 87 issues, Mr. Premier — 
87 issues. And they relate, Mr. Premier, to the social, political, and 
economic advances and aspirations that they desire, much the 
same as those that are desired by the other people that are not 
Indians throughout Canada. 
 
Your policies, Mr. Premier, in the course of my term of office, 
have not resolved nor even tried to resolve the issues confronting 
the people that are at the lowest scale of our social and economic 
mainstream of society. You have not. You preach God, love, 
family -slogans of that sort, Mr. Premier. But when it comes right 
down to it, you don't practise what you preach. You have a double 
standard. 
 
Mr. Premier, in my upbringing, I considered people in the 
Legislative Assembly and people in parliament and people in 
churches with high regard, because I was raised that way. But 
upon my experience here in this legislature, Mr. Premier, that 
regard has diminished somewhat. 
 
When I watch your performance, when I watch the performance of 
the PC Devine government, when I see the lack of compassion 
that you have for people, the ordinary working families in this 
province, for people of different ethnic minority backgrounds — 
and in relation to my critic area as Indian, Metis, and non-status 
Indian critic for the small opposition party that we have over on 
this side of the House — I want to say to you, and I concur with 
the minister, the member for P.A.-Duck Lake, that you have no 
commitment, no commitment whatsoever. I have met with the 
native organizations and I have met with various interest groups 
and the people in my constituency, and the same thing applies 
over there. 
 
You mentioned a moment ago that you will win every rural riding, 
Mr. Premier. Let me assure you that there will be two rural ridings 
that will definitely not go with you. 
 
I look at the revenues generated from the top half of our province. 
And there are a tremendous amount of millions and millions and 
millions of dollars generated from the top half of this province. 
And the people in the North are asking for a fair share of those 
resources. They're not asking for 50 per cent, 40 per cent, 30 per 
cent, 10 per cent, or whatever. They're asking for jobs. They're 
asking that welfare dependency rates be cut down. I told the 
member for P.A.-Duck Lake that the native people in the 
provincial jails have increased as compared to all the total 
population. The people of native ancestry, Indian, Metis, and 
non-status people in the male provincial jails have gone up. When 
the former minister for Lumsden-Qu'Appelle held the office of 
Justice, that figure was 63 per cent. Now with the new minister for 
the Department of Justice that figure has increased by 64 per cent 
to date. And I look at the women's institutions in terms of the total 
population. That figure today is 84 per cent native. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, does that tell you something — that there is 
and has never been a commitment on your part to do what is fair 
and what is right for the people of native ancestry, for the Indian, 
the Metis, and non-status Indians  

of this province? 
 
I asked the minister for the Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat, 
which I call the Indian, Metis, and non-status Indian affairs 
department, a question that relates to . . . And I'll ask you the same, 
Mr. Minister. Can you tell me, Mr. Premier, can you please advise 
me where you stand on the issue of native self-government, native 
self-determination? 
 
You've attended a good number of conferences in Ottawa, and I've 
heard of your performance. And I've heard that Saskatchewan, 
Alberta, and British Columbia have not endorsed nor have made 
any commitment towards the aboriginal people of this province. 
 
I look at the Saskatchewan Native Economic Development 
Corporation program. The feds have given $9.1 million to try to 
boost, to try to establish . . . If the member for P.A.-Duck Lake 
wants to get into the debate, you'll have your opportunity. I'm 
debating with the Premier. You've had your day already. I wish 
you'd clam up for a while and let the Premier listen to what I have 
to say because that's going to be his last opportunity. When he gets 
the courage, the nerve, to call a provincial election he's going to be 
going back to Estevan for good. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Premier: there were good proposals submitted to 
you by the native organizations, proposals that would work. The 
federal government put in and committed $9.1 million. The 
province was supposed to have committed itself to $4.1 million. 
But the minister for Indian and Native Affairs says no; there's no 
way I'm going to put any money to that program — no way. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Premier: what commitments, what 
understanding, what is your position on the issues confronting the 
aboriginal people of this province and throughout Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we have taken some 
relatively straightforward positions regarding Indian economic 
development and self-government. 
 
I would like to point out to the hon. member who talks about funds 
in northern Saskatchewan: I don't know of many native people 
who would like to see the mines closed in northern Saskatchewan. 
And I know that the member from Athabasca, for example, is 
very, very adamant and he fights a great deal in the NDP caucus 
with respect to closing of the uranium mines. 
 
I don't want to close them. Obviously people are employed; it 
generates money and income, economic activity. But the NDP 
policy is to close all the mines in northern Saskatchewan, putting 
thousands of people out of work. And so the member from 
Cumberland can stand here and say, well for Heaven's sakes, 
what's your policy with respect to northern Saskatchewan? Well, 
I'll tell you what it isn't. It isn't closing the uranium mines. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, when we're looking at sound economic 
development packages, and take advantage of the North with 
respect to gold mining, uranium mining, tourism, wild rice, 
economic development, forestry . . . I mean, all day today they 
were talking about, they're  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2367 
 
 

against the new forestry agreement; they don't like that. They're 
obviously against tourism. They didn't want to do anything about 
that. 
 
They didn't encourage anything with respect to opening up new 
uranium mines now that they're not in power. I mean, they were 
all prepared to nationalize the world when they were there. Now 
they want to close it. I mean, they have been on every side of 
every issue you can think of today. Trade — they're on both sides; 
they're for the banks and against the banks. 
 
I want to just point out to the members opposite, because they 
were asking about financial contributions; and I'm going to raise 
this with them because here's . . . It's just been published in the 
Western Report. It's called "Beer Bucks." 
 

Breweries and distilleries are the big NDP donors. (And it 
goes on to say that) James Scheaffer Woodsworth, the first 
leader of the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation, was a 
teetotaller. His staunch abstinence, however, has had little 
impact upon the corporate donation policy of the new 
CCF-NDP democratic descendants in Manitoba. 

 
In fact (it goes on to say — and I'm just putting this on for 
the record) breweries and distillers have emerged as the 
party's big contributors in 1985. (And it goes on to say:) Of 
the NDP's 76 contributing companies, brewers and distillers 
are among the most generous. 

 
And it lists them. Molson Companies were $2,187; Joseph 
Seagram and Sons, $2,000; John Labatt Ltd., $2,000 (to the NDP); 
Schenley Canada Inc., $1,000; Potter Distilleries Ltd., 750; the 
London Winery Limited, $300; and the Reider Distillery, 250. 
 
And here, Mr. Chairman, is another interesting surprise . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: —Order, please. Order, please. It's getting a little 
noisy in here. I would ask hon. members to please quieten down 
so we can hear the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, another surprise here 
in this editorial, and it's right that: 
 

James (Jim) Wright, past chairman of the Winnipeg 
Chamber of Commerce and owner of Assiniboia Downs 
(and it was interesting to note that now the member from 
Quill was trying to sidle up to the chamber of commerce) 
donated $593. 

 
So the liquor companies and distilleries and the race track owners 
are contributing to the NDP as we see in . . .  (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well I wonder what we can do, because they're 
$400,000 in the hole, so they're sidling up to the banks a little bit 
and sidling up to the breweries. And for the last two or three times 
in the House, they've been obviously against beer and distillers 
and Molsons and all the rest. Well, Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to 
put that on the record so the member from the Quill Lakes would 
be quite well aware of the fact that the  

rest of the country knows indeed where the NDP are getting their 
money. 
 
We obviously support uranium development in northern 
Saskatchewan because it employs people in northern 
Saskatchewan. I believe that's important. The Government of 
Saskatchewan supports the needs for Indian people to exercise 
wider autonomy in decision making, particularly at the community 
level, and I have stated that position time and time again at the first 
ministers' conference. 
 
The Saskatchewan government suggested a combination of an 
accord amendment that would have committed governments to 
practical self-government initiatives with local or provincial 
aboriginal people, and it would have provided a mechanism for 
the constitutional protection of self-government agreements. 
 
(2030) 
 
If you look at the kinds of economic activities that we've 
participated in northern Saskatchewan, I'd just like to point out a 
few, Mr. Chairman. We have the Northern Economic 
Development Subsidiary Agreement that identified a number of 
priorities for northern Saskatchewan. It was agreed to on August 
of 1984, and this five-year, $36 million cost-shared agreement is 
aimed at enhancing long-term employment prospects in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We have, second, the Athabasca hydroelectric transmission line. 
The NDP were in power for a long time and never thought of it 
and never did. And one of the side effects of the 1982 Beaverlodge 
mine closure in Uranium City was that three hydroelectric 
generating stations in the area became redundant. We are putting 
40 to $50 million in this project which will create jobs and 
economic activity and provide lower priced utilities, like 
electricity to people of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
We have a third project, mineral surface leases. One of the 
responsibilities of the secretariat is to make sure that we develop 
mining in northern Saskatchewan. We have a minor and in some 
cases a relatively significant gold boom going on in northern 
Saskatchewan, and obviously exploration is one of the things the 
native population can be involved in, in an intimate fashion. 
 
We have the Northern Development Advisory Council, Mr. 
Chairman. It was formed on November 30 of 1985. It's an 
11-member body and has a mandate to promote northern 
economic development. We have done several things with respect 
to wild rice, with respect to tourism, economic development. 
 
And finally just let me point out with respect to the whole question 
of the forestry management in northern Saskatchewan — people 
that want to work in the bush have asked governments for years 
and years and years to allow the individual farmer and the small 
operator, whether he is native or non-native, to be able to 
participate. And we have provided for the first time a 
comprehensive package to allow for a major economic activity to 
take place in a new forestry management arrangement. We'll be 
doing that with a new paper-mill, 
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2368 
 
 

 a new pulp-mill. Farmers, small-business operators, native and 
non-native alike, will for the first time have opportunities in force 
that they haven't had for years. 
 
So, when you look at mining, gold, and uranium exploration, 
tourism, forestry, wild rice, economic development advisory 
councils, and the changes and recommendations that we have 
made at the national level, Mr. Chairman, I would be quite glad to 
defend our economic record and promotion of self-government at 
any time with respect to people across northern Saskatchewan, and 
compared with any place else in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I want to say to you, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
(At this point the hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
I'll interpret it for you if you want to. But I'll tell you, the people 
out there listening to television, the estimate . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: —Order, please. Order, please. We're trying to 
hear what he said, but a couple of members aren't allowing us to 
do it. 
 
Mr. Yew: — (At this point the hon. member spoke for a time in 
Cree.) 
 
I ask you, Mr. Premier, if you have any commitments like the 
members on this side of the House. Does your party, Mr. Premier, 
unequivocally endorse the principle of self-government for the 
Indian, the Metis and non-status people of this province, and 
Canada's aboriginal people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, just let me make the 
point. We were quite prepared to see a major move towards 
self-government, particularly starting with the status Indian and 
the Inuit because they know exactly where their land base is, and 
they're quite prepared to accept it. 
 
The difficulty, as I've raised it at the national conventions, is that 
you have a broad range of native and Indian, Metis people. And 
it's quite one thing to say for the Inuit to have self-government — 
community self-government, local self-government in the major 
parts of the Northwest Territories. It's quite another thing to say 
that somebody's living on Winnipeg Street who claims that they 
want to have self-government, and side-by-side somebody is not 
native. They go to the same church, play in the same baseball 
team, involved in the same community function, and you're saying 
well, all right you can have some self-government, but your 
neighbour can't; or you're going to have some combination, and 
that's much more complex. 
 
So what I said is that, let's look at native self-government, if you 
will, in the aboriginal sense where you have status Indians; where 
you know exactly where the property is and it's easily understood 
and so forth. And I had support for that. 
 
When you make it broader, when you get into the Metis in  

down-town urban environments, it's much more complex. And I 
said I think we need some time to be able to resolve those, work 
them out. And I have discussed with AMNSIS and every other 
group that is in Saskatchewan about the various combinations of 
things that you can do. So it's not easy — and I'm sure the hon. 
member knows — to talk about self-government in down-town 
Regina for a separate group of individuals. And if he's got some 
suggestions I'd like to hear them, but obviously we've had many 
negotiations. 
 
So we've looked at the combination and the range. When we put 
them all together at the same time, Indian and native people are 
telling me we're not all the same, and we cannot be treated all the 
same. We come from different circumstances and live in different 
environments, and I agree with that. So they have to be treated 
with respect and with the dignity that they deserve, and respect for 
their individual characteristics and their individual environment. 
And I believe that's the right action, which means some will be 
settled before others. 
 
I don't think that there's any way that we can put them all in the 
same pot or even think that they should be, or settle them all at the 
same time, but let's look at, as they suggest: if you have aboriginal 
rights, if you have Inuit situations, if you have status Indians on 
reserves, if you have non-status and Metis in major urban 
environments, that's a different problem, and I'm quite prepared to 
address it, and I have to date and I will continue in the future. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Members on your 
cabinet asked me a moment ago to describe briefly what I meant 
by my question, Mr. Premier. I look at native self-determination, 
native self-government as having a land base, an economic base, 
Mr. Minister. And I have a brochure here which is from a united 
group of aboriginal people, and in part this is what they're saying: 
 

We must have political development and the recognition of 
basic political rights that are fundamental to the objective of 
all aboriginal people in Canada. 

 
Another quote, Mr. Premier, indicates that institutions that allow 
aboriginal people to share in decision-making authority with 
governments must be established to manage wildlife, land, fresh 
water, etc. And finally, Mr. Premier, comprehensive land claim 
settlements and agreements must give aboriginal people more 
political control, not only over land and resources, but over 
economic development of those resources as well. 
 
Mr. Premier, in northern Saskatchewan we have unemployment 
ranging up to 90 to 100 per cent. We have massive welfare 
dependency rates in the North. All of a sudden, you know, you 
didn't recognize the fact that many of our communities are isolated 
and are not accessible to lower food prices and commodities that 
we in cities like Regina or Saskatoon have. 
 
You cancelled the food and transportation subsidy to Wollaston 
Lake, Mr. Premier. Just a mere $250,000 program, and you turn 
around and give Manalta Coal of Alberta, a corporation, a $145 
million loan guarantee;  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2369 
 
 

and again, the other Alberta oil company, you gave $390 million 
loan guarantee as well; and just the other day you gave another 
millionaire from Alberta $21 million, 11 of which is a loan 
guarantee and 10 million of which, Mr. Premier, has not got to be 
paid back. It's just an outrageous grant to a person, a wealthy, 
powerful individual in Alberta who does not need $10 million 
grants. 
 
Why don't you recognize the people that are in need, the needy 
people in this province, the people that need jobs? I've met dozens 
of them in Regina. I didn't know anybody in Regina, but 
fortunately enough the proceedings of this House are now 
televised. They can recognize you and I. They can recognize 
members who are fighting against the working people in this 
province. They can recognize the members who are against the 
ordinary families in this province. They can recognize the 
members, the PC government on that side of the House, who are 
fighting the ordinary people in this province and giving away our 
assets to multinational corporations like Weyerhaeuser — $248 
million worth of assets. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Premier, we are not against development. You 
talked about uranium just a moment ago. Well I want to tell you, 
Mr. Premier, we had when we went into major development, in 
any major development, in any major piece of legislation that 
involved Northerners, we had, Mr. Premier, public inquiries all 
over this province. And you have not had one on the 
Weyerhaeuser deal, not on. The people of northern Saskatchewan 
. . . You are giving away the forestry rights, some 7, closer to 8 
million acres of land, prime forest resource, for 30 years — or 
perhaps that will change the face of the North for ever — without 
even consulting, Mr. Premier, without consulting anyone in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
You have not consulted the elected officials, the villages, the 
hamlets, the various communities I just mentioned. Mr. Premier, I 
ask you: have you been to Wollaston Lake? Have you been to 
Sturgeon Landing? Have you been to Sucker River? Have you 
been to Jans Bay? Have you visited Pinehouse? The president of 
the forestry moratorium committee which is against herbicide 
spraying, George Smith, lives in Pinehouse, and he has a large 
gathering. Have you consulted with the people of the North? You 
are, Mr. Premier, avoiding to meet the public. You are avoiding to 
meet the people in this province, and you have neglected and 
abandoned and ignored the northern people. 
 
Mr. Premier, in all sincerity, that resource is valuable to us in 
northern Saskatchewan as well as it is to the rest of this province. 
You generate a lot of resource revenue from the North, Mr. 
Premier, and that's fine, but let's keep that North intact. Let's not 
do it the way you're doing it. You are giving away our resources; 
you're giving away to a multinational corporation — a bad deal for 
the people of this province and particularly for the people of the 
North. 
 
Many, many people in the southern areas of this province go to 
northern Saskatchewan, in the areas like Waskesiu, Lac la Ronge, 
Southend-Reindeer Lake, Dore Lake, and the far northern regions 
like Uranium City, to visit a natural environment, a natural 
environment where they can relax and enjoy nature. 
 

And the people of northern Saskatchewan, the Indian, the Metis, 
and non-status people of this province rely on the traditional way 
of life to this point in time because you have not committed 
yourself to native self-determination and native self-government. 
You have not created a land base for the people of native ancestry. 
You have not created an economic land base; you have not 
developed any major initiatives to help alleviate the high 
unemployment rates in the North. You have not created anything 
to help alleviate the high welfare dependency rates. 
 
(2045) 
 
You look at the statistics of the Department of Justice, and you'll 
see you've got more Indians, more Metis and non-status people in 
your jails in this province than any other ethnic group. Now 
doesn't that tell you something, Mr. Premier? 
 
Mr. Premier, we rely on the North, and we'd like to keep it as 
natural an environment as possible. We are not against 
development, but let's do it the correct way. Let's give to the 
people of this province some public participation, public 
involvement, and public decision-making. 
 
You called one of my colleagues on this side of the House a 
capitalist just a moment ago, or something close to that effect. 
Well I'll tell you who the capitalist is today, Mr. Premier. You are 
the capitalist; you are the capitalist because people like yourself 
dictate the terms of any agreement related to the people in this 
province. You dictated the terms with Weyerhaeuser behind 
closed doors. 
 
We're into session now; we're into legislative session to scrutinize 
policies, programs, and legislation, and major agreements like 
Weyerhaeuser and also the Peter Pocklington deal. But thus far, 
Mr. Premier, the PC government of this province is really a 
disappointment and a dismal failure to all the people in this 
province. That is the reason, Mr. Premier, that you're not calling 
an election. That's the only reason. You're running scared. In Cree, 
Mr. Premier, we have a word for people like yourself. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What is it? 
 
Mr. Yew: — Wapush. That's what you are, and it's just very 
appropriate. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I'm sorry. Can you tell me what that 
means? 
 
Mr. Yew: — The member for Moosomin wants to know what it 
is. Well I'll tell the member for Moosomin out of courtesy, so that 
the Premier will have the opportunity to hear what it is. Mr. 
Premier, you are a rabbit. Rabbits come in cycles. You guys come 
in 50-year cycles. When you have the nerve and the courage to 
call a provincial election, you'll be wiped out another 50 years. 
And the people of this province, the electorate in this province will 
be the ones with the pea shooters to make darn sure that you end 
up in Estevan for good . . .  (inaudible interjection) . . . They 
haven't promoted you. That's too  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2370 
 
 

bad, Larry — promoted you to any cabinet post. In fact, you're not 
running again. 
 
I asked, Mr. Premier, the member for P.A.-Duck Lake whether or 
not your government would commit itself to 4.1 million to the 
native economic development agency program, to fund the 
Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation. And you said 
no; we were elected to look after the taxpayers' dollars 
. . .  (inaudible interjection) . . . You were. That's' what your 
statement was, Mr. Member for P.A.-Duck Lake. But you know 
what he told me? He said no. He said, we're looking after the 
taxpayers' dollars. 
 
But you know what has happened, Mr. Premier? You have 
mismanaged the economy of this province to the tune of well over 
$2 billion. We are now paying the banks and the bond deals, in 
interest payment alone, well over $200 million a year — $200 
million a year that could go towards economic job creation, 
economic development, and job creation for the people in northern 
Saskatchewan. Instead, Mr. Premier, we are standing here today 
with a deficit of well over $2 billion, and for every man, woman, 
and child in this province, we owe well over $2,000 annually just 
on the principal and interest alone. A family of four owes $8,000. 
 
Mr. Premier, when the member for P.A.-Duck Lake responded to 
me by saying, we were elected to look after the taxpayers' dollars, 
I'm sure that the people of this province didn't agree with him. 
Now when your government has decided to put this province in 
the red for well over $2 billion, people in this province will know 
the facts of your administration, the priorities of your 
administration. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, in terms of the Weyerhaeuser agreement, 
will you or will you not have a major environmental impact 
assessment — public hearings — or will you not? Before that deal 
is signed, will you not meet with the people of northern 
Saskatchewan and people throughout the province to provide them 
with the detailed information and the terms of reference, clause by 
clause, of what form of an agreement that your government is 
prepared to sign if you have not signed already? You have 
provided the members on this side of the House with very vague 
information pertaining to the Weyerhaeuser deal . . .  (inaudible 
interjection) . . . What did the member for Meadow Lake say? 
. . .  (inaudible interjection) . . . They are more important. 
 
The member for Meadow Lake asks me whether or not I'll be 
attending a stampede in Meadow Lake. Well, Mr. Minister, I'm 
sorry to say but we are in discussion over very serious matters 
here, very serious matters. If you want to take those issues that I've 
related to the Premier just as lightly as to suggest a stampede, 
that's fine, you can attend. That's your riding. That's your home 
community, but I'm prepared to stay here and debate with the 
Premier on issues of importance to the ordinary working families 
in this province and the people that are in need. 
 
Since your PC government took office, Mr. Premier, we have had 
nothing but soup kitchens and food banks. And once again, I want 
to ask you, Mr. Premier, when your government signed the 
Canada-Saskatchewan subsidiary  

agreement on northern economic development dated the 31st day 
of August 1984, whey then, Mr. Minister — when the former 
minister for northern affairs put his signature on that agreement — 
why can you not honour that agreement by putting money into the 
Saskatchewan Native Economic Development Corporation so that 
they can begin building some initiatives aimed at alleviating the 
high welfare dependency rates, the high incarceration of native 
people in our jails, and the high unemployment in northern 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, with respect to the 
environmental review associated with the paper-mill and pulp-mill 
and the new economic activity, I can assure the hon. member that 
we will be doing the normal environmental review and impact 
studies that are necessary, as we do with power projects, as we do 
with upgraders, or various other kinds of projects that we build. 
 
Regarding some assistance to northern Saskatchewan. I think he 
mentioned $270,000. I can only say to the member that three days 
of operation of the pulp-mill, three days, if we could get out from 
under the debt, would pay for all your subsidies — $91,000 a day 
the taxpayer is losing and it's been doing that for five years, and 
he's talking about a subsidy in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Two projects that I can suggest that are in the multimillion dollars: 
uranium, and the member opposite wants to close all the mines 
and all those losses and what it would mean. He talks about 
$270,000. He's talking about millions and hundreds of millions he 
just wants to wipe out with the stroke of a pen. He didn't mention 
that. And secondly, the pulp-mill, which his administration got the 
public into for $350 million. What we lose daily, $91,000 — three 
days of that loss, that hemorrhaging, would pay for all the 
subsidies that he wants. 
 
So he takes two major investments by the NDP — the uranium 
business and the pulp business. And if you put those two together 
you'd have enough money to finance northern economic 
development for decades and decades. 
 
So I would say, we're trying to maintain money and a healthy 
economy with respect to uranium exports into the United States. 
Number two, we're trying to stop the hemorrhaging in the pulp 
business so that we don't lose $91,000. And if we could touch 
another one, potash industry, they borrowed $650 million from 
U.S. bankers and we're still paying it back, plus the interest. We 
could have had well over a billion dollars in the Heritage Fund to 
help all kinds of people. 
 
If you take the potash industry and the pulp business and the 
uranium business, and put it together in terms of the, as I call it, 
the economic apartheid practices that the members across the way 
practise . . . They blacklist anybody in the private sector, put it all 
in the public sector, lose all kinds of money, and then blame me 
because they're losing money with respect to these public 
investments that don't make it. 
 
So I would be glad . . . I've went through and I've gone through 
and I will continue to go through the new  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2371 
 
 

proposals for northern Saskatchewan. We don't have a jack pine 
curtain any longer; it's knitted into the entire province. It's part and 
parcel of the entire economic development package for north and 
south, so that we're all one — health care, agricultural, tourism, 
mining, and so forth. And that is popular and I will continue on 
that. 
 
And I'll tell you, I'll continue to move towards a new forestry 
management agreement, a new paper-mill, a new integrated 
pulp-mill. I will continue mining and I will continue uranium 
mining, and I will make sure, wherever possible, that we 
encourage private investment here because it helps make profits 
which helps pay taxes, which helps build roads and build schools 
and hospitals and so forth. 
 
I don't know where the hon. member thinks we get our money 
from, but it's from people making money in the private sector. 
That's why you tax them. And if he doesn't like the private sector, 
then he comes from a different school — and so be it. We could 
argue philosophy. I don't believe that losing $91,000 a day by 
having the pulp-mill in the public sector is a good thing for 
taxpayers or anybody else. Now he may like it, but there's an 
awful lot of people that don't. And I can read to him, as I read to 
others, the newspaper in Prince Albert, the chamber of commerce 
in Prince Albert, people in Meadow Lake, everybody that thinks 
what we're doing is absolutely the right thing to do; as well as in 
the city of Regina, Saskatoon. 
 
I'll go door to door with you if you want to talk about closing 
uranium mines. People don't want to close uranium mines, but 
that's your policy. And I'll go door to door with you with respect to 
if you think it's a good idea to pay U.S. bankers millions and tens 
of millions of dollars of interest when we could be doing it 
ourselves with Canadian money — and that's your policy. 
 
So quite clearly, the people have seen your policies and have 
rejected them. And your economic policy for northern 
Saskatchewan, with closing all the pulp-mills, closing the uranium 
mines and having losses, obviously wouldn't help. So I haven't 
heard of an idea you suggested this evening that makes very much 
sense in terms of economic development. You want $270,000 in 
subsidies. Well, as I said, three days closing of the pulp-mill — 
three days closing of the pulp-mill. If we can fix that, and you'd 
have it; and you've had five years of $91,000 a day, and I never 
heard you mention it — not once. 
 
What about all your people in northern Saskatchewan? Have you 
told them that the government loses $91,000 a day on a pulp-mill 
that's no good in terms of its financing? I think to be fair you 
should tell your constituents that. You tell them that. You tell them 
you're going to close all the uranium mines. You tell them you're 
against business and the private sector and tourism coming in. You 
tell them that you're against the private sector getting into farming 
in terms of wild rice. You tell them you're against god mining. 
 
I don't know why you don't tell them all those things. I don't know 
what you do tell them, but it isn't the facts. Because if they had the 
facts, then they'd be quite aware  

of the fact that we are losing hundreds of thousands of dollars a 
day because of practices and policies that the NDP got into when 
they were in power. And it will take us decades to get out from 
under the mess that your administration got this province in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Premier, we made money from PAPCO. In 
1980-81 we made $24 million; in '82-83, $27 million. We had 
figures in here just the other day indicating that that corporation 
had made money. 
 
The reason why we're losing money under your administration, 
Mr. Premier, is the fact that — we had it during question period, 
read a letter from a firm in Manitoba re the sale of timber from 
PAPCO, the promoting in the management of such by the minister 
responsible for that area, the member for Meadow Lake — was 
the fact that you did not encourage and promote the sale and the 
marketing of our products. Isn't that one of the reasons why the 
mill is losing now? 
 
You simply, Mr. Premier, your philosophy and mine are 
completely different. You talk about selling our resources and our 
assets to firms outside of this province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Giving it away. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Giving it away, is more appropriate. And you also 
give away major assets, such as the deal we're talking about, to a 
firm from Washington, Weyerhaeuser Ltd. from Tacoma. 
 
Why, Mr. Premier, aren't you looking at assisting small business in 
this province? Let them initiate job creation and a better economy 
for the province of Saskatchewan, rather than giving it to firms 
that will probably have all sorts of "no trespassing" signs in the 
northern administration district, in the top half of our province — 
signs that will indicate to us that the United States of America now 
owns Saskatchewan. That is what's going to happen. 
 
For 30 years, Mr. Premier, the trappers, the fishermen, the people 
that live the traditional life, the only form of income that they have 
is from trapping and commercial fishing from the natural 
environment of the North, will now be excluded or fenced out 
from those resources. You talk about tourism on one hand and 
then you turn around and try to over-exploit the last remaining 
frontier in this province. I can't understand the mentality of your 
government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I know that the hon. member 
is against a new paper-mill. I'm for it. I suspect we can agree to 
disagree. We want to see the new development and he would 
rather see the government own it. There's a difference of 
philosophy, so maybe we could just agree to say that he would do 
it his way and I would do it mine, and let it got at that. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Premier, I am not against development. I 
mentioned it before and I believe the member for  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2372 
 
 

P.A.-Duck Lake knows that. 
 
What we did, Mr. Premier, when we talked about major 
developments is we had public information meetings. With the 
people that are directly affected as well as the rest of the province, 
we had public consultation, public involvement, public 
participation into the Cluff Lake uranium mine, into the Key Lake 
uranium mine, into the establishment of the department of 
northern Saskatchewan, into the establishment of the northern 
municipal council, and for the establishment of a Northern 
Municipalities Act. We held public meetings. 
 
But, Mr. Premier, on the part of the PC government, the Devine 
government of this province, we have yet to see public 
information meetings held throughout the province before you 
decide. You are trying to run this agreement — shaft it down the 
throats of people throughout this province, and particularly the 
people on the top half of the province without even consulting 
them as to what the terms of reference are pertaining to the 
agreement. That is what you're doing. 
 
We held meetings, and we initiated major economic development 
initiatives in northern Saskatchewan. And when we were in office, 
when the New Democrats were in office, we didn't have the high 
unemployment rate that we have today — not under our 
administration we didn't. We held public information meetings to 
decide and to analyse the type of projects, the type of economic 
activity that was being proposed. 
 
But as far as you're concerned, Mr. Premier, your PC government 
is still arrogant and more, perhaps, insensitive to the needs of the 
people of this province, and to the needs of the people that will be 
directly affected by this major give-away, this major deal with 
Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, Washington. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, just to correct the hon. 
member, we have had cabinet committee hearings on farm input 
costs; we have had trade hearings; we have had water hearings; 
we've had educational hearings on core curriculum; we've got the 
Northern Development Advisory Council that we have held 
hearings; and we've had health care hearings. And all the time, Mr. 
Chairman, the NDP members criticized the cabinet committee 
hearings, the trade hearings, the water hearings, the core 
curriculum hearings and so on. 
 
And I mean, we have hearings all the time; we have public 
participation. And, Mr. Chairman, when you want the public 
involved, they're never had an opportunity like they have now to 
buy power bonds, to buy oil bonds, to buy shares and participate 
in the Crown corporations, and our whole new forestry 
management agreement is to have the little person, the small 
operator, and the farmer involved. And the NDP didn't like that. I 
mean, they had to have the government. 
 
It's the old economic apartheid, blacklist the private sector, that 
they keep pulling the wool over the people's eyes. They'll go out 
there to all the little people and say, oh, we're for you. And as soon 
as they get in power it's not for them, it's for the government, and 
the government is not the same as the people. The individual little 
farmer  

and that small operator and those entrepreneurs, they are not 
government. 
 
Do you know the reason . . . You know the NDP right now 
criticize us for advertising. Every government will advertise. It 
wasn't that you can't advertise. It was the philosophy of the NDP 
that you had to advertise the Saskatchewan family of Crown 
corporations as some holy instrument, some holy philosophical 
instrument; that the public Crown corporation, the government, 
would run your life, and not the individual. 
 
And the members opposite can turn their backs and they can look 
the other way, but that is at the root of what the member is talking 
about. They believe in economic apartheid; they believe in 
economic segregation. They don't believe at all in the little 
individual. They don't believe in protecting home owners against 
22 per cent interest rate. 
 
They don't believe in farmers owning their land because they 
offered land bank. They don't believe in small operators being in 
the bush; they never let them in the bush. And people all across 
northern Saskatchewan will tell you that small operators could not 
be in the bush, and are they ever happy with this new policy. They 
don't want it run out of Regina. They want it run out of their 
homes, their farms and their small businesses. 
 
So real families — I'll tell you, they've come to our cabinet 
committees on trade and water and farm land and input costs, on 
core curriculum and our hearings with respect to environment, and 
we will continue to have them. 
 
But the problem with the member opposite is that somebody got a 
hold of him when he was young, or whatever, and taught him 
economic apartheid. He got it pumped into his head that every 
small business and operator was a capitalist and a free-enterpriser 
and by definition was wicked and deserved to be blacklisted. And 
you believe that. You believe that. 
 
Well I'll tell you what, Mr. Chairman, there's a different 
philosophical view about what built this country. Governments 
didn't build this country, people did, families did, farmers did and 
traders did, and trappers and fishermen. And they didn't have it all 
run out of Regina. They did it because they believed in doing 
things with their own hands and developing their family 
businesses and their enterprises. Now that doesn't mean the 
government runs it. 
 
Where in the world did you ever get it figured out that if the 
government runs it, it's good for the people? It's not. The people of 
northern Saskatchewan will tell you that it isn't. We've had 
government involvement north of the jack pine curtain for as long 
as we can remember, and it didn't create any sort of sound 
economic development. And now when they're in opposition, they 
want to close the mines, and they're against paper-mills, and 
against pulp-mills, and against economic developments. 
 
They believe, philosophically believe, in economic apartheid. You 
blacklist the private sector and you put them on one side, and 
anybody that's working in the  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2373 
 
 

public sector, they're special. Advertise it through Crown 
corporations, spend all that money, and then it'll be good for the 
people. Well look at, you can sell that if you like. You might be 
successful for a few people, but I'll tell you, the folks in 
Saskatchewan are not going to be fooled again. They learned their 
lesson. They learned the kind of philosophical arguments that you 
had before and that you did not deliver, and you built up losses 
upon losses upon losses. 
 
We would have a surplus in this province, even under the current 
economic conditions, if you hadn't bought and borrowed all the 
resources from New York bankers and saddled this province and 
this people with debt into the United States. The member opposite 
worries about people from United States investing here. What 
does he do? He takes his people's money and he sends it to New 
York and to Wall Street to pay for a big debt, and we already had 
it. Imagine! He had to buy back the mines that were already ours 
that we already had control of, and send the money to New York 
and pay the interest on the U.S. dollar as if that was good for him 
in La Ronge. How does he think it's good for La Ronge to be 
paying all that money to New York? 
 
What we're saying is, having people from New York take that 
money and put it in here so we can use it, and we will build roads 
and hospitals and pulp-mills and paper-mills with their money so 
we can have economic development. What does he want to do? 
He wants to nationalize it and pay them. 
 
I suppose, Mr. Chairman, next thing he'll say, well he'll buy back 
the roads. He could buy back the lake. He could buy back the 
trees. I'll bet you we could buy back the trees, and we could 
borrow money from the United States and buy our trees back and 
pay them for that. Well, your economic logic is not very sound, 
my friend. If you want to look at the kinds of things that we're 
prepared to do, we obviously have a difference in philosophy. I 
believe in the private sector, I believe in the farmer, the fisherman, 
the fur trader and all those people who want to run their own life, 
and I do not think that everything north of Saskatoon should be 
run out of Regina or in government. 
 
We set the environment, and I believe that more and more people 
— as you see in the P.A. paper and the Meadow Lake paper and 
the Nipawin paper and the La Ronge paper — are saying, I want 
to see some individual initiative; I want to see small operators in 
the bush; I want to see farmers involved in the bush; and I want to 
see a good private sector forestry arrangement, so that we can look 
forward to long-run economic activity in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I agree with that; you may not. You don't understand economic 
development the same way I do — fair enough. I'm not sure that 
you understand a debenture; I'm not sure that you understand 
paying for things that we already own. Maybe you were taught 
that way, but obviously we have a difference, and we'll let it go at 
that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Premier, I did not have the opportunity that you 
have in terms of education. And I want to tell you  

and the other members of this House that my education has only 
been to grade 4, but I can debate with you with regards to northern 
issues any day, any time, any week, any month, any year — 
whenever you please. 
 
I know what the people of the North are thinking. And I tell you, 
Mr. Premier, we were the ones — when the New Democrats were 
in power — we were the ones that initiated major initiatives up 
there, but we did so after consultation, after public meetings. 
 
I remember a meeting October 27, 1977 and '78 — the Bayda 
inquiry — where we went to the locally-elected officials 
throughout the northern administration district, and we met the 
native organizations and the special interest groups, and we 
confronted them with the question. But the Justice minister, 
Edward Bayda . . . Oh, pardon me, he was the man appointed to 
head this major inquiry. We didn't ram it down the throats of 
people; we consulted with them. I remember those days very 
distinctly because I was the chairman of the northern municipal 
council. And I said to the people, we will see what the terms are, 
what there is in terms of job security, what the conditions are in 
terms of training and safety. And it took us a fairly long time, but 
the final end result of that inquiry was that the people decided to 
vote in favour of the uranium industry at Cluff Lake. And 
following that major inquiry, we initiated another one — the Key 
Lake inquiry, and the people then were also involved. 
 
(2115) 
 
But you're telling me that I'm against development, Mr. Minister. 
Mr. Premier, I'm telling you, I'm not against development. We 
need the jobs. I'd sooner work for a living. My family would be 
proud of me to earn a living rather than to go humbly to the 
member for Rosedale, is it — Rosemont — the Minister of Social 
Services and go begging for him for a welfare cheque that is 
totally inadequate in order for my family to survive. 
 
Mr. Premier, many of my people have had to eat porridge three 
times a day. Sometimes, when I grew up, I had to go into the busy 
in order to feed myself. I had to pick blueberries to fill up my 
stomach because I was hungry. That is the kind of capitalist 
system I am against. 
 
Today, Mr. Premier, we gave Peter Pocklington over there which 
you gave $21 million to, 10 of which he doesn't have to pay back. 
It's an outright grant. And he's got the working people against him. 
Alberta is wanting to kick him out; they've asked him to leave 
Alberta because he won't give a decent wage increase to the 
working people in that province. There's a whole lot of 
controversy, and I'm sure you know about that controversy. 
 
And again, when you want to talk about capitalism, I look at 
Weyerhaeuser. Weyerhaeuser is now in a controversy by itself. 
His workers, he's chopped back some $4-an-hour wage 
increments, and he's in trouble with his own labour, with his own 
workers. He comes North, and the northern people don't know 
what the deal is, the type of deal, or the type of give-away that 
you're initiating. How can you say, Mr. Premier, that the people of 
the  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2374 
 
 

North and the people in this province will benefit? How can you 
say that? 
 
If the mill is losing $91,000 a day, Mr. Premier, I'll tell you we are 
losing money as well because of your incentives and give-aways 
to people like Peter Pocklington; people that are wealthy and well 
off. That is why we are losing money. That is why we're $2 billion 
in the red — because of misplaced priorities, because of a lack of 
compassion for the needy. 
 
Mr. Premier, you're on your way out as soon as you can get the 
nerve to call an election. You will not be on that side of the House, 
I can assure you that. There will be other members on that side of 
the House, and the members on that side of the House will consist 
of New Democrats. 
 
You ask the pollsters to date where you stand, and I'll tell you that 
is the reason why you're afraid to call a general election. You're 
afraid because the few members we have on this side of the House 
have handled you for five years. You have not been able to 
intimidate guys like me, with a grade 4 education, and the 
colleagues beside me. We have stuck in unity, in unity not only 
amongst ourselves, but in unity with the rest of the people in this 
province. We have garnered their support. And you go to the 
pollsters and they'll tell you the same thing. 
 
Mr. Premier, your time is up. It was up some months ago. but by 
law — I didn't know that — but by law I guess you can go five. 
But I challenge you to call an election whenever you have the 
courage to do so. I'll tell you, when we get into power, we 
recognize the high unemployment that is in this province. We 
recognize the high welfare dependency rates in this province. We 
recognize the needs of the farmers. We recognize the needs of 
people, working people, the ordinary families, the people in 
northern Saskatchewan which you have neglected and ignored and 
abandoned. 
 
Many, many memories will come back, Mr. Premier, when you 
find the courage to drop the writ, when you have the courage to 
issue that writ. I'll be around; I'm young. I might not be in this 
building in the next term of government, but I'll be around yet 
some day. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I just couldn't let it 
pass. Most people that develop this province, whether they're 
homesteaders or small business and so forth, had less than grade 4 
education and they were free enterprisers. They were capitalists, 
and they left Europe to own their own land and to set up their own 
businesses and to have the freedom and opportunity to earn a new 
way of life and create a brand-new country. They did not have a 
Ph.D. in economics or a law degree or anything else. My 
grandfathers that homesteaded here had grade 3 education and 
grade 4 education, respectively. So the member can talk about his 
education. 
 
The people that started this province and the economic activity 
that led to the development we had today had very little education, 
and they thought and believe the same way I do. I want you to 
understand that. All those people that developed this province 
think and thought the same way I do. It was before they had any 
idea of the  

public sector owning anything. 
 
So you can mention your grade 4 education, fair enough. There's 
been a lot of people in this province have had grade 4 education 
and built a great deal right with their bare hands — farms and 
businesses and communities and community centres and all kinds 
of things and they still are . . .  (inaudible interjection) . . . Exactly. 
And they don't have much education and they are still building. 
 
The attitude that will work is one that says that I respect myself 
and the community and my family and I will build as a family. 
That's the attitude that built this country. Real families. Not the 
Saskatchewan family of Crown corporations but real families that 
believe in each other and believe in their children. Now if you 
believe in that and you believe in economic development, then we 
have no problem, but if you say that it has to be done all in Regina 
and I say that obviously it can be done with families, we've got a 
difference. 
 
And again I say in all respect, we agree to disagree on political 
philosophy. You would rather have the government involved, say, 
in the department of northern Saskatchewan. I don't even think 
you had any hearings before you set that up. You just had DNS, 
and it was rejected. People absolutely rejected DNS, but you may 
like to do that again. You close uranium mines, set up DNS, and 
do these things. Fair enough. You made your point. I think, fair 
enough, we'll agree to disagree. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Premier, I concur that many of our pioneers 
pioneered this land. They pioneered it for a good purpose too, but 
they sure the heck didn't do it for Peter Pocklington and the likes 
of Weyerhaeuser. They wanted to build a province that they could 
be proud of. They elected you to look after this province, but, by 
gosh, they will not elect you a second term of office. 
 
Wasn't it you, Mr. Premier, the economist, that said one time that 
deficits — and I'm referring to your $2 billion deficit — at one 
time or another you mentioned that deficits are just deferred 
payments. That money has to be paid back, Mr. Premier. And I'll 
tell you, the pioneers of this province understand that, and I 
understand it too. 
 
With that I'm going to leave. My colleagues have other questions 
to raise. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The individuals that are successful, that are 
builders, will create companies. And companies are not bad, 
whether it's a meat packing company or an automobile 
manufacturing company or a pulp company. That's not bad. I can 
think of people like Peter Pocklington . . .  (inaudible interjection) 
. . . No, but you're saying that it's bad because they create 
economic activity. I believe Peter Pocklington quit school in grade 
8 or grade 10. He didn't finish school . . .  (inaudible interjection) 
. . . No, I'm saying he quit school in grade 10, and he created 
economic activity, and he wants to come in here and create 150 or 
200 jobs in North Battleford, and you were just crying because 
you didn't have a job. 
 
And this very individual with Grade 10 is coming in here to create 
a brand new bacon plant, and you can't see the forest for the trees. 
You can't stand there and tell me that  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2375 
 
 

you're afraid to work at one time, and then go over and say, this 
individual's coming in to create a brand new bacon processing 
plant for 100 new jobs for you and your family and you're against 
him because he's got Grade 10 or it creates economic activity? 
 
You're against success in economic activity. It's economic 
apartheid; it's a philosophy. If you're successful, you must be evil. 
It's just as I said to the Leader of the Opposition, you think that 
every business man lies and cheats and steals. That's what you 
believe. And you believe everybody that ever is in the private 
sector will not be fair and will not create and will not build. 
 
And you can stand there night after night and talk about that 
foolishness? Well I hope you stand here until the middle of 
December, and you can talk every night and tell the people of 
Saskatchewan about your economic philosophy. And you can 
stand there and tell me that you think you're worried about getting 
a job, and on the other hand condemn every individual that built 
this country with his own two hands and has some smack and "get 
up and go" and would like to create some economic activity, and 
you can pooh-pooh them. 
 
If they build a new bacon plant or build an upgrader or build this 
or build that, obviously they must be in the private sector, so 
they're evil and they're crooked and they steal and they lie. 
 
Now you can believe that, and you can pump that into your 
children, but I'll tell you the majority of Saskatchewan people 
don't believe that. We built this country with honesty and integrity 
and hard work — men and women. And they weren't — no — 
they weren't all in government. They were individual families — 
individuals who built, who respected each other and had the 
respect of their colleagues. 
 
I respect people in the public sector and the private sector, but I do 
not condone, and I will not condone anybody else saying that this 
administration or anybody else will practise the economic 
apartheid that you believe in where you blacklist half the 
community because they're in the private sector. 
 
I respect the private sector and families and farmers and men and 
women and children who live in the private sector, and if you don't 
believe in that, that's fair enough. But don't come weeping to me if 
you said, I want a job, on one hand, and then on the same breath 
say, but I can't stand anybody who's going to provide economic 
development, because this person is in business. Wouldn't you 
think economic development is if it isn't business? Businesses 
create economic development, and they create jobs. 
Intercontinental Packers creates jobs for people. How can you be 
against them? Well if philosophically you are, fair enough. But 
don't cry out of both sides of your mouth and say that you want 
work, and then at the same breath say that you're against the very 
companies that are going to provide employment. You can't have 
it both ways. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to ask you,  

Mr. Premier . . . I don't want to get into a political harangue. My 
colleagues have some very important questions to ask of you. But 
I want to ask you one very important question. We started out by 
asking and talking and wanting answers on Indian, Metis and 
non-status people in this province and throughout Canada, and you 
didn't provide me with any concrete commitments. 
 
But my next question, my very important question, Mr. Premier, is 
this: will you hold, before the Weyerhaeuser deal is closed and 
finalized, will you hold with the people of this province and 
especially with the people of northern Saskatchewan who will be 
directly effected — will you hold a public inquiry, a major public 
inquiry such as the one that was initiated by the Chief Justice of 
this province, Mr. Ed Bayda. He is a very just man as far as I am 
concerned and as far as many people in the North and in this 
province are concerned. Will you hold a major public inquiry into 
the Weyerhaeuser deal or will you not? That is before signing and 
completing that deal. 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, again I would suggest to the 
hon. member, you can't have it both ways. Do you want jobs? You 
want jobs? You want jobs for northern Saskatchewan people? 
Well if we're going to build a new paper-mill with 165 new jobs or 
165 families, do you want to have hearings on it, or do you want 
to have it built? It would seem to me that if you've been crying for 
a job and you want jobs and we're going to bring in $250 million 
to build a brand-new paper-mill, that you would like to see that, 
because that's jobs. 
 
Now, you talk about hearings. We've had environmental hearings; 
that's one thing. But I didn't see any hearings in Saskatchewan 
when you nationalized the potash industry — not one hearing. I 
didn't hear of any hearings in Saskatchewan when you bought the 
pulp-mill — not one. So I mean, look it, you're talking out of both 
sides of your mouth. You don't really want hearings; you don't 
even want the jobs. You just want the politics of talking about the 
private sector versus the public sector into the pulp business. 
 
So look, I'm telling you, we're going to have our environmental 
impact analysis, and we will. But I'll have just as many hearings as 
you did the potash industry when you nationalized them, with 
respect to the economic impact. 
 
Mr. Chairman: —Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —Mr. Premier, before we forget it — we will no 
doubt have lots of time for this — but I would like to get the 
names and salaries of your staff in Executive Council. We would 
like the names, titles, and salaries of your staff in Executive 
Council before I forget it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We'll get that over to you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —Given your track record, Mr. Premier, I have 
to ask you when. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I can send it over right now to the hon. 
member. 
 
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2376 
 
 

Mr. Shillington: —Will you give me the details of any salary 
increases of any way, shape, or form that your staff have got. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, if he wants me to calculate 
any increases for any member of Executive Council over the last 
fiscal year, we'll have to calculate them. 
 
I mean, you've got two pages of people there. Right? What, 
precisely, do you want? I mean, some of them got maybe a 3 per 
cent, some got an increment, some of them got a promotion, some 
of them got . . . What would you like? 
 
Mr. Shillington: —I want what I asked for, and that is the 
percentage increases that your staff got. 
 
You have held the public service to slightly over 3 per cent. Not 
all of your senior people have been held to that, and I want to 
know what increases they got. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, we'll have to calculate them. You 
have last year's salaries with the last year's names . . .  (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Oh, yes you do. You got them from me last year. 
And you've got this year's salaries and this year's names so that 
you can calculate and we'll calculate them, so we'll go ahead with 
our calculator here and give you the increases. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —By what time may I expect them, Mr. 
Premier? Will you have them ready for me tomorrow morning 
when these estimates resume? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —Mr. Rousseau's salary is not on here. What is 
his salary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — $60,000 per year. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —I know you don't take responsibility for the 
newspaper, but he was quoted as having a salary of $70,000 a year 
. . .  (inaudible interjection) . . . The member from Saskatoon is 
giving you a lot of assistance here that I know is invaluable. I 
wonder if I could get the Premier to answer the questions and not 
the member from Saskatoon. Are there any increases or other 
fringe benefits which would go to make up a higher salary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the salary is $60,000. Any 
additional benefits will be the same kind of cost-of-living things 
that the previous agent-general got and the agent-general before 
him got. So his salary is $60,000 and the normal sorts of benefits 
that go with that position. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —I notice as well that Mr. Tkachuk's name is 
not on this list. I wonder why that is, Mr. Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — He doesn't work for Executive Council. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —Mr. Premier, are any of these people 
employed by a contract of service, and if so, is it a standard 
contract of service; and if so, would you be  

prepared to file a copy of that contract of service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We have three people who are under 
personal service contracts: Mr. Mik Barabas, for the planning 
bureau at $300 a day; Mr. Dave Black, administration, $190 a day; 
and Lorelei Sigmeth, administration, at $100 a day. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —The gentleman who is making $300 a day, 
what is . . . I'm curious as well about the terms of the contract. Is it 
for a term certain? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — It's $330 a day for Mr. Barabas, it's not 300, 
and the position is a scientific and technical advisor The scientific 
and technical advisor provides the Government of Saskatchewan 
with scientific and technical advice as specially requested from 
time to time with regard to the development of the province's 
energy and natural resources. Mr. Barabas is a professional 
engineer. He's a registered, professional, active engineer, licensed 
consulting engineer. He is the principal of his firm presently 
providing consulting services to the planning bureau, Executive 
Council. He has had a great deal of experience. He's 
well-respected in the industry, and it's about normal for that kind 
of professional in terms of engineering advice, water advice, 
energy advice, and so forth. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —Could you tell me briefly what the 
circumstances were for the other two service contracts. I wouldn't 
normally get into this except the service contracts were badly 
abused by the like of Mr. Leier who got an enormous salary. And I 
wonder, Mr. Premier, could you briefly give me the circumstances 
under which the two other service contracts were entered into. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Miss Sigmeth is a secretary; that's what 
she's contracted to do. And Mr. Black is a co-ordinator in terms of 
logistics in my office because I make a lot of trips, got to a lot of 
different places in Saskatchewan. I'm all over the place and he 
helps co-ordinate my transportation, my itinerary, making sure 
people are there in terms of doing advance work and so forth to 
make sure it works. So logistics co-ordination. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —Mr. Premier, I wanted to ask you about Mr. 
Tkachuk. I was impressed with the integrity shown by the former 
manager of the SGI who promptly fired Mr. Ryan, a political, 
when he got out of line. I was impressed with both Mr. Black's 
courage and his integrity. 
 
I was disappointed, Mr. Premier, that you weren't made of the 
same timber. I was disappointed that you chose to defend and 
condone Mr. Tkachuk's behaviour, whereas Mr. Black, to his 
everlasting credit, showed both courage and integrity, and it also 
appears that it cost him his job. So it appears to have been an 
expensive act on his part, But I’m sure he will always be proud of 
himself for having done it. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Premier, why you couldn't have shown the same 
courage and integrity — why you couldn't have done the obvious, 
and reprimanded Mr. Tkachuk, indeed fire him, as happened to 
Mr. Ryan. 
 
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2377 
 
 

I just expressed the . . . Mr. Premier, I simply expressed the forlorn 
hope that you might have shown the courage and the integrity that 
Mr. Black showed when his subordinate did something that was 
clearly out of line to have reviewed a confidential file. I just 
express the forlorn hope that you might have shown the same 
courage and integrity and fired Mr. Tkachuk. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, maybe the hon. 
member would like to fire people. I've said at the time and I'll say 
now — when individuals come to me for help, I can go to deputy 
ministers, I can go to heads of Crown corporations and say I want 
the information on this particular case because I believe the 
individual has a reasonable case. And I do that. They come to my 
office. And my staff does that. They will help me get the 
information from deputies, from Crown corporations, wherever. 
And you know yourself, having been in government, they'll come 
to the minister's office and say, I don't think I've been treated 
fairly. I want you and your officials to do something about it. Well 
how in the world do you think they do something about it if they 
don't look at it? 
 
So I have them coming in here all the time, farmers, welfare 
recipients, workers compensation, you name it. They come into 
me and say, my crop insurance needs to be re-looked at, my life 
insurance does, my workers compensation, my something else — 
'cause I don't believe I've been treated fair by SaskTel, or SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance), or crop insurance, or 
Highways, or whoever it may be, and I have to review it and I do. 
And that's what my staff does. And when you were minister, your 
staff would do the same. 
 
So when my staff asks for files, or asks for information — and 
they're given information; they do that on a regular bases. 
 
So as I said, Mr. Tkachuk does not work for me, does not work for 
the government. He is not here — he's not in Executive Council, 
so he has nothing to do with Executive Council estimates. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —He's everything to do with Executive Council 
estimates. 
 
Mr. Premier, if Mr. Tkachuk had asked the general manager for a 
report and given it to you, that would have been quite appropriate. 
He didn't do that. He choose to surreptitiously obtain a 
confidential file to which he had no right to access. Mr. Ryan was 
fired. Mr. Tkachuk was not. The situation strikes me and almost 
all observers as being very, very unfair. Either Mr. Ryan was dealt 
with a great deal too harshly, or Mr. Tkachuk was dealt with, with 
a great deal too much leniency, Mr. Premier. The facts don't admit 
of any other then those two conclusions. 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Tkachuk asked for the file and received 
it. Right! And he got the file and received it, and he looked at it. 
And they took the case to court and the judge says that Mr. 
Tkachuk was right. It shouldn't have even been in court and agreed 
with him, and they examined it, and so be it. 
 

So if you want to say that Mr. Black should have fired Mr. 
Tkachuk — he didn't work for him. Mr. Tkachuk went down and 
asked for the file and got the file, and he reviewed it. He's done 
that 100 times if he's done it once, from going to various officials 
and say I want the information of that to give; they gave him the 
information. Is he supposed to get fired because he asked for the 
information . . .  (inaudible interjection) . . . Come on — hardly. 
So he got it; he was right The judge said he was right. It was 
reasonable. So we'll leave it at that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —I take it whenever friends of Mr. Tkachuk's 
come around, he is quite — I take this to be your position — he is 
well within his rights to surreptitiously obtain confidential files 
and then go back to the general managers or deputy ministers and 
lean on them in an attempt to obtain the result which he cannot 
obtain by more appropriate means. I take it, Mr. Premier, that 
that's behaviour you condone. Because if it is, your government is 
even more patronage-ridden than I thought it was. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, I appreciate 
the opportunity to ask the Premier a couple of questions, and I 
don't intend to take a long time. 
 
This question probably would have been better put in Agriculture, 
and it may have been, but I had some people from the Swift 
Current area who were asking me about the single-desk selling in 
the beef stabilization program. Are there any announcements 
forthcoming about getting rid of it at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I was recently in a conversation with Mr. 
Boyd Anderson with respect to the whole single desk-selling 
agency, and there is no obligation. I want to make it very clear — 
there's no obligation to sell under the single desk. 
 
And the — Mr. Anderson wanted to make that very clear to all 
members of the livestock industry. They can certainly choose to 
sell it on a single desk under the rail-grade system, but if they want 
to chose some other mechanism — as long as it's acceptable to 
both sides and it's acceptable to the board. 
 
So I think that it's operating; it's being improved. It seems to be 
well received. The advice that I'm getting from Boyd Anderson, 
who talks to the people all the time, is that it's working, and in fact 
it's better understood and is accommodating the needs of the 
industry. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to get you clear on this. Then you're 
in favour of single-desk selling as it presently exists in the beef 
stabilization program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I'm saying that the 
single-desk selling agency was set up to market rail grade so 
individuals could have that option. Right now they can either use 
that option, or they can use another option. And some like it, and 
some don't. And as Mr. Anderson points out, you've got it any way 
you like. You can use it, and you can still stabilize your cattle if 
you want to market it some place else, as long as it's agreeable 
with the board as it operates. So they can go either way, and it 
seems to  
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2378 
 
 

be quite acceptable to members. If they like it . . . It's like enabling 
legislation with respect to a marketing board. If the majority of 
producers like it, fine; if they don't, then they can change it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — So what you're saying then is that we don't 
have single-desk selling in the province at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, we do. We have it, and 
it's operating, and for those that want to use it, they use it, and for 
those that don't, they don't have to. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, it's interesting to have single-desk 
selling but be able to sell anywhere. That's a strange definition, but 
it fits well with the Conservative administration and their ability to 
administer. But there will be those in Swift Current — and the 
member from Morse will know them well, and the member from 
Swift Current will know them well — who don't agree that there is 
an option of selling single-desk or going their own way, even to 
the point where a number of them are moving out of the province. 
 
I'll tell you this, that there's a group of business people in Swift 
Current who have been there for many, many years who are 
moving their trucking firm and their cattle operation out of the 
province because they can't deal with you people. 
 
Now these are people who worked for you in the last election. 
They're people who worked for you . . .  (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well, not only the individual the member from 
Souris-Cannington mentions, but his partner and all the other 
partners in the firm who worked hard and donated to the 
Conservative party are telling us that because of your lack of 
courage — that you promised to get rid of single-desk selling 
when you were elected, when you were down in Swift Current in 
the last election. You promised them that you would get rid of it 
and haven't done it — that you haven't defended your 
Conservative policy. 
 
Now I want to tell you that you have a problem with that, with 
your Conservative friends. And I want to say that there are many 
people who worked for you in the last election — many people 
who worked for you in the last election who are now fleeing from 
the Conservative party. That's in Swift Current — Swift Current. 
 
I know why you didn't call a June election. I know why you didn't 
call a June election, because I think there's something happening 
out there in rural Saskatchewan, Swift Current, Weyburn, places 
like that — right in the middle of the oil patch, interestingly 
enough — maybe in Estevan. 
 
I want to say the Premier was talking about electoral success 
earlier. Well I was there the night of the electoral success in 1980 
in Estevan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — In '82. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — No, in 1980. I was in Estevan that night. 
And I remember sitting in this Assembly when Mr. Larter 
resigned his seat — he used to sit right over here in  

this desk — resigned his seat, the safest seat in the province so the 
now Premier could run. I remember that night very well. And they 
parachuted him into Estevan into the safest seat. He had run up in 
Saskatoon and had lost in 1978; I believe it was in Nutana. He ran 
in Nutana and lost. Then they parachuted him down into the best 
seat in the province. And Bob Larter resigned his seat, and then 
was sent over to London for a reward after the election in '82. 
 
But I want to say that what happened in 1980, what happened in 
1980 when the now Premier lost that seat, the safest Tory seat in 
the province, is beginning to happen again. That's what's 
happening. When you have cattlemen and truckers in Swift 
Current saying that they can't make a living in Saskatchewan, that 
they can't . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Katzman says he had the safest seat. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well maybe Mr. Katzman, or the member 
from Rosthern, does have the safest seat. But I want to tell you that 
there's a trend occurring right across the province, and that is as 
that in the Swift Current and Weyburn area, that the Conservatives 
are going down and going down very quickly. And I want to say 
that that trend is only going quicker and quicker the further we get 
away from the last election. We are now well into the fifth year of 
this government's mandate — five years. We are now five years 
. . . into the fifth year of the Conservative mandate. 
 
And I want to say that when we look at what this government has 
done for the people of the province, there is no doubt and no 
reason why they shouldn't be slipping in the polls and with 
popularity with the people of the province. Because I want to say 
that . . .  (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member from Regina 
Victoria is shouting from his seat, and I want to say that he has a 
few problems as well with the candidate Harry Van Mulligen 
who's running against him. And he should be out canvassing if he 
intends to win, because he's going to have a tough time. 
 
But I want to talk about some of the reasons that we are going to 
have a different configuration in this Assembly after the next 
election — a very different configuration. 
 
I want to say that in the area of housing . . . Let's take one area. 
During the late 1970s the housing starts in Saskatchewan ran 
between 8,000 a year and 12,000 a year, and there were thousands 
of people working in the housing industry. Well I want to tell you 
that in 1985, in the last full year of this government's 
administration, there were 5,200 housing starts — half of what it 
was in 1978, '79 and 1980 — one-half of what it was. Young 
people no longer are building houses. They've quit; they can't 
afford to; there's no jobs. When we left office there were about 25 
or 26,000 people unemployed. That number has now risen to 
45,000 families without jobs — 45,000 without jobs in this 
province. 
 
If we look at welfare . . . I was the minister at the time of the last 
budget. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not a very good one. 
 
  



 
June 26, 1986 

 

2379 
 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, maybe not a very good one. But I'll 
tell you that our last budget . . . in our last budget there were $98 
million set aside for welfare — 98 million. This year the number 
will exceed 200 million being paid out in welfare to people who 
can't find jobs in this province, more than 100 per cent more on 
welfare in this province in 1986 than there was in 1982. 
 
I want to say that that is a disgrace when you have young families 
who want to work, sitting at home collecting welfare because you, 
Mr. Premier, have been able to administer the affairs of this 
province to meet the needs and to build jobs. And I say one of the 
areas you have failed miserably is in housing construction, and 
your own records will prove that, that this past year there were 
5,200 housing starts which is half of what it was, half of what it 
was under our government. That's right, half of what it was. 
One-half of the single-housing unit starts as what it was back in 
the late years of the NDP government. Now that should be an 
embarrassment to the Premier. That should be an embarrassment. 
 
But I want to tell you that a New Democratic government would 
do something about that. It would do something about that. We 
have a program that would give a $7,000 grant to every young 
family that wanted to build a house in this province — every 
one -whether they were on a farm, or whether they were in a small 
town or a city, whether it was Estevan, Saskatoon, 
Souris-Cannington — any of those areas — young families would 
get $7,000. And I'll tell you, that would create jobs. 
 
Where would we get the money? I'll tell you where we would get 
the money. We would get the money from the likes of Peter 
Pocklington, from the Weyerhaeuser, the 248 million we're giving 
away to that multinational forest giant from Tacoma — the 
American company who's coming up and getting seven million 
acres — seven million acres of our forest, of prime forest, as well 
as $248 million . . .  (inaudible interjection) . . . That's right. 
 
And I'll tell you that you have a little problem when you look at 
the housing industry — one half of what it was. And I'll tell you 
that our program would create 15,000 jobs at the cost of one deal, 
that Tacoma deal that you're giving away to Weyerhaeuser. That 
would pay for the housing program and many other programs. 
 
You want to wonder where we'd get the money from? It would be 
easy. Simply quit giving it away to your political allies. Quit 
giving it to Pocklington, quit giving it to Weyerhaeuser, and give it 
to the people of the province to build homes. That's all you have to 
do. It's an easy solution. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Premier, that you are a disappointment to 
the young families in this province. I have many farm families . . . 
the family wants to repair their homes. There's no money. We 
haven't made money on the farm since 1982 when you were first 
elected . . .  (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Well I paid interest at 20 per cent. I never paid at 22 because the 
credit union in Shaunavon never charged more than 18. But the 
Premier is so out of touch with reality that he keeps yelling 22 per 
cent. I farm. I never  

paid more than 18 per cent at the credit union in Shaunavon. It 
was never higher than that. But I'll tell you, when it was 18 per 
cent in 1981, I paid income tax and made money . . .  (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, everyone made money. Everyone made 
money in Saskatchewan in 1981, and they had jobs. 
 
But I'll tell you, today in Shaunavon constituency there are many 
farmers who can't repair their farm homes. They don't have any 
money to repair their homes. And I'll tell you, we have a $7,000 
grant to repair the farm homes of this province that is unlike any 
other program anywhere in Canada. And every farm family will 
be eligible for the program — $7,000 for every farm family for 
their house. 
 
Mr. Chairman: —Order, please. Order, please. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, just prior to adjournment, I 
wonder if, by leave of the Assembly, I'd like to move the 
following motion, seconded by my colleague, the member for 
Regina Rosemont: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns on Friday June 27th, 
1986, it do stand adjourned until Wednesday, July 2, 1986. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:03 p.m. 
 


