


















































June 3, 1986 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 3, 1986 
 
 

1675 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Women's Secretariat 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 41 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I would ask the minister to please introduce 
her officials. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Tonight I have 
the pleasure of introducing to the Assembly the executive director 
of the Women's Secretariat, to my immediate right, Leah Siebold. 
To Leah's right is Janet McGregor. Immediately behind me is 
Ruth Warick. 
 
Perhaps before we get into a few questions, Mr. Chairman, a few 
opening comments. The past year has been a very busy one and it 
is an extremely challenging one, and perhaps more challenging 
than a department itself. Because when you deal with an agency 
that is responsible for co-ordination between various departments 
and government agencies, the challenge indeed becomes one of a 
magnitude that one doesn't often deal with. However, regardless of 
the challenge, I feel that some of the accomplishments over the 
year in terms of government policy and the integration of various 
concerns into some departments has been very good, and I would 
hope that the year following will be even better. With those 
comments, I look forward to questions from the opposition. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too welcome 
the officials to the legislature. A number of members of the 
opposition will have some questions of the minister on the 
Women's Secretariat. madam Minister, I think it has been said 
before, and I think it is quite accurate and I will state again, that it 
is my hope that your secretariat will eventually be able to have as 
much clout and as much influence as did the previous women's 
division in the Department of Labour. 
 
The concern was expressed not only by members of the opposition 
but by many women's organizations as well as organizations who 
one would not define as women's organizations, that the Women's 
Secretariat was something that was formed in haste and 
controversy when your government cancelled the Department of 
labour's women's division; found out that there was more pressure 
to have some organization in government speaking on the issues 
that relate to women and their problems in the economy and in 
society; and therefore your government had to act, and created a 
Women's Secretariat. Another example of backtracking, although I 
might say that if you can show over not too long a period of time 
that there are some positive results then I think sometimes you 
have to even accept that backtracking is an important step. 
 
I will ask you a number of questions. I don't think I have any 
particular concern with the staff or the activities of the secretariat. 
But I want to know what some of the particular areas are that you 
have made a representation  

on and what the results have been. I noted that in the last year's 
estimates you answered a question to . . . In fact, it wasn't a 
question; it was in your opening remarks that your secretariat had 
been involved in many issues, as you again said this year — that 
those issues that you were involved in were pornography and 
prostitution, business information and conferences, education, 
guidance counsellors' training, and ongoing liaison with federal 
and provincial governments. 
 
Can you tell my, Madam Minister, what kind of activities — and I 
don't mean this in any facetious sense at all — but what kind of 
work has your secretariat done in the area of pornography? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, perhaps the member 
opposite has not had all the historical background, if I may call it 
that, in terms of the secretariat and the purpose for it. And I would 
suggest that he go back and he take a good hard look at why the 
secretariat was set up and the reasons given. And I would suggest 
that he would also conclude, if he was honest with himself, that it 
was not done in haste. And in fact I will remind, or tell the 
member for the first time, when Saskatchewan introduced the 
Women's Secretariat it was the third one in Canada to be set up. 
But it wasn't the last. Immediately following that, several other 
provinces moved and took the structure of the Women's 
Secretariat, along with the legislation to model their secretariats 
after it, in order to deal with the issues that governments right 
across Canada and the Northwest Territories were facing. 
 
So I take with a very large grain of salt what the member says, 
when he says that it was set up in haste. In terms of the secretariat 
and its accomplishments versus the NDP and women in the 
Department of Labour, I would suggest that the scope  . . that the 
secretariat has branches out all across all departments of 
government and agencies, which could not possibly happen within 
one department in government. 
 
And I think the member, if he were honest with himself, would 
probably agree to that, for he has indeed in his time been minister 
of several departments and he knows how departments react and 
initiate various programs, and how they also react to programs and 
initiations coming from other departments. 
 
The accomplishments . . . And I would like to touch on them 
briefly, Mr. Chairman. The pornography issue that the member 
has raised was dealt with more than a year ago now, and I believe 
that it had at that time received some very positive comments and 
feedback from the public. I think the next step to that came when 
the Minister of Consumer Affairs introduced some regulations as 
it pertains to videos and the classifications of — and which, I 
might say, was also received very positively, particularly from 
parents with young children. 
 
Along with that particular accomplishment, Mr. Chairman, we 
have been involved with such issues as the automatic enforcement 
of maintenance orders; we have finally seen that implemented. We 
have been involved in discussions on pension plans, particularly 
for housewife . . . part-time workers, which the majority of them 
are  
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1676 
 

 

females, many of them single parents. We have also been very 
actively involved in trying to increase the representation of women 
on government boards and commissions, and I believe since the 
introduction of a government policy we have been very successful 
in that. We have also been very active with the Department of 
Tourism and Small Business in looking at the women's 
contribution in business, entrepreneurial, and within the 
management category. We also have been working with the 
Department of Social Services in the child care area. And of 
course, there is the Department of Education. 
 
It wasn't too long ago, Mr. Chairman, that there was an 
announcement in this House from the Department of Advanced 
Education and the minister responsible, the member from Meadow 
Lake, and at that time there was some new initiatives announced, 
and it included — for the first time ever in this province, and I 
believe it's probably ahead of a few other provinces — some 
assistance for single parents that are trying to further their 
post-secondary education. 
 
Along with those, Mr. Chairman, we of course look at legislation, 
The Matrimonial Property Act that was under review, and I 
believe that through consultations and communications, we have 
in fact been able to impact greatly on the various policies that 
departments are looking at or in fact have implemented. 
 
If the member would so wish, I would be glad to collect for him 
the brief that we put out on pornography and prostitution, which 
was entitled Respecting Human Dignity. If he does not already 
have a copy, I will in fact send one across for him. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, I would appreciate a copy, Madam 
Minister. I do not think I have a copy. Our office may have that. I 
do not have it, so if you would either . . . You don't necessarily 
have to do it today, but if you will make sure that I would get it, I 
would appreciate it. 
 
Madam Minister, was it the secretariat that recommended to the 
government and the Minister of Finance last year that there be a 
tax in the budget on pornographic material? Is that where it was 
initiated? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I don't believe that the secretariat has ever 
recommended to the Department of Finance what it should tax and 
what it shouldn't. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Was the secretariat consulted, then? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the tax that the member 
from Regina North East is referring to, as he well knows, was not 
pursued. And I think through consultation there was an agreement 
that we could perhaps pursue other ways to discourage the use. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I'm sure that there was consultation in some 
form, including what must have been an impossibility to enforce 
it, to change the government's mind. You did not answer my 
question. Was the secretariat consulted, or were you, as the 
minister, consulted prior to the announcement, the splashy 
announcement by the government that it was going to implement 
the tax? 
 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as a member of 
cabinet, I have access to information, and that's where those 
matters come. Of course I would have been, in cabinet. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, you have made a great 
to-do about the influence of the secretariat in the government and 
the fact that it's no longer a department and therefore is going to 
have a lot more clout. One would have thought that if the 
government as a whole, including the Department of Finance, 
recognized this new importance of the secretariat, that the 
secretariat would have been consulted on this issue which the 
secretariat, as you indicate, has been leading the work on. I'm not 
complaining about that. I think that's important and if the 
secretariat has done that, I commend it. 
 
But having said that, do you now think it would have been 
therefore just as important for the Department of Finance to 
consult the secretariat as the Department of Industry and 
Commerce? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well given that the member seems to be so 
hung up on tax, it seems to me I've spent two days in this House 
with him and that's precisely all that we've talked about. 
 
The issue of taxation as it relates to the budget — consultation 
takes place with cabinet. The member knows that as a past 
minister of Finance, unless of course he didn't consult. I don't 
know. I wasn't there. I suppose he could answer that better than I. I 
think what is important is that the issue was not pursued and there 
was an agreement that we will in fact pursue other ways of 
discouraging the use, if in fact that would even discourage it. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — In other words, Madam Minister, you're 
saying that the government will selectively choose to consult your 
secretariat when it feels like it. But when it comes to some things, 
and in this case this particular tax which you have, I'm sure, every 
intention to implement — otherwise it would not have been 
announced by the Minister of Finance in 1985 — but when the 
government chooses not to consult the secretariat, it won't. In this 
case the secretariat was not consulted. 
 
The Minister of Small Business and Tourism — now I have it 
correct — I'm sure that his department .  . If you were going to do 
something in the area of small business and provide managerial 
training for women who are in business, I'm sure that that minister 
and his department would consult with the secretariat. As a matter 
of fact, I know that in the conference that was recently held there 
was some joint work that was done, and that's good. 
 
Why would therefore not the Department of Finance think it 
important enough to consult the secretariat before dealing with this 
kind of an issue which the secretariat was leading the way on in 
research and in the making of a brief and so on? Can you answer 
that, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, my colleague from  
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1677 
 

Saskatoon Sutherland says, maybe we should talk about the 
removal of the tax on clothing, E & H tax on clothing. That's 
perhaps not a bad idea. I can only state, Mr. Chairman, as 
discussions go in cabinet, most of them are confidential and the 
member is really — how shall I say it — being rather picky in 
issues that he's looking for if he wants to dwell on whether 
consultation took place on a proposed tax that, in fact, never was 
further pursued after the announcement. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well what I'm trying to establish, Madam 
Minister, is whether the establishment of a Women's Secretariat by 
your government is window-dressing, or whether it's a real thing. 
And you are leading the committee to believe by your evading the 
answer — which you have done — that as far as the government 
is concerned, although you have very well-meaning people in the 
secretariat, in the government's opinion, it's window-dressing. And 
in the words of the Saskatchewan Action Committee on the Status 
of Women when they referred to your budget: "Flashy 
communications and hollow rhetoric have become the trade-mark 
of the Saskatchewan government." 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where did you read that? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I'm reading it out of a press release. And 
I'm telling you, Madam Minister, that your avoiding the question 
does only one thing. It reinforces the view that people, who are 
concerned about the work of the secretariat and would like to see it 
succeed, are saying that they fear the government really does not 
intend anything serious, but simply has some form of 
window-dressing. 
 
So since you do not want to answer the question of whether the 
Department of Finance considers, along with other departments, 
the secretariat to be important enough to consult it when it begins 
to initiate policy that may affect some of the work of the 
secretariat, when you're saying that, then you're saying that the 
government is not really serious about the work of the secretariat. 
 
Now one of the things that you mentioned, Madam Minister, is 
that the secretariat will assist women in locating in jobs, and also 
training, assistance to single parents who may be taking an 
education. Well I just want to give you some statistics and then 
ask you a question. 
 
In the last four years inflation has been about 30 per cent, but there 
has only been one increase in the minimum wage. In four years 
inflation has gone up 30 per cent, but the minimum wage has 
increased by 6 per cent — that's all. Over those four years there 
has been an increase of 15 per cent in the number of Saskatchewan 
women employed — that's from 1981 to 1985 — but there has 
been a 70 per cent increase in the number of women unemployed. 
Now I think that's pretty serious — from 10,000 in 1981 to 17,000 
in 1985. 
 
That does not provide evidence to support your so-called 
accomplishments in pursuing this particular field of government 
responsibility. Added to that, Madam Minister, the number of 
fully employable persons on welfare — fully employable persons 
on welfare, and  

many of them are women — has been increased over the past 
years by some 150 per cent. So your economic policies and your 
fiscal policies have actually jeopardized the opportunities that 
women in our society should have. 
 
Madam Minister, it has been now — is it a year since the 
minimum wage was last increased? At least a year, maybe more, 
and that was only one increase in four years. Have you recently 
. . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Five years. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Is it now five? — going on to five years. 
Have you recently made representation to the Minister of Labour 
to consider increasing the minimum wage, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the minimum wage issue — 
and I'm glad the member from Regina North East raises it along 
with employment or unemployment, whichever the case may be, 
because I think the whole area needs a good discussion. And what 
better arena to have that discussion than in here? I will again state 
my position on the minimum wage, which perhaps the hon. 
member from Regina North East has not heard before. And if he 
has, I'm sure he will forgive me for repeating myself, but perhaps 
it's worth repeating. 
 
The minimum wage has been raised once. It is still the highest in 
Canada. It is still the highest in Canada. However, if I were to say 
to the member from Regina North East, the minimum wage shall 
be $10 an hour, where does he think everything goes from there, 
respectively? It goes upward. 
 
And when I hear the opposition tell me that if only we would raise 
the minimum wage everything would be great for women, I 
wonder where he's been for the last 10 or 15 years. Everything 
would not be okay if the barriers are still there to better job 
opportunities, if there is no incentive there for your further 
education and training, and if there isn't a concerted effort made to 
deal with attitudes that put up the barriers in the first place. So you 
have to look at the thing in a much broader perspective than the 
minimum wage. 
 
When we took a look at the minimum wage — and I might add, its 
impact on females, and there's no doubt about it that a lot of 
women, particularly women working part-time, are on minimum 
wage — we found that there was approximately 3 per cent of all 
Saskatchewan residents working for pay were earning the 
minimum wage; 10,000 people, Mr. Chairman. Seventy per cent 
of the minimum wage earners were women. I have already 
recognized that the majority on minimum wage are in fact women. 
 
Seventy per cent of those earning minimum wage were under 24 
years old. I would suggest that that takes into consideration 
seasonal employment also. Seventy-one per cent were single and 
52 per cent were students, Mr. Chairman. Sixty-six per cent of 
those worked part time and 68 per cent were employed at present 
jobs for less than a year. Fifty per cent of all minimum wage 
earners were women working part time, and 69 per cent were in  
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1678 
 

 

the service industry, 21 in sales, and 8 per cent in the clerical jobs. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, you tell me by raising the minimum wage, 
that anything changes. And it doesn't. Prices go up, expenses go 
up, and they're still at the same point where they were before, if 
you do not put into place those factors that allow them to move up 
within the job force to areas that pay more. Mr. Chairman, we took 
a good hard look at it, and we have done precisely that. 
 
I will remind the member for Regina North East the skills 
development program within Social Services has been very 
successful. It gave people an opportunity to upgrade themselves 
and to become independent and self-reliant, and that is basically 
what most people ask for. And that particular program gave them 
precisely that opportunity. 
 
Along with that, Mr. Chairman, we put an emphasis on education, 
advanced education, and training. Mr. Chairman, we took a look at 
some barriers that we felt we could control or at least show a 
position of leadership on, and that was in the area of women in 
management. The minister in charge for Public Service 
Commission about a year and a half ago announced the 
affirmative action program for the Government of Saskatchewan. 
All of those, Mr. Chairman, have given women a greater 
opportunity in terms of economic equality. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I do not — and I will emphasize again — believe 
that the opposition really believe that all that is necessary is the 
upping of the minimum wage. If they do believe that, it tells me 
how very little they actually know of the work place and of the 
opportunities, the expectations, that women have set for 
themselves. 
 
I think there's no doubt about it that we still have some areas 
where women get locked into in terms of job opportunity, and 
there's some reasons for it. Some of it will be not finishing their 
education; some will be no training into particular jobs; or perhaps 
they will have taken a job training in an area or got locked into a 
job that has traditionally required low education levels and the 
opportunity has simply not been there. All those factors come into 
play when you're talking about the minimum wage and the 
work-force and women as they relate to the work-force. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Madam Minister, if rhetoric could 
accomplish anything, you would have a star rating. But 
unfortunately rhetoric and words do not solve problems. Action 
does. And you just stood in the House for about five minutes and 
given nothing but rhetoric about minimum wage and about other 
things, totally ignoring, Madam Minister, and I say in a very 
irresponsible way, the problems that women — because we're 
talking about women, many of them single parents, but other 
people in society as well — face because of the kind of priorities 
that you and your government set; priorities where if you are in an 
upper income bracket you're going to get all the breaks, but if 
you're in a lower income bracket you get no breaks at all. As a 
matter of act you even get taxed more and more and more. That's 
the policy of your government. 
 

You suggest that the only issue that we are raising or that I am 
raising is the minimum wage and somehow assuming that that's 
going to solve all the problems. That's not what I'm suggesting at 
all. That's only one component of many and we will get to many 
more. That's only one component. 
 
I am saying to you that you have increased the minimum wage by 
25 cents an hour in over four years. Now I don't know whether 
you can raise a family of two or three children on $9,000 a year, 
but I kind of doubt that you could. I know I would find it very 
difficult. We would do it, but I can tell you that those children 
would have to give up an awful lot. I can tell you that those 
children would be going to school — and I have seen some of 
them — and they would not have some of the things that other 
children have because of your miserly approach to people on low 
incomes in our society. 
 
You suggest that the way to deal with the problem is reduce the 
barriers to job opportunities. I don't disagree with that. If we can 
reduce the barriers to job opportunities, that would be very 
commendable. But I ask you, Madam Minister, and I wish you 
would answer the question: how are you reducing the barriers to 
job opportunities when unemployment has doubled in the last 
four-and-some years to over 8 per cent, when the fully employable 
persons on welfare has increased by 150 per cent; when there has 
been a 70 per cent increase in the number of women who are 
unemployed? How is that, Madam Minister, will you explain, 
reducing the barriers to job opportunities? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well the member wants to talk about 
rhetoric. He sat there and he says for five minutes he listened to 
rhetoric which tells me he wasn't listening, because I gave him 
precisely the information that he has once again asked for. I would 
be more than pleased to give it to you again. Mr. Chairman, no 
rhetoric. Let's talk some figures and facts that the member can 
easily understand if he takes the time to listen. And if he doesn't 
believe what I'm saying, I would be more than glad to send him 
the documents that they come out of. Keep it simple, the Minister 
of Health says. That's probably wise when dealing with the 
member from Regina North East. 
 
On April 30, 1986, Mr. Chairman, the overall Saskatchewan 
unemployment rate was 8.2, and I might add that our employment 
rate was one of the highest — if not the highest — in Canada. But 
because we are talking about women tonight, I'm going to tell the 
member from Regina North East that the number, the rate for 
women was 7.4 compared to 8.8 for men at the same time. Now 
I'm not too sure where he says that the unemployment factor has 
grown so much more for women than it has for men. I am giving 
you statistics, sir. 
 
Women's participation rate in the labour force, Mr. Chairman, is in 
fact increasing, and the member knows that. In 1985 the number 
of women in the labour force increased by 15,000, in 1985 alone, 
by 15,000 for women in the work-force. That's a statistic. Now I'm 
not sure which statistic the member's dealing with but they're 
certainly not mine. He says, what are we doing — the barriers. 
 
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1679 
 

Mr. Chairman, the Saskatchewan skills development program 
began June 1, 1984. And it was a program in co-operation with 
several departments — Advanced Education, Social Services, and 
the Employment Development Agency. And what it was, it was 
upgrading for single unemployed social services recipients. The 
total number of registers to that date, May 8, 1986, is 5,960, and 
approximately 57 per cent of those are women. We also in 
realizing that these single parents would require child care 
facilities, that was set up to assist the women that were accessing 
that particular program. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we had the Saskatchewan employment 
development program that began on April 1, 1984. That too was a 
job creation program for single unemployed recipients; 4,883 
placements were made; 1,363 of those were women. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we ran the opportunities program in '84, '85, and 
'86, and approximately 50 per cent of each of those years were 
women on those jobs. 
 
We also had the Access youth program. That was a provincially 
funded job creation program aimed at helping young people from 
ages 16 to 25 find work. And there was approximately 1,600 jobs 
created in 1985, and half of those were female. 
 
So as you see, Mr. Chairman, the opportunities were indeed there. 
And those opportunities must be created by government in order 
to bring down some of the barriers that we talked about earlier. 
 
Mr. Chairman, to come back to the female participation rate, it's 
interesting to note — and I would encourage the member from 
Regina North East to read in Statistics Canada the labour force 
annual averages. And they show a very interesting picture for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And let me take the years from 25 to 34 years old. In 1975, and 
that was the year the member was around, 45 per cent 
participation rate by women. Well in 1986, Mr. Chairman, that 
figure is 69.7 participation rate by women. So, Mr. Member from 
Regina North East, when dealing with statistics, don't tell me that 
that hasn't been increasing for females. It has, very much so. And 
females have been taking advantage of the opportunity. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Chairman, you can use all of the 
statistics that you want. The fact that there has been a 70 per cent 
increase in the number of women unemployed speaks for itself. A 
70 per cent increase in the number of women unemployed is not 
an insignificant figure. But there are other kinds of arguments and 
other kinds of concerns that I would like the minister to consider. 
 
You speak of all of these job creation programs that your 
government has initiated and you boast about them. But let me tell 
you what you've done. With those job creation programs and with 
other things that are happening which you are not addressing, you 
are maintaining the traditional approach for jobs for women. And 
that is that their jobs mainly will be, in your approach, in the 
traditional work that women have always done, the  

lowest paid jobs in society. 
 
You boast about your job employment program. Well I want to 
tell you, Madam Minister, just in case you don't know — and I got 
this from the Minister of Social Services just the other day, 
because I asked him for it — that the duration of those jobs was 
from 22 . . . This is important. I want the minister to listen to this. 
I'm not finished. I just wanted to get your attention, Madam 
Minister. Those jobs that you talk about lasted on the average of 
22 to 26 weeks — 22 to 26 weeks, and you're boasting about the 
great things you have done for young women getting into the 
work-force, young women or single mothers you've taken off the 
social assistance rolls. 
 
Well all you've done under that program, Madam Minister, is 
played games, cruel games, for political purposes. You take 
people and you give them a job at low wages, around the 
minimum wage, for 22 to 26 weeks. Guess what? That's the time 
that's required to qualify for unemployment insurance. Then you 
tell them, now you can go on unemployment insurance and then 
you won't show up on our statistics as somebody who is on the 
welfare rolls. Now I can't think of any more insensitive way to 
deal with the unemployment problem than that, than to play with 
the lives of families in this way. That's the kind of program you're 
boasting about. 
 
Madam Minister, even you would not disagree with your statistics, 
that the number of part-time jobs has been growing at a very rapid 
rate in our economy. At a quicker rate than ever in history, 
part-time jobs has been growing and has been replacing full-time 
jobs. As a matter of fact, in SuperValu, something like 90 or 91 
per cent of the employees are casual or part-time. They get no 
benefits; they get no pension plan. 
 
And I know that your government talked in either the budget 
speech or the budget speech or both about introducing a pension 
plan. We have still to see the light of day, and it's day 52. We 
know, and we will want to see, but I suspect that that pension plan 
will not help any of these people we're talking about, because they 
won't be able to afford to make a monthly contribution to that 
plan. Because your voluntary pension plan, I suspect, will only 
benefit those people with a large enough income so that they can 
put aside whatever the amount is going to be each month and put it 
into a pension plan which you will then match. but anybody on a 
minimum wage, or a low wage somewhere close to the minimum 
wage, won't be able to afford to do that and will therefore not 
qualify for the pension, but will actually be subsidizing upper 
income people who will be able to qualify for the pension because 
the government will be making a matching contribution. 
 
Madam Minister, people on part-time work get no benefits. They 
do not earn enough. And you say somehow that it comes up in job 
statistics — you claim that as being jobs created. That's your claim 
to job creation. What have you done? You have put people into 
the kind of jobs where they cannot possibly make a decent living; 
get no security because they can't develop any security for the 
future. And therefore, Madam Minister, you have failed them. 
 
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1680 
 

 

(1945) 
 
I ask you again — and I'm not dealing as if it's a cure-all for 
anything — do you not think that it is a responsibility of yourself 
as the minister in charge of this agency, and the responsibility of 
this agency, to make a representation to the Minister of Labour 
expressing some concern about the minimum wage and at least 
addressing the question on whether the single mothers and others 
who are on minimum wage can afford to make a living working 
for the minimum wage as it is today? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, that's probably true. As the  . . I 
thought it was the member from Shaunavon saying, but it wasn't. 
Sooner or later it will be; it will be. 
 
I'm going to tell the member from Regina North East what my . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . You're going to have a long wait; we 
can only hope you'll hold your breath while you're waiting. 
 
What my responsibilities are in terms of being responsible for the 
status of women — it is my responsibility to ensure that there is an 
equal opportunity there, opportunity not necessarily given, but that 
the doors are open and that it be taken. It is also my responsibility 
to ensure to cabinet that there is a voice there for the various 
concerns of women. 
 
And if the member from Regina North East thinks that women 
talk with one voice, he shouldn't be in here. Women, first of all, 
are individuals, and they have as many differing views as what 
you find in this Assembly by the males. So why does he think 
there is one cure-all for all women? There isn't. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That's socialist mentality. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, that's very true. As the member from 
Weyburn says, that's a very socialistic mentality. In fact, what it 
comes down to is you set the lowest common denominator and 
then you make sure everybody fits into it. And bless us — if we 
don't fit into it, there's nowhere to go. 
 
I have a responsibility, Mr. Chairman, to ensure that through 
education, advanced education and training, through small 
business, that women in fact are in there participating. And I 
would encourage the member to look at what is happening in 
advanced education and what women are starting to take in the 
colleges. 
 
For example, Mr. Chairman, let's use agriculture, because that's 
what Saskatchewan is all about — agriculture. You know, in 
1975, when my good friend was minister of Education away back 
then, there was 90 per cent of women taking agriculture. Well, Mr. 
Chairman, I'm happy to say under the Progressive Conservative 
government, in 1985, there were 32 per cent of those in the 
College of Agriculture as women — as women. Now can you 
imagine the opportunity that those young women will have in 
coming out when Saskatchewan's economy is based on 
agriculture? And the spin-offs that are out there in terms of jobs 
are great in number. I have great faith for the future when this 32 
per cent graduates from college. 
 

The member says, "What?" He wasn't listening. 
 
The College of Commerce. When the member was the minister of 
Education, 21 per cent of those in commerce were women. Well 
today, now that the member from Meadow Lake is the minister, 
47 per cent in the College of Commerce are women. 
 
Dentistry, 1975 — 14 per cent in the dentistry faculty were 
female; in 1985, 34 per cent are women. 
 
The College of Medicine is another good example, Mr. Chairman. 
In 1975, 31 per cent were women and today 42 per cent are there. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Got the numbers for veterinary medicine? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, I do. For the member from Weyburn, 
for his benefit as a vet, in 1975, 22 per cent were women; in 1985 
almost 60 per cent of those in that college are women. So that 
should tell the farmers within the Assembly who's going to be 
looking after the animals in a few years down the road . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Well of course it does. You know, you can read what you want 
into the statement. The simple reality is that those girls coming out 
of vet medicine, when they graduate, will have a very good 
opportunity in terms of vet medicine in this province. More than 
half of them are female . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . There is 
only one statistic on length and it comes with the next election. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I think some of these things speak for themselves. 
You know, he wants to talk opportunity. he keeps saying, women, 
minimum wage; and I keep saying, women, given the opportunity, 
will go a way beyond that. 
 
And I look at advanced education as only one good example. I 
look at the public service as another good example where the 
numbers are increasing. I look at the banking community, which 
for years and years has been the domain of male managers, and 
the doors are wide open. You have only to go into any credit union 
or bank in Saskatchewan, and you will find a female bank loans 
manager, a bank manager. They are there, but you have to look. 
Take the blinders off. There's a few other areas where they have 
made great strides, and we still have a few areas where it's been 
extremely tough, and there's some very difficult work that remains 
to be done. 
 
I look at the world of small business. And let's talk about that for a 
minute, because all the trends tell us that the future with the 
economy and jobs is in small business for the future. Well 49 per 
cent of small businesses are owned or operated by women in the 
province of Saskatchewan, over and above the national average. 
That is an extremely good opportunity. It will also impact on the 
future down the road if you get women into those decision-making 
positions. There is an impact on the women that come after them. 
 
Role models, that's what some people call them, but they will in 
fact probably operate their businesses in a little  
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1681 
 

different manner; pay perhaps a different attention to areas like 
starting wages, particularly if it's a single parent that comes on. So 
I would ask the member to broaden his vision in terms of what 
women can do given the opportunity over and above the minimum 
wage. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Madam Minister, I do not need any 
broadening of my vision. I am quite aware of what women can do 
and in fact are doing, and are doing in greater numbers. And that 
trend that you talk about: nothing has happened because of any 
effort that your government has instituted, Madam Minister. It's 
happened because women have decided to take part in those, and 
that's good. I don't object to that. 
 
I object to your making two classes, is what you're doing. You're 
talking about those who can get into better paying jobs, and then 
you're saying you're going to ignore those who do not have jobs 
other than minimum wage jobs. Somehow you want to build this 
economy on the backs of the lowest paid people in our society. 
You refuse to address that question, and you want some people 
who are on low incomes to shoulder the burdens of an economy 
which you have brought down almost to its knees while those on 
higher incomes are able to benefit even more. 
 
You mentioned, Madam Minister, that you have a responsibility. 
Well I want to ask you about another responsibility. You say that 
you have an ongoing liaison role with the federal and provincial 
governments. Well I want to ask you about the federal 
government. 
 
There is a special parliamentary committee on child care that's 
been established by parliament. It comes as a result of a task force 
which the federal government spent $1 million on. That 
parliamentary committee on child care is going to travel the 
country and hear representations made to it. As a matter of fact, I 
think it's here on the 6th of June. 
 
Are you, Madam Minister, making a representation or is any other 
of your colleagues making a representation on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan to this parliamentary committee on 
child care? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Can I ask you who is making the 
representation? Is it officials, or which minister, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I don't know why it's so important that the 
member knows who is making it, but he can be assured that the 
appropriate people at the appropriate time will be making the 
presentation. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — That's the height of arrogance — absolute 
arrogance, Madam Minister, you are here in a committee to 
answer questions on behalf of your government. If you can't 
answer a simple question like, who is the minister or who the 
appropriate officials are that will make the representation to the 
parliamentary committee, you are being absolutely arrogant like 
all the rest of your colleagues in your cabinet. 
 
The question is: who is responsible for making a  

representation to this parliamentary committee on child care? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — What is arrogant? That the member from 
Regina North East stands here and tells me what I answer and 
what I don't. I'm doing estimates as it relates to the Women's 
Secretariat. Now if we want to talk about day care for a while, we 
can do that — day care, rest, child care, in terms of government 
policy is the responsibility of the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Now if everything goes according to plan, there will perhaps be 
two of us that are making it. But if everything doesn't go according 
to plan, then there will only be one. And I would assume that it 
would be the Minister of Social Services and then myself. How 
that relates to my estimates I'm not too sure. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Madam Minister, whether your 
government is making a representation on as important an issue as 
child care, I think, is important to your agency because the agency 
has a very broad mandate. It talks in your annual report about 
consultation: 
 

In Saskatchewan, there are numerous local and provincial 
organizations related to the status of women. Representatives 
from the Women's Secretariat consult with these groups to 
explain government programs . . .  
 

In your own words you say it is the function of your agency to do 
liaison with the federal government. What better opportunity to do 
liaison than to make a representation to this committee? I am quite 
pleased to hear that indeed you're going to make a representation. I 
don't know if I'll be so pleased when I hear what you or the 
Minister of Social Services presents, but I am prepared to give you 
the benefit of the doubt and wait until I see what the content is. 
 
Can I ask you this question then: did the secretariat have input into 
the brief that's going to be presented to the parliamentary 
committee on child care? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased that the 
member from Regina North East is pleased that we are making 
representation on such an important issue as child care. At the 
same time I also made a mental note to myself, that I don't recall 
the opposition making any kind of representation to the Fraser 
committee on pornography and prostitution, but if they did so and 
I missed it, I would certainly apologize to them. 
 
Yes, we have been in consultation with the Department of Social 
Services on the brief, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, either you didn't answer 
the question or I didn't hear it because of the noise coming from 
your side of the House — but will you sit down until I'm finished 
asking my question. You really have to understand, Madam 
Minister, that you're here to answer question and you will have to 
be patient while we ask them and then you will have to answer 
them, and keep away . . . (inaudible interjection) . . .  
 
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1682 
 

 

Well that's fine. I agree. The member from Moosomin says that 
the ministers don't have to answer the questions. Well that's fine. If 
ministers feel they don't have to answer the questions then they 
will have to answer to the public about that. They can spend 
millions of dollars . . . Mr. Chairman, will you call the government 
members to order. Thank you. 
 
When the government cabinet ministers spend millions of dollars 
— and I'm not suggesting there are millions in this agency, but 
millions of dollars — for this government to say they don't have to 
answer questions about the expenditure of those millions of dollars 
is really highly irresponsible. And the member from Moosomin 
may have the view that ministers don't have to answer the 
question, and I guess they don't, but they have to decide if they 
have an obligation to answer the question and I submit that they 
do. 
 
Madam Minister, I ask you for the last time on this particular 
question: did the Women's Secretariat have a role to play in 
helping to prepare the brief which the Minister of Social Services 
or yourself, or both, are going to present, and in the process of 
preparing that brief were child care groups in the province also 
consulted? 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I believe I answered 
that question. And I think it is incumbent upon the member when 
he doesn't hear the question to recognize why he didn't. He was 
consulting with the member from Shaunavon and that's why he 
didn't hear my response . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. yes. If 
you'll stop talking long enough for me to answer, for the second 
time, the answer is yes. We were in consultation on the matter. 
And if you want to know if there was other consultation with the 
public, yes. I can assure you that the Minister of Social Services 
has met with many and in fact did some public consultation, and I 
also have met with some women's groups and with the advisory 
council on the status of women. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, thank you very much, Madam 
Minister. I'm surprised it took us a half an hour for you to get 
around to say that. It would have been quite simple for you simply 
to say it in the first place, and the question would have been 
answered. 
 
I'm glad that there was some consultation. I'm not sure whether it 
was simply listening and not hearing, which is the tradition of your 
government. If that's the form of consultation that you had, then I 
submit to you that it was not very adequate. I will have some 
further questions on this later but I think there are other members 
who want to get into this consideration of your estimates, and I 
will bow to them for a few moments. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — First of all, I would like to thank you for many 
of the comments you made while the member from Regina North 
East was asking questions. I appreciate your stand on minimum 
wage, not because neither you nor I necessarily want people to 
have low income jobs, but I'm sure that we understand that to 
climb up the ladder of success first of all you have to have a job 
and experience, and that's what minimum wage can do. 
 

I appreciate also you explaining to them very clearly that women 
don't think alike and that women have views of their own just as 
men do. And I certainly appreciate the good sense that you have 
presented to the member from Regina North East. 
 
The first thing I want to mention is that there was a Saskatchewan 
Federation of Women's Conference in P.A., and I understand from 
the people organizing it that you were responsible in helping them 
get funding for that conference. I'm not sure if you actually gave 
the funding or that you helped them get the money. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I have to admit I don't remember a letter on 
a particular conference from the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Women. I do know that they had pursued the avenue of Secretary 
of State funding for several years, and were simply told no. And I 
did write a letter at that time in support of the Secretary of State 
taking a look at it and encouraging them to assist them in funding 
of some kind. 
 
I'm wondering at this point in time if the funding for the 
conference in Prince Albert was perhaps — I might have directed 
it to protocol. If it's a national conference and there's people from 
out of province they would qualify, as do other conferences, under 
those same rules, or in fact it could have been done with assistance 
from the Secretary of State. But I would have to check my file to 
find out for sure. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — The Saskatchewan Federation of Women is 
provincial, and I believe perhaps it was from a heritage grant and 
that you were responsible for helping them get this. Is this not 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The heritage thing rings a bell now. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — I want to tell you that Mrs. Betty Lemke of 
Saskatoon told me that you were particularly helpful in helping 
them get that grant and made sure that their application was on 
time. The conference .  . You know, I might say I was biased 
because I was asked to be one of the guest speakers. The 
conference was attended by people all over Saskatchewan. 
 
There was a very good representation of northern ladies, and one 
of the issues we were discussing is the area of family rights. And 
so many people felt that the conference was very worthwhile. John 
Gormley, the MP from the Meadow Lakes was there, and just on 
behalf of the Saskatchewan Federation of Women, we appreciate 
the support that . . . We appreciate what you have done . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I thought maybe you'd have a comment 
about it, sorry. 
 
So I just would encourage . . . There's also REAL Women of 
Canada, Saskatchewan branch, and I'm sure the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Women and groups such as this would be very 
interested in giving input to the kinds of concerns that you 
expressed as is your prerogative as Women's Secretariat. And I 
just hope that you will continue to consult with them and they 
appreciate the support you've done. 
 
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1683 
 

This is the next question . . . That really isn't a question. But the 
next question I'm going to ask is really a federal concern. But 
since you in some ways are the liaison person between the 
Secretary of State, particularly in the funding of women's groups 
and Saskatchewan concerns, I would like to express my concern 
about some of the unbalanced groups. That's a little bit facetious, 
maybe. People might think that's really what I want to say, but the 
groups which I perceive are unbalanced in creating a broad view 
of women's concerns. First of all, have you had any dialogue with 
the secretary — I believe McLean, Walter McLean — about the 
funding of Saskatchewan women's groups? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — My apologies for the delay. We were just 
trying to remember who the new Secretary of State was. The 
member from Saskatoon Westmount, on the Prince Albert 
conference . . . I was not at the conference and that's why I did not 
feel that I could contribute any more to it. 
 
There is not a formal line, if I could say that, in terms of liaison on 
the funding of women's groups. The federal government has had 
total responsibility and does not consult with the provinces, I 
guess for a lot of reasons. Perhaps they feel, well, that's their 
responsibility for letting the money go, and there is no consultation 
process that is set up. 
 
However, that's not to say that — as I stated before, I had written 
them in regards to the Saskatchewan Federation of Women and at 
one point had also asked for the criteria, because there was more 
than the federation of women that were asking how they could 
access federal moneys to do some things. And I think there is a 
growing concern that that access is not necessarily there to a wide 
range of views. And I'm well aware of some women's groups that 
feel that it should be, instead being narrowed and isolated perhaps 
as it is. 
 
I have not had any kind of great success when Mr. Walter McLean 
was Secretary of State in terms of getting anything more on the 
issue of how women's groups are funded and on what issues. And 
when I say what issues, I use the example of a very good event 
that took place a year or two years ago at the university of 
Saskatoon, and it was the summer extension program which was 
set up for rural women. And the Saskatchewan Women's Institute, 
I believe, had a particular interest in it at that time — and Glenis 
Joyce, who works at the university, was trying to access funds for 
this kind of a conference and had no great success at all. And that's 
only one other example, other than the federation of women that 
have had a problem with it. 
 
However, our discussions will continue with the new Secretary of 
State, and perhaps we will eventually get somewhere in terms of 
more women's groups, whether it's rural or urban, being able to 
access some moneys for some particular concerns and causes that 
they may have in their respective communities. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — Well I appreciate that answer, and I appreciate 
the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — — Was it an answer or was it a  

preachment? 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — Well, it was an answer — sorry, I understood it. 
And I appreciate the help that you're giving, and I think that will 
gain credence to people who are saying that there seems to be an 
unbalanced view presented in the Secretary of State, that they 
seem to have a very, sometimes radical agenda. 
 
And I'd like to just, you know . . . and once again, I'm not blaming 
you for this but to give some example. For example, we have 
Briarpatch — and I must clarify that. I have no objections to 
Briarpatch existing; I have no objection to Briarpatch being 
published; I have no objection to it being read — it's rather 
amusing. But Briarpatch is a very admittedly left-wing magazine. 
And one would suggest, if you want to write a magazine, you 
could pay for it himself. And their funding, 7,500 for the potential 
for articles in Briarpatch. And one of the things is the potential 
impact of the emergence of reactionary women's groups on the 
women's movements and women at large. And many people will 
be very distressed to find that the Secretary of State is funding 
groups .  . organization to write tax on other women's groups. 
 
And one of the articles here we have is the "Freedom to be free 
and fear of the far side of the moon". And it's featured and it says 
it's from Secretary of State women's program, and the entire article 
discusses women who are, in particular, the enemy, namely Gay 
Caswell, Gwen Landolt, and Phyllis Schlafley — two out of three 
who happen to be Canadian women. 
 
And I tend to think that this puts up people's ire that they're very 
much choosing sides about women's concerns. They're saying one 
group has some legitimacy and one group doesn't. And I 
appreciate that you have tried to speak to the Secretary of State in 
Ottawa and deal with that issue. 
 
(2015) 
 
Another example of their mentality, and this is from the Montreal 
Gazette front page, and it talks about and there's a small print, 
"P.M. begins to discuss trade," so on and so on. And there's an 
article "REAL Women: The pretty pink facade," and REAL 
Women is an organization of women who would support, you 
might say, more traditional values, not necessary in what we call 
radical feminist group, although they most certainly are for 
equality and equal opportunity. 
 
And it says here: 
 

Tory MP John Gormley, one of a growing number of politicians 
impressed with REAL Women goals, calls on the spirit of 
fairness that says if feminists get public money from Ottawa, 
then so should REAL Women. 

 
And I just would like to know, and I think probably you've already 
clarified your views on your efforts to get such sensible groups as 
the women's institute funded, what your views are on such groups 
as REAL Women or groups that may not take a hard-line feminist 
or Marxist position getting funded from the Secretary of State to 
provide some  
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1684 
 

 

balance. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think there's a very 
basic issue and a question to be asked when it comes to third-party 
grants and funding that governments can do, whether it's 
provincial government or federal. And I think the first question 
that we as elected people have to begin to deal with and that is the 
question of funding either direct service groups or the advocate 
group. I don't think it's any secret in Saskatchewan that I think the 
dollar is best spent in terms of direct service to other people. And I 
think that somewhere along the line government is going to have 
to really look hard and review the whole question of funding the 
advocacy groups. And that's basically what we're talking about in 
terms of funding out of the Secretary of State. 
 
The one thing that we must never forget, Mr. Chairman, and that is 
that whether it's the Secretary of State's money or the provincial 
government, it is still a taxpayers' dollar. And whether it's right 
wing or left wing I think that groups have an equal opportunity 
and have to be given serious consideration because it is in fact 
everyone's money that the Secretary of State is handing out. And 
as I said earlier, I'm well aware of some of the concerns that some 
groups, for whatever reason, whether it be religion, politics, or 
something else, have not been given the serious consideration for 
opportunity of funding from Secretary of State. I will make a 
commitment to the member from Saskatoon Westmount tonight, 
and that is to press once again for a review of the funding of 
women's groups out of the Secretary of State. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — Thank you very much for that sensible answer. 
And I might add that one of the things that they talk about 
women's groups really, as far as I am concerned, really aren't 
women's groups at all. For example. Project Ploughshares is a 
group of unilateral disarmament, and I don't necessarily think that 
women are more concerned about, you know, wanting a 
communist take-over than men. 
 
And I think I want to . . . I'm to ask questions, but I want to 
express that your view on advocacy funding, that the taxpayer has 
to pay, no mater if it's right-wing or left-wing, is very well 
understood. And I think groups like REAL Women of Canada 
would be very happy to see no advocacy groups funded. But 
because some are, to the tune sometimes of $11 million, they need 
to have a balance. And I guess it's always a question — what the 
pro lifers come to me about health or whatever — if one group is 
funded, should the other group be funded or should none be 
funded. And I think the question is that until we have no advocacy 
funding, we have to be very careful of our balance. And I 
appreciate your efforts that you've done in the past on this. And 
I'm sure that both of us will continue to make sure there's more 
balance. 
 
And that's the end of my questions and comments on the Women's 
Secretariat. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the minister a 
couple of questions about the proposed pension plan which has 
been announced in the throne speech and in the budget by your 
government, and I have some questions that maybe you will be 
able to answer for  

us. And I understand that you will not be the minister bringing the 
Bill through the House — or maybe you will be — but in terms of 
your role as minister in charge of this area, as well as being one of 
the senior cabinet ministers and in charge of the Women's 
Secretariat, that you will have input into the design of the pension 
plan. 
 
There is a good deal of interest in what the details of the plan are. 
It's now a couple of months since we've heard the announcement 
that there would be a plan. And I think there are some people in 
fact who are interested to start making payments into this plan and 
they're wondering what the plan will include. There are others 
who are more cynical, who are saying that this is merely an 
election gimmick and there will be nothing brought forward 
before the election call and before the House adjourns. But I was 
pleased to hear from the Premier yesterday or the day before that 
he intended to have the Bill passed before the session ends. 
 
And I now have a couple of questions that I wanted you to outline 
for the committee. And I wonder, can you basically outline how 
the plan will work, if you're in a position to do that for the 
committee. And maybe you aren't; maybe there isn't; maybe the 
people who are cynical are right, that there isn't anything to this 
plan. But being the minister in charge of the Women's Secretariat, 
I'm sure that you will have — if in fact there is a Bill ready to go 
— you will have a broad outline of how it will affect women in 
the province. 
 
The other thing that cynical people are saying is that it will only 
benefit wealthy families where the husbands are earning enough 
money to put in a good chunk of cash, and that people who have a 
family income that is 9 or $10,000 of course will not be able to put 
their share in. 
 
But I wonder if at this time you could outline what that pension 
plan in broad terms will look like — and I'm not here looking for 
the details clause by clause of any Bill — but what suggestions 
have you made from the Women's Secretariat on that pension 
plan? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all it will be 
the Minister of Finance that is carrying it. And secondly, the 
member from Shaunavon, now he's either slow on process or he 
thinks I'm absolutely stupid. But the process is that those things 
are not released until the legislation is tabled in this House, and 
that stands on this issue. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, referring to someone who is slow, 
what I was asking you is whether the representation that the 
Women's Secretariat made to the Minister of Finance, if you could 
outline what lobbying you have done as a representative of the 
women of the province who will be affected by the pension plan. 
Can you give an outline of what lobbying you have done or what 
representation you have made to the Minister of Finance? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, those things will be 
handled after the legislation is tabled in this House. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well what I was asking is not the legislation 
or any details of the legislation, but what 
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1685 
 

 representation have you made as Minister of the Women's 
Secretariat. And I can't for the life of me understand why you 
would want to be secretive about the work that you've done in 
representing women's pensions in the province. I can't understand 
for the life of me why you wouldn't stand up and say, look, I've 
been working very hard, I'm one of the architects of this 
legislation, and here are the proposals that I have put forward — 
and be proud of what you've done. 
 
Well why wouldn't . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member 
from Souris-Cannington says that she is proud of the work she's 
done in this area, but yet she seems to be embarrassed to give an 
outline of the pressuring or the lobbying she has done. 
 
And I'm not here asking for a great deal of detail, but if you could 
outline what representation you have made. Have you done any 
studies into the area of pensions within the Women's Secretariat? 
Have you done a review of how many women presently have a 
pension? Let's start out there and maybe we can go at it in a 
different manner. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can only state once 
again, I am not prepared to give an outline of what is going to be 
in that legislation. I believe that would be most improper, and I 
also believe that the member from Shaunavon knows that that 
would be improper. And the mere fact that he can have the gall to 
stand here and ask that it be done, I consider to be improper. I 
would be more than pleased to answer any kind of questions that 
my friend from Shaunavon has after the legislation is tabled. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I want to ask it a little slower this time. 
I want to say I'm not asking about an outline of the legislation 
now. I'm asking about the lobbying that you have done — and it 
may be nothing. Maybe I'm overestimating your role within the 
cabinet. But I want to re-emphasize that I'm not asking you now 
for an outline of the legislation. And we'll get that point out of the 
way. 
 
Twice you've risen and said that I'm asking for the outline of the 
legislation. I'm not asking for that. I'm asking for what lobbying or 
suggestions you have made as the minister in charge of the 
Women's Secretariat. And I just can't believe that you wouldn't 
have done some lobbying, because there will be people out there 
who will have expected you to do that, and I think you probably 
have. 
 
I want to know what lobbying you did. That's what I'm asking is: 
what lobbying and what suggestions did you make as minister in 
charge of the Women's Secretariat? Did you suggest, for example, 
that a certain level of funding be put in by the government and a 
certain level by the individual? And if you did suggest that, what 
was the level of funding? 
 
What I'm asking here is not what is in the legislation, or an outline 
of the legislation, but what suggestions you, as the minister in 
charge of the Women's Secretariat, made to the Minister of 
Finance in drawing up what we think will be a piece of legislation 
introduced before the end of the session. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, any kind of  

suggestions that I may have made in regards to the forthcoming 
pension legislation will be released publicly after it is tabled in this 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder — I had asked a question earlier, 
and I want to go at this in a different direction — can you tell me 
how many women in the province presently have a pension plan? 
Do you have that statistic out of the Women's Secretariat? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I do not have that material 
with me tonight. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I wonder if the minister would be able 
to get that information for us. It seems like it's a very important 
issue that the Women's Secretariat would be dealing with, that is, 
pensions for women. I'm a little surprised that you don't have it 
with you, but I wonder if you'll give us the commitment that you 
will get that number for us. Basically what I'm asking for here is: 
how many women, and the age groups, who have pensions and 
those who don't — if you will be able to get that for me. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it's not surprising at all 
that I don't have that. I just told the hon. member from Shaunavon 
that the Minister of Finance will be carrying the pension 
legislation through this House, and the material as it relates — 
statistics, background material, options, etc., etc. — will rest with 
the Minister of Finance. At that time I would be more than glad to 
try and get any kind of figures and answer any questions that he 
may have, but I will not do so until then. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I'm not asking about the legislation; 
I'm asking about an important women's issue, and that is: how 
many women in the province presently have a pension plan? And 
believe it or not, there will be women in the province who will be 
surprised that the minister in charge of the Women's Secretariat 
doesn't know what percentage of the population who are female 
have a pension plan. And that is just shocking, and will be 
shocking to a good number of people. 
 
And I just want to ask you again, as part of your estimates for the 
Women's Secretariat, if you would get me that information. I'm 
sure that the staff with you there today either know it off the top of 
their head — because I know they're professional people — or 
they would be able to get it for the committee. 
 
And I would just like to ask you again .  . and of course you can 
refuse. Mr. Chairman knows and everyone knows that ministers 
can refuse to give information. I don't know why you would in this 
case, but I want to know if you'll get that information for us. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I've already told the 
member that I would indeed give him that information and any 
other information that he may want, that I could possibly supply, 
after the legislation is tabled by the Minister of Finance. 
 
I find great difficulty in believing the member from Shaunavon in 
his sincerity, you know, that he's trying to ask about an issue that 
is important to women. Last year in  
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1686 
 

 

this House, there wasn't one question from that floor on estimates 
— not one. And the member looks at me with a question mark on 
his face. Not one question. 
 
And now this year, all of a sudden this is important. Is it any 
wonder there's a little bit of cynicism out there? I would suggest 
that it's out there because it rests with members like him that have 
been around for a fair amount of time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I simply can't understand why the 
minister will not give us the percentage of women who have a 
pension in the province and those who don't. But the people of the 
province, who think that our job is to ask questions . . . And many 
of these questions that we ask are not questions that we make up 
on the spur of the moment, but are questions that come to us from 
various women's groups or from individuals. 
 
I know I have a couple of letters from farm wives, and I want to 
ask you a question on their behalf. Do you think that the pension 
plan will apply to farm women? Let me put it a different way. 
Have you made a recommendation to the Minister of Finance that 
this pension plan apply to farm women, women who would 
classify themselves as home-makers, in the home on farms? 
 
And here again, you can refuse to answer this question. I want you 
to know that this is not my question, but representations have been 
made to us asking that we find out from the government. And I 
wonder if you can outline whether or not farm women will be 
eligible for the new pension plan. 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well I'm sure that the member from 
Shaunavon must have received a pension card in the mail, and I 
would ask that he simply take the time to read it. And there would 
be a fairly good indication that possibly housewives would qualify 
— I mean, that was released some time ago — into the 
government's pension plan and the intent of it. But as to the details 
of it and everything else, once again, Mr. Chairman, I will not get 
into it until after the legislation is tabled. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I just want to get one point straight. Did you 
say that possibly farm women will be eligible for the pension 
plan? Is that the statement you made, that they will possibly be 
eligible? Did you make that definitive, hard statement that farm 
women will possibly . . . I just want to know what to write back to 
these farm women who are writing us, that the minister in charge 
of the Women's Secretariat has outlined now that they will 
possibly be eligible. I just want you to get that straight. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if I could refer the 
member from Shaunavon to the Women's Secretariat news-letter, 
there is a section in there dealing with pensions for home-makers. 
Now, you probably have two or three different categories that 
farm women would fit into. I know a lot of farm women that work 
full time off the farm besides working full time at home. They 
could, for instance, be a nurse or a teacher. In that case they may 
already be into a pension plan. They may be working part time 
and for whatever firm or business, have access, too. 
 

Then you have the farm wife who is on the farm as a housewife, 
and if that's the case, then yes, they would probably be looking at 
that pension plan. but to stand here and say that all farm women 
are going to be able to qualify, I think the member only has to go 
back and read the Minister of Finance's budget speech. I will send 
you a copy of the women's newsletter tomorrow. I'm sure you will 
enjoy it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to use an example to get this straight. 
I think we're now getting an answer. A farm wife who is classified 
as a home-maker and doesn't have a pension plan would probably 
be eligible for the pension plan. Is that what you're saying? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I'm going to read what is in 
here and perhaps it will answer the question. it says: 
 

The government will introduce the Saskatchewan pension plan 
to provide an opportunity for home-makers, employees of small 
businesses, and self-employed people to save for retirement. 
The pension plan will be designed as an option for those people 
who do not qualify for or have access to other pension plans. 

 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder in the consideration that you've 
done in building towards this plan and in the studies and analysis 
that you've done within the Women's Secretariat, would you be 
recommending or would you, personally, be in favour or opposed 
to a family income limit? And here I want to use for example, a 
doctor who would be earning $150,000 a year . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . That's right. Would they be eligible for the plan or 
not? And here I would like you to put on the record, not in terms 
of what's in the legislation, but what you personally would 
recommend as minister of the Women's Secretariat. Would the 
plan, as you would see it, I suggest to the minister, be income 
tested or not? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we're getting back into 
details and the outline and the hint of what's in the pension plan. 
And I have simply stated that I am not prepared to lay that out — 
the details of the pension plan. 
 
I would say to the member, if he wants to talk about the doctor's 
wife, I'm quite willing to talk about the doctor's wife or the 
farmer's wife or perhaps the politician's wife. And I would suggest 
that if you were wondering which way to go, you have a very 
serious question to ask yourself in terms of those that do not have 
access to pensions. You know, is it dependent on the fact or who 
you're married to or what you're married to? I would suggest that 
maybe you roll that around in your mind for a while. You know, 
this is 1986 — not 1906. And I think we are long past — that's my 
personal opinion — long past a point where questions are asked as 
to the doctor's wife as if they aren't an entity on their own; they 
are. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well what I'm asking you is whether, in 
your opinion and your recommendation as the minister in charge 
of the Women's Secretariat, whether the plan would be income 
tested. Now you can laugh and make fun of and ridicule the 
question, but believe it or not there  
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1687 
 

are many plans in your department that are income tested. The 
doctor's wife is not eligible for welfare, so you're income testing 
the welfare plan, obviously, with good reason. 
 
What I'm asking is whether or not your recommendation would be 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Ah, the Minister of Social Services 
who has taken money out of the pockets of many women in this 
province now says that doctor's wives are eligible for the welfare. I 
just would say to the minister in charge of the Women's 
Secretariat, that in asking questions about what your department 
does in terms of pension recommendations are well within the 
bounds of what we should be asking here. 
 
And my question to you is not one that . . . Well, you can ridicule 
it if you would like, but I think the question is legitimate; whether 
or not your recommendation from the Women's Secretariat would 
be to income test the pension plan or not. I think that's a legitimate 
question. For you to stand up and arrogantly make fun of whether 
or not government plans are income tested or not shows how naive 
you are about how your own government works, because many of 
your plans are income tested. 
 
Your farm programs — many of them are income tested. The 
heritage grant program to the senior citizens was income tested. 
And here the question is whether or not the pension plan or the 
recommendations from yourself to the minister in charge of the 
plan will be income tested. And I would like your view of the 
issue and whether or not you can tell the committee. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member thinks I'm 
naive. Let me ask him this: does he see a difference between 
person income or . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Would you listen. 
I sat here and listened quietly to you. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I asked the question and you're supposed to 
answer it. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I'm going to answer you. The member has 
to answer another question, and I will endeavour to answer his. Is 
there a difference between personal income and family income? 
 
Of course I'm aware government programs are income tested. I 
mean, most people are. What will this one be, he says? How many 
times have I said, and let me say it again — I am not prepared to 
give the details of the pension until it is tabled in this House. Then 
you can ask me anything you want on the pension plans. 
 
I will also inform you that as far as the recommendation from 
myself and the secretariat, it has been one — and that's been on 
record for two years — that we were in favour of home-makers' 
pensions and pensions for small business, particularly part-time 
while they have family responsibilities. So they go into the 
part-time work-force, and that access to pension is simply not 
there. 
 

That has been my recommendation. As for the details of those 
recommendations, they rest with the Minister of Finance until the 
legislation is tabled in the House. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well now, after half an hour you're giving 
out what some of your recommendations are. Half an hour ago 
you weren't going to give out what any of your recommendations 
to the minister were. In the recommendations, did you include a 
provision that would income test the plan — in your 
recommendations to the minister — or will it be open to all 
income families in the province, in the recommendations that you 
gave to the minister that you're now referring to? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I just told him what 
my recommendations were and the details, in order to implement 
that recommended policy were to be worked out with the 
Department of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, I 
have a series of questions which really are for information and for 
getting facts on the record. Some of the questions, I suspect, I will 
know the answers to, but others who may be watching or reading 
may not. Some of the questions I will not know the answer to. 
 
The first area deals with equal pay, or pay equity, or questions of 
that nature. I ask you, Madam Minister, do you have figures which 
indicate the approximate income of women in the work-force as a 
percentage of the average income of men in the work-force in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I do not have up-to-date figures. I only have 
the 1980 statistics and those were out of StatsCanada. We have 
been looking at how we get a more up-to-date, complete figure in 
1986. I know that StatsCanada is right now doing the census 
taking. But their figures will not be compiled for another two 
years, and we are really feeling a need to have an update on them. 
So we will be having a look at that over the next year. 
 
What it was in 1980, which is one figure I can give you, was 66 
per cent. Women employed full time in 1980 earned 66 per cent of 
what men employed full time did. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And I think 
that's a good comparison. So we don't have the factor of part-time 
work and whether or not more women work part time than men 
blurring the picture, with respect to equal pay for equal work and 
the legislation with respect thereto, which is on our statute books 
now. 
 
Would the minister indicate what progress, if any, has been made 
in the general enforcement of the statutory provisions for equal 
pay for equal work. And if you wish me to direct this to the 
Minister of Labour in due course I can, but I thought it might be 
something that would be of interest to the Women's Secretariat. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, the statues in Saskatchewan are not 
on equal pay for equal work. The statute in Saskatchewan is equal 
pay for similar work. Okay? And I think . . . which is not the same 
as the first term that you  
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1688 
 

 

used when you began to speak, which was pay equity or equal 
value. Those are three different terms and in fact there are several 
differences even in pay equity and the equal value, depending on 
the kinds of policies put into place with them. 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I'm aware 
of at least part of the point you make. The categories are 
frequently stated as two — equal pay for equal work, and equal 
pay for work of equal value, and we readily admit that they are 
very different concepts. 
 
With respect to the one of equal pay for equal work, or if you 
prefer, equal pay for similar work, could you indicate what 
progress if any has been made during the year in having that 
particular principle adhered to in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I have to admit I'm . . . The question is not 
quite clear, Mr. Chairman. And I'm not sure what you mean by 
what progress has been made in this last year. Are you referring to 
the number of complaints to do with equal pay for similar work? 
Are you referring to labour standards, or are you referring to the 
statistics that would show the wage gap narrowing and women 
moving up the scale in some categories? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, I 
was not referring to the latter because that, whether women move 
up the scale is not, or whether the average income earned by 
women working full time in the labour force is closer to the 
average income of men so working, is not only a function of equal 
pay for similar work, but it's a function of the various types of 
work they do. And I don't want to enter into that. 
 
What I was asking was whether or not you are satisfied with the 
manner in which the legislation is working, and whether you feel 
that the — if I may put it this way — whether you feel that 
virtually all of the women in Saskatchewan who are doing similar 
work are receiving equal pay, or whether you feel that there is still 
work to be done in order to have the principle which is enacted in 
the legislation, apply on the ground. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you: that helps. Now I can only hope 
I can answer your question to your satisfaction. As I stated earlier, 
and I'm going to come back to that first point about the 1980 
statistics and the secretariat feeling a need to perhaps bring those 
up to date, has been because when we've looked at the issues — 
and rather than talk just women's issues, I think it's, you know, 
perhaps people issues that we're talking about — we have had a 
concern that perhaps the gap is not closing as quickly as what 
some would like it to close. 
 
And yet, when we take a look at various mechanisms put into 
place that we think and we know that eventually will address some 
of that — like educational opportunities, training, affirmative 
action, aggressive management policies — that those in fact do 
have an impact down the road on the issue. 
 
When you break down the overall 36 per cent gap, you  

find that about one-half, one-half of that 36 per cent is accounted 
for by hours worked — and that's where you get into even the little 
bit of the part-time stuff — or by productivity factors like 
experience or education. 
 
However, there's another 10 to 15 per cent that relates to 
occupational segregation, or in other words to the fact that women 
tend to hold different jobs than men; and those particular jobs tend 
to pay less, whether because of low needs in terms of education, 
market-place . . . There's various factors, including attitudes from a 
way, way back — there's no doubt about that. But that's another 10 
to 15 per cent. 
 
Now another 5 to 10 per cent you can attribute — 5 to 10 you can 
attribute — to not paying women the same as men even when they 
hold the same job. So you have that 5 to 10 per cent that is really 
the attitudinal and the barrier factor that you have to deal with. 
And of course the big question is, how in fact do you deal with 
that, and is it a long-term solution or a short-term? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and I think 
that that 5 to 10 per cent that you refer to is the target group for 
legislation of the kind of equal pay for similar work — I will use 
your term. 
 
I now turn to the other concept which you refer to — equal pay for 
work of equal value — and I ask you whether or not the secretariat 
has had an opportunity to examine how legislation in other 
jurisdictions works, legislation providing equal pay for work of 
equal value. And I think we should say at the outset that this 
legislation is not nearly as broad as those words usually indicate. 
But the federal government has some limited legislation on equal 
pay for work of equal value, I believe. The Manitoba government 
has some. And I would be interested in knowing whether or not 
the secretariat has had any opportunity to look at that legislation to 
see how it works and whether or not it appears to be a suitable 
pattern for legislation in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, for some time now the 
Women's Secretariat along with myself has been in discussion on 
the perceived issue of equal pay for work of equal value. I want to 
state to the Assembly that over the last year in talking to various 
sectors of the public on it — including some women's groups, 
doing radio phone-in shows, that type of thing — if there's one 
thing I have found that is consistent throughout the issue, that has 
been one of some confusion on the equal pay for work of equal 
value, or for equal work. 
 
And I don't think that there's any doubt that Saskatchewan people 
believe in equal pay for equal work or, as Saskatchewan's 
legislation which has been in place for some time says, similar 
work. I believe that Saskatchewan's legislation is probably one 
step further than the equal work, and in fact allows an appeal 
procedure and that type of thing, which is precisely what we have 
found over the last year — that, for example, the federal 
legislation is, that has been in for a very short period of time. In 
the number of years that it's been in I think they've received 12 — 
12 complaints that they have had to monitor. 
 
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1689 
 

I am familiar with the Manitoba legislation. It is pay equity 
legislation and it is quite precise in terms of what's being put in 
and how it's going to be monitored. I am also familiar with the 
green paper and the proposed legislation for Ontario. I believe that 
is about all that is in Canada at this point in time. 
 
We have also gathered what materials we have been able to from 
south of the border, and from around the world — Australia, Great 
Britain — and I guess what we were looking for in the course of 
our discussions was who has had it in for a period of time that they 
have been able to evaluate it and, in fact, measure the impact on 
society, the work-force, but more particularly on women. To date, 
my records show that Australia is probably one of the older ones 
and at this point in time they are somewhat worried because there 
seems to be an indicator that the participation rate for women 
within the work-force went down after it had been in place for a 
period of time. However, I have not seen any specific documents 
on it, and that is something that we will be pursuing over the next 
year. 
 
I have some concerns with it, with what I know now. That is not to 
say that I do not have a concern with the wage gap. I think our 
government has recognized that there has to be some support 
measures put in place to try and close that gap. And as I said 
earlier, it becomes a matter of deciding which way is the best way 
in the long-term as opposed to kind of a quick fix it on the 
short-term. We've looked at several issues. We believe that it 
made sense to focus on reducing some of the occupational 
segregation that was taking place through education and training 
and advanced education. If I Look at the participation rates of 
women, into post secondary. I'm very hopeful for what is down 
the road. 
 
We also believe that there still has to be an encouragement for 
women in the management and professional levels. And while not 
everybody will work at that level, it is important that women be in 
to those management positions where decisions are made, where 
there is a role model opportunity, if that in fact is what they choose 
to do, that those barriers have to come down. 
 
We also believe that it is very necessary to equalize the pay level 
entry. That is where you start form. And you know if you go into a 
job where the man next to you is starting out more than you are for 
very, very similar work, equal work, chances are the gap will grow 
even wider down the road. So we believe that the equalizing pay 
entry levels must take place. And of course affirmative action is 
also another one. 
 
There has been some caution by the experts that have been dealing 
with the equal pay for work of equal value. If there's one signal 
that is consistent in the programs that are in place, it is that it is 
bureaucratic and that it certainly adds tot he cost of the program. 
And I don't believe any jurisdiction that has gone into it has found 
a way to minimize the red tape and the bureaucracy with it. 
 
(2100) 
 
I guess if one of the concerns that I hear from women is valid, is 
that it is a value-based judgement call by  

somebody when they're setting up the program. And what they say 
to me is, well how do we know that who's doing the valuing 
doesn't have some biases to begin with and aren't built into the 
program? I think that there is curiosity on the program. And as I 
said, there is no doubt that the wage gap is still there. However, we 
will have a better idea of how far that wage gap is after we have 
been able to bring the 1980 statistics up to date. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Just a last question on this area, Madam 
Minister. Do you have any plans for introducing a proposal or 
recommending a proposal for equal pay for work of equal value, 
either comprehensive or limited, in the near future? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I had stated the need for 
some statistical gathering, and that will take place first before any 
decision is made on what kind of a program is going to be put in. 
If in fact at that time there should be one, I do not believe that you 
can stand here and say that equal pay for work of equal value 
should go as it did to the east in Manitoba without knowing what 
the statistics are that you are dealing with. 
 
I also do not think that it can take place by itself. And I will once 
again emphasize — and I will sound like a broken record — it is 
important that support services be put into place, like education 
and training, affirmative action, encouragement for management 
positions, professional levels. All that must happen. 
 
The equal pay for work of equal value, without taking a good hard 
look at it, could have some serious detriments to women. And they 
could find themselves out of jobs if in fact what they have found is 
true at a glance in Australia and a few of the states in the United 
States. So I think the matter has to be given very serious 
consideration, and I do not believe that it is in the best interests of 
anyone in Saskatchewan to jump in. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, I 
take the answer to be no. 
 
I want to move to another area now which is a matter of . . . I'm 
just touching on two or three areas which are of great interest to 
many women's groups and individual women with whom I talk. 
And one of them is the place of women in the workplace, and 
we've touched on that. Another is child care. And a third one is 
retirement. 
 
And with respect to retirement — and I'll try to ask my questions 
very carefully here — could you tell me either of the following: 
the approximate number of women who are in the labour force; or 
the approximate number of women between the ages of say 18 and 
65 who are in the labour force. And when I say number, I'm not 
looking for the absolute number but the percentage of the women 
between the ages of say 18 and 65 — if it's 16 and 65, or 20 and 
65 it doesn't matter. Approximately what percentage are in the 
labour force and of what percentage are not in the labour force? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I don't have the breakdown from 20 to 60 
with a total figure. I can give you those categories . . . (inaudible) 
. . . Well they're separate categories, for instance: 15 to 24, I 
believe I'm dealing with the year  
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1690 
 

 

1985, 65.6 per cent of Saskatchewan women in the labour force, 
this is by age; 25 to 34 was 69.7 per cent; 35 to 44 is 73.6 per cent; 
and 45 to 54, 67 per cent; and 55 to 64 years is 41 per cent. Total 
number of employed women is 176,000. And full-time is 69 per 
cent of that, 121,000, and 55,000 being part-time. I believe that 
should answer your question in part. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Madam Minister. It looks as 
if we have of the order of 160,000 people in the labour force of 
whom are 40 or 45,000 are part-time. And 120,000 or thereabouts 
are full-time, if I've got the figures right, and that it represents, 
full-time and part-time together represent about 65 per cent, 
perhaps, of the women between the ages of . . . Well it starts at 15, 
but I will say between the ages of 20 and 65, and that's plenty 
good enough for me. That gives me the idea. 
 
Do you know, Madam Minister, approximately what percentage 
of the women in the labour force have access to a pension plan? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I don't have that information 
with me tonight, and I have gone over that with the member from 
Shaunavon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, I 
don't want to get into a dispute with the minister. I say again that 
areas of high importance to many individual women and women's 
groups that I speak to are — and I mention three — the treatment 
that women receive so far as pay is concerned in the work-force; 
child care; and retirement. And I anticipate that most women in 
Saskatchewan will feel that the Women's Secretariat will in 
general terms be monitoring these areas and will be able to have 
information, basic information which is relevant in dealing with 
these three areas. I'm not expecting you to have details of the child 
care program operated by the Department of Social Services, but I 
would suspect you might have some general idea of how many 
children may be in need of child care. And I'm not asking that 
now. 
 
You have given me some information with respect to the relative 
position of women's wages versus men's wages in the labour force, 
and I thank you for that. You have given me the approximate 
number of women in the labour force, and I have asked you to tell 
me the approximate percentage of those who would have access to 
a pension plan, and you are telling me you don't know. I find it 
difficult to think that that sort of basic information wouldn't be in 
the hands of the minister, wouldn't be in the hands of the Women's 
Secretariat. No one is asking for precise figures, but if the 
Women's Secretariat has not concerned itself enough to know the 
approximate number of women in the work-force who don't have 
access to a pension plan, then I think that that speaks volumes for 
what the Women's Secretariat is doing or not doing. 
 
Members opposite may feel that the women in this province are 
unconcerned with access to pension plans, or with child care, or 
with pay equity. If I may, Mr. Chairman, may I just rest a minute 
while the members opposite exercise their lungs. It may be, as 
people are shouting from across, that I need a rest, but I will take it  

now and again ask the minister: are you asking us, Madam 
Minister, to believe that the Women's Secretariat does not have 
any approximation — any reasonable approximation — of the 
number of the people, women in the labour force, who have access 
to a pension plan? You just have no information on that? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, asking the Leader of the 
Opposition to believe something is like asking me to believe that 
this concern of his on women's issues is really so great. I mean, it 
was 1982 that I had to wait — and I was born in 1943, if you can 
imagine — to find a female in cabinet. And it sure wasn't under an 
NDP ticket, I'll tell you that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — What I am telling the Leader of the 
Opposition tonight, whether he believes it or not, and it doesn't 
really matter if he doesn't, the Minister of Finance is carrying the 
pension plan in this House and will table the legislation for it. And 
he has been dealing with the pension people, Department of 
Labour, and of course Department of Finance. 
 
And as I told the member from Shaunavon, as far as my 
recommendations, done in conjunction with the Women's 
Secretariat, was to bring forth issues of concern, which we did, 
whether it was home-makers, small business, those people that 
didn't have any access to pension. That has been done. The details 
and statistics, I do not have with me in my memory. They are with 
the Minister of Finance and will stay there until it is tabled in the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, I 
am sorry that I have not been able to make myself clear. I am not 
asking about the pension plan and did not express one word about 
pension plans that your government may be bringing in or not, and 
a review of the Hansard will indicate not one mention. Nor was I 
asking what you had recommended to the Minister of Finance. I 
did not, and a review of the Hansard will make that clear. 
 
What I asked, Madam Minister, was whether the Women's 
Secretariat has any information on the number of the women in 
the work-force that have access to a pension plan. And I will just 
make it clear. I will say as of approximately January 1st last year 
— this year — had access to a pension plan. That will be before 
the Minister of Finance's budget speech. it will be before any 
active consideration, presumably, of a pension legislation, so we 
won't get it mixed up with legislation. It will be before you 
presumably made any recommendations to him, and I'm not 
asking that. I am asking whether, at any date, some previous date 
— and you may pick it, Madam Minister — you are able to give 
me the approximate number of women in the work-force who 
have access to a pension plan in Saskatchewan?  
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I simply don't have 
those by memory or with me tonight, and I would endeavour to 
collect the information, along with the information that the 
member for Shaunavon has  
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1691 
 

requested, and send it to him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. That's 
a measure of progress. I'm a little bit surprised that the matter of 
access to pensions, general retirement schemes, would not have 
been thought of as an item likely to arise under Women's 
Secretariat, but I thank the minister for her offer to send me what I 
understand to be such information as the secretariat may have on 
the approximate number of women in the work-force in 
Saskatchewan, or the approximate percentage, either one, who 
have access to a pension plan. Thank you, Madam Minister. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, we 
hear a lot of concern about alcohol abuse in the province, and I'm 
just wondering, madam Minister, if your department has done a 
study on alcohol abuse and what your position might be regarding 
alcohol abuse and liquor advertising on TV? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, Mr. Chairman, we have not. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Madam Minister, if you haven't done the 
study in the Women's Secretariat department, Madam Minister, 
what is your position on liquor advertising? Do you think that it is 
something that should be going on in light of the many concerns 
there are in the province regarding alcohol abuse today? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I find it very difficult 
to relate this to the Women's Secretariat estimates. I have great 
difficulty with it. I would encourage the member to read Hansard 
from my estimate in Education, and he will perhaps find the reply 
in there. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Madam Minister, you seem to have difficulty in 
relating a lot of things to the Women's Secretariat department. I 
don't know why you established the department then. 
 
There is a concern in this province that many young women are 
victims of alcohol abuse, if you want to relate it to women alone. 
And it isn't only women that have the problem, Madam Minister, 
but if you want to relate it to the Women's Secretariat, let's say 
there is a problem in the area of women and alcohol abuse.  
 
Now, Madam Minister, we have seen a lot of liquor advertising on 
television. Your government is part of the body that allowed it. 
What is your position, Madam Minister, as a minister of the 
Women's Secretariat and your concerns or the concerns that are 
held regarding alcohol abuse among young women in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the Minister of Health 
just recently released a report, a study, on alcohol and drugs. And I 
would suggest . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well he says, what 
about my department. Well, let's talk about that. You want another 
study. Typical NDP — study, study, study, and no action, and just 
keep studying and on and on it goes. 
 
It is not within the mandate, the alcohol and drugs. We have 
alcohol and drugs as it relates to education in the Department of 
Education, and you have the Minister of  

Health who has the mandate through the drug and alcohol 
commission. And we have not done a study. I would suggest to the 
member that the statistics, though I have not looked at them 
myself as it pertains to girls and women, would probably be about 
average and perhaps a little bit less. I'm not sure; I'm only saying 
perhaps. But I don't know for sure and I would have to check with 
the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Madam Minister, you get into a little snit 
every time somebody asks you a question that might be a little 
touchy. You complained about the fact that I want more studies 
and study and study and study and study, and that's what you're 
saying. Well, Madam Minister, that's been the direction of this 
government for the last four years, over four years now — it's 
nothing but studies and studies — and I'm surprised that your 
department wouldn't be part of the same direction. 
 
Madam Minister, we know what the Minister of Health's position 
is regarding liquor advertising, and he seems to approve of it. We 
know what the Minister of health and Welfare federally, what his 
position is, the Hon. Jake Epp. He is opposed to liquor advertising. 
We know what the candidate from your constituency, John 
Penner, thinks about liquor advertising. he's opposed to it. madam 
Minister, what is your position on liquor advertising? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I related this in 
education. I felt that that was appropriate in my estimates. I mean, 
he knows the process of the House. And for his benefit I want to 
send over to him a book is called A Sense of Balance: Equality in 
Government Communications. And I want to tell him that as a 
female I object to his communications in this House. He has 
constantly — him and other members — portrayed terms that are 
a put-down to females, and perhaps he will benefit from such a 
book. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Madam Minister, you seem to object to any 
terms we use regarding females, so I haven't used any terms that 
would be objectionable to females. I only asked a question 
regarding women, young women in this province, because you are 
the minister responsible to the Women's Secretariat. 
 
Now if you want me to say, Madam Minister, what is your 
position on liquor advertising regarding the alcohol abuse of 
young women and young men in this province, fine. I don't object 
to using that term either. I am just asking you what your position is 
on liquor advertising. And since you are the minister in charge of 
the Women's Secretariat, one would assume that maybe your 
concern would be more in the line of how it affects women than 
men. But if you want to answer on both counts, I'll certainly accept 
that. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I am really pleased to see the concern that is 
in the opposition tonight. I believe just about every member has 
had a question to ask. Unfortunately he is not asking on the issues 
of the day as it pertains to women's issues, whether it be automatic 
enforcement of payments, owning your own business, equal pay 
for equal work, education opportunities; he can't seem to get to 
those points. 
 
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1692 
 

 

I wonder when it was that he last called a male colleague a snit. I 
can't remember that ever happening. yes, today . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, well, well, I doubt that very much. Mr. 
Chairman, it still remains inappropriate in terms of doing the 
estimates. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — On Item 1, I just have a couple of short 
questions. I see here . . . well, the minister from Meadow Lake is 
all in a rush here. But I have a couple of little questions. 
 
Under administration there is a number of increase in staff, and I 
believe that these have been transferred from Advanced Education 
and Manpower. Can you just outline how many people were 
transferred and the amount of money that was in that area — 
Advanced Education — last year, both in terms of staff and 
moneys? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, there were 13 employees 
transferred; and approximately $313,000. 
 
I gave the member from Shaunavon the wrong answer on the 
number of years. I'm sorry, I was looking at the total. The number 
transferred was six. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, I just want to get this confirmed. 
There were six transferred from Advanced Education and 
Manpower. There were six there already; so there's been an actual 
increase of one as opposed to what people might assume to be an 
increase of seven? In actual numbers there's an increase of one 
staff? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, my . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. The minister's trying to answer 
the question. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — My official informs me there was no 
increase. It was a transfer of seven, and there were six there, for a 
total of 13. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 41 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Women's Secretariat 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 41 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 41 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — That concludes estimates for the department 
of the Women's Secretariat. The minister may wish to make some 
concluding remarks. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, just briefly, Mr. Chairman. Once again 
I thank the opposition for some interest this year. It was much 
better than having nothing, like we had last year. And I would 
hope that that interest continues because, while we talk about 
Women's Secretariat, many of the issues, in fact, are people's 
issues and have an  

impact on all of society. 
 
I would also like to thank the officials that are with me tonight and 
the Women's Secretariat for what I deem to be a very good year 
and for what I also think is going to be a very busy year coming 
before us. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I just want to add my thanks as well to the 
staff of the minister. And also, if the minister would assure us that 
the information that she promised to get for us would be 
forthcoming expeditiously, and that we will look forward to it with 
a week or so, if she would do that for us. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 23 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I would like to call on the minister to please 
introduce his officials. 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:— Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to introduce to you and to the committee, Bob Reid, the deputy 
minister seated to my immediate right; John Reid, assistant deputy 
minister, resource policy and economics, to his right; behind the 
deputy is Les Beck, executive director of geology and mines; and 
behind myself, Jack McPhee, manager of special projects; and at 
the back we have Peter Leier, Dale Fletcher, Janis Rathwell, and 
Maurice Hall. peter is the natural gas policy analyst; Dale Fletcher 
is the director of economic and fiscal analysis branch; Janis 
Rathwell, director of personnel and administration; and Maurice 
Hall, potash policy analyst. I think Bruce Wilson's here 
somewhere. And to my left, Bruce Wilson, executive director of 
petroleum and natural gas, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I want to ask you some 
routine questions. Maybe we can start out that way, at any rate, 
then get into some detailed questions and answers. I wonder if you 
have with you a list of your personal staff, executive assistants, 
special assistants, and that sort of thing, with their salaries and also 
the increases that have taken place to those salaries within the last 
year. Let's say the calendar year 1985. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, and hon. member, what I 
have is as of March 30, 1986, Energy and Mines minister's office 
staff complement. I don't have any increases for 1985, but I could 
undertake to get that for you if you so wish, and I'll send this 
across to you as soon . . . The Deputy clerk is going to help us out 
here. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I just want to get one thing straight on the 
increase here. Are you saying there were no increases in '85, or 
that you don't have them with you and will get them? If you're 
saying that you'll get them for us, would you arrange to have them 
here tomorrow morning and that would be fine. But the increases 
not only for '85 — let's say from January '85 to present, that time 
period. 
 
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1693 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, I'll undertake to provide you with 
that tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — In the area of your deputy's salary, as well 
as the associate deputy and the executive directors within the 
department, have you got a similar list of salaries and increases 
that may have taken place during that same time period from, let's 
say, January 1st of '85 to present? 
 
And here again if you've got the list that you could send across I 
would appreciate it. And if you could just jot down, I'm sure that 
your deputy would at least have some of the increases that would 
have occurred in that time period. Both by the way of increases 
that may follow some guide-lines, and if you could explain as well 
how you establish the increases. Is there a formula that is applied 
across the board, or is it done on an individual basis? And if you 
just give a little outline about how those increases occur for your 
upper levels in that department. 
 
And here I'm not making the argument, at least not at this point, 
that the increases shouldn't occur because I think as we have 
argued that minimum wage should increase on a regular bases to 
reflect inflation, I'm sure that people who are doing a good job 
within the department at every level should have that kind of an 
increase. 
 
And always we have difficulty understanding how one minister — 
and we heard it earlier this evening — argues that people on 
minimum wage need no increase, but others at the top end of the 
spectrum should have an increase. And these arguments are 
difficult for people to understand but — well, the member from 
P.A.-Duck Lake indicates that he agrees that people at the bottom 
should be frozen while people at the top increase, but that's his 
position. I don't share that view, but I wonder if the minister could 
just outline how those increases occur. And here I'm not saying 
there shouldn't be increase. I'm just wondering what the formula 
is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Chairman, I'd like to raise a point of 
order. There was some mention by the member just now that I had 
indicated that people on minimum wage should not receive 
increases and clearly I made no such indication. And I wonder if 
the member would be willing to withdrawn those comments, since 
he did put them on the record. They simply aren't accurate and I 
believe he knows they aren't accurate. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I don't believe it is a point of 
order, but in listening to the ministers' comments, I clearly heard 
someone indicate that they were in favour of the policy of having 
the minimum wage frozen and having increases for upper echelon 
civil servants. And . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order! Would the member please be 
seated. The point of order that has been raised is a dispute between 
members regarding alleged facts, and as such I don't believe it's a 
point of order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I just want to say, Mr. Chairman, that with 
respect for the member for P.A.-Duck Lake, it may not have been 
him who indicated that the minimum wage — people at the 
bottom should be frozen while those at the top get increases. But it 
clearly did come from some  

member of the Conservative caucus. If it was not him, then . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order! The member is once more 
alleging certain facts between members. This time he has decided 
to include the whole caucus on the other side of the House. And as 
such, no more comments will be made on that topic. 
 
Please get back to the topic at hand which is the estimates for 
Energy and Mines. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I agree with you that we should get back to 
topic. I'm sorry that the member for P.A.-Duck Lake brought the 
issue up, and I, of course, wish he hadn't have. Like you, I agree 
with you that he shouldn't have. 
 
But I wonder if the minister would have the increases? I have the 
deputy minister and the petroleum natural gas executive director 
and the ADM and the executive director of geology and mines. 
Could you just give me the increases if you have them there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I don't have the 
increases. But I, in fact, will undertake as well to provide that for 
you and the basis, although for the most part it's been limited to 
merit increases. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Can you explain how the merit system 
works? And I understand that the guide-lines that apply to the 
people who may be unionized within the civil service, those 
guide-lines wouldn't apply to the executive directors and ADMs 
and deputy. But what . . . Is there an upper limit in these merit 
increases throughout the government? Or what guide-lines do you 
have as a minister? And I'm not even sure whether you're the 
person who would make the final decision on the merit increases. 
But maybe you can just outline how that process words for us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, the 
procedure for merit increases, I'm advised, is not unlike what was 
in place when the NDP were the administration. There is an 
annual employee assessment, and other than the deputy, the 
deputy does them. Obviously he doesn't do them himself. The 
merits, the normal step is four per cent, and they may or may not 
be eligible for an additional performance bonus, or they may be 
just eligible for a performance bonus by itself, in which case there 
will be a two per cent — something in the range of two per cent. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I asked you about the performance bonus. 
Are you saying that the performance bonus is limited to two per 
cent, or if I'm wrong in assuming that, or hearing that coming from 
you, what would be the maximum that the performance bonus 
could be? You have the normal four per cent, and that would be 
more or less automatic. I imagine you could — if the work of the 
individual wasn't satisfactory, it could be less — but what you're 
saying is the normal increase is four; then what would the 
performance bonus maximum be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, and hon. member, the 
merit step is four per cent. Now if somebody had reached the 
maximum and there were no more steps  
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1694 
 

 

available to them, or if there had been extraordinary and 
exemplary service — in either one of those two instances — they 
might be eligible for a performance bonus. The maximum 
performance bonus is four per cent. However, the department, 
because of the economic conditions, if you like, that we all have to 
live with — and very responsibly I might add — use two per cent 
as their sort of normal performance bonus for those who had 
performed in an exemplary fashion. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — That's what I wanted to know. The normal 
step increase is four per cent. Then there could be the possibility of 
a four per cent increase. But you have chosen in your department, 
to limit it to two. And you will get those numbers for me, what 
applied to each of these individuals, and I'll leave that as well. 
 
On your personal staff I just want to get it straight here. I believe 
there's six individuals. Their income range is between 44,000 for a 
Doug Emsley, to a 20,000 a year income for Ruth Classen. And 
you will be getting me the increase for each of those six? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — That's correct. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — On the individuals you've listed here, the 
four chief executive officers of the department, can you tell me 
whether or not there are any perks that are forthcoming to those 
individuals? Do they have an automobile assigned to them, either 
from CVA or otherwise? And would you tell me as well what 
arrangements do you have for the use of the executive aircraft? 
Are there a group of people within the department who are eligible 
to use it, or is everyone eligible under the direction of the ADM or 
the deputy? 
 
Can you indicate two things: whether or not executive officers in 
your department have vehicles assigned; how many individuals 
would have one; and who does the policy as it applies to executive 
aircraft work within your department? 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, not unlike 
the merit increases, the so-called perks are unchanged with this 
administration as from the previous administration. The deputy 
minister has an assigned vehicle, CVA. As it relates to exec. air, 
departmental official use is sparingly, to say the least, and all 
approvals are done through the minister's office. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, can you arrange for us — and 
I don't think you would have it with you — but the number of 
flights that were taken in province and out of province using 
executive aircraft by your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, to allow us to answer 
that question more specifically for you, over what time frame? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — If you would get it for me from January 1st 
'85 to present, and by present I don't mean today, but if you could 
set a date and let's say, up to April 30th of '86, if you could provide 
that for us. 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, we'll provide it tomorrow, hon. 
member. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder if the minister would also include 
on that the individuals who were on each of the flights. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, in keeping 
with the tradition of the House, I'll undertake to provide to you the 
number of miles travelled, the cost, and the number of people who 
accompanied me. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — What about when you weren't on the flights, 
will you provide . . . What I want is for the total department. I 
don't only want your flights but, oh, let's say your deputy had to 
fly out to Lloydminster and that sort of thing, or out to Calgary to 
meet with oil executives, or Husky — that sort of thing. Will you 
include that in the list? And I would like to have the individuals on 
the flights. 
 
I'm not sure whether or not those manifests are public documents 
with the Department of Transport, and whether or not we can get 
those names. I believe we can. Through freedom of information I 
think that it is now possible to get them. Well we may have to go 
that route. I was just thinking that it makes much more sense for us 
to do it here. But . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I'll tell you. 
The member from Saskatoon, former minister of Energy and 
member from Sutherland, says why would we want to know. Well 
I'll tell you, after Jimmy Garner was caught flying around with his 
family . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order! The hon. member knows that 
he is not to use the names of members of this House. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — You could have fooled me. I thought he had 
resigned. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order! Would the hon. member please 
accept the ruling of the Chair without any further speeches about it 
and get back to the topic. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I am not making a speech about the fact that 
the member from Wilkie hasn't been in the House for 53 days. I'm 
not making a speech about that. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. The hon. member also knows that 
members are not to speak on whether or not a member is in the 
House. It is also a ruling of this House. So once again, the hon. 
member is out of order in his remarks. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to ask the chairman about that very 
issue. You've raised an issue about asking questions about . . . or 
mentioning members not being in the House. We've asked this 
question in question period and the Speaker has allowed it . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, I'm asking for a ruling on this, 
because we have asked questions of the minister about attendance 
in the House. And now you're saying we can't ask that in the 
House. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I've just said that the members are not to refer 
to other members as not being in the House. That's the ruling. 
 
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1695 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, the issue here is not whether or not 
the member for Wilkie is in the House at the present time. I'm not 
saying that he's not in the House. Whether or not he's in the House 
at the present time, people will be able to make up their mind. But 
I'm referring to the fact that he hasn't been here for 53 days. And 
the public will make up their mind whether he's in the House at the 
present time. I'm not saying that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
No. 
 
What I'm saying is that when I ask for the flights of the minister in 
his department . . . And I don't know what these people are getting 
so excited about. It was nice and quiet in here till I bring up the 
member from Wilkie, and then they all get excited and jump to his 
defence, and he hasn't been here for 53 days. And they're all 
yelling, point of order, and I don't know what they're yelling about. 
 
Why would the minister and the people on that side of the House 
be so excited about air travel and not giving out the list when I 
bring up the former minister of highways, the member from 
Wilkie and the fact that he had to resign from cabinet because of 
misuse of the aircraft. And now when we bring it up, the minister 
won't give us a list of who flies around with him. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, these people opposite have got the nickname 
of birds. Everybody refers to this government as birds. And the 
reason that is, is because they're like the member from Wilkie, 
because they fly all over the country. And I know I want to ask the 
minister about his flights — his flights. And I want to tell you, Mr. 
Chairman, why I mention this. There were a number of people in 
my constituency who were saying: why do you always refer to 
these guys as birds? He says: why do you refer to them as that? 
Well I say it's because of the member from Wilkie and others who 
spend all their time flying around. They fly here and they fly there. 
 
And what I want to know, Mr. Minister, is who's flying with you? 
Who's flying with you when you go around the province? I don't 
know why you're embarrassed about that? I don't know why you're 
embarrassed about that? I'll tell you, the people of this province 
who are paying the bill, the people of the province who are paying 
the bill for these flights around Canada and around the world, I'll 
tell you, are getting a little upset. 
 
And it's not that long ago the Deputy Premier, when he was asked 
about his flights around the world, gave out the list, and you 
couldn't believe all the places he had been to on one trip. He'd 
been in Saudi Arabia and he'd been here and he'd been in 
California and he had stayed everywhere. 
 
And now when we're asking about where this minister went and 
who he took with him, he won't give them to us. I don't know. 
There are cynical people in this province. And there are also 
people who are legitimately concerned about their taxes going to 
flying these people around. 
 
Now I'm not assuming that this minister made any flights that 
weren't legitimate or any other stuff. I don't think he did. I don't 
think he did. Nor do I think any of his staff did. But the suspicion 
is there when you're so secretive that  

you won't give a list. And then people will include you with this 
other individual, the member from Wilkie, who was caught flying 
around inappropriately and had to resign from cabinet. And I don't 
think you deserve that reputation. And why are you being 
secretive? . . . (inaudible) . . . It had nothing to do with flying? 
Well what did he resign for? Oh, he didn't tell the truth. 
 
Well I'll tell you, you're not telling the whole truth by being 
secretive. That's right. That's right. You're holding back 
information that should be rightfully in the hands of the public. 
And that is, who has been flying around with you? And I think, 
Mr. Chairman, that these are perfectly appropriate and legitimate 
questions. I think even you are curious. I think even Mr. Chairman 
would be curious to know who these people in the treasury 
benches are taking with them on the flights. 
 
I say to you that I believe that they're legitimate in the case of this 
minister. I'll defend him, but I can't for the life of me understand 
why he is being secretive to protect other ministers who may not 
be legitimate in who they are taking with them on these flights. 
 
I say that there's a suspicion out there when you won't tell us that 
you're taking political people with you on these flights to do 
campaigning. That's a suspicion . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Yes it is, and the taxpayers of this province are suspicious of this 
government. That's what they believe. 
 
When they see the aircraft flying hither and yon this summer with 
cabinet ministers with staff on, and then think about the fact that 
this minister wouldn't tell the public who was with them, that 
they're out doing a little campaigning — that's what they're going 
to believe. And they're going to look at that aircraft every time it 
stops and say, this is costing me $5, $10 out of my pocket to pay 
for these birds to fly around and try to get re-elected now that 
they're in trouble . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I know, and 
the member for Meadow Lake says that would be a good idea. 
Yes, he says he's going to fly around in Shaunavon and do some 
politicking. Well that's what I'm afraid of. That's what I'm afraid 
of. And I want to tell you that the taxpayers of this province are 
not in a mood to deal with a government that is fearful of them, 
and now into their fifth year, and is going to spend this summer 
spending millions of their dollars flying around trying to get 
re-elected. 
 
Well, the member for Meadow Lake, if he's the only one that 
comes, that's all right. We could handle him because I've travelled 
with him before. He's no problem. He's no problem to travel with. 
What I worry about is the political hacks he might bring with him. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I'll bring them all. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, he's bringing them all. Well I'll tell 
you that if the people of this province could witness what we're 
seeing tonight, of this government blatantly admitting that they 
didn't call the election in June because they're going to spend this 
summer campaigning, I'll tell you that we have got a problem with 
the Minister of Energy. 
 
  



 
June 3, 1986 

1696 
 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order. I believe that the member 
is making allegations which are not related to the estimates for 
Energy and Mines. And I also believe that the member is 
wandering all over the board, and I believe he's being repetitious. 
He's tried to ask the same question over and over for about five or 
ten minutes in different ways. And I'm just asking the member to 
get to his question or else we'll move on to another question. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister will be interested in the 
question that I'm going to put from him when I'm done my 
remarks. And I'm sure that he will be, because what we're talking 
about is the taxpayers' dollar as it affects this department. That's 
what we're talking about. 
 
What we're talking about is where the taxpayer's dollar is going to 
in this department. And the minister has already said and clearly 
stated that some of it goes to executive aircraft and flights around 
the province, out of province, and out of country. And I agree that 
that is a legitimate reason to be spending the taxpayers' money — 
that there are legitimate reasons to be flying around the province. 
And I believe they have three executive aircraft that fly cabinet 
ministers, and besides that they use a number of private carriers to 
lease their planes or to charter planes to fly ministers and their 
staff around the province and out of the province. 
 
And I understand, Mr. Chairman, that that is legitimate. That's 
why we have them. And it's much better for the minister to be 
flying than it is to be driving a car down the highway taking 
valuable time to be doing it. 
 
But I want to say that in not giving us the list of names . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. According to rule 3(4) and the 
Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan 1981, members who are deemed to be repetitious in 
their questions by the Chair — and I believe that now the member 
has had sufficient time to put his question and his comments, and I 
recognize the minister. 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Chairman, on a point of order. I have 
an important question to ask the minister, and I would appreciate 
the opportunity to . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — I have warned the member a few minutes ago 
that he should put the question, and he has been wandering all 
over the map. I have told him to put the question; he has not done 
so. I now recognize the Minister of Energy and Mines. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the member may well have 
a question that's reasonable, but at this time of the night he has a 
tendency not to be that way. So I would say to you, Mr. Chairman, 
that I move that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for 
leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:01 p.m. 
 
 


