


















































May 13, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 13, 1986 
 
 

1261 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Today I would like to introduce to the 
Assembly Mr. Eddie Bright, Esq., Clerk of the House of 
Representatives of the parliament of The Gambia. Mr. bright 
will be a guest of the Clerk at the Table for a portion of the 
current legislative session. I would ask all members to welcome 
Eddie Bright here with us, and to take the opportunity to meet 
and talk with him when you see him around the corridors. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure in 
introducing two students from the Shaunavon grade 8 class, 
Lawrence Johnston and Nadine Zackodnik, and their teacher 
Richard Dahl. They’re here in the Speaker’s gallery today as 
guests of our department; they are winners in the child safety 
award. 
 
For a moment I’d just like to indicate what they did in their 
town, Mr. Speaker. The grade 7 class from Shaunavon last year 
did a research on the use of seat-belts in their town. They had a 
real campaign of posters and awareness, and on “Seat-belt 
Saturday” they doubled the use of seat-belts in the town of 
Shaunavon. I understand that they’re doing it again this year 
under the direction of their teacher. They’re accompanied today 
with the head of the child safety committee, Mrs. Ruth 
Robinson. I would like all members of the Assembly to really 
show our support for the concern that these young people are 
taking towards safety in this province. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to you 
and through you, along with my friend and colleague, the 
Minister of Health, the group from Shaunavon — Lawrence 
Johnston and Nadine Zackodnik who attended grade 8 last year 
with my daughter Sacha. And they did in fact have a great 
operation on Seat-belt Saturday. Leading up to it, they did some 
advertising and had posters around the community. And what 
they clearly found in that advertising had a great impact on 
young people, and in fact on the whole community, in the use 
of seat belts. 
 
I would like to join with the minister in welcoming them here 
today, along with their teacher, Richard Dahl, a friend and a 
good teacher, I can testify to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure all members will want to join with us in 
welcoming them here today and wishing them the best of luck 
in their work in trying to get a seat-belt week declared in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I’m sure the minister will lend 
them his ear today in order that that will take place in the near 
future. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf  

of my colleague the member from Regina Centre, I would like 
to introduce to you, sir, and through you to the members of the 
House, 26 English as a second language students who are 
attending the Regina Plains Community College. They are 
seated in the Speaker’s gallery. They are accompanied by their 
teachers, Sally Heeren, Elsa Turek, and Yvonne Lewchyshyn. 
 
These men and women are studying the English language. They 
are in the process already of making a contribution to Canada 
and Saskatchewan. We’re most happy to have them here with 
us. We hope that they will enjoy their stay in the legislature and 
get a great deal out of how our system of government works. I 
ask members of the House to join me in extending to them our 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Forest Products 
 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my 
question to the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Forest 
Products, a public company which lost taxpayers more than $3 
million last year. In light of that loss, one would assume that the 
Saskatchewan Forest Products would be anxious to gather in 
every bit of business possible. Yet Saskatchewan Forest 
Products appears to have blown the sale of 1 million board feet 
of pressure-treated wood products to a Manitoba wholesaler. 
 
Can the minister explain why an offer made in January of this 
year by Shan-Wood Lumber Ltd. was never followed up on? 
And, as a result, this wholesaler withdrew his offer to purchase 
1 million board feet of pressure-treated wood products, such as 
two by fours and two by sixes, at a loss of more than $350,000 
to the corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the member’s colleague 
sitting directly behind him asked the question yesterday. I took 
notice and I will be providing the answer, I believe, as early as 
tomorrow. 
 

Visit to San Francisco by Sedco Official 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Premier took 
notice of a question from the member from Quill Lakes with 
regards to Mr. Price. The member from Quill Lakes indicated 
among other things that Mr. price was on a holiday in San 
Francisco. That is, in fact, not true. Mr. Price, accompanied by 
some other people from Westank-Willock, were at a national 
tank truck carriers trade show in San Francisco that attracted 
that particular industry from across the entire North America, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
He also indicated that they were there for a period of one week. 
That is not true. There was a travel day. They travelled down 
there Monday afternoon, got in late Monday night, and came 
home Friday. They were there Tuesday, Wednesday, and 
Thursday at this trade show. 
 
The hon. member also indicated, Mr. Speaker, that the  
  



 
May 13, 1986 

 

1262 
 

hotel room was 152 to $350 a night. That is also not true. The 
hotel room cost 138 for the first night and 86 for the second 
night. Mr. Speaker, he indicated as well that this was at 
taxpayers’ expense. In fact, he was accompanying people from 
Westank-Willock. The bill was paid by Westank-Willock — a 
total cost of $1,130, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This particular group is trying to get into the U.S. market to sell 
a product that can be produced right here in Saskatchewan, right 
here in Regina; to create jobs right here in Saskatchewan, right 
here in Regina. 
 
The hon. member would have us believe, number one, that 
cabinet ministers should never travel outside the province. They 
criticize us if we make a brochure; somebody else makes a 
brochure because it’s political. Now they criticize anybody 
travelling any place. I would have, or take to believe, that the 
member would suggest that the particular employee take a 
moped, pack a tent, and move to San Francisco for three or four 
days, see if he can make a sale. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary to the minister. Does 
the minister deny that Westank-Willock is owned as to more 
than 99.5 per cent by the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The minister will do exactly this, that 
the Westank-Willock was saved from bankruptcy by Sedco. 
Sedco was pursuing now ways by which we can sell Sedco to 
somebody in the private sector. In the same course, this 
particular industry is now being turned around, Mr. Speaker, to 
preserve jobs in the city of Regina, and I can tell the member 
opposite that the particular union of Westank-Willock does not 
take kindly to the members of the NDP, their so-called friends, 
trying to drive that business down so that they lose their jobs, 
and jobs are lost in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I didn’t 
quite catch the relevance of the minister’s last comments with 
the respect to the ownership of Westank-Willock. I’ll ask him 
another supplementary. 
 
Does the minister deny that on this particular trip to California 
there were several employees of Westank-Willock, and the 
question that needs to be asked is: why was there an need of an 
extra employee of Sedco? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Along with the president, Mr. Campbell, 
there were also two engineers to deal with the particular buyers 
on the engineering capacity with regards to what 
Westank-Willock can produce in the Regina plant, and as a 
result, they were taken down as you would at any trade show to 
try to promote your wares and give the details of your wares. I 
might also indicate to the members opposite, as if he needs me 
telling him, that his friend Gerry Van Wachem was there 
running a company far less secure than Westank-Willock, also 
doing the same thing. 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, final supplementary. 
Does the minister deny that the president of Westank-Willock 
was there, and if so, what was the purpose being served by the 
president of Sedco being there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The particular Mr. Price is on the board, 
along with the president of Westank-Willock, along with two 
engineers. They’re trying to sell product outside of 
Saskatchewan. They’re trying to sell product into the United 
States. 
 
And I don’t know what the members opposite are so down on 
anybody trying to manufacture something in our province to 
sell, whether it’s in California; to sell, whether it’s in the 
Yukon; to sell, whether it’s in the Pacific Rim. We believe that 
that’s what the people of this province want to see — people 
manufacturing in our province, selling outside of our province, 
bringing money and jobs into this province, creating a better 
economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. 
Does not the minister share the view that having regard to Mr. 
Price’s record of performance at Pioneer Trust — a company 
which will be known to the minister — we, the taxpayer, would 
be better served by the president of Westank-Willock, Mr. 
Campbell, than we would be served by Mr. Price’s efforts to 
sell tanks, an industry of which he knows nothing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Price has in fact taken the loss of 
Sedco in 1984 of 8.8 million down to a figure this year of 
562,000 — and that’s pretty good results, I would indicate. And 
I think that should be commended. 
 
The member opposite always seeks to try to somehow put down 
a person, whether he’s in business, whether he works for the 
government, whoever he might be — somehow you shouldn’t 
move out of the province to try to do something. 
 
I remind the Leader of the Opposition that the last time you 
took a government trip to California you went to Disneyland. 
And I’ll tell you, in Disneyland you didn’t sell any tanker 
trucks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Hiring of Consultants from Ontario 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to direct a 
question to the Minster responsible for Science and 
Technology. And I ask the minister: can you confirm that in 
recent weeks your department has hired Ontario consultants and 
that you are paying each of them $500 a day plus expenses to 
advise your department on some aspects of high technology? 
 
I ask you: could you not find any qualified consultants here 
within your own staff or at the universities or indeed within 
high-tech industry in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, once again, obviously a 
question when I have officials so that we can  
  



 
May 13, 1986 

 

1263 
 

get into that type of detail, we can do it in estimates, or I can 
take notice of the question. I’m not sure where it’s leading. If 
it’s a question of the capacity of local people, if in fact some 
consultants from outside the province were hired, I’m sure 
there’s a very good reason for it. I will take notice of the 
question and bring it back to the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Okay. A further supplement so that you can 
have more information, Mr. Minister. I ask you, are you aware 
that in February of this year a contract was prepared for the 
signature of one Denzil Doyle of Kanata, Ontario? And are you 
aware that under the terms of this contract, Mr. Doyle was to be 
paid a minimum of $12,000 plus expenses for providing your 
department with advice on the basis of four days a month over a 
six-month period? In other words, a rate of about $500 per day 
plus expenses. 
 
I ask you, are you aware that that contract was indeed 
commissioned with Mr. Denzil Doyle of Ontario as a consultant 
of your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, once again, in 
estimates of Tourism and Small Business I presented a list of 61 
consulting contracts that were awarded by that department. 
When Science and Technology comes up we will present you 
the whole list of consultant contracts that were awarded by that 
department. We can do it that way or, if it’s your wish, I will 
take notice and bring information on this specific one back to 
this House. 
 
I wonder why, in fact, Mr. Doyle has been picked out of another 
exceedingly long list. Is this another attempt, Mr. Speaker, to 
slander someone who does not have the opportunity to defend 
himself or the redress of the legal system? I’m surprised at this 
again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I ask the 
minister about a second consultant and, in the course of so 
asking, do not slander the consultant but simply ask — but 
simply ask — whether your department has agreed to pay 
$3,500 plus expenses to one Harold W. Blakely of Mississauga, 
Ontario, for seven days of work. And are you aware that such 
an arrangement has been made by your department to engage 
the consulting services of the said Harold W. Blakely? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, once again I’m not 
sure if this is a relative of the Leader of the Opposition or not. 
But I will take notice of that question. 
 
I have some knowledge of Mr. Doyle who, I’m informed, is 
probably the best high tech venture capitalist in Canada. This 
gentleman is the head of a particularly successful high tech 
firm. But I will take notice; I will bring back those details. And 
as I indicated, I can present all the contracts, consulting 
contracts this department has awarded when we do estimates, 
but I’ll take notice and bring back those individual ones if it’s 
an attempt to somehow discredit some of the individuals that 
work for the department. 
 

Income of SGI Employee 
 

Mr. Sveinson: — Could you please, sir, outline the income of 
Mr. Morley Koskie, an employee of SGI in  

1982 who is a brother to the member from Quill Lakes and a 
former cabinet minister in the government of the last NDP 
administration? Also, would you confirm that this gentleman 
had seven relatives working for the Government of 
Saskatchewan at that time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, believe me, I’d be very 
pleased to take notice of that question and come back and report 
to the House on that matter. 
 

Non-Payment of Municipal Taxes by Pioneer Trust 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the former 
minister of finance in the absence of the Minister of Finance. It 
has to do with the biggest business collapse in the history of 
Saskatchewan, and you will know the referring to the closure of 
Pioneer Trust last year. Mr. Minister, the victims of that 
collapse are still coming in a full year after the Pioneer Trust 
closed their doors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by way of background, the latest is a group of 25 
families who had their mortgage accounts with Pioneer Trust 
and who discovered only after the fact that Pioneer Trust had 
not been passing on the municipal tax portion of their monthly 
payments to the municipalities involved. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, can you explain how this took place 
and whether or not you have lobbied with the Canada Deposit 
Insurance Corporation to see that that portion of these families’ 
lost taxes is paid by the Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I will take notice of that question on 
behalf of the Minister of Finance. I can’t take at face value the 
statements made by the member from Shaunavon, although it 
does remind one of a story that was run on the TV about three 
weeks ago which, I assume, is what he is referring to. I heard 
some show, or saw some show on TV about three weeks ago. 
Perhaps I could take notice, have the Minister of Finance 
respond to you next day. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a supplement to the minister 
who makes light of the fact that 25 families in the province are 
short a good deal of change as a result of one of their friends 
who flew the coop, so to speak. 
 
But I will ask you, Mr. Minister, since these 25 families had 
paid their monthly payments to Pioneer Trust in good faith, and 
the money collected was never passed on, have the 
circumstances surrounding the non-payment of taxes by Pioneer 
Trust, has it been investigated by law enforcement authorities? 
Have you got any indication whether that is at the present time 
being investigated to see that these families are protected from a 
company that has taken their money and disappeared? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, I think that because this question 
come up three weeks ago, I think the member from Shaunavon 
conveniently waits until the Minister of Finance is not in the 
House to pose the question. 
  



 
May 13, 1986 

 

1264 
 

Mr. Speaker, I indicated that we would undertake notice. I’m 
not making light of this at all. I do challenge the credibility of 
the member from Shaunavon who stood up back in January or 
February and accused the PC party of getting grand amounts of 
dollars from Pioneer Trust. The Minister of Finance at that 
point in time told him the way it was, made him back down, and 
made him look like a fool. And when he comes back into the 
House, he’ll probably do the same thing again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, there were suggestions that 
the Tory party had money on deposit prior to the collapse of 
Pioneer Trust, and those rumours are around, and we will find 
out after the next election when you pulled the money. That’s 
the question. 
 
And getting back to the issue at hand, and the minister is well 
aware of Pioneer Trust because, Mr. Speaker, by way of 
background you will know he was the minister responsible for 
the bill when we had to pay out $20 million of hard-earned 
taxpayers money because of a letter he sent. And for him to 
stand here sanctimoniously, I think, is a little ridiculous. But I 
want to ask the minister, who now has no knowledge of Pioneer 
Trust apparently, Mr. Minister, is too much trouble to 
investigate and to see whether or not Pioneer Trust, in fact, 
broke any laws in taking this money and not passing it on to the 
municipal authorities who they, in fact, should have. Is that 
asking too much? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I simply responded, Mr. Speaker, to the 
member’s question by indicating that it was under the 
jurisdiction of the Minister of Finance. I indicated that he’s not 
here today; that I’m sure that he wishes to respond, Mr. 
Speaker, to that particular question as to whether something can 
be done for those particular individuals. We are, in fact, 
concerned about those individuals as any government would be, 
and we will undertake to do what we can, Mr. Speaker. I simply 
ask the member to be patient, to wait for the Minister of 
Finance to return to his chair tomorrow, at which time he’ll give 
a response to it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Final supplementary to the minister. If 
he’s indicating the opposition to be patient, he is also indicating 
that he knew about this three weeks ago. He has indicated to the 
Assembly that he knew about this problem three weeks ago. 
Today he pleads innocent on it. And I would ask you, sir, 
whether you think it’s fair to these families that you would say 
to them: be patient, because I have known about this for three 
weeks, but I didn’t intend to do anything unless it was raised as 
a political issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I think that the particular response 
I had is that I saw a show on TV about three weeks ago, which I 
assume is where your question arises form . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, it’s the Minister of Finance within his 
jurisdiction to do. 
 
Now you ask me: is it fair to ask these people to wait one more 
day? I ask you, I ask you, four short years ago was it fair when 
people were paying 22 per cent interest on their mortgage for 
you to sit mute with your . . . 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 

Delays in Answering Written Questions 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a question to the acting Government House Leader. Mr. 
Minister, probably the height of any government’s arrogance is 
when the government refuses to provide information on the 
expenditure of the taxpayers’ money, and that is what your 
government has been doing. 
 
I remind you that we are now in the 40th sitting day of this 
legislature, but still your government has failed to answer a 
number of written questions that were ordered by this Assembly 
nearly two years ago. And I’ll remind you, for the benefit of the 
minister, what some of those were. 
 
Can you, Mr. Minister, tell Saskatchewan people when you will 
finally answer the questions such as: the government 
employment arrangements for former PC candidate, Mr. Terry 
Leier; the money paid out to various law firms by government 
departments and Crown corporations; and the out-of-province 
travel expense of cabinet ministers such as the Premier and 
former minister of Economic Development and Trade? 
 
Mr. Minister, these written questions have gone unanswered for 
nearly two years — highly unacceptable. When will you finally 
respond to these questions? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the question, 
perhaps it’s appropriate to draw a comparison. I remember 
sitting on the benches in opposition and watching that 
government, that former NDP government, coming to this 
House with boxes on the very last possible hour of a session, 
coming in here with boxes of answers that had not been 
provided to the legislature over many, many, many months. 
And they brought them in here with a great raucous laughter 
which was participated in by that very member who asked the 
question. 
 
As it relates to the questions and the way in which questions 
have been answered by this government, Mr. Speaker, just for 
your information and for the information of the member from 
Regina North East, since 1982, 302 orders for return have been 
ordered. There are 19 of those which remain outstanding; 22 
have been answered in this session. Three hundred and two 
ordered; 19 are outstanding, and 22 have been answered in this 
session, Mr. Speaker — a record which I believe, in the eyes of 
everyone in Saskatchewan, will stand in good stead as it relates 
to the comparison that I’ve just drawn with the former 
government. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the point is: if that’s the 
argument — new question — if that’s the argument that the 
minister wants to make, the least he could have done is 
answered these questions on the last day of the last session. 
We’ve been waiting here, the public has been waiting, for two 
years. Never before has the public of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, had to wait for two years to get answers to questions, 
and the only questions that the government answers are the ones 
they selectively choose to answer. 
  



 
May 13, 1986 

 

1265 
 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, why do you choose to hide the answers 
that deal with things like the travel arrangements and costs of 
your Premier two years ago? What is it that you’re trying to 
hide? I further ask, Mr. Minister, what is it that you’re trying to 
hide about the travel arrangements and costs of the former 
minister of Economic Development and Trade, that you 
selectively refuse to answer the questions to? And why do you 
choose to hide, and what is it that you’re choosing to hide, Mr. 
Minister, about the kind of government employment 
arrangements for former Conservative candidates? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, what the member says in 
his preliminary remarks and that supplementary is simply not 
true; it’s simply not so. The record is stated for itself. And as I 
have said before, 302 returned ordered, 19 are outstanding; we 
have been answering them a few at a time as this session goes 
on. There are 19 outstanding, 22 have been answered during the 
course of this session, in the last — what did he say? — 40 
days. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Final supplementary. Mr. Minister, can 
you explain to the House and to the public of Saskatchewan 
how you can justify not answering any question for two years? 
Can you answer that question for the benefit of the people who 
have paid these expenses, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, there are members in this 
House who sat in opposition for two terms and never did 
receive an answer until they got into government — until they 
got into government and got the answers for themselves in 
government. For the member, the former minister in the other 
government, who brought in returns to this House in the way in 
which I described, Mr. Speaker, with boxes rolling in here, with 
boxes and great laughter, and so on — a big joke about it — 
they made light of the answering of questions. We have never 
made light of the answering of questions. We provide the 
information; we continue to provide the information, and we’ll 
stand on our record in that regard, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Promised Arbitration Hearing 
 

Mr. Sveinson: — I have a question of the Premier of 
Saskatchewan. I ask the Premier: in your globe-trotting 
extravaganzas, Mr. Premier, where you spin off Conservative 
rhetoric about individualism and protection of the individual 
from big government, do you ever reflect on some of the 
promises you’ve made individuals in Saskatchewan? We have 
one sitting here today in the Assembly, a Mr. Hainstock. You 
promised to solve the man’s problem two months ago. You 
promised him an arbitration hearing. He has not yet received it. 
 
I ask you, sir: are you sure that you would like to solve this 
man’s problem, or are you just making false promises that will 
delay a solution to this man’s problem so he’ll fall into 
bankruptcy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — No, Mr. Speaker. We said that we would 
be quite happy to have an independent appraisal of the property 
so that we know how many cattle to run on it, and I’m quite 
prepared to have an independent  

appraiser, and there’s no reason to stop that. 
 
Secondly, we reviewed all the stumpage policy and stumpage 
fees associated with forestry as you cut trees for new land. Now 
our policy is consistent with other jurisdictions, and I’m not 
about to change it. 
 
So with respect to rent on the land, we’ll have a private 
appraisal. With respect to the tree policy and stumpage, we’ve 
made up our mind. We’ve looked at all the rest across Canada, 
and we think ours is fair, and we’re going to stay the course. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Supplementary. Have you examined the 
agricultural Act and what it says regarding stumpage? The man 
claims that the forestry Act is not his problem; it’s the ag Act, 
and that his problem is under that jurisdiction, and that the 
stumpage that he claims he’s paid, and that should be paid back 
to him, should be governed by the ag Act and not the forestry 
Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I’m not going to get into the agriculture 
Act and the forestry Act and the combination of which Act has 
jurisdiction. I’ll tell you, from my point of view I have made up 
my mind what the policy’s going to be, regardless of what Act 
it’s under. It’s going to be that we are going to charge stumpage 
fees if there’s going to be people clearing the trees and then 
marketing them. They do it in other jurisdictions, and that’s 
what we’re going to do here, whether it’s the agriculture Act or 
the forestry Act or any other Act. 
 
So I will review his entire land values to find out if, in fact, he 
can carry cattle; how many they can carry. Let’s have a private 
appraisal. But we get into the whole question of stumpage. It 
doesn’t matter to me what Act it’s under. I mean, we can 
modify the Act or you can have legal . . . I have my legal 
counsel; he has his. But I just say that the policy and the intent 
of the policy is to charge people — if they cut trees and they’re 
going to market them commercially, they should pay some 
royalty to the government, to the people of Saskatchewan, and 
we’ll stay the course on that policy. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 03 — An Act to incorporate Holy Resurrection 
Orthodox Church 

 
Clauses 1 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 03 — An Act to incorporate Holy Resurrection 
Orthodox Church 

 
Ms. Zazelenchuk: I move that Bill No. 03 — An Act to 
incorporate Holy Resurrection Orthodox Church be now  
  



 
May 13, 1986 

 

1266 
 

read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 7 — Housing Needs for Senior Citizens 
 

Mr. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for me 
to rise in the Assembly today to bring in the motion which reads 
as follows: 
 

That this Assembly commends the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation for the initiatives undertaken in meeting the 
needs of senior citizens in our province. 
 

It is with great pleasure, as I said, to stand and speak on this 
motion, Mr. Speaker. And I’m sure that being in the city of 
Moose Jaw, in Moose Jaw South where our main part of our 
seniors’ high rises are, the people in Moose Jaw South and 
throughout Moose Jaw are very happy with what’s happened 
with senior housing over the past four years. 
 
I’m quite sure that with the comments I get from many people 
in Moose Jaw that it is very inadequate in Moose Jaw for senior 
housing up until that point in time, and which we have done 
many things for them in regard to building more homes, not 
only in Moose Jaw, but throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation has committed 5,550 units 
since 1982 in the province. And I’m quite sure that we, as 
citizens of this province who visit these places, frequently 
realize the good which these seniors are getting out of them. 
 
I’m quite sure that many people are quite well acquainted with 
the task force which we had on senior citizens’ housing in 
1983-84, which recommended changes to the senior citizens’ 
housing, and also the senior citizens’ home repair program, 
which was at a very low figure whenever we took over, and it is 
now at $1,000 per family every five years, and I’m quite sure 
that this year alone has kept many people in their homes in the 
province due to this program. 
 
I certainly appreciate what has been done for the seniors. I don’t 
believe that I am quite in that category yet myself, but . . . I 
suppose I can call myself the kid from Moose Jaw South. And 
I’m sure that there’s many people in this legislature today that 
want to speak on this Bill, and I’m quite sure that there will be 
some good things said about the housing corporation. 
 
I’m very sure that over the past four years that the 
administration of these places have been well improved. We’ve 
got some very good administrative boards in these cities and 
towns looking after these. And I think the Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation should be commended on this, as before 
there were very many things that weren’t being looked after 
under these programs, and now we have very good boards 
throughout the province. And I’ve talked to many of them  

and been to some of their seminars and that, and they’re all very 
well pleased that we are taking an interest in what they are 
doing as caretakers and what not in these homes. 
 
I think we’ve got to realize that they need recognition, as well 
as those who are living in them. It’s caretakers and those on the 
boards and what not that keep these things going. So I think I 
will read this motion and them turn it over to some of the other 
ones: 
 

That this Assembly commends the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation for the initiatives undertaken in meeting the 
needs of senior citizens in our province. 

 
And the seconder of this motion would be the member from 
Saskatoon Centre, and he will be seconding the motion. 
 
Mr. Sandberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a 
pleasure for me to rise today and support my colleague, the 
MLA for Moose Jaw South, in his resolution which you have 
just read, and it says: 
 

That this Assembly commends the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation for the initiatives undertaken in meeting the 
needs of senior citizens in our province. 

 
And I’m very happy and indeed privileged to speak on senior 
citizens because there are a great many of them in the 
constituency of Saskatoon Centre, Mr. Speaker. You know, this 
government has accomplished a great deal in just four years for 
seniors. It’s a record I’m proud of. It’s a record the people of 
Saskatchewan will note with satisfaction. It’s a noteworthy 
record of accomplishments in very tough economic times when 
revenues have fallen drastically in this province, but times in 
which the people of Saskatchewan have tightened their belts 
and worked that much harder. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government’s record of building for seniors is 
the best in the history of this province, there’s no doubt about 
that. In my constituency of Saskatoon Centre alone, in the last 
four years, we have seen the building of many, many units. For 
example, Fifth Avenue Place on Fifth Avenue in Saskatoon, 
right in the heart of downtown Saskatoon, has 138 new units; 
and King Edward Place on 25th Street, 120 new units. 
 
I’ve spent a lot of time visiting folks and friends in both of these 
new developments. The residents tell me they are very pleased 
with the facilities. They’re located — that is, the facilities are 
located — in the down-town core close to the services that 
seniors need, such as shopping, the store of down town, the 
library, theatres, doctors and other medical services, as well as 
transportation such as transit and taxis. 
 
The seniors also enjoy the proximity of Kinsmen Park, a 
beautiful park located right in the heart of down-town 
Saskatoon next to these two senior citizens’ complexes. And of 
course the view of the South Saskatchewan River valley from 
the floors, anywhere up above the third floor to the 10th or 
11th, wherever they may go, is just fantastic. I’ve enjoyed many 
sunny afternoons with tea or  
  



 
May 13, 1986 

 

1267 
 

coffee with many of my friends in these complexes. 
 
(1445) 
 
I must also point out, Mr. Speaker, the building of the 
Sutherland House in the Sutherland residential area with its 44 
units. My friend and colleague, the MLA for Sutherland, tells 
me it’s a much appreciated complex and much needed by the 
seniors who call it home in that area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are about 1,100 seniors’ units in Saskatoon 
administered by the Saskatchewan Housing Authority. May I 
take this opportunity to commend the board, headed by 
chairman David Brittain, and executive director Jim Wasilenko 
and his staff for doing an excellent job. His staff, by the way, is 
located in the Shepherd Apartments on 24th Street, and they do 
a real good job administrating the Saskatoon Housing Authority 
and the some 1,600 units under their jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, housing for seniors is a great challenge for the 
’80s, and a great challenge for the ’90s as well, and into the 21st 
century. We have to work hard and do much research for the 
right answers and the solutions to seniors’ housing problems. I 
believe we have to encourage our seniors to maintain their 
independence in their own homes as long as is possible. 
Therefore we, as the younger generation, much provide the 
services — that is, the services the seniors need — to allow 
them to stay in their homes, in their own communities, and in a 
familiar environment. 
 
I know, my mother lives in a senior housing unit in Cut Knife, 
Saskatchewan. It’s a blessing that she can stay in our home 
town and be near her friends and be near her family, rather than 
having to move to a city where she would be in a strange 
environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a great demand for seniors’ units in 
Saskatoon. Many seniors gravitate to the city from the rural 
communities. Saskatoon is a beautiful and well-run city. It 
provides excellent shopping, health services, and entertainment 
for the seniors. And I’m informed that our seniors population is 
growing fast. It’s now 12 per cent and is expected to grow to 
some 20 per cent by the year 2000. As a matter of fact, Mr. 
Speaker, by the year 2000 I’ll be pretty close to senior status 
myself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some 2,000 units for seniors 
administered by private institutions for seniors in Saskatoon — 
complexes, housing places such as the Lutheran Sunset Homes 
and Jubilee Residences. And there is a continuing and enhanced 
trend for church organizations to build seniors’ complexes 
targeted to higher-income seniors. This, in my opinion and my 
view, Mr. Speaker, is good because many seniors want to enjoy 
their retirement years in the company of other seniors where 
services are provided and also for the obvious social benefits. 
 
I would also point out that the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation has provided funding in Saskatoon for St. 
Vladimir’s seniors’ home where there are 100 units coming up; 
the Circle Drive Alliance Church seniors’ home, another 100 
units; and St. Ann’s seniors’ home where 60 units are being 
built. These three projects, Mr.  

Speaker, total some $14.3 million, with the province’s share of 
capital cost at 3.6 million. And it was a pleasure for me to be 
there with the former minister of the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation when these projects were announced some time 
last year. 
 
Another private seniors’ residence recently completed is the 
Saskatoon Mennonite home for seniors, in the Lawson Heights 
area, and that has some 70 units. The province provided 0.8 
million for that $4 million project. Mr. Speaker, I should also 
point out that the Circle Drive Alliance Church nursing home 
will provide 50 beds. That’s a $3.1 million project. 
 
The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation is also to be 
commended for some new initiatives in enriched housing. 
These projects are designed for independent living for seniors in 
the province’s smaller centres. The projects have a central 
entrance, with common hallways and a separate exist to the 
outside, to a back yard or whatever. In these projects, the 
community is encouraged to provide some of the services, such 
as meals on wheels, aerobics or exercise classes, or even arts 
and handicrafts classes. Projects are on line for Wynyard and 
Eston, in those areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it goes without saying the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation has been very busy these last four years, and has 
many accomplishments which my friend from Moose Jaw 
South alluded to briefly. They’ve committed 5,550 units since 
1982, and some 2,335 of these have gone to senior citizens, 
including 616 enriched units, 1,960 to families, and 1,250 units 
for nursing homes. The commitments have resulted in an 
estimated $142 million expenditures and have created 
approximately 4,900 man-years of employment in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And another accomplishment of the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation is the announcement in 1984 by the Department of 
Health to launch a new five-year program to provide some 
1,600 new and replacement special care beds. The corporation 
has been able to provide through its budget allocation 890 units 
to meet this objective. That’s all ready, Mr. Speaker. This is 
well ahead of the planned 766 units to be committed over the 
planned five-year period. So that is indeed progress. 
 
In 1986 the corporation plans to commit another 300. This 
brings the total commitment to 1,190 units or 79 per cent of the 
total units to be committed over the planned five-year period. 
So that is indeed progress. 
 
On another topic of accomplishment, the senior citizens’ task 
force on housing in 1983 and ’84 recommended changes to the 
home repair program for seniors and the introduction of the 
innovative enriched housing concept for seniors. The new 
senior citizens’ home repair program, established in August of 
’84, provided $1,000 grants for needed repairs to almost 22,000 
households for a total of 19 million. 
 
The previous five-year program under the NDP, started in 1979, 
provided 650 grants to 1,350 seniors for a total commitment of 
11 million. So to date, 1,616 enriched housing units which 
promote the independent life-style  
  



 
May 13, 1986 

 

1268 
 

of the senior have been committed. And I’d like to commend 
the housing corporation also, because in April they announced a 
program to register contractors so that seniors are protected 
from fraudulent or unethical practices in those contractors that 
they hire to do that $1,000 improvement program. 
 
And another program, Mr. Speaker, in 1985 the province 
introduced a provincially funded, senior citizens’, non-profit 
program which provided 309 units. And I’ve already listed 
some of the projects in Saskatoon that come under that program 
— St. Vladimir’s, St. Ann’s, and Circle Drive, just to name 
three of them. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, a program innovation is an integral part of 
the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. This commitment is 
illustrated by five innovative programs. Number one I want to 
speak briefly on is the elder suites pilot project which explores 
an alternative way to house seniors, which allows them to 
remain independent while maintaining the benefits of a close, 
warm family relationships. 
 
And I talked briefly a short while ago to the president of the 
housing corporation, and he tells me that the program has been 
started in the North of Saskatchewan. And what it does it attach 
a seniors unit to an existing residence. And the Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation will build the unit and rent it, geared to 
the income of that senior. Already one unit has been produced 
and has been accommodated, rather, at Green Lake in northern 
Saskatchewan. And he tells me that they’ve also got one 
self-contained unit that has been touring northern Saskatchewan 
to show the folks in that area just what they can be used for. So 
that, indeed, is a good innovative program. 
 
And I want to talk briefly about developmental services for 
senior residents in enriched housing projects. The housing 
corporation is introducing a personal alarm system pilot project 
for seniors. A device being tested is a wristband worn by the 
user and, when it’s activated, can summon immediately 
assistance through the telephone system. So when a senior finds 
himself or herself in trouble and unable to reach the telephone, 
this device will alert the proper people to take care of the 
problem. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we all have friends and relatives that are 
senior citizens, individuals who’ve spent a lifetime of hard 
work making our province a better place to live. In the 
community, we witness their meaningful contributions. Within 
the family, they are the most cherished and the most valuable 
resources, and I speak from the heart on this. To their sons and 
daughters, they are a source of inspiration and advice. And to 
their grandchildren, they are indeed warm and loving 
grandparents. Yet in the past these valuable members of our 
society were generally neglected under the former 
administration. 
 
In 1977 a moratorium was placed on nursing home 
construction, and it lasted until 1982. In nine years only 245 
nursing home units were built by the former administration. 
Seniors were not being given a reasonable raise in income 
supplements. In 10 years there was only one — only one $5 
cost of living increase.  

This was unfair treatment to those who had given so much to 
this province. 
 
When we assumed office in 1982, we found nursing homes 
overcrowded and health care for seniors inadequate. Our 
response was to improve health and social services while 
strengthening incomes and housing for seniors. 
 
In the area of health care for the elderly, this government, our 
Progressive Conservative government, has spent 14.2 million 
on construction of special care homes. This has resulted in the 
completion of 688 nursing home units in just three years. 
Additionally we have made a commitment to providing 1,500 
new special care beds over a five-year period. 
 
At this point, Mr. Speaker, I would like to pay special 
commendation to the folks in my home town of Cut Knife. I 
represent Saskatoon Centre, but I have indeed a close 
attachment to that town. They have raised almost half a million 
dollars to get their new nursing home under way, and it has 
been announced by the Minister of Health, a new 30-bed 
nursing home facility. And I congratulate His Worship the 
Mayor, Roger Manegre, and the hard-working committee that 
worked with him to get this project under way, and of course 
the generous people, the very generous people of Cut Knife and 
district. 
 
At this point I would also like to say a congratulations and 
heartfelt best wishes to the long-time doctor of that village, Dr. 
Ronald Scratch, who has nursed my wounds through growing 
up, Mr. Speaker, and who has served the people faithfully, 
loyally, and untiringly for some 40 years in the community of 
Cut Knife. And what a great man he is. The citizens of Cut 
Knife have told me they are going to be honouring him some 
time later this summer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see that the member from Quill Lakes is 
bellowing from his seat again. That’s what he’s famous for; he 
can shout and holler from his seat. He’s evidently become a star 
now in the newspapers of Regina. I show you a column 
referring to the member from Quill Lakes as one of the political 
terrorists who sit over on that side of the House and bellow like 
a moose. And there he goes again, Mr. Speaker, bellowing like 
a moose — the political terrorist; part of the rat pack from the 
NDP opposition. And I can assure that member that the people 
of Quill Lakes will not send him back to the legislature next 
time around. And we, this government, will not have to put up 
with the foolish antics of that incompetent member from Quill 
Lakes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I can get back to my topics on seniors and the 
services provided to them by the Government of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve directed over $2 million for innovative 
programs such as respite beds, daytime hospital care, and 
geriatric programs, as well as establishing a provincial 
chiropody program to provide foot care for seniors. As well, 
we’ve seen new hospital construction in Regina, Saskatoon, and 
new small hospital initiative packages for rural communities. 
 
We viewed the incomes of seniors to be unfairly adjusted in the 
past. To combat this, we doubled the income supplement for 
single, low-income singles from $25 to  
  



 
May 13, 1986 

 

1269 
 

$50 per month. For couples, the increase was 66 per cent, from 
$45 to $75 per month. And on January 1st of 1985 we initiated 
the senior citizens’ heritage program which covers 75,000 
eligible seniors with incomes of less than $30,000 per year. And 
I understand now, Mr. Speaker, on this topic, and I am even 
flabbergasted to believe this, but one of the seniors in my 
constituency phoned me and told me that the NDP had told her 
not to fill out an application for the seniors’ heritage grant 
because they weren’t going to get it. Can you imagine anything 
more low life than that, than those people who sit over in that 
other benches and some of the people who support them telling 
seniors that they cannot receive their senior citizens’ heritage 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I just want to 
caution the member for Quill Lakes that we aren’t allowed 
coffee in when the House is in session. 
 
Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Speaker, to carry on. To give seniors 
better access to government departments and programs, we 
created the seniors’ bureau, which is important to them. This 
organizations provides one-stop shopping and counselling for 
seniors. Over 250 seniors use the services every month. 
Additionally we’ve sent a directory of programs and services to 
every senior in this province. 
 
To further improve the way of life for seniors we implemented 
a $20 million senior citizens’ home repair program which I 
have outlined. These programs and initiatives have given our 
seniors a new sense of security and optimism. 
 
(1500) 
 
By listening and acting upon the concerns of seniors, our 
government has taken a direction which benefits us all. We 
strengthen, not only our senior citizens, but our pride, our 
families, and our communities. By helping seniors we are 
working to make Saskatchewan a better place to live. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, it does indeed give me pleasure to 
second the resolution put forth by my colleague, the member 
from Moose Jaw South, which says: 
 

That this Assembly commends the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation for the initiatives undertaken in meeting the 
needs of senior citizens in our province. 

 
And I am happy to second that resolution. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had delayed 
for a minute, thinking that the opposition was interested in 
expressing their feelings on the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation. However, I can understand why they wouldn’t 
want to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of the resolution before us, what’s 
important is that the resolution does identify an important part 
of our government, namely the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation. But more importantly it identifies an area of an 
important policy development in a relatively new government, 
our government, which took effect in 1982. 
 

Now for a minute let me talk about the history in relation to 
seniors, because it’s important to realize how far the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation has come in policy 
development for the benefit of seniors in Saskatchewan. As you 
recall, before 1982 the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation did 
not have a good reputation. As you recall, there were various 
things done within the corporation which were highly political 
in nature, which really paid more attention to the concerns of 
the politicians of the day than the seniors in Saskatchewan. And 
that is the type of legacy that was left to us by the NDP 
government which was soundly defeated in 1982. 
 
In terms of the history of the treatment of seniors, there is a 
variance there as well. Mr. Speaker, there was a time when the 
former CCF government saw the needs of seniors and focused 
in on programs dealing with medicare, for example, which 
assisted seniors in acquiring proper medical care and attention. 
However, as the years slipped by and as the NDP took hold of 
this province, things changed; the seniors instead were seen as a 
tool, a tool in the political game, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As you recall, the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation wasn’t 
utilized to bring home the concerns of seniors and do something 
for seniors in the province. Instead, we saw election after 
election where the seniors were simply frightened into 
supporting the NDP, and many of them in fact did, and many 
saw through it and did not. 
 
As you remember, the housing corporation didn’t worry about 
performance, but was involved with the fear tactics conducted 
by the members opposite when they were in government. So the 
housing corporation has come a long way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we saw before 1982 was a moratorium on nursing home 
construction by the NDP government. The housing corporation 
wasn’t utilized to increase the number of nursing home beds 
that were constructed in the province of Saskatchewan. Instead, 
the government of the day had other priorities such as 
nationalizing the potash mines, for example, which are such a 
great economic success today in light of that great investment 
on our behalf. 
 
So there were certain priorities that were different than the 
priorities the housing corporation has today. As you recall, the 
government changed in 1982, and the member from Saskatoon 
Centre indicated some of the changes that were important to 
him which we can see happening in Saskatoon. Many, many 
projects for the benefit of seniors have been built in the last four 
years and have been announced recently, much more than any 
four-year period in the history of this province, and I challenge 
any member of this legislature to show otherwise, because it’s 
clearly a fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what we have seen in Saskatoon is not unique to Saskatoon. 
I come from Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, and I know in my seat 
alone we’ve seen several major projects which exemplify the 
attitude that this government has to seniors, the pioneers, the 
people who built this province. For example, the Northcote 
Manor, a seniors’ high rise, was brought to my constituency by 
this government. The Duck Lake Nursing Home was brought to 
Duck Lake by this government. The Macdowall Seniors’ 
Building  
  



 
May 13, 1986 

 

1270 
 

was brought to Macdowall by this government. All of this 
happened, Mr. Speaker, because the present government, our 
government, cares about seniors. We have compassion for 
people who need assistance and have earned that type of 
assistance. So the result, Mr. Speaker, has been good for my 
area as well as Saskatoon and many other communities in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What has been the process that has led to these changes? As 
you recall, Mr. Speaker, an intensive review of the housing 
corporation was conducted when the government changed in 
1982. Certain people were removed, as you recall, from the 
housing corporation. And I remember distinctly the members 
opposite arguing how we took these non-political people, who 
were there to serve seniors, away from government. You recall, 
they objected to Mr. Van Mulligen running into some problems 
because he was one of these non-political civil servants. As you 
recall, now he has suddenly become a candidate for the NDP 
party. So clearly the members opposite were not really telling 
the whole facts to the public in Saskatchewan in regards to the 
housing corporation. 
 
But as you recall, there was a reorganization in 1982 and 1983. 
In relation to seniors, it was deemed important by the 
government, by us, to find out what seniors wanted and what 
they felt, rather than bureaucrats under the NDP who sat in the 
back rooms and simply designed programs which were 
vote-getters and which attempted to figure out what seniors 
really needed. 
 
Well the government, the Progressive Conservative 
government, took the view that, since we serve seniors, we 
should ask seniors how they feel and what they require, because 
seniors represent a growing population in Saskatchewan, as 
they do across Canada. 
 
So a seniors’ task force was implemented, visited roughly 10 
communities. And on that task force were people, not only in 
government, but people from the private sector who were 
seniors themselves. They travelled, listening to seniors 
delegations across Saskatchewan. And there were many, many 
important factors that were brought to the attention of the task 
force which were reduced to a task force report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was proud to see that the vast majority of the 
submissions that were made to government through the task 
force have now been implemented, and the others are being 
worked on. I’ll give you some examples. 
 
The home repair program is a great success in Saskatchewan 
because the senior citizens said to the task force, listen to what 
we need. We are the seniors who are living in older homes, 
perhaps. We’re able to live there, and we want to live there 
longer. However, we need some help in fixing the roof. We 
need some help in fixing the windows. We need some general 
assistance to allow us to remain in our homes. 
 
And the seniors also said that because of their concern for the 
taxpayers — their daughters, their sons, their grandchildren — 
they believe that it would save the government money, and the 
people of Saskatchewan money, if they were able to stay longer 
in their homes.  

And we agreed, Mr. Speaker, because that makes common 
sense. And we find that seniors who built Saskatchewan have 
common sense. 
 
So the seniors’ home repair program was changed. The old 
program under the NDP, which wasn’t really smart and not very 
creative, had a limit of $650 to it. And unfortunately the seniors 
were compelled to make the changes or renovations to their 
homes during the winter. Well that didn’t make much sense, 
Mr. Speaker. We don’t believe in compelling seniors to doing 
their repairs during the winter because it would somehow 
discourage them from doing repairs, because it wouldn’t be 
very pleasant to change your windows in winter. We changed 
that rule. 
 
So what we did, what we did, Mr. Speaker — and I can hear the 
NDP screaming from their seats, as usual — but what we did, 
we brought in a better program, designed by seniors. And this 
program was for a maximum of $1,000, which better identified 
the amount which would be required to make some of the 
necessary changes. Plus we cut away 90 per cent of the red tape, 
made it very simple to apply for, and also we didn’t obligate 
seniors to do the repair work during the winter time, which was 
welcomes by the seniors; and in fact I have some of the figures 
to indicate how successful that program was. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What can you do with $1,000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Now one of the members opposites 
says, what can you do for $1,000? Well, here’s the numbers 
indicating to you that many people did a lot for $1,000. The 
home repair program was so successful that repairs were done 
to 21,912 households for a total of $20 million, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s because people thought they could do a lot for $1,000. 
 
The previous five-year program under the NDP for $650 went 
to 13,565 seniors for a total of only half of the new program. 
That indicates, Mr. Speaker, that the program under the former 
government was not effective because they didn’t listen to the 
seniors. You can’t have people in the back rooms of 
government designing programs without talking to the real 
people. That’s why the present system works. 
 
Well what else happened, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the task 
force? Well the enriched housing program came into force. And 
the enriched housing program wasn’t in existence under the 
former administration. The reason was because when you have 
a moratorium on nursing home beds, it’s a little difficult to go 
and face the seniors in all the communities and ask them what 
they would need. So you can see why the task force didn’t take 
place under the NDP government. Again they were too busy 
nationalizing uranium mines and potash mines and everything 
that they could get their hands on. 
 
However, the enriched housing complex, the design, the system 
itself was based on the ideas from seniors. The task force . . . 
wherever we travelled around the province seniors told us that 
they had an idea, an idea to provide something that wasn’t quite 
a nursing home but yet provided some of the basic services for 
seniors. 
 
Recently I was at the official opening of one in one of my 
  



 
May 13, 1986 

 

1271 
 

 neighbouring constituencies, the Shellbrook constituency, 
where the enriched unit was officially opened, and I visited 
some of the seniors in the complex. And, Mr. Speaker, there 
wasn’t one complaint because the facility was designed with 
seniors in mind after seniors had input. Before the building was 
announced, a visitation from the housing corporation staff took 
place at Shellbrook to listen to the requirements of the local 
seniors. 
 
So what has happened now, Mr. Speaker, we have developed a 
very important program leading to the construction of enriched 
housing units that previously weren’t constructed. As you 
recall, the only buildings that were constructed previously were 
semi-detached units under the former administration which 
worked in some communities. However, we thought that the 
seniors had a better idea, and the seniors were, in fact, telling us 
they had better ideas in terms of accommodation for seniors, so 
that’s why we went to the new program. As a result, Mr. 
Speaker, more nursing home suites and more enriched housing 
units are being constructed in this four-year term than any 
four-year term under any former government in the history of 
Saskatchewan. And again, if this is not accepted by any 
member in this legislature, I challenge them to produce the facts 
to prove otherwise. 
 
What this means, Mr. Speaker, is that we’ve built a basis. The 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation has been involved in a new 
task in the last four-year period. Not the task of protecting the 
members opposite; not the task of greasing political supporters; 
not the task of providing ribbon-cutting ceremonies for projects 
that really didn’t exist. What the housing corporation has been 
involved in is building a basis for seniors for the future, and 
they’ve made phenomenal progress. 
 
I have to commend the minister of housing, who is the member 
from Regina Rosemont, in his intense regard for the wishes and 
aspirations of seniors in this province, who, I submit, before 
1982 were often forgotten. Someone indicated to me the other 
day . . . This individual was a senior and came to me and said, 
you know I really have to commend you people for the job 
you’re doing on nursing home construction and your enriched 
housing units. And the lady indicated that she had visited the 
new enriched housing unit, and she said it was about time that 
facilities for seniors were built that at least remotely resembled 
some of the lavish construction the members opposite 
undertook for the bureaucracy and, in fact, for jails in 
Saskatchewan. There was a standard under the former 
administration that somehow inmates in correctional institutes 
deserved better accommodation than seniors. Now we’ve 
changed that, and the housing corporation is primarily 
responsible for changing that rule, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1515) 
 
So for the future, the member from Saskatoon Centre reminds 
us that the seniors’ population is growing constantly. I believe 
it’s over 2 per cent per year, the rate of growth. And what that 
means is by the year 2000 over 20 per cent of the people in this 
province will be seniors. Many of us will be seniors by that 
time. It’s important that we use innovation, Mr. Speaker, and 
creativity in  

designing some of these programs to allow seniors to remain in 
their homes; those that can’t, to allow them to move into much 
needed facilities which they now are able to move into. Mr. 
Speaker, this trend must continue. 
 
The members opposite are now in the midst of a heated 
campaign asking the people to allow the province to go back 
into the ’60s when the Leader of the Opposition was in his 
prime. However, the seniors of this province know that the plan 
for the future, to plan for the future of their children and 
grandchildren, we can’t go back to the ’60s, Mr. Speaker. And 
in fact, if the Leader of the Opposition thinks about it, he too 
will be a senior very shortly and will want to make sure that 
there is a good deal of creativity that goes on in the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. 
 
And again I want to commend this staff and the Minister of the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation for what we’ve seen in the 
past few years and the progress that we’ve seen for the pioneers 
of Saskatchewan. Therefore, I’ll be glad to support the motion 
before us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a few 
comments on this resolution and then move an amendment. I 
listened to what the member from Prince Albert had to say, and 
I feel so moved that I think I need to respond to some of his 
comments, because in the usual tradition of the member from 
Prince Albert-Duck Lake, he spent most of his time in the 
debate on this resolution talking about the past. 
 
It is becoming quite evident that this government has become so 
mired in its ineptitude and its mismanagement of the economy 
that it has no more forward-looking ability whatsoever, and if 
anything else, Mr. Speaker, that is what Saskatchewan people 
are concerned about — that among many other things. 
 
What the people of this province desire to see more than 
anything else is a government that anticipates, a government 
that looks ahead, identifies some of the problems that people 
face, and then gets out and tries to provide some solutions in 
consultation with them . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the 
member from Rosemont yells from his sheets . . . seat, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m sure that he does from his sheets too, because he 
obviously shouts all the time. But the member from Rosemont 
has very little to say in the House, Mr. Speaker, except when 
he’s in his seat and somebody else is trying to say something. 
It’s very highly unbecoming of any member of this House. Now 
as soon as the members have settled down, Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
continue. 
 
The point I think they make, by their carrying on, when we talk 
about their inability to look ahead and to plan for the future, is 
that they feel guilty about it. Any member of a government who 
would feel good about what they have done, and good about 
what they are about to do, wouldn’t have to over-react when a 
member of an opposition stands up and makes some comment 
about the fact. But obviously, Mr. Speaker, there is a sense of 
unease among those members as the member of Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake has just demonstrated, and therefore their 
reactions, I think, are predictable. 
 
The member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake talked about  
  



 
May 13, 1986 

 

1272 
 

going back to the ’60s. Well, Mr. Speaker, nobody wants to go 
back to the ’60s except to recognize the good things that came 
out of that time. And medicare was one of the things that came 
out of that time, and I’m going to mention medicare because the 
member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake does . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well the other member from Saskatoon now 
yells from her seat as well. She may choose to do that, and as 
long as she continues to do that, I will wait. I think she’s 
finished now. I can continue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The problem with the Conservatives who talk about going back 
to the ’60s, Mr. Speaker, is that they have demonstrated 
unequivocally how they are prepared to go back to the 1930s. 
The whole style of this government, Mr. Speaker, the whole 
style of the leadership of this government, is in the style that 
was moulded in the late 1920s, and the people of Saskatchewan 
decided in the 1930s they weren’t going to have any more of it, 
and then we didn’t see that style again for another 50 years. 
 
Well I think it’s quite clear by the way that this government has 
managed this session, or mismanaged this session, because they 
do a better job at mismanagement than management, that once 
again we’re going to see . . . And every day I go out to visit my 
constituents in their homes people are saying, this is the end for 
this government. They cannot feel comfortable with a 
government that has no vision for the future. It talks about a 
vision; even the Premier has now produced a pamphlet in which 
he talks about a vision. Well, Mr. Speaker, isn’t it regrettable 
that for four years this government felt not the need to have any 
vision or any plan. They stumbled along, very easily handing 
out patronage and not providing information that was asked in 
the House. We had it happen again. But as far as thinking about 
the future well-being of Saskatchewan people, that was one 
thing that the government has failed to be able to handle 
adequately. 
 
The member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake talked about the 
CCF and I’m glad he did. I’m proud that I come from the roots 
of the CCF, that the New Democratic Party comes from the 
roots of the CCF. It was that party that introduced into this 
province, and as a result into all of Canada, hospitalization and 
medicare. And when the program was introduced, Mr. Speaker, 
who do you think led the fight against it? The most prominent 
people leading the fight in the KOD, Keep Our Doctor 
committees, and those who were trying to put down medicare, 
were Conservatives, Mr. Speaker. All across this province the 
people who fought medicare . . . 
 
Well the member for Qu’Appelle — it’s nice to see him back in 
the House — says, oh. He might not realize that because at that 
time he was still a very young guy and probably a Liberal. It is 
only since then that he has decided to be transformed into an 
extreme right-wing Conservative, and I’m sure that maybe in 
recent weeks and months he’s probably had some regrets about 
that as well. 
 
But the point, Mr. Speaker, and I only mention this because the 
member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake did, is that when the 
medicare programs were being introduced in Saskatchewan, the 
people leading the fight  

against it was the Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. And I’m 
not going to mention names, but there was some very, very 
prominent people involved in that. Some of them have even 
achieved this great lofty position of being the senator. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, now the member from Prince Albert-Duck 
Lake tries to cloak himself in the shroud of being a great 
supporter of these great programs that were introduced over the 
protestations of the Progressive Conservative Party back in the 
’60s. What new has this party done in this area, Mr. Speaker? 
The Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living was introduced 
by the New Democratic Party government prior to ’82, 
providing prosthetic devices and other kinds of similar devices 
for people who need them. You know what’s happened since 
1982, Mr. Speaker? That program has been reduced and cut 
back. People who need artificial legs are waiting nine months 
because of the cut-back. Nine months, Mr. Minister of Health, 
and I have examples of . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I think the member realizes that 
he’s straying a long ways from the topic when he starts talking 
about artificial legs and things, and I would ask him to come 
back to Sask Housing. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t question your 
ruling. I simply am responding to the comments of the member 
from Prince Albert-Duck Lake who raised the question of 
medicare, and I’m sure you will agree that he did. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’ve given the member quite a bit of liberty, 
and now I’d ask you to get on with the debate. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I shall proceed with the debate, Mr. 
Speaker. I will not choose to argue with your ruling. Simply 
suffice to say that since the member from Duck Lake indicated 
that he had some comments about the whole question of 
medicare and the CCF, I thought it was only appropriate to 
respond. And I have done that, and I shall move on. 
 
One of the things that I think seniors are concerns about, Mr. 
Speaker, is exactly those kinds of comments — comments by 
the member that have no bearing to what the reality is and what 
the truth is. But that’s fine. I think the judgement day will come 
whenever there is an election, and people who know the 
practices and the attitudes of this government will have an 
opportunity to make a decision. 
 
Now the member who spoke is a former minister of the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. So I think, Mr. Speaker, 
there is a point that I would like to make about that because he 
talked about the housing corporation which does indeed have a 
mandate to provide many kinds of housing for many kinds of 
people, including senior citizens. 
 
Now one of the things that the member forgot to mention, 
which I am finding a lot of people throughout Saskatchewan 
concerned about, is the lack of emphasis that this government is 
putting on the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation as it used to 
be. 
  



 
May 13, 1986 

 

1273 
 

Well the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake laughs. Well 
maybe he should talk to the new minister in charge of the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, who is his seat-mate, and 
ask him about the empire building that’s taking place in the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation these days. Yes, ask him 
about the centralization that is being proposed of the running of 
local housing authorities throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the way many senior citizens’ units in 
many communities of Saskatchewan are run is that local 
housing authorities are appointed. They’re local people. There’s 
a committee that consists of three people that appoints these 
local people. There’s somebody from the federal government, 
somebody from the provincial government, somebody from the 
municipal government. And then they provide 
recommendations, to the minister in charge, of people who 
should sit on the local housing authorities and therefore look 
after the units in their community. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What about seniors? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well seniors’ housing is part of the local 
housing authority in these communities. You have been the . . . 
I’m surprised, after all the years you were minister of housing, 
you didn’t learn that, Mr. Member from Prince Albert-Duck 
Lake. 
 
Well what’s happening, Mr. Speaker — and seniors are 
concerned about this — is that there is a process in place in the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation to take away the 
decision-making authority of these local housing authorities. 
And senior citizens who live in many of these units are 
becoming very concerned about that, and so they should be. 
 
In fact, the concern is so great that when the new Minster of 
Social Services spoke to a meeting of people who are on these 
local housing authorities, he was not welcomed with open arms. 
And he laughs nervously, because he knows that the result of 
his presentation to the meeting was a chorus of boos around the 
room, because of the great concern that people have about this 
power grab by the government, taking away the 
decision-making rights of local housing authorities and 
centralizing it — for what reason I don’t know. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the policies of this government are not working, 
with regard to senior citizens’ housing or any other kind of 
housing, as well as they ought to. And I’ll give you one other 
example. 
 
In the cities we have communities like there are communities in 
rural Saskatchewan. Well I’ll give you an example of a 
community in the constituency of Regina North East. It’s called 
Eastview. It’s kind of next . . . backed up against the Ross 
Industrial Park area. Most of the people who live there have 
lived there for quite a number of years. In a sense it is a 
community unto itself in the context of a bigger Regina 
community. 
 
In the community of Eastview there is no reason in the world 
why provisions couldn’t be made for some senior citizens’ 
units. But under the policies of this government, that’s not 
happening. I have had a number of people  

make this presentation to me, including people involved with 
the parish there, saying that this would be a good idea, but the 
policies of the government under this government don’t allow 
that to happen. 
 
And I just want to say and put on the record, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — sorry, I didn’t realize you were in the seat 
— I just want to put on the record that I think the policy of the 
housing corporation should change. It should not be so 
restrictive to prevent a community like that, if they have the 
initiative to get something started, from being able to have for 
people who live in that community in the larger Regina or any 
other city community, to provide themselves with senior 
citizens’ housing so that people, when they want to and when 
they choose to move out of their home, should be able to still 
stay within the vicinity of their community. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I may continue. One of the comments 
that was made in the House was dealing with the desire for 
most seniors to stay independent, and I agree with that 
comment. The member from Saskatoon said that. He said a 
number of things which I could agree with. It’s unfortunate the 
member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake just tended to feel that his 
only role in the House is to be negative, but that’s his decision. 
 
(1530) 
 
But the member from Saskatoon Centre talked about the desire 
of senior citizens to be independent. And I know that that is 
their desire. Both of my parents live in the city of Saskatoon. 
They live in their own home, and, as long as they can, that’ 
what they want to do. And they’re not unique. They are like 
almost every other senior citizen. They want to live in their own 
home. They want to live close to their friends that they have 
grown with and worked with and even, if it’s possible, close to 
their relatives. 
 
So every effort that is made by governments to make it possible 
for these people to live independent for as long as they can, I 
think, is a well-meaning effort. And any amount of money that 
we can spend in making that possible, I think society, Mr. 
Chairman, should be prepared to spend. 
 
But what has this government done? They have held back on 
home care to such an extent that the home care boards have 
seen the number of people who need assistance grow. But the 
home care boards are afraid to advertise their services because 
they know that with the restriction of funding under the last four 
years, they will not be able to handle the demand. I really think, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s unfair. 
 
When you say to people who, under severe hardship, built this 
province, made it the great place which it is, made it possible 
for every one of us who’s in this House and the people we 
represent to be able to reap the benefits of a province that is 
truly, truly great and wonderful, when we have the people who 
made that possible for us say: we want to be independent, home 
care is a good way to assist us to do that; and then they have a 
government that doesn’t provide adequate funding to make that 
possible to the extent and the level it  
  



 
May 13, 1986 

 

1274 
 

should be possible, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we are being 
unjust as a society. And I think this government needs to be 
condemned for that lack of initiative in this field. 
 
No one deserves more the expenditure of taxpayers’ money 
than our senior citizens — your parents, my parents and 
grandparents, and people who are of that generation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about senior citizens’ home 
repair program. Well I was pleased to see one of the members 
opposite say such great things about the senior citizens’ home 
repair program. Why, you may ask, am I pleased? I am pleased 
because the program was introduced by the former NDP 
government, and the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake 
knows it. Well I’m pleased that at least there’s one program 
which this government did not cut and destroy, because it is 
indeed a good program. 
 
The problem with the program as it is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
that this government is reducing its priority for that program. 
And just let me give you the facts. The commitment to keep 
seniors in their own homes under this government has been 
declining, and I regret that. 
 
And I submit to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that under a New 
Democratic government, that would change. There would be a 
very high priority to keep senior citizens in their own homes or 
help them to stay in their own homes if they so choose. 
 
But here are the facts. Do you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
in 1984, this government spent $10.9 million for the senior 
citizens’ home repair program, and in 1985 they spent only $7.9 
million in the senior citizens’ home repair program, and then in 
1986 that’s cut in half from 1984 to $5.3 million? And I get this 
out of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation building plan. 
Both of those gentleman should know about it. 
 
Now if there is not an example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of a 
reduction in priority dealing with senior citizens’ home repair, 
then I don’t know what is. Clearly, clearly that is what’s 
happening here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now I want to turn to another subject briefly. That’s the 
question of the special care home units constructed. We here 
see the same kind of reduced priority. In 1984 there were 325 
home units constructed. And notice, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m 
not going way back into the past; I’m talking about relevant, 
more or less up-to-date years. I’m even talking about only the 
Conservative years. But in 1984, 325 nursing home and special 
care beds were built. In 1985 there was a little bubble. There 
was talk of an election that year, as you will recall. Everybody 
believed, including the Premier and his cabinet, that they were 
going to call an election in 1985. And so guess what? They 
announced 565 special care home units. But do you know what 
the proposal for 1986 is, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It’s 300 to 350 
according to the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation plan. 
 
What happened to this priority? Somehow, this priority has 
disappeared. But not only have the numbers been  

reduced, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but the new funding arrangement 
is such that it makes it more difficult for local communities to 
be able to finance these units because the formula has been 
jigged so that local communities have to raise a great deal more 
money than they used to. 
 
So what the government has done in their public relations 
efforts is announces a number, announces a figure in the 
budget, and then unknown to anybody but several weeks later 
tells the local communities, although you knew you only had to 
raise — what was it? — 5 per cent cost locally, we didn’t tell 
you this earlier, but now we want you to know that you have to 
raise more. What’s the new figure they have to raise? It’s about 
15 per cent. So all their planning has been done. Then the 
government turns around and changes the rules. And that’s one 
way they can get away with putting in a number and then after 
putting the number in . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It is 15 per 
cent. I thought it was 15 per cent. They put a number in and 
then they surprise the people out there who are planning these 
units, change the formula, and they have to start all over again. 
 
Now that’s the kind of cruel politics, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
no one — I don’t care if it’s Conservatives or Liberals or New 
Democrats — that’s the kind of cruel politics that no political 
party should play with senior citizens. But that’s the kind of 
cruel politics that these gentlemen opposite have been playing 
with our senior citizens. 
 
Now they talk about a moratorium. And I’ll just, for this one 
moment, I’ll go back in history a little bit. But the members talk 
about a moratorium. The thing that they never mention, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and I want to put that for the record once and 
for all, is that in none of those years that they refer to was there 
ever a year in which nursing homes weren’t built. They’ve dug 
out some bureaucratic memorandum on a moratorium and they 
claim that there was a moratorium, but they can’t substantiate it 
because in every year there were nursing homes built. 
 
The members opposite are sceptical about that. Well we asked 
the Minister of Health in his estimates to show us the years in 
which no nursing homes were built. He has yet to provide that 
information. And I ask: why does he procrastinate? What is the 
problem that he is not able to tell us the years in which there 
were no nursing homes built? Simply because they probably 
were built, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I submit in my comments to this resolution, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that it is really quite regrettable that the Devine 
government has allowed, as well as senior citizens’ housing, 
new housing starts in general to fall to the lowest level in years. 
The total level of new housing starts in Saskatchewan in both 
1984 and 1985 were at record lows. 
 
Now that surely cannot be called a commitment to housing. The 
housing industry is, I submit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, an excellent 
way not only to provide housing, adequate housing for all kinds 
of people including senior citizens, but it’s an excellent way in 
which to help get Saskatchewan people working again. If you 
build homes, you have a lot of — you have literally thousands 
of people  
  



 
May 13, 1986 

 

1275 
 

working on those homes. Jobs for Saskatchewan workers are 
made available. Contracts for Saskatchewan small businesses 
are made available in communities all across Saskatchewan. 
And that’s what we should be doing. 
 
That’s why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the New Democratic Party 
has a proposal. It’s a proposal not only that will provide 
adequate housing, but it also will provide jobs because the two 
can go together. And that’s what I mean when I talk about 
looking to the future and having a plan about what you’re going 
to do as a government, which this government has not had — 
having some idea about what you want to accomplish. 
 
The problem with the last four years is that our government has 
looked through tunnel vision at issues. Oh, the member makes a 
good tunnel across the way, the member from Moosomin. But 
that’s been the problem. Maybe that’s why he’s not running 
again; he’s recognized the problem. 
 
You see, they identify a crisis and then they rush over and try to 
solve it instead of having some scheme by which they can 
prevent the crisis from happening and accomplish other things 
as well. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the central issues facing 
Saskatchewan today is yes, housing; and yes, housing for 
seniors citizens. But it also is the issue of getting Saskatchewan 
people working again. And who best can get Saskatchewan 
working again is also an issue. Is it that government which has 
had four years of opportunity to do that, or will it be a New 
Democratic government which will be given an opportunity to 
do it after the next election? And I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that more and more people are recognizing it will probably be a 
New Democratic government because we have a program and a 
policy that will do that. And my colleague, the member from 
Regina Centre, and others, have outlined it very adequately. 
 
We will provide, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a $7,000 grant for people 
who want to build a new home. That will give them the ability 
to make a down payment, and we will provide them with a 7 
per cent mortgage so that they can afford to make the payments 
and still have some money to buy the furniture and the 
appliances which they can put in their home and live 
comfortably. And people who already have a mortgage will also 
be able to benefit because they will be able to write down . . . 
I’m getting to the seniors, because it’s part of this package. 
They will be able to write down their mortgage to 7 per cent. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that will create 18,000 new direct 
jobs and generate more than $1.3 billion in new economic 
activity over the next five years by setting a minimum target of 
8,000 housing starts for Saskatchewan for each of the next five 
years — not the 4,500 and the 5,000 under the former 
government, but 8,000, where in a province like ours it ought to 
be . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member from Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake laughs a lot today. He only has to look back 
prior to 1982, and he will find that in those years that’s what the 
housing start levels were. They were 8,000 to 10,000 to 12,000 
housing starts a year; only in ’84 and 1985 did we drop to 
record lows. 
 

So you see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the point I’ve been trying to 
make here is you don’t simply talk about houses; you talk about 
other needs. You talk about jobs. And you put together a 
package that not only creates affordable homes, but it also 
provides for work for people who want to work. And believe 
me, there are thousands out there who want to work. When you 
have the kind of unemployment levels we have, when you have 
the kind of numbers of people who are on the welfare roles, not 
by their choosing, then there are an awful lot of people who 
want to work. 
 
The program of this New Democratic Party will provide work 
for those people, and the spin-offs from this, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, are just something amazing. The spin-offs in the 
purchases of appliances and the purchases of furniture . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I think the member is 
straying from the motion. It has nothing to do with 
employment, and I would ask him to get back on to the motion. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — If the Deputy Speaker would look at the 
amendment that my colleague has mentioned that he will be 
moving, he has indicated that he intended to move the 
amendment, and the amendment follows these lines. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I have not got the 
privilege of seeing the amendment. So let us now get back to 
the . . . If the members wants to move the amendment . . . 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t question 
your ruling. I just simply want to make this point. I agree with 
the member from Shaunavon; I think his point is well made. 
And I will be referred to my amendment very shortly. But I 
really find it difficult to understand how housing, whether it’s 
for senior citizens or anyone else, does not create employment. 
I really think it does. And that’s the point I’m . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — You are questioning my ruling when 
you insist on your own line of debate, and I would ask you 
again to follow the rules. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I will be, Mr. . . . I just want to, I guess, 
serve notice that I will be moving an amendment at the 
conclusion of my remarks along the following lines. I will be 
saying when I move the amendment that the Assembly regrets 
that the provincial government has failed to implement a 
comprehensive and vigorous housing policy which would 
provide jobs for Saskatchewan workers, contracts for 
Saskatchewan small business, and decent, affordable housing 
for Saskatchewan seniors and families. 
 
Now the point I was coming to before you called me to order, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, was this: that in the housing program of 
the New Democratic Party, senior citizens are included. Seniors 
citizens’ housing is included. There is a part of the component 
of this program, a home rehabilitation assistance plan, which 
will provide up to  
  



 
May 13, 1986 

 

1276 
 

$7,000 in assistance for those making major renovations or 
repairs to older homes. 
 
Now I submit to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that senior citizens 
generally, not always, live in older homes. They will as much, 
and maybe more than most other people, benefit from this very 
significant program. They will be able to improve their homes. 
And with $7,000, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you can do things like 
the rewiring of your home — the essentials that have to be 
done. You can do things like put in all of the windows that you 
need, instead of one or two which is possible under the present 
program of the present government. 
 
So that part of the package, that’s what I talk about — a 
comprehensive package rather than a crisis mentality approach 
which has been taking place from the members opposite. This 
rehabilitation program will indeed be a very significant help to 
senior citizens in being able to provide adequate 
accommodation. 
 
And, of course, the final component of the program is a firm 
commitment by the New Democratic Party to increase 
construction of social housing for low-income families and 
senior citizens. A total package. 
 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this program has met with 
widespread approval by the Saskatchewan public. And that’s 
one of the reasons . . . And I had a meeting with a number of 
people over the last several days in my constituency, some of 
them in the real estate business. And those people are saying 
people want to know when there is an election so that they can 
make some decisions about when they’re going to build or 
repair their home. And one of the injustices of the Premier not 
calling an election is that there is this uncertainty, uncertainty 
by people about the decisions that they want to make, but they 
really are uneasy about making them because they don’t know 
any more when this election is going to be called. 
 
And so if this government can do anything in the near future 
that would be of the greatest benefit, I submit that calling an 
election would most likely be it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, having made my comments, I want to now 
move my amendment, and it’s seconded by the member from 
Athabasca. And here is my amendment: 
 
That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted and the 
following be submitted therefor: 
 

regrets that the provincial government has failed to 
implement a comprehensive and vigorous housing policy 
which would provide jobs for Saskatchewan workers, 
contracts for Saskatchewan small business, and decent, 
affordable housing for Saskatchewan seniors and families. 

 
I so move. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It’s indeed a great pleasure for me to be able to speak 
on the amendment that has been offered today by  

my colleague from Regina North East, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
The words that he has spoken in here today and explained the 
reason for this type of amendment, I want to add to that. 
 
I listened with great interest to the member from Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake when he was speaking, and how he was 
referring to the past and about the housing programs under the 
New Democratic Party that were not well received and did not 
have a good reception. 
 
I want to say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that is just not 
so. Figures will bear that out, and I will try to bring out some of 
them figures today, and hopefully to the citizens of 
Saskatchewan out there who will be making a decision, I hope, 
on the housing programs that have been put forward by your 
government, sir, and also by the housing program that we have 
put forward. And I think that when they make that decision you 
will see that we will be sitting on the other side of the House, 
and they will be over here on this side. 
 
Talked about not having a good reputation in housing . . . I 
asked the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake to go up into 
northern Saskatchewan and take a look at the housing program 
that has been implemented under the New Democratic 
government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the program that has 
been implemented under the Conservative government. And let 
me tell you, we have a reputation up there, and it is a good 
reputation. We were building up to 2, 3, and up to 500 homes a 
year in northern Saskatchewan. And since the Conservative 
government got in, they have just shut that down. In the largest 
town that I have in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, the town of 
La Loche, they haven’t started one house. 
 
And prior to 1982 we built senior citizens’ homes in many of 
the communities in my constituency. And I can single out 
Green Lake and Beauval and Ile-a-la-Crosse and Buffalo 
Narrows and La Loche. And they were built under the New 
Democratic government. They were senior citizens’ homes. We 
now have . . . And under our program, under the section 40 
housing, we also had senior citizens who qualified and moved 
into section 40 homes and are still living in them and are very 
proud of them. 
 
I want to now turn to the senior citizens home repair program 
that the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake also was 
referring to, and how successful it was. Well I want to say to 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that living in northern Saskatchewan 
and getting a senior citizens’ home repair program is a lot 
different than it is living in Regina or Meadow Lake or any 
southern community. And it just didn’t work out very good. 
 
And the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake, who was the 
minister in charge of that program at that time, and myself, 
exchanged letters and verbal views on this, and we tried to get 
that straightened around. But it took a lot of time. And senior 
citizens up there were confused. And there are still many senior 
citizens in northern Saskatchewan who have a hard time 
applying for and receiving the type of grants, the housing and 
the home repair grants. 
  



 
May 13, 1986 

 

1277 
 

It’s one thing to live in Meadow Lake and be a senior citizen 
and get a $1,000 home repair grant, and to a senior citizen who 
is living in St. George’s Hill. Many of the senior citizens could 
not take advantage of these programs because, number one, 
they didn’t understand the applications that were put forward; 
and number two, they didn’t have anyone to do the work 
because there’s no tradespeople up in that area in many of the 
communities, and number three, they had no transportation. 
Some of them had to drive over 200 miles in order to purchase a 
window or material to repair their home. 
 
When you want to compare our program and the program under 
the Conservative government, well it’s just not comparable 
because we had department inspectors who went into the senior 
citizens’ homes. Many of the inspectors were local people who 
spoke the language, went in and filled out the forms for them, 
inspected the houses to see what they needed, and then there 
was a delivery system. Because many of the senior citizens, that 
grant, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was eaten up just with the 
transportation of the material from the closest lumber yards at 
that time was Meadow Lake. 
 
So it was tough on senior citizens up there. And it’s still like 
that because we still have a large gap up there with not enough 
tradespeople to go around. 
 
Another part of the application stated — and we finally got 
around that, but with a lot of confusion — was that there had to 
be two applications . . . two bids put in by contractors. And that 
just didn’t work out. 
 
But the member also wanted to dwell on the past. And he said 
that the New Democratic Party was more interested in 
nationalizing potash mines and “anything else” was his words 
that we could nationalize — everything that we could. That was 
his words, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So let me tell you, and I want to say this to the member from 
Prince Albert-Duck Lake: yes, yes, we did nationalize the 
potash mines. And I tell you, that gave security. And we’re 
talking about the amendment here, and providing jobs and 
security, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And let me tell you, that did 
provide jobs, and it provided security, and it provided revenue 
to this province so that we could go out and carry out the 
housing programs that we did carry out. We carried out them 
programs because we had money to operate with. When we left 
government in 1982, we had a massive housing program. We 
had $140 million in the bank. And that was because of our 
policies. 
 
But the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake, he suggests 
that we want to live in the past. And I want to say that that is 
right: that we would like to go to the past right now, and the 
citizens of Saskatchewan would like to go back to the past, 
when the New Democratic Party was the government of this 
province. They have had four years now; they’re into the fifth 
year. 
 
And let me tell you, the senior citizens, the folks out there who 
are unemployed, would dearly love to go back to the years of 
the New Democratic Party when we had an active housing 
program, not only for senior citizens but  

for the families in this province, and everybody was working. 
And that’s right; that’s right, everybody was working. We had 
an unemployment rate of 4 per cent, and we could live with 
that, and they were happy. 
 
But I want to say that when you talk about living in the past and 
going back in history, I’m not too sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if 
the Conservative members really want to go back to the past 
and go back to 1929 to ’34, the last time they were in 
government. and we know what happened then. They went to 
the polls and they never got any seats. And I would suggest, 
with the housing program that they have implemented under 
this regime, this could repeat itself. 
 
Under our program . . . And I will touch on that, but I just want 
to touch on some of the disruption that has taken place under 
the senior citizens’ program. And many senior citizens, when in 
1982 the Conservative government came to power, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they were promised new senior citizens’ homes and 
the like, and they were also promised that they would have a 5 
per cent sales tax taken off. And that wasn’t done, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and that caused confusion. 
 
The property improvement grant was another thing that they 
took off. And then they had to reinstate it, and senior citizens 
were confused. And right now we have senior citizens confused 
again. They talk about a moratorium on nursing homes. And I 
just want to repeat what my colleague, the member from Regina 
North East, has indicated. There was never, ever a moratorium, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and you know that. There isn’t one year 
that we were in government when there wasn’t senior citizens’ 
homes opened up in this province. 
 
But you can go into northern Saskatchewan — and I’ll tell you, 
you get north of Meadow Lake, and there isn’t one. There isn’t 
one opening that has taken place since they got in except for 
starts that were started under the New Democratic government. 
 
I want to now turn to what it is going to mean to the 
small-business community in this province if the housing policy 
that the New Democratic Party has put forward is implemented. 
And one can just make a comparison. 
 
(1600) 
 
The Conservative members over there said, well, the senior 
citizens’ home repair grant program that we had was only for 
six months . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right. That’s 
what was said. I just want to . . . And Hansard will bear that 
out. I’m not saying that the member from Prince Albert-Duck 
Lake said that, but one of the members said that well, only . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I will let you know tomorrow, if you 
want that answer, when I read Hansard. But I most certainly 
won’t have to because my memory’s not that short. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when they talk about 
our housing program being only a winter works program that 
started in October and ended at the end of April, and you take a 
look at the housing program that we are putting forward which 
gives the first time home owners a $7,000 grant to start off 
with. It gives them a  
  



 
May 13, 1986 

 

1278 
 

mortgage of 7 per cent over seven years on the first $70,000 on 
that mortgage. And their program, Mr. Speaker, runs for one 
year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the housing program that the 
Conservative government has put in their budget. 
 
Well I just want to say that we feel that the citizens of 
Saskatchewan have a right to be able to plan and to not rush 
into this, so we have made our program a three-year program. 
Ours is available for three years. So from the time we get back 
in power, which will be as soon as the next election is over, for 
the next three years there will be an ambitious housing program 
in this province. Now only new housing starts will begin with 
security, because they’ll have three years to take advantage of 
the program, but they’ll also be able to have 7 per cent 
mortgage money on the first $70,000 of that mortgage. 
 
There’ll also be another $7,000 grant available to individuals in 
this province to repair their homes. And just imagine what 
that’s going to mean, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the business 
community in Saskatoon and in your constituency — the 
lumber yards and the hardware stores who are going to provide 
this material. 
 
Just imagine what it’s going to mean to the labour force in this 
province, with the carpenters and the plumbers and the 
electricians who are now going to have a job. And they’re not 
going to have a short-term job. It’s not going to be some of the 
make-work programs that we see under the Conservative 
government that go on for 20 weeks and then they’re laid off so 
they can get UIC. 
 
These housing programs are going to go on, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, for three years to start with. And the workers who are 
working will know that at least they’ve got a job for three years. 
And we will have a bright future, because that is going to get 
the economy working. Once we can get Saskatchewan working, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, then you will see the small business 
community in this province will start to thrive, and that’s what 
we have to have. We have to get the young men and women of 
this province back to work, and we have to give them security. 
And by this type of a housing program we will not only give 
them security for housing and jobs that are affordable, but will 
give some security to this province. And you will see what this 
province will do with our program, compared to the 
Conservative program that they announced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that there are many members in the House 
that want to speak on this important amendment that we have 
put forward, so with that, Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I welcome the opportunity to 
engage in this very important debate, and I do so as the minister 
responsible for seniors in the province of Saskatchewan, and 
also as the minister responsible for Sask Housing Corporation. 
and I do want to, I believe, at the outset of my talk, draw 
attention to some of the things that were mentioned by the 
members opposite which certainly need to be corrected. 

And I do want to speak directly to all of the seniors in the 
province of Saskatchewan who are watching this particular 
telecast today, and let them know that our Progressive 
Conservative government certainly takes very seriously the 
concerns of our seniors’ population here in the province. And I 
think that it’s important for the seniors who are watching today, 
and for all members of the Assembly who are here, to know 
exactly what the record of the former NDP administration was. 
 
We have heard the members opposite today indicate that they 
did not put a moratorium on nursing home construction here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. And that, of course, is something 
that relates directly to the housing needs of seniors And when 
we have seniors in our province today that form such a large 
percentage of the population, surely to put a moratorium on 
nursing home construction clearly indicates that the NDP 
opposition did not understand the needs of seniors, nor did they 
give the needs of seniors priority. Oh, they gave priority to 
potash mines and uranium mines and their family of Crown 
corporations, but I ask you senior citizens, and I ask the 
members of this Assembly: did they give priority to your 
needs? 
 
And here’s the evidence, and I quote from an NDP cabinet 
memo from Walter Smishek, and I’m sure many of the seniors 
watching today will remember that name. He was chairman of 
the NDP treasury board, and he sent this memo to the minister 
of Social Services at that time, Mr. Rolfes, and I’m sure many 
seniors will remember that name as well. And he said that: 
“Treasury Board is seriously concerned about the level of 
construction occurring in the special care home sector.” 
Concerned, in other words, that too much construction was 
taking place on behalf of seniors. “The level of activity 
proposed in (this particular) budgetary request would result in a 
surplus of beds . . .” 
 
Now can you believe that the NDP would ever believe that that 
would actually happen. And so the two NDP cabinet ministers, 
here is what they have said: 
 

Treasury Board deferred a decision on the level of funding 
to be approved for this activity, pending the review of 
more detailed information on all committed projects. Until 
such a time as the need for additional beds can be clearly 
identified and a suitable construction policy defined, a 
moratorium on future commitments should be enforced 
. . . 

 
The senior citizens of this province need to understand very 
clearly that it was an NDP government, under the leadership of 
the present Leader of the Opposition, that put in place a 
moratorium on nursing home construction. And in 1978, two 
years later, a memo was sent to the village of Theodore that was 
very concerned for their seniors that they have some kind of 
additional seniors’ housing, nursing home beds. Here is what 
the NDP government of the day said: 
 

. . . your request and similar requests from other 
communities have been held in abeyance . . . special-care 
beds currently in operation throughout the province have 
prompted  

  



 
May 13, 1986 

 

1279 
 

government to place a moratorium on the development of 
any additional special care beds . . . 

 
That was the priority of the former government when it came to 
meeting the housing needs of the seniors in this province — a 
moratorium. And I want the seniors of this province to know, 
and I want all members of this Assembly and especially the 
members opposite to clearly understand what the priority of the 
Progressive Conservative government today is when it comes to 
meeting the needs of special care home beds for senior citizens 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me read the list, Mr. Speaker, of the kinds of things that we 
are doing to meet the housing needs of seniors in the province 
of Saskatchewan. This was 1984-85, just one year ago: 
Davidson, 10 beds . . . Tell the seniors in Davidson that this 
government is not concerned. They will remember a number of 
years ago that they did not receive special care home beds under 
an NDP administration, but they certainly know today that this 
government is concerned about them. 
 
Indian Head, 15; Kelvington, 10; Kindersley, 80 replacements 
beds; Kinistino, 16 new beds; Lloydminster, 50 replacement 
beds; Outlook, 16 new; Regina, Lutheran, 11; Saskatoon, Circle 
Drive, 50; Stoughton, 6; Wawota, 30. And that was just in 
1984-85. 
 
What about 1985-86, Mr. Speaker? And I’m sure many of the 
seniors who are watching this afternoon, who live in these 
communities that I am going to list for us now, will be very 
happy to know that there is not a moratorium on the 
construction of nursing home beds today. 
 
There may have been, a number of years back, but under the 
leadership of the Premier of this province today: Arborfield, 36 
new beds; Big River, 30 beds; Dalmeny, 9; Duck Lake, 90; 
Foam Lake, 12; and Goodsoil, 12; and Lampman, 19; and 
Lucky Lake, 12; and Melville, 30; and Nokomis, 12; and Rabbit 
Lake, 12; Regina, Salvation Army, 30; Rose Valley, 12; 
Saltcoats, 30. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here we have a solid commitment, a firm 
indication that this government places the housing needs of 
senior citizens right at the top of our priority list. And if every 
anybody doubted whether or not there was any difference 
between the former NDP administration and the Progressive 
Conservative government of today, all you have to do is 
compare the moratorium memo from the NDP to the list of 
special care home beds that this Progressive Conservative 
government is constructing. 
 
And I would remind the members that we have committed 
ourselves to construct 1,500 special care home beds over a 
five-year period of time, because we indeed do care about 
senior citizens — we indeed do care. 
 
Now the members opposite also talked about their vaunted 
seniors’ home repair program which they wanted to talk about 
so highly. I would like to tell the seniors today who are 
watching, and all members of the Assembly, that the senior 
citizens’ home repair program that we have introduced recently 
in the province of  

Saskatchewan provides seniors with a grant of $1,000 to assist 
with needed repairs. They will be interested to know that the 
NDP administration had a grant, but it was only $650. 
 
And in addition, Mr. Speaker, their grant was available only 
during the winter-time. And the grant for the seniors under the 
Progressive Conservative administration is available year-round 
to seniors. 
 
The latest statistics that I have here is that something in the 
order of almost 22,000 seniors’ households have benefited from 
present Progressive Conservative senior citizens’ home repair 
grant program. That is a major commitment, Mr. Speaker — a 
major commitment of funds, a major commitment from our 
heart to that of the seniors, that we care about them; we want to 
see their needs met. And when you compare the magnitude of 
our program to that which was offered under the NDP, 
certainly, certainly, Mr. Speaker, there is no comparison. We 
are providing a senior citizens’ home repair program of great 
substance. 
 
Now the member opposite said that somehow this government 
has not planned for the future. I only need to remind the 
members of what I said just a few moments ago. Putting a 
moratorium on nursing home construction, which the NDP did, 
is just the antithesis of planning for the future. 
 
How can you plan for the future? And I see the member for 
Regina Centre listening to the debate. How can you plan for the 
future, Mr. NDP Member, by putting a moratorium on nursing 
home construction? In fact, that is simply closing your eyes to a 
growing need that seniors had in the province of Saskatchewan 
in the mid and late ’70s. You did not plan for the future. In fact, 
you closed your eyes towards the future. You turned your back 
on the future for senior citizens by putting that moratorium on. 
 
To put in place a five-year program to provide 1,500 new 
nursing home beds is obviously an example, I believe, of 
planning for the future. I’m sure there were some who would 
like to see a few more than 1,500. But certainly that magnitude 
of bed construction stands in stark contrast to a moratorium. It 
stands in stark contrast to a lack of planning for seniors’ 
housing on the part of the NDP administration opposite. 
 
Today, for example, whether it’s turning sod on the Trianon 
high-rise down town in the city of Regina — and we see the 
building being constructed for seniors — whether it’s the 
Lutheran Sunset Home or the Circle Drive home in the city of 
Saskatoon, clearly there is a firm commitment on the part of 
this particular government to meet the housing needs of seniors 
in the province. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to draw attention to the fact that this 
government believes that it is important to be innovative when 
we consider the needs of people in this province for the future. 
Innovation, new ideas, progressive adventures. I believe that is 
what sets this government apart from the former NDP 
administration and from the kinds of things that they are 
offering in their  
  



 
May 13, 1986 

 

1280 
 

policies to the people of this province today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s clear to say that this government is a 
government that believes in building towards the future. To do 
that successfully you need to anticipate, you need to come up 
with new ideas. You can’t simply bank on things that happened 
in the past. You need to project into the future. 
 
And I want to just draw your attention, Mr. Speaker, to one or 
two of the key innovative things that I know seniors are very 
excited about in the province. I know they are projects that our 
government is certainly proud of, and I think the people of 
Saskatchewan are very pleased that they have a government that 
is moving in this direction. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, we are today in the Sask Housing 
Corporation committed to the elder suites pilot project that 
explores an alternate way to house seniors while allowing them 
to remain independent and maintaining the benefits of a close, 
warm, family relationship. Elder suites where elders can live in 
very close proximity, perhaps in the same yard, or nearby their 
particular family members. The cost of those units are 
substantially less than the traditional senior citizens’ apartment 
costs, and I think, given the magnitude of the growing seniors’ 
population in our province, the elder suites pilot project is a 
very keen example of the innovative and forward-looking 
thinking of the Devine government here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As well I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, another example is the 
personal alarm system pilot project for seniors. I know that 
seniors are very concerned about security issues, Mr. Speaker, 
and rightly so. This device, this personal alarm system, this 
device that we are testing, is a wristband which can be worn by 
the user, and when activated it can summon immediate 
assistance through the telephone system. The costs, we expect, 
will decline as economies of scale are introduced in the future, 
and this is a very reasonable way to provide health support and 
security support assistance to the senior citizens of our 
province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we compare things like the elder suite 
and the personal alarm system, and the building of 1,500 new 
nursing home beds, and the home repair program for seniors — 
when we compare that to what we saw under the former NDP 
administration — a moratorium on nursing home construction, 
a senior citizens’ grant that was a little bit more than half of 
what we are providing to seniors — certainly I think today 
seniors know that they have a government that is deeply 
concerned about the seniors’ needs. 
 
Now we also know when it comes to housing needs, we’re not 
simply talking about the large facility, the large high-rise 
apartment or construction of a house itself, but we’re also 
talking about little things that a senior may need to purchase to 
keep themselves in their house — to possibly fix up certain 
aspects of their house, certain small repair items that need to be 
considered by a senior. 
 
How does a senior get the income, Mr. Speaker, if they are on a 
fixed income, a pension income of some kind, or perhaps all 
they have is the old age security or the guaranteed income 
supplement? How do they receive  

additional income to provide for those small but very important 
repair needs for seniors? Well, certainly we have the guaranteed 
income supplement, Mr. Speaker, and we, of course, 
substantially increased that from $25 to $50 a month here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I compare that to the members 
opposite who in fact increased that once in seven years from 
only 20 to $25. That does provide a little bit of additional 
money for seniors to meet some of their housing repair needs. 
 
But I think the most significant thing, Mr. Speaker, that this 
Progressive Conservative government has done has been to 
introduce the senior citizens’ heritage grant program this year, 
for the first time ever in the province of Saskatchewan. This is a 
heritage grant program, Mr. Speaker, which will provide 
literally thousands, indeed tens of thousands, of seniors with 
substantial income for them to use at their discretion. And I’m 
sure that many seniors will be using that income to meet some 
of their small but important housing needs or repair needs this 
year in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I know that many seniors watching have already received 
benefits under this program. There may be some seniors 
watching who, for some reason or another, are still not aware of 
the seniors’ heritage grant program, and I think members 
opposite will certainly benefit from being reminded about this 
particular program and how seniors can access it and put that 
money to use to benefit their housing needs. 
 
And this of course, Mr. Speaker, is as follows, the details of the 
program: any senior who has an income of under 30,000, 
whether they are a couple or whether they are a single senior, 
they can apply. Application forms have been sent out to all 
seniors. If for some reason they have not received one, they can 
certainly contact my office directly here in the Legislative 
Assembly Building and we will send an application form to 
them. 
 
Seniors may be eligible for as much as up to $700, Mr. Speaker, 
for couples, or $500 for a single senior. And that will provide 
them with substantial income to meet some of the needs that 
they have in the province of Saskatchewan today. 
 
And if any member of the Assembly today wondered, Mr. 
Speaker, whether or not the senior’s heritage grant program was 
of benefit, then I think, as members consider this motion before 
us today, they will be interested to hear the words of the 
following letters that I have received from senior citizens here 
in the province in the last few weeks concerning this grant 
program. And I think members here today will be able to 
deduce from the letters that I am reading exactly the potential 
benefit that seniors receive for housing purposes from this 
particular grant program. 
 
Here’s a letter, dated May 1st, that comes from Moose Jaw, 
Saskatchewan. And I know there are many seniors that live in 
Moose Jaw, and certainly some of them will be watching this 
afternoon. 
 

Dear Sir: I just wanted to write you and tell you how much 
I appreciate my pension and what a good and appreciated 
work you are doing for all us seniors. There is no 
government that could do  

  



 
May 13, 1986 

 

1281 
 

more than our present government is doing for everyone, 
especially for seniors. 

 
Now that’s a single senior from Moose Jaw who will have 
benefited with the $500 cheque and will have been able to apply 
that to some housing need in Moose Jaw. 
 
Here’s a letter which was dated April 28th, coming to us from 
rural Saskatchewan, directed to the Premier and to myself: 
 

Please accept my thanks for the $500 cheque. You have no 
idea how this has helped me. You are the only ones that 
ever did anything for me. I will remember you. Thanks 
again. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we can image how that $500 cheque 
benefited that senior. And I don’t think anyone in the province 
of Saskatchewan today would hold it against that senior that 
they received benefit from this government because they did not 
perhaps have sufficient income so that they could live the kind 
of independent quality of life that we would like to see seniors 
living today. 
 
And we know that there are many seniors who, for one reason 
or another, have not had sufficient income to do the kinds of 
little things that they would like to do, particularly as it relates 
to housing. And why should they not be in a position like the 
rest of us, Mr. Speaker, to be able to enjoy the kind of quality 
housing that you enjoy and that I enjoy and that all members in 
the Assembly here today enjoy? Why should seniors not have 
that benefit? 
 
It was for that very reason, Mr. Speaker, that we, as a 
government, decided that the time was ripe to provide seniors 
with the first-ever heritage grant program in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I think this letter which says is so 
succinctly, Mr. Speaker, but so clearly and so from the heart, is 
a prime example of how seniors are benefiting from the heritage 
grant program. 
 

You have no idea how this has helped me. You are the 
only ones that every did anything for me. 

 
Surely, Mr. Speaker, the program speaks for itself. And I think 
the actions of this government, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 
seniors’ housing, speak for themselves. The motion today, Mr. 
Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member opposite 
interjects from his seat and says that the debate in essence 
should come to an end. I think that’s what he’s saying when he 
speaks from his seat. Perhaps his conscience bothers him a little 
bit because he used to be one of the NDP cabinet ministers 
when they had the opportunity to build 1,500 nursing home 
beds for seniors. But instead they put a moratorium on it. I think 
it was the member from Shaunavon who made those remarks. 
 
They had the opportunity to provide seniors with a $1,000 home 
repair program for seniors, but the member opposite, I suspect, 
was more taken up debating take-overs of potash mines or 
take-over of uranium mines or perhaps — I’m sure, Mr. 
Speaker, this was a possibility since he comes from rural 
Saskatchewan — taking money  

from the taxpayer and not giving it to seniors, but buying farm 
land instead. 
 
Well I suspect the housing needs of seniors, the housing needs 
of seniors suffered in the 1970s and early 1980s because money 
that should have gone into housing programs went into a 
socialist land bank scheme — went into a socialist land bank 
scheme. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that housing is a very important priority 
for seniors. So whether it’s the home repair program, whether 
it’s the seniors’ heritage grant program used for housing 
purposes, whether it’s the 1,500 new nursing home beds 
constructed in the province of Saskatchewan, whether it’s the 
elder suite program, or whether it’s the personal alarm program, 
this government is committed to meeting the needs of seniors. 
 
This resolution before us today should be supported by all 
members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I want to enter this debate, 
such as it is. I’ve listened to the members opposite who have a 
great deal to say about the perceived failings of the housing 
policy during the ’70s, and a great deal less to say about the 
obvious failings of the housing policy of this government 
during the ’80s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have repeatedly spoken of 
the freeze on nursing homes. In fact, there was no freeze on 
nursing homes. There’s been nursing homes built in this 
province every year since the province began building them 
decades ago. With the benefit of hindsight, it is possible to 
suggest that we should have built more nursing homes in the 
’70s, Mr. Speaker, but I note that that’s simply with the benefit 
of hindsight. 
 
No one was offering that advice at the time. The member from 
Souris-Cannington did not offer that advice, nor did the 
member from Kindersley offer that advice, nor did the member 
from Rosetown offer that advice, nor did the member from 
Moosomin offer that advice. It is only with the benefit of 
hindsight that the shortage has developed. 
 
At least I may say — and then I’m going to leave this historical 
discourse — at least one might say with respect to the ’70s that 
the problem was not obvious. We now have a problem which 
cries out for attention, which is obvious to all concerned, and a 
government which is still not tackling it in any meaningful way. 
 
The shortage of nursing homes in this province contributes to 
an overall malaise in the hospital system. Indeed, senior 
citizens’ housing is probably the single most important element 
in solving a hospital crisis. While there’s more staff needed in 
the hospitals, there’s also a need to take care of senior citizens 
in a different fashion. Anyone with the slightest acquaintance 
with our hospital system knows, Mr. Speaker, that there are 
people in the hospital system who would be better served in a 
nursing home. There are also, I might say, people who would be 
better served with a more extensive home care system. 
 
(1630) 
  



 
May 13, 1986 

 

1282 
 

This government has done nothing meaningful about either; has 
waited until the problem boiled over and now can’t understand 
why both nurses and doctors are racing each other up the stairs 
of the Legislative Building to plant a picket sign in the skull of 
the Minister of Health. It comes about . . . Well it’s not a new 
situation. It comes about because of the inadequate seniors’ 
housing. 
 
The member from P.A.-Duck Lake is alternatively amused by 
the problem and critical because he thinks I’m off the subject. 
Neither is the case. The single most important contribution we 
could make to solving the crisis in hospitals — that’s not too 
strong a term — is to tackle in a meaningful way the problem of 
senior citizen housing. 
 
At one end of the spectrum, we have an insufficient amount 
being spent on home care. At the other end, we have an 
insufficient amount being spent on nursing homes. The result is 
an enormously expensive problem in the middle, in hospitals. 
The most expensive solution in the world to an inadequate 
number of nursing homes is to leave them all in hospitals. 
Hospital care is vastly more expensive than nursing home care. 
Neither one’s cheap, but it’s a lot cheaper than leaving them in 
hospitals, which is the current solution. 
 
Walk down any hospital in any major city in Saskatchewan, and 
room after room after room has people who patently should be 
in nursing homes. It is the failure of this government to properly 
deal with the problem of nursing homes. It has backed up, and it 
is now backed up all the way through the health care system. 
We thus have, as I say, doctors and nurses arriving virtually 
simultaneously, and unco-ordinated with each other, to criticize 
this government for its leadership in health care. 
 
There are a number of things which can and should be done. 
The most important thing that should be done is to do 
something about senior citizens’ housing. That hasn’t been 
done. There is, I think, while we could use more senior citizens’ 
high-rises — more senior citizens’ multi-residential units, I 
think they’re called — while we could use more of those, there 
isn’t the crisis in that regard that there is with respect to nursing 
homes. 
 
Each year during the 1970s we built about one senior citizens’ 
high-rise a year in my riding, and I can name them all for you, 
if you want them. I don’t suppose that would serve a great deal. 
That came to a halt in ’82 as this government entered into its 
paralysis by analysis phase which lasted for a couple of years. 
We now see the pressure building up to the point where not 
even this government can ignore it, and there is the odd one 
being built here and there. 
 
There is a need for more of those. There’s a lengthy waiting list. 
Senior citizens’ incomes drop . . . peoples incomes drop 
dramatically when they retire. One of the solutions which they 
seek to meet that problem is to find residential accommodation 
which will give them adequate housing at a cost they can 
afford. The solution which many senior citizens choose is 
multi-unit residential units, what we call senior citizens’ 
high-rises, or senior citizens’ apartments. They’re not all 
high-rises. 

I am glad to see . . . If the housing corporation is going to build 
a housing unit which is free of any problems in my riding, I’m 
glad to see this break with precedent, Mr. Speaker, because the 
last one they build was a horror story. It is in part resolved, but 
only in part. It’s Davis Mews. 
 
I was canvassing in Davis Mews during the federal election . . . 
I say this to illustrate the problem. I was canvassing in Davis 
Mews during the federal election, and it was very hot in ’84, 
outside, and I thus didn’t notice the heat inside until I’d been in 
the building for a while, and I realized it was unordinarily hot. I 
went and found the thermometer which I had seen earlier in the 
hall. The temperature in the hallway in the senior citizens’ 
high-rise was 91 degrees Fahrenheit. That situation, I found out 
as I canvassed through the building, had been the subject of 
endless complaints to the minister opposite, the ministers 
opposite, both the member from Saskatoon Sutherland and the 
member from P.A.-Duck Lake. Both had blissfully ignored it. 
 
We then began a campaign to attempt to remedy the problem. 
The problem was that the paralysis by analysis had extended 
further than that. After the election in 1982 they had changed 
the plans on what was supposed to have been air conditioned. 
The air conditioning was cut to save costs. The result was that 
the rooms were left with windows which were virtually 
impossible to open. One little square window that you couldn’t 
scarcely throw a box out, a small box out, was the only 
ventilation in the entire suite. They turned into ovens. 
 
Senior citizens, who I think would be the first to admit, are 
probably less able to cope with extremes in temperature, much 
less so than young people. After a campaign of many months in 
which I wrote letters, senior citizens wrote letters, they finally 
got some air conditioning in the halls. That has helped 
somewhat; it’s not a complete solution. 
 
So if they’re now going to build, as the member from 
P.A.-Duck Lake says, if they’re now going to build an 
apartment block in my riding which is going to be trouble free, 
then . . . Now I see him shaking his head. No I don’t think they 
will. I tend to think this may be the first honest comment the 
member has made in some time. It is certainly going to be a 
break with precedent because the past efforts have been badly 
flawed, badly flawed by people who simply . . . by members 
opposite who simply don’t listen. 
 
I think important to senior citizens, the whole housing market is 
a single market, and of course when you provide houses in the 
market, you provide houses for senior citizens. One of the 
programs which occurred by sheer coincidence was a 
juxtaposition of two programs — one federal, one provincial. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s a good word. I like that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That’s a good word, isn’t it? Yes. The 
member from Redberry likes that contribution to the language. 
 
  



 
May 13, 1986 

 

1283 
 

We had this government introduce a program, a $3,000 program 
which provided a $3,000 grant for new home builders. Almost 
simultaneously the federal government announcement the same 
program. We were able to stack them, and thus during 1983 
there were . . . a $6,000 grant for new home owners. Mr. 
Speaker, I was pleased to see that in a way. In a way the 
program was badly flawed, but in a way I was pleased to see it. 
 
I have, for one, been concerned about the number of new homes 
that we have been building in this province. For many, many 
years we built 8 to 10 to 12,000 new homes a year. Under this 
administration that number has dropped to 4 and 5,000. While 
in this recession — not caused by the Conservative government, 
but contributed to by a failure to take any steps to alleviate the 
problem — while in this current recession the demand may not 
catch up with us; in due course it will. 
 
In due course, no matter how hard it’s raining, the clouds will 
break, the sun will start to shine again, and normal economic 
times will return. It’s part of the cycle of an economy such as 
ours. I see the member from P.A. in the back nodding his head 
vigorously at this recitation of economics. Eventually the clouds 
are going to break; eventually normal times are going to return. 
 
When it does, a home building program of 4 to 5,000 units a 
year is going to haunt us because there’s going to be a pent-up 
demand. That is going to make itself felt in the market, and that 
is going to result in a rapid escalation of housing costs unless 
we deal with the problem. 
 
That occurred before, Mr. Speaker, during the late ’60s and 
early ’70s. We built very few new homes in this province. In 
the first half of the ’70s housing prices doubled and trebled in 
this city because there was a pent-up demand. It is going to 
happen again unless we take some steps to deal with the 
problem. 
 
That is why I say in one sense I was pleased to see some modest 
effort, however modest, on the part of the government opposite 
to induce more homes being built. The problem was that it was 
too short. It created a real bubble in the market. In 1983 the 
number of new houses being built shot up dramatically and the 
cost of construction went up, the land titles system got badly 
plugged, and the usual ills befell us which befell us when you 
inspire too much demand too quickly. 
 
Our program, Mr. Speaker, which I announced on April 3rd, 
and which has been the subject of good deal of favourable 
comments by the public, and a great deal of adverse comment 
by members opposite who wished they had done it themselves 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, the member from P.A. says 
it has not been the subject of adverse comment by members 
opposite. Well I’m pleased to see there are some members 
opposite who are honest — a couple of honest ones. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our program provides for a $7,000 subsidy. In 
constant dollars that’s less than the $6,000 in 1983 — a good 
deal less, actually. That, Mr. Speaker, will I think give us a 
sufficient incentive for people to go out and build houses. That 
in fact, Mr. Speaker, gives you your down payment on a 
modestly priced new house. That,  

Mr. Speaker, enables young people to buy a house. 
 
I have heard members opposite say that nobody should get 
something for nothing; you shouldn’t give them the down 
payment. Give them the down payment and they’ll wreck the 
house. They won’t look after it and they won’t make the 
payments. Nothing could be further from the truth. 
 
In many ways a home and a house is an embodiment of 
ourselves. This is the material extension of ourselves. Few 
things are as important to people as the home they live in. 
While people may be a little rough on the back fence or the 
garbage can, I don’t think they treat their house to quite the 
same fashion. I don’t thin it’s going to matter one whit whether 
they put up a down payment or not. I think they will take what 
time is available to them, what resource is available to them, 
and they’ll look after the house and the homes every bit as well 
as if they put the down payment down. 
 
So I don’t share the criticism of members opposite who say that 
if you give them the down payment you’re going to spoil them 
and they won’t look after it, and they won’t make their 
payments. I think that’s nonsense. We all, except for some very 
rare individuals, have an emotional attachment to the house we 
live in, Mr. Speaker, so I have no hesitation and no apology for 
the $7,000 down payment, for the $7,000 grant to build a new 
house. It provides, Mr. Speaker, an incentive to build new 
houses. It provides young people with a means of getting into a 
new house and it will spur on new houses. 
 
In the long run, history has shown that these things run in 
waves. Housing demands will build up to a breakneck pace 
resulting in a rapid escalation of prices which means that the 
older portion of our population are suddenly enriched because 
their houses become worth a great deal more than what they 
ever anticipated. Young people are impoverished. That is not a 
very healthy way to develop a housing system. 
 
A system which continues to build enough new houses to meet 
the market for everybody is in the best interests to continue with 
the inordinarily low number of new homes being built so that 
eventually the prices of their homes would increase in value 
because of a shortage. I don’t think any of them would argue 
that. Senior citizens, in addition to everything else, in addition 
to a number of other fine qualities, do have a sense of 
responsibility for society in the future that’s sometimes lacking 
in young people in a strange way. 
 
(1645) 
 
So I think the $7,000 will (a) enable young people to buy a 
house. It will spur the building of homes. We need that because 
we’re not building enough houses now. We need it as well 
because we need the jobs. This party is not content to see 
46,000 people unemployed in Saskatchewan. When you think 
about it, that is an  
  



 
May 13, 1986 

 

1284 
 

enormous waste of talent and manpower, and it marks an 
enormous amount of suffering as well. I think all of us have had 
some experience with unemployment. I think we’ve all got to 
know some people who have been unemployed, many of them 
for the first time in their life. And given the likelihood of a Tory 
government ever returning, it’s probably the last time in their 
life that they’ll ever have to put up with this. All of us have got 
to know some of these people. It really has marked an 
inordinate amount of suffering. 
 
So the housing program which we have . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well members opposite, if they haven’t 
experienced unemployment, just call the election and you’ll get 
your chance to share this human experience. Just call the 
election and you’ll have your opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need the jobs; we need the homes. Much of the 
$7,000 is going to return to the government in terms of taxes 
because it circulates throughout the economy. It’s spent over 
and over. If a $7,000 grant results in the construction of a 
$70,000 house, then patently it’s a good investment for the 
government as well, because you’re going to get more than 
$7,000 back in taxes. So I say that the $7,000, even in the 
relatively short run, in the period of two to three years, is not an 
expensive program. 
 
Part of our program as well, Mr. Speaker, provides a $7,000 
grant to assist people in the construction of older homes, assist 
them in renovating older homes — the $7,000 which is 
available. We do that for a variety of reasons, Mr. Speaker. We 
do that because we need to provide older homes with an 
enhancement in terms of their resale value. We need to ensure 
that there’s a ready market for those. 
 
And we need to assist people who live in older homes. I suspect 
that people who live in older homes, while they cut across a 
wide variety of the social spectrum, probably are, on the 
average, lower income than people who live in the newer 
homes. So we need the program so that this assistance goes to 
lower income people. We also need it to make sure that older 
homes are saleable, are looked after. And of course the same 
thing applies, Mr. Speaker. This construction grant provides 
work for tradesmen. It often provides work for tradesmen who 
are not part of any large company, which are self-employed, 
and it will provide work for some people who are having a great 
deal of difficulty finding it. 
 
It will provide work for people. It will provide . . . It’ll increase 
the saleability of older homes and will provide, Mr. Speaker, for 
a smoother flow through the system of the sale of house. As 
people want . . . Many people who are going to build a new 
home will want to sell an old one. This grant, by enabling them 
to fix up the older home, will make these houses more saleable 
and thus will assist the program in flowing through. 
 
It will avoid some of the distortions that were created by the 
short-lived, if well-intended, program in 1983, about which I 
might add . . . The 1983 program, I might add, is one that is . . . 
anyone connected with the industry is at this point in time 
critical of, even real estate agents. I met with a group of them 
the other day. They said, well-intended effort but fatally flawed, 
and it created a  

distortion in the market which we are still . . . and we’re still 
suffering from the results of that program. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who said that? Name them. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well I don’t have the permission to name 
them. I don’t have the permission. The member from P.A.-Duck 
Lake wants to know the name of it. Suffice it to say that we met 
with the executive of the Regina . . . If members opposite would 
stop yelling from their seats, I could tell them. It is difficult, I 
will admit, Mr. Speaker, it is difficult to yell over 20 braying 
jackasses opposite. If you’ll be quiet, I’ll tell you who we met 
with. 
 
We met with the executive of the Regina Real Estate 
Association. The views were put forward as the views of the 
Regina Real Estate Association. So while I’m not . . . That’s the 
point I was going to say earlier. I’m not going to name names, 
because I don’t think I have their permission to use their name 
publicly. I do think we have permission to use the language of 
the . . . use the name of the Regina Real Estate Association . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, because . . . I don’t . . . This 
seems to make them nervous. 
 
It makes them nervous, Mr. Speaker, because this, I suppose, 
was a group upon whom the Conservatives counted upon for 
undying support. Well I’m not so sure that that is the case. I 
think they objectively evaluate each government’s performance 
the same as everyone else does, and I think they find many of 
the efforts of this government sorely wanting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the final part of the program is the 7 per cent 
interest rate. If we are going to build new houses to (a) ensure a 
more orderly market over the long run . . . Long-range planning 
by members opposite consists of worrying about what’s going 
to happen next month. Short-run planning, dis-enables them to 
worry about what’s going to happen tomorrow — they’re 
concerned about today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of the New Democratic Party want to 
take a longer-run view of the thing. You can’t provide 
leadership to a government worrying about next month. We, 
Mr. Speaker, are worrying about . . . We, Mr. Speaker, are 
attempting to provide leadership for over a longer term. To do 
that, Mr. Speaker, you need to ask yourself: what do people 
need to spur them to build new homes? 
 
We think that the $7,000 grant will do that. We think the $7,000 
grant for renovation of older homes will assist in that by 
providing an orderly market. We think, as well, the guarantee of 
a 7 per cent mortgage is the final leg of what is probably a 
three-legged stool . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . well that has been the question. The member 
from . . . such brilliance and such dominance in this House, I 
can almost remember your name and your riding. It might be 
Melfort. The member from Melfort asks, how much is it going 
to cost? That’s a fair question. The answer is, it depends upon 
what the interest rates are during the period of time it’s in 
effect. 
  



 
May 13, 1986 

 

1285 
 

Now if members opposite will give me a gold, gilt-edged 
certificate telling me what the interest rates are going to be over 
the seven years, I’ll give them a cost, and it’s not hard to do. 
The cost of the program, if you assume you are subsidizing . . . 
The cost of the program is, we believe, about $20 million per 
per cent of subsidy. So, Mr. Speaker, if the program began at a 
cost of some $80 million, it now costs a good deal less than that 
because interest rates have been falling. 
 
Indeed, I note the Economic Council of Canada predicting 
interest rates of 7 per cent plus — in the 7 per cent range. If that 
happens, Mr. Speaker, the program will cost very little. 
 
Members opposite ought to recognize this because that’s 
precisely what happened in 1982. You introduced a program 
during the ’82 election which might have been enormously 
expensive. When you announced that, interest rates were 
running at about 21 per cent. By the time you got around to 
getting it into effect interest rates had dropped to 15, and the 
program scarcely cost this government very much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 7 per cent program is our best guess as to what 
is a reasonable peg. We wanted to peg it below the market, but 
not at an inordinately low level. So far economic events are 
proving us right. 
 
I said to the same real estate people that in . . . Government is 
not unlike a business. You inform yourself of the facts, analyse 
them as best you can, but in the end result you roll the dice and 
you hope that you correctly judged events. That’s what you do 
in business. The member for Moose Jaw South — North, 
whatever it may be — will now. And that’s what you do in 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we may be wrong about the interest rates, but I 
don’t think we are. We are running, Mr. Speaker . . . We are 
supporting our position with respect to interest rates . . . We 
have, Mr. Speaker, to support us with respect to our position on 
interest rates, a number of respected economic bodies, and we 
have the course of recent events. Interest rates are dropping, and 
they have come down fairly markedly. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, the chances are fairly good that it will 
be an affordable program. It is an effort, Mr. Speaker, to assure 
that when those young people buy homes that they will be able 
to afford them. One of the problems with the programs which 
this government introduced is it sometimes got people into 
homes which they couldn’t afford. We are attempting to avoid 
that by giving them, not only assistance with the down 
payment, but an assurance of a guaranteed interest rate. 
 
The assumption, Mr. Speaker, during the ’70s and ’60s was that 
you could go out on a limb because your payments would 
remain relatively stable while your income went up. Many, 
many young people bought houses they couldn’t afford in the 
late ’60s and ’70s and, Mr. Speaker, it worked. In an era of 15, 
20 per cent inflation, it didn’t take long before that payment 
which really was beyond your means was affordable. Then after 
a few years it got so that it was highly affordable. 

There’s no assurance, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well, if you don’t believe I said that, then you need to come 
back and spend some time in opposition. Any government . . . I 
say to the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, any action in 
life involves some risk; there’s nothing assured. There’s nothing 
assured, Mr. Speaker, in government and nothing assured in 
business. You always have to make the best guess you can and 
hope that events don’t surprise you. 
 
You people . . . The members opposite, with respect to virtually 
every one of their programs, have engaged in best-case 
planning. And it has got you into trouble because you’ve had 
anything but best-case luck. You’ve had some bad luck. And I 
say with respect to this, with respect to the housing program 
which we have introduced, it has not been best-case planning. 
We think it’s been a realistic estimate based on some sound 
economic analysis. With respect to interest rates, we think it’s 
affordable. We think it’s highly affordable. It’s also attractive. 
 
I note, Mr. Speaker, that members opposite have said virtually 
nothing about the . . . Can anyone remember what the figure 
was? They had some such faint shade of our program in the 
budget. 
 
An Hon. Member: — $3,000. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — My colleague from Athabasca has a 
sterling memory. He can actually recall the figure; it was 
$3,000. I assume members opposite can’t recall the figure 
because they haven’t mentioned it since the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Sutherland says 
nobody’s mentioned it. Everybody I talk to asks me about it. 
Some people are interested in the renovation program; some 
people are interested in the new home program. Some business 
men whom I’ve talked to ask me if I think it’s an affordable 
program. I answered them as I’ve answered you people; the 
$7,000 is largely refundable and the interest rates, Mr. Speaker, 
are, I think, a realistic . . . (inaudible) . . . of the interest rate. 
 
There is, Mr. Speaker, something useful from members 
opposite. I’m reminded from the chatter opposite that it’s the 
House Leader’s plan not to reconvene at seven but to adjourn, 
and if I keep talking for much longer, we’re going to be back 
here at 7 o’clock. So I will sit down and give him a moment 
before 5 o’clock to adjourn the House. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 o’clock. 
 


