


















































May 16, 1986 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 16, 1986 
 
 

1353 
 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
for me this morning to introduce to you, and through you to the 
Legislative Assembly, 17 students from Mistatim. They’re 
accompanied here today by their teacher Annette Legare, and 
their principal Garth Hibbert. They also have their chaperons 
along with them. They have Gordon and Joanne Kirkland and 
they have Martin and Eunice Biro. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these students come from the north-eastern part of 
our province where we believe it’s the prettiest it could be. It’s 
the forest land of Saskatchewan and certainly one of the party 
here today works in the bush up there in our northern 
communities, and all our northern communities are involved in 
the forest industry one way or another and in farming. 
 
So I’d like to extend to them a welcome. I hope they find the 
morning informative and that they enjoy it very much and that 
they have a safe trip home. I’ll be meeting with them at 11 
o’clock for pictures and back in my room at 204 at 11:15 for 
refreshments. I ask all members of the Assembly to join with 
me in welcoming them to Regina. 
 
Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Health Laundry Study 
 

Hon Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister of Health, and it deals with a report prepared for his 
department called the Saskatchewan Health laundry report, or 
perhaps Saskatchewan Health laundry study. Can the minister 
tell the House and the Saskatchewan taxpayers who prepared 
this report for his department, about how much the study cost 
the taxpayers, and how the government contract for the work 
was awarded? 
 
Hon Mr. Taylor: — I can indicate to you that it was, I think, 
it’s associated . . . the consulting firm for Ron Ryan. I’m not 
sure of the name. I would have to . . . I wouldn’t want to 
mislead you as to the cost. I would take notice of that and bring 
that figure to you. I do not have the figure at my fingertips. And 
also I think you question was how the contract was awarded. I 
would be pleased to provide that information to you too. 
 
Hon Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. Is the 
minister able to confirm that the study was prepared by 
Associated Business Consultants, the company owned by the 
former employee of the PC Party and also the former executive 
assistant to the president of SGI, Ron Ryan. Did I understand 
you to confirm that in your answer to the first question? 
 
Hon Mr. Taylor: — Most certainly, Mr. Chairman, when I 
became Minister of Health, I noticed that there were certain 
patterns in laundry delivery that I did think that  

maybe we could correct. For example, the laundry from one of 
the hospitals in North Battleford is not done in the laundry in 
North Battleford but goes to Prince Albert. That was the 
wisdom of the other government. The laundry from Meadow 
Lake passes through North Battleford to be done in Saskatoon. 
So there’s been some very, very strange patterns established in 
how laundry services were done. 
 
As an effective way of looking at more efficient use of health 
care dollars, I felt that it would be wise that we take a look and 
a study at how we can improve laundry services and also save 
money in providing them. So I asked my department to get a 
consultant to do this. In answer to your question, sir, yes, as I 
said at the beginning of my answer, the firm was the one owned 
by Mr. Ryan. 
 
Hon Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Did you 
feel that Mr. Ryan’s service at SGI, which as the Premier told 
us yesterday was terminated, apparently for a breach of trust, 
particularly qualified him to undertake this work on behalf of 
your department, I suggest to you, on the basis of a contract of 
employment which was not tendered? 
 
Hon Mr. Taylor: — I instructed my deputy minister to do a 
study, to get a study done on the laundry services because, and I 
will repeat it again, what I saw when I took over was rather a 
hodgepodge and looked to me to be a mess. 
 
There’s been pressure from an area in North Battleford which 
has a laundry, with maybe a few dollars could be updated, could 
serve that area much better. I think it’s only wise that we have 
someone take a look at it and make some recommendations as 
to how it can be better provided. 
 
And the underlying factor, of course, is to save taxpayers’ 
dollars in the operation of the health care system. So therefore I 
have instructed my deputy to have a consultant do it. I think he 
looked at various other ones. I’ve told the member opposite that 
I will report back to him as to what way the contract was 
awarded, as to the amount of money that was paid for the study, 
but certainly that was the company that was selected. 
 
Hon Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Was it 
Mr. Ryan’s experience as an assistant to Mr. Collver and the 
Conservative Party, or was it Mr. Ryan’s experience at 
improperly obtaining files from the SGI and showing them to 
people who had no right to see them? Was it each of those areas 
of experience which caused you to employ him, to study 
laundry services in North Battleford, Meadow Lake, Saskatoon, 
and elsewhere? 
 
Hon Mr. Taylor: — I will tell you why I’m studying laundry 
services in Meadow Lake, North Battleford, P.A., and other 
parts of the province, because what I inherited from you and 
your operation was a sheer, utter mess of patronage to certain 
areas, certain trucking firms, things of this nature. That was it. 
Your tell me. You . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. 
  



 
May 16, 1983 

1354 
 
 

Hon Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I wasn’t finished my answer 
because I’d like the members opposite to justify why they think 
it’s in the best interests of efficient delivery in Saskatchewan to 
take the Meadow Lake laundry to Saskatoon when you go right 
by one in North Battleford, to take the North Battleford 
Hospital to P.A. – to take the North Battleford’s laundry to P.A. 
when there’s one in North Battleford, And there are other 
services, Yorkton, other areas. That’s what we have to look at. I 
asked my deputies to get a consultant to do this. He went 
through the selection process, and the firm of Mr. Ryan was 
selected. 
 
Hon Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 
minister indicates that he hadn’t finished his answer. So far as 
I’m concerned he hadn’t started his answer. 
 
Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon Mr. Blakeney: — The question was relatively simple. 
What were Mr. Ryan’s qualifications to undertake the study? 
Let’s concede, for the purposes of this question, that a study 
was appropriate. What were Mr. Ryan’s qualifications, and 
were the qualifications his particular knowledge of patronage, 
which you referred to in your last answer? 
 
Hon Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it’s evident in this House 
any time you give an answer that happens to indicate some of 
the skulduggery, some of the poor service that was there when 
we took over, immediately . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. This Assembly cannot operate 
with this much noise, and I’m going to ask the members to 
come to order. 
 
Hon Mr. Taylor: — . . . immediately the members opposite, to 
try and cover their mismanagement, start shouting from their 
seats, making rude remarks, hollering and yelling in this forum. 
I don’t appreciate that and neither do the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I indicated to the member opposite that I saw great needs that 
could be improved within the service of laundry in the hospitals 
of this province. I asked my deputy minister . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well you can make light of it; you may think it 
may be better. The member from Quill Lakes again bellows 
from his seat saying he prefers that the laundry from Meadow 
Lake go through to Saskatoon. In fact, he probably would prefer 
it to come to Regina, because that was their policy to centralize 
everything here. 
 
Let me tell you that I believe that money can be saved – money 
can be saved in the laundry services by taking a look at this. 
That money, Mr. Speaker can be used to being in other services 
in health care in this province. And I think that’s what we 
should be doing. 
 
They continue to banter from their seats because I don’t think 
they support that kind of action, but I certainly do. I asked for a 
consultant to look at this. I asked my deputy to see if he could 
find someone that would come up with this type of evaluation. 
He selected Mr. Ron Ryan, and that is the study that’s in. 

Positions Occupied by Relative of Member 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, in my capacity as minister in 
charge of the Public Service Commission, I would like to 
respond on behalf of the minister in charge of SGI who took 
notice of a question a couple of days ago concerning positions, 
Mr. Speaker, that were occupied by relatives of the member 
from Quill Lakes. The question was asked by the member from 
Regina North West, and I would like to provide this information 
to the Assembly today. 
 
The information is as follows, Mr. Speaker. The sister-in-law of 
the present NDP member from Quill Lakes, the wife of one 
Morley Koskie, was employed in the Attorney General’s 
department . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — As I indicated, Mr. Speaker, the first 
relative employed by the NDP member from Quill Lakes was 
Deanna Koskie. The second relative employed by the NDP 
member from Quill Lakes . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, 
I guess, do not want to hear the information. But I will give it to 
the public anyway because this is very significant information. 
Mr. Speaker, I did not know this information until I became a 
member of the Assembly, and I think everybody in 
Saskatchewan deserves to know how many relatives . . . 
 
Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Everybody in Saskatchewan deserves to 
know how many relatives of ours . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I would ask the minister to get 
on with the answer to the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I will be pleased, Mr. Speaker, to get on 
with the answer. The third relative of the NDP member from 
Quill Lakes who was employed in the former government was 
one Morley Koskie, who happened to hold the position of 
vice-president of SGI. I suspect that he is the brother of the 
present NDP member from Quill Lakes. 
 
So Mr. Speaker, we had Deanna Koskie, we had Linda Koskie, 
we had Morley Koskie, and the fourth relative employed by the 
former NDP government, the brother of M. Koskie, former 
NDP cabinet minister, related, of course, the member from 
Quill Lakes, the present NDP member, was Ted Koskie. Now 
Mr. Ted Koskie was appointed executive assistant to the 
minister of Consumer Affairs. 
 
So what we have, Mr. Minister, to recap for the members of the 
Assembly and for all of the public: we had Deanna Koskie, 
Linda Koskie . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please, If the members would give the 
opportunity for the question to be completed, it would  
  



 
May 16, 1986 

1355 
 
 

take not nearly as long. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’m going to caution the members that I’ve 
asked for order quite a number of times this morning and I’m 
not going to continue to do it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was recapping 
and the members opposite had been making so much noise that 
I’m sure they could not hear my answer. So I will recap for 
them one more time. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I would ask the minister to 
come to an end of the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In addition to 
these four relatives of the present NDP member from Quill 
Lakes, I understand that there many have been a fifth relative 
that was employed in SaskTel corporation. We haven’t been 
able to determine that completely. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, five 
relatives, at least four, possibly another one, employed by the 
present NDP member from Quill Lakes when he was in the 
NDP cabinet. 
 
Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’d like to ask the minister a supplement. We’re 
any of them ever charged or convicted for incompetence, or 
removing files, or corruption, or have any of them fired who 
were with cause? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I had considerable difficulty 
hearing the question from the NDP member from Quill Lakes 
whose relatives were employed so substantially . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’d like to ask a supplement to the minister, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to ask the minister, in view of all of the 
dismissals because of cause relative to Ron Ryan episode that 
has continued during your reign as government, I want to ask 
you whether any members of the Koskie family that you 
mention, any of them were fired for cause or for corruption or 
for pilfering files or incompetence, as is happening in the 
employees of your government vis-a-vis Grady, vis-a-vis Cutts, 
all of these people that you’ve hired. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I think the real question that 
should have been asked, Mr. Speaker, is were there any Koskie 
relatives that were not hired? 
 
Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: Order, order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — The question is, since the minister has 
indicated the number of Koskies that were hired, I want to ask 
him whether any of them were dismissed for cause or 
corruption or for mishandling the affairs of government, 
pilfering files, or excess travel, or any of the current concerns 
that we have with the management of government at the present 
time. 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I can speak for my relatives, 
and I can certainly say that none of my relatives are employed 
by the present government. I’m sure the member opposite 
knows his relatives better than anybody else, and that’s likely 
one of the reasons why so many of his relatives were employed 
by the former NDP administration – four, five, perhaps six of 
them. 
 
Talk about nepotism, Mr. Speaker. It was rife under the former 
NDP administration. Certainly that is something not to speak of 
proudly. And how the member opposite can stand up and 
somehow defend the fact that four or five or six of his relatives 
were employed by government, certainly that is something 
which I don’t think the public would support. And I think it’s 
important that they hear the information, and I have just given it 
to them, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the 
Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, two months ago in the throne 
speech which opened this session of the legislature, which has 
now been sitting for some considerable days, your government 
promised the quick introduction of legislation to create a 
voluntary Saskatchewan pension plan. 
 
Can the minister inform the Saskatchewan people whether the 
detailed legislation has been drafted and, if it has, when will it 
be introduced in this Assembly so that many groups in 
Saskatchewan, many families in Saskatchewan, and others 
interested in how the plan will operate, can study the 
legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The legislation is presently being drafted. 
I’m not sure whether it’s into the final draft yet or not. We 
certainly expect it this session. I know the hon. Member is 
getting the same questions we are – that people support the 
Saskatchewan pension plan, the concept behind it, particularly 
the home-makers of Saskatchewan who believe it lone overdue, 
Mr. Speaker. I’m sure that the public of Saskatchewan will 
continue to look with interest at this rather innovative proposal 
by the Government of Saskatchewan. And the legislation, as I 
say, is presently being drafted and will be introduced at the 
appropriate time in this session. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary. Mr. Minister, clearly this 
is not a simple issue. This is a very complicated issue, and the 
details of the legislation are very crucial as to just how effective 
or how fair such a plan is going to be. Press releases are not 
going to be enough, Mr. Minister, but the legislation is what 
citizens of this province must see, so that they have sufficient 
time to consider it. 
 
Why was your government not capable of preparing this 
legislation before you introduced it in the throne speech, and 
therefore delaying it until the latter stages of the session so that 
the public will not have an opportunity to study it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The hon. member talks about time, and I’m 
actually somewhat surprised and shocked at that  
  



 
May 16, 1983 

1356 
 
 

question. He had 11 years in the cabinet to try and come up 
with pensions, an adequate and fair pension, for the 
home-makers of this province. The NDP turned their back on 
them like they turned their back on the farmers and those 
owning homes when the interest rates were 20 and 22 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest that the program will be well received by 
the people of Saskatchewan. They will have their opportunity to 
review it. I continue to remind the public that the NDP turned 
their backs on those pensions, refused to have them, and have 
already indicated – have already indicated – that they will 
oppose the Saskatchewan pension plan, have indicated their 
alternative of the guaranteed annual income, modified welfare 
for seniors, which is the NDP proposal. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, 
that it’ll be another opportunity for the NDP to oppose a 
common-sense, good proposal for the people of Saskatchewan 
like they’ve done with the paper-mill, Gainers, upgraders, etc. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — New question, Mr. Speaker. And I wish 
the minister would address the question. I will give him an 
opportunity to do that. Mr. Minister, you will know that there 
have already been a number of questions that have been raised 
about the fairness of your proposed pension scheme, at least as 
you have outlined it to this point, and I think that that is even 
more reason why many groups and individuals are anxious to 
see the detailed legislation well in advance of the final passage. 
There have been suggestions made by people who have some 
authority on this that substantial subsidies to those well-off 
households will be provided under your scheme, and there will 
be many, many people who cannot afford, in this pension plan 
proposal of yours, to be in it, who will be left out. And that’s 
why it is important to have this legislation early, Mr. Minister. 
 
So I ask you: prior to your decision to proceed with a voluntary 
pension plan for home-makers, did you study the history of 
such plans in other places, like in Europe, where governments 
have found that only upper income people are able to take 
advantage of such plans while the neediest home-makers are 
left out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I can’t see how the member can have 
it both ways. On the one hand, he’s criticizing the plan that has 
not yet been . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Oh yes, you’ve been criticizing it. The 
NDP have been criticizing the Saskatchewan pension plan, 
doing it here again today, anticipating a plan that I’ve indicated 
the drafting is being done and that the public will have ample 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker. You can rest assured that the plan 
will be well received by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Secondly, it’s about time that the home-makers in this province 
have had a pension plan. We will continue to show the 
leadership in protecting the security of home-makers and those 
owning homes in the province, Mr. Speaker. I just remain 
absolutely amazed that every time a new idea, a new proposal, 
new industry, new business, new opportunities have come 
forward, the  

NDP have opposed them every step of the way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 
minister obviously has now indicated that the reason that they 
have delayed the introduction of the legislation – because 
they’re afraid of a critical analysis of the proposed scheme, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Can the minister tell us how a needy family, which can’t afford 
the monthly payments into a voluntary pension plan, would 
benefit under your scheme? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The details will be announced, but we 
brought this . . . He said that we were not anticipating or afraid 
of criticism. Let me make it abundantly clear, Mr. Speaker. 
When we announced the Saskatchewan pension plan and the 
program for home-makers’ pensions, we were anticipating 
criticism, Mr. Speaker. We were anticipating criticism from the 
New Democratic Party, its members and its candidates. We 
believe that that criticism will come, Mr. Speaker, because they 
have opposed every single good idea, every new business, every 
new project that this government has implemented over the last 
four years. 
 
Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Young Offenders’ Centre in Saskatoon 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I direct my question to the 
Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, it deals with concerns that 
have been raised, and I raise this question again for your 
consideration as you weren’t here the other day and the acting 
minister of Justice wasn’t able to answer it. It deals with the 
concerns raised by the residents of a residential neighbourhood 
in Saskatoon who have learned almost by accident that your 
government plans to open a young offender’s centre in the 
middle of the residential area. 
 
Can the minister tell the Assembly that the people and the 
people of Saskatoon Nutana – why your government refused to 
consult with the residents in the area prior to the decision to 
open the centre? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member and the 
people of Saskatchewan know full well that this government is 
noted for consulting before we make moves on anything. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to also inform you that we’re dealing with a 
relatively new piece of federal legislation here, and there are 
certain transitions that are taking place across Saskatchewan. 
It’s interesting to note that the NDP members had great concern 
over crowding problems a week or two ago in our jails, and 
now when there is an attempt to revamp the system and to bring 
in new ideas, they suddenly don’t like that either. 
 
In specific reference to the question, I wish to now refer it to the 
Minister of Social Services who is directly responsible for this 
area. 
 
Mr. Speaker: Order, please. Order, please. The minister 
referred it across to the Minister of Social  
  



 
May 16, 1986 

1357 
 
 

Services who is responsible for the area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, the matter of the location of 
young offender’s facilities is, of course, something that is 
naturally of concern to myself as Minister of Social Services 
responsible for the implementation of young offenders’ 
programming. I know that it’s a matter of concern to people in 
the province. 
 
We want to ensure that facilities are appropriately placed to 
alleviate whatever community concerns there might be as best 
as possible, but at the same time, to ensure that we are 
providing appropriate residential facilities for young people 
who are not a threat to the safety or the well-being of the 
community, and many of these young people that are sentenced 
under The Young Offenders’ Act, of course, do live in urban 
areas. 
 
It’s appropriate . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Well, the 
members opposite don’t seem to be listening whatsoever, Mr. 
Speaker. I don’t know why they even ask the question unless 
they’re interested in hearing the answer. 
 
I indicated to the member opposite that we are in a consultation 
process with the individuals in that particular area. The matter 
of where young offenders’ open-custody facilities should be 
located is a difficult decision. We want to do what is best for 
the community. At the same time we want to do what is best for 
the young people who are involved, because we all do have a 
concern about both of those matters. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 41 – An act respecting Stock Savings Plan Tax 
Credits 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill, 
respecting Stock Savings Plan Tax Credits. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 42 – An act to amend The Income Tax Act (No. 2) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Income Tax Act (No. 2). 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 43 – An Act to amend The Wildlife Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Wildlife Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
Bill No. 24 – An Act respecting the Licensing and Inspection 

of Amusement Rides 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I’m going to be 
relatively brief in my comments on second reading. I’ll be less 
brief in committee of the whole, Mr. Minister. We have no 
particular quarrel with the goal of this legislation. Indeed we 
had – the former government – had made some tentative and 
unsuccessful efforts to develop some legislation to deal with 
this problem. 
 
Amusement park rides operate in a variety of milieux in 
Saskatchewan, everything from the exhibition in Regina to 
some very small and very unsophisticated operators operating 
in smaller communities in Saskatchewan. These rides are 
inherently dangerous, put a child at the end of a light chain and 
swing them around, and you obviously have a potential for 
injury and danger. 
 
So we don’t quarrel with the legislation. It’s overdue. 
 
I have some serious questions, Mr. Minister, about your ability 
to enforce this legislation. I note with alarm, I think that the 
same branch of your department which failed to prevent the 
death of Polly Redhot, and I won’t put it any stronger than that, 
is also looking after this. The staff complement wasn’t adequate 
during that regrettable incident a year ago and hasn’t improved 
much. You’re adding on to a branch which was already 
overworked – demonstratively so, with tragic consequences; 
you’re adding on quite a hefty responsibility from the 1st of 
June to the 1st of September. 
 
This, if it’s done properly, will be a very considerable 
responsibility. So I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, how you’re 
going to enforce it? I don’t want to be misunderstood. It isn’t 
just small operators who run a potential risk. I note there was a 
girl killed in Vancouver in what must be one of the larger 
amusement parks in Canada at the moment, at the Expo ’86. So 
patently the very large operators in Regina and Saskatoon, the 
very small operators operating in towns and villages, all require 
supervision. It’s an inherently dangerous situation. 
 
We support, Mr. Minister, and we’ll be voting in second 
reading for the Bill. But I really want the minister to address 
himself as to how he’s going to enforce it as you simply don’t 
have the manpower you need to do the job, unless there’s 
something I’ve overlooked, and if I have, I’ll be delighted to be 
informed of that fact. 
 
I don’t take any particular joy in the understaffing of the safety 
inspection branch of your department; no one would. 
 
So with those comments, Mr. Speaker, our caucus will be 
voting in favour of this on second reading. The minister may 
have an opportunity to address himself to some of these things 
in closing debate, or you may want to do it in committee of the 
whole, but we do want you to address yourself to your staff 
complement in the safety and inspection branch. 
  



 
May 16, 1983 

1358 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m certain that 
the opposition agrees that this legislation is necessary. It’ 
unfortunate that we recently had an example of a little girl being 
killed at Expo, which drives home the need for this legislation. 
Unfortunately the opposition wishes to have a guarantee that if 
we pass legislation, no one will be injured in Saskatchewan. 
And I can’t make that kind of guarantee, nor can I guarantee 
that there won’t be other accidents in Saskatchewan. 
 
But we have to start somewhere and we are starting today to 
pass safety legislation on amusement rides and to make 
inspections, and certainly while we can’t guarantee no one will 
be injured, we can guarantee that there will be a greater effort 
made than there ever has been in the past. And we do not 
guarantee that there will be no injuries. So therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, we make no guarantee and, if there is an injury, I 
certainly hope that the opposition will not be joyful in the 
misery of the people of Saskatchewan when there is an 
accident, as they have dwelled on it in other instances. 
 
We consider this a positive step, Mr. Speaker, and the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve this kind of protection. We will do 
everything possible to enforce the legislation. We will be 
reasonable about the enforcement, but the number one priority 
will be the safety of children and adults who ride on these rides. 
Therefore I’m pleased to move second reading. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 31 – An Act respecting the Provision of Home Care 

Services 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I do 
not have a great deal to say on Bill 31, which basically sets out 
a Bill that will set in legislation what has already been in 
existence for some time, as I understand it. 
 
And as you know, Mr. Speaker, the home care program, which 
is an excellent health care program, was brought in by the 
previous New Democratic government under the leadership of 
the then premier, Allan Blakeney, and the minister in charge of 
Social Services – that’s when this area was under the auspices 
of Social Services and now has been moved over to Health. But 
my colleague and friend from Quill Lakes was the minister of 
Social Services at that time, and I think did an excellent job of 
setting up, now without some difficulty – but any new social 
program will have an introduction period, but I think now has 
proven to be one of the best health care programs in Canada. 
 
And I just say that the legislation which we are now dealing 
with today does little to improve the home care program; in fact 
there are many in the province who believe that home care is in 
many ways starved for money. And I hear from time to time 
from home care boards who are saying that they would very 
much like to expand the four basic roles of home care to include 
physiotherapy and a meaningful transportation component. 
Because, as you will know, Mr. Speaker, in the rural areas 
particularly, members of families who are elderly and needing 
home care, one of the big  

components is transportation and physiotherapy. And not only 
haven’t we moved quickly into physiotherapy, but we haven’t 
even taken the opportunity to set up a division, at our 
university, of occupational therapists. 
 
And I think that’s something that our government will look at 
quickly after the election which we believe will be called on 
May 24th at the nominating convention of the member from 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. And I think there’s a great deal of 
anticipation, not only that Bills like this will actually have some 
substance to them in terms of bringing physiotherapy and 
transportation in a meaningful way, but right after the election, 
which we believe and people are hoping will be called on the 
24th of May, that we will have proper staffing of our hospitals, 
where many of the seniors are, in terms of getting health care 
and are not getting the proper nursing care because we have a 
nursing shortage at the present time, is clearly outlined by the 
nurses in the province. 
 
I say as will that there will be some questions that I want to ask 
if we get to the committee on this Bill before the election is 
called on May 24th at the nominating convention of the 
member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. If we get to committee, I 
want to raise a number of issues, and some of them are the 
reference to volunteers in the minister’s remarks. And I won’t 
do it now, but there are some questions about the role of 
volunteers – if we’ll be moving away from paid staff in the 
home care program to more volunteers, or whether he’s 
suggesting volunteers will play a lesser role in the program. 
And I’m not here being critical, but there are some answers that 
I would like to see. 
 
I would say as well that the other areas that should be looked at 
in the area of complementing the home care program are 
programs again that were brought in by the New Democratic 
government, such as hospitalization insurance. We worry a 
great deal, with the very high deficit that these birds have run 
up, that they will be forced to – if they were to possibly win an 
election after May 24th when the election is called – that with 
that high deficit, if they are not able to manage the economy of 
the province, that they may look at having hospitalization 
premiums the way the last right-wing government of Mr. 
Thatcher, when they couldn’t manage the economy . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I would ask the member to stay 
on the subject of the Bill. He’s wandering into elections and 
many areas that have nothing to do with the Bill. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — A big part of the democratic system, the 
fact that we are here, Mr. Speaker, has to do with the fact that 
we were elected, and it’s hard to deal . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I’ve just given my ruling. The 
member is not allowed to debate my ruling, but rather to follow 
it, and I would ask you to get on with the subject at hand. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Your ruling is definitely correct, and I 
know the members opposite are very, very sensitive at the 
present time. And I will want to talk about other little programs, 
not small to the people who they affect, but that complement 
the home care program – things like  
  



 
May 16, 1986 

1359 
 
 

medicare, which come under the umbrella of the Department of 
Health and are a big part of the home care program which were 
brought in by previous NDP and CCF governments. And we 
would hope that as we work through this Bill that there are 
some questions that I want to ask as the relationship between 
hospitalization and medicare and the home care program. 
 
But I want to say that in having people remain in their own 
homes, whether they are elderly or whether they are younger 
people who have medical problems that are debilitating, that 
possibly mean that they need the help of the home care 
programs, there were other programs brought in by the New 
Democratic government like the SAIL (Saskatchewan Aids to 
Independent Living) program, the drug plan, the hearing aid 
plan. 
 
And I just say to you, Mr. Minister, that it is difficult to work 
under such restricting rules in this Assembly when we have to 
stick so closely to the Bill, but I think maybe we will be 
allowed in committee to ask some of the questions that will 
directly relate to things like the programs brought in by the New 
Democratic government. Mr. Speaker, you will remember some 
of them, when you were in opposition, like the SAIL program 
and others that greatly helped senior citizens. And we would 
hope that the home care program will not deteriorate further 
under your government because that’s what people are basically 
telling us. 
 
And I remember being in, I believe it was in Rosetown, for the 
opening of that home care operation, and the great excitement 
and expectation that there was at that time, and speeches made 
by individuals there that complimented the government of the 
day for bringing in the home care program. 
 
And today what we are seeing is the culmination of a great 
work done by a New Democratic government. And I give you 
credit for bringing in the Bill, but I would also suggest that we 
would look at extending the home care program to include 
transportation and physiotherapy. And I know that all members 
of the Assembly will be supporting this Bill. It’s not a matter 
that there’s anything in it, but it gives more legitimacy to the 
home care program that was introduced by the New Democratic 
government in the late 1970s. 
 
(1045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I listened with interest to 
the member opposite when he stood up. I thought he was giving 
an election call. He was continuing to talk about nothing about 
home care other than try to bring out pure partisan politics. I 
listened to him for five minutes. 
 
I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, the reason this Bill is in this 
House is that the NDP never ever got around to providing a 
basis for home care. It was just a clause under The 
(Saskatchewan) Hospital Standards Act. They never thought 
home care was important enough to bring in a Bill and put it on 
its own right. 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, since taking over in health care 
some four years ago, we’ve travelled this province. More 
recently we’ve talked to over 2,500 people who  

said that home care is a priority and home care should be beefed 
up. We listened to those people. In last year’s budget we 
changed the formula so, where there were areas where there 
were more elderly people in that home care district, they got a 
bigger grant; and that was very well received. And in this year, 
in our consultation and discussion with people . . . (inaudible 
interjections) . . . 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, as soon as you start touching a nerve in the 
opposition, they start barking from their seats. The member 
from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg continuously hollers from his seat 
every time you start to score a point against the NDP . . . 
(inaudible interjections) . . . 
 
Let me indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that the people out there 
said, thank you for doing that, but we have a predominance of 
elderly people, so let’s look at the funding again. So this year in 
this budget you will see that, for those who have people over 75 
years of age, they get an extra $30 in their operating budgets. 
Those are the things that people want to see happen. 
 
And I hear the member opposite talk about volunteers. I know 
that they are against volunteers, but as I travel this province, I 
know there’s an awful lot of people out there, people who feel 
that they can do something to help the senior citizens and the 
young disabled of this province. They don’t want to go into 
full-time work; they don’t want part-time work; but they want 
to use their expertise and their ability to help out. 
 
And from where I come from in Saskatchewan, that’s what 
Saskatchewan is all about. I see nothing wrong with allowing 
people who want to help out in some way, shape or form: in 
driving people down to shop, and maybe helping people go to 
the doctor; things of this nature, providing transportation in 
small towns. If they so want to do that, if church groups want to 
do that, and service clubs want to do that, they should be 
allowed to do that. They may think that everybody should be on 
a contract and be paid, and they would like every worker to be 
unionized – and I know their standpoint – but I can tell you, in 
talking to people out there there’s an awful lot of people in 
Saskatchewan that say we support what you’re doing in the care 
for the elderly; we support the fact that you’re building 1,600 
nursing beds; we support that you’re enriching home care; and 
we want to help out, and we’ll help out as volunteers. And this 
Act is going to allow them to do that. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I’m proud to bring this Act, this Act that has 
been needed for a number of years in Saskatchewan because the 
legislative authority was never really there. The Provincial 
Auditor is questioning how grants can be made without an Act, 
so the Act is coming here. The federal government was willing 
to probably cut back on payments without an Act. That was the 
way the NDP had home care in place. I can tell you that the 
Devine government has improved home care immensely over 
the last four years. We’re going to do more. 
 
The member opposite talked about therapy. If he had listened to 
the Speech from the Throne and listened to my estimates, he’d 
know that the number of therapists in rural Saskatchewan are 
being doubled this year. 
  



 
May 16, 1983 

1360 
 
 

So certainly services to the young, disabled and the elderly, 
mainly the people served by home care, are forging ahead. And 
I can tell you that the home care program that has been 
developed by the Devine government is the best home care 
program in Canada, and I’m proud of that. And that’s why this 
Act is here, and I’m proud to move second reading of this Act. 
 
Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr.Birkbeck: — I ask leave of the Assembly to introduce 
some guests. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure today to 
introduce some guests to our Assembly, and I do this on behalf 
of my colleague the member for Humboldt. 
 

Our distinguished guests today, Mr. Speaker, are seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery. They are from our good neighbours to the 
South, the United States of America. They are six in number. 
And I just want to, on behalf of the Assembly, wish them a very 
pleasant visit to our legislature. I trust that in the short time that 
you’re here you will have an opportunity to gain some 
knowledge of our legislature, of our parliamentary system. 
 

I am going to be taking the opportunity to meet with them, Mr. 
Speaker, for a while, for 15 or 20 minutes in about 20 minutes 
from now, and try to assist them in understanding our 
parliamentary system as it contrasts the United States system of 
government. 
 
I would also, Mr. Speaker, like to just make note that they are 
accompanied today by a teacher from Humboldt, Mrs. Candace 
Adams. And so I would ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming them here to the legislature today. 
 
Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: M. le Président, c'est mon plaisir de vous 
présenter pour ma collègue le ministre d'Energie, le membre pour 
Weyburn, des étudiants de la belle province, Québec. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Merci. J'espère que vous allez enjouir de 
votre visite ici á la Saskatchewan, et que vous allez trouver la 
session á la législature très intéressante. Les professeurs qui sont 
avec les élèves sont Richard Wanner, de Weyburn, et Messieurs 
Arsène Savoie, Alain Gauthier, et Walter Sonier de Jonquière, 
Québec. Vienvenue! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 34 – An Act to amend The Highways and 
Transportation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and to the Assembly our associate 
deputy minister, Mr. Merv Clark, directly on my right. And as 
well with us here today is Paul Hunt from the department, a 
traffic safety engineer. 
 
Clause 1 

Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, I have a number of questions 
that I want clarified in this Bill, although we don’t necessarily 
object to you allowing signs along highways. But there are 
some questions in this Bill, and I think what I’ll do, if the 
chairman will be lenient and give us enough time when we go 
clause by clause, I will ask most of my questions as we go 
through the Bill clause by clause. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Clause 3, Mr. Minister, it says here that you 
will be allowing a larger group of private signs to be exempt. 
Now what do you mean by that? What kind of signs will be 
exempted that will not require a permit apparently, or whatever 
the section is supposed to mean. Could you just explain what 
that means? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Quite simply, what we will be doing is 
expanding that, and they will primarily be the advertising type 
of signs that will be advertising the small businesses in our 
various communities. So they will be small-business signs, 
direct advertising signs, if you like. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Those will be allowed along the highways then 
without a permit being required? Any business that wants to set 
up a sign will be able to put it up without having to apply for a 
permit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — No, they will have to have a permit. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, you’re saying then that they will 
require a permit for any sign that they put up. What’s that 
clause with the exemption in there supposed to mean then? 
Why do you feel that this will allow a larger group of private 
signs to be exempted? Just what is that clause supposed to 
mean? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — They would be limited in number and 
primarily would consist of – I guess a good example would be a 
construction sign. If there is some ongoing construction in an 
area, and people would like to be directed to the construction or 
be knowledgeable about where the construction is taking place, 
that would be a prime example. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — That will not, however, apply to any other 
form of sign then. It would be basically an informational sign 
regarding construction or some other thing that may come up at 
a given time and will not be a sign that will be up there for a 
lengthy period of time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, they’re normally a very temporary 
type of signs. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, it also states in here that you will 
be exempting a certain size of sign; anything over 3 by 3, 3 
square metres, will be exempt. Does this mean that anyone 
having a sign that’d be larger than that would not require a 
permit, or are you saying that anyone with a larger sign than 
that will not be able to put up a sign at all? 
  



 
May 16, 1986 

1361 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes. Signs that are the standard 4 by 8 
sheet of plywood size or smaller will not require a permit. Any 
signs larger than that, yes, they will be able to be erected. But 
signs larger than 4 by 8 – I prefer to use the imperial measure, if 
you like – signs larger than 4 by 8 will require a permit. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Did I understand you to say that a sign by 4 by 
8 will not require a permit, but anything larger than a 4 by 8 
will require a permit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — That is correct, sir. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — So then you’re saying, Mr. Minister, that if 
anybody wants to put up a 4 by 8 sign, he can just set it up 
along the highway for whatever purpose he wants, and he 
wouldn’t require a permit for it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I’m sorry, I did not make myself 
perfectly clear. I was speaking about on-premise signs. If we are 
speaking about signs that are off the premises, then all signs 
regardless of size will require permits. I want to make that 
perfectly clear. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Okay, Mr. Minister. Any signs, then, that will 
be on the direct premise of that business will not require a 
permit – if it's a 4 by 8 sign, or smaller than 3 square metres, 
will not require a permit – if I understood you correctly. That’s 
what you are saying. But if they want to set up . . . if that same 
business wanted to set up a 4 by 8 sign a quarter-mile down the 
road or so, they would require a permit for that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, sir that’s absolutely correct. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, it states here also in 3(3) that you 
will be designating, you could designate, a person or an 
employee or anyone else to provide or allow or issue these 
permits. Do you have someone in mind, or what kind of 
structure are you going to create to provide permits for whoever 
applies for them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, that’s a very good question, and 
we certainly have given these considerable thought. And the 
intent of it is to pass on this right, if you like, or the authority to 
issue the permits to local governments. We’re speaking about 
municipal officials or urban municipal officials or R.M. 
officials, or someone designated by those elected people. 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Is there going to be some form of guide-lines 
given to them by which they could sort of assess whether the 
sign will be allowed to not allowed, or are they just going to be 
appointed and told, well, you make the decision whether you 
want that sign out there or not, and we aren’t going to tell you 
what the guide-lines should be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, that will be covered in depth by 
regulations. And I can assure you that there will be standards 
that will have to be adhered to, and those will be covered once 
again by regulation. 
 
Clause 3 agreed to. 

Clauses 4 and 5 agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — On clause 6, I would just like to . . . 
well firstly, introduce to you someone from the Department of 
Tourism and Small Business. The director of tourism 
development, John Spicer, is with us. And I at this time would 
like to pay a great deal of tribute to the small-business people in 
the department. 
 
The impetus for this whole legislation came when our Minister 
of Tourism and Small Business went to a number of meetings 
around the province and consulted first hand with a large 
number of business people all over the province. His officials 
were with him. And this was brought to light, that a major 
concern of many small-business people would like less 
restrictions on business signing. 
 
At the conclusion of these meetings it was brought to my 
attention, and our department officials, together with the 
officials from the Department of Tourism and Small Business, 
worked very, very closely in some other follow-up meetings. 
And I just wanted to pay my personal thanks to both the 
officials in my department who worked very, very hard on this, 
and the officials in the Department of Tourism and Small 
Business who did go out to the public and consulted with a 
large number of people. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I think it’s very, very important that we as 
a government respond quickly to the needs and the wishes of 
the public of Saskatchewan. And in this particular instance I do 
want to really say that we really worked quickly to address the 
solution. And I’m certainly very, very happy that the opposition 
is co-operating in their rather abnormal fashion. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, after listening to some of those 
comments, I would only hope that the people that’ll be involved 
would look closely at the countryside and the scenery that we 
have in this province and not litter the highways with signs 
totally, so that the people driving down those highways can 
enjoy some of the scenery that we have. 
 
Also, Mr. Minister . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’ve got to watch for potholes. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — I think it would be nice if you would also fix 
up some of those highways so that when the people are trying to 
read those signs they wouldn’t wind up wrecking their vehicles 
while they’re driving down the highways. So I think you have 
to maybe do both. 
 
Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — When you put up the signs, get some of those 
highways fixed up at the same time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well I, at this time, certainly wouldn’t 
want to direct my comments specifically to the roads, but as it 
respects the aesthetics of the countryside, I really do appreciate 
your genuine concern for that. 
  



 
May 16, 1983 

1362 
 
 

And I can give you, and I can give the public of Saskatchewan, 
our assurance that the regulations will cover these signs, so that 
aesthetics are not jeopardized and so that we do not end up with 
any billboard jungle. That certainly will not be the case. We 
will be very, very cautious that we go a slow road on this and 
make very, very certain that we have still a very aesthetically 
pleasing landscape. 
 
Clause 6 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 34 – An Act to amend The Highways and 
Transportation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Parks and Renewable Resources 
Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 39 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Well, Mr. Minister, I have a few questions 
with regards to your estimates in general, if I may. I want to 
start out, first of all, with a couple of concerns to my farmers 
with regards to duck depredation and water-fowl depredation of 
our crops. Can you outline to me the system that will be in 
place this year for farmers to collect compensation for duck 
depredation or water . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order! I’m afraid I’m going to 
have to insist on a little less noise in here. The minister certainly 
won’t be able to hear the question, and I would ask that you 
come to order. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — I’ll repeat that question, Mr. Minister. The 
opposition was making a bit too much noise. With regards to 
duck depredation of our cereal crops, Mr. Minister, could you 
explain to me the system that will be in place this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would like to 
respond to the concern the member just raised and I don’t think 
it matters which political party he represents, because this 
particular issue is certainly non-partisan and it certainly cuts 
across all political boundaries and it is also extremely 
important. So I’d just like to respond to the member and outline 
our water-fowl crop damage prevention program. 
 
A five-year, water-fowl crop damage prevention agreement 
covering the period 1983-87 was signed by Saskatchewan and 
Canada on March 30, 1984. The agreement was implemented 
by Saskatchewan Parks and Renewable Resources and covers 
prevention activities  

only. I think that’s important to note. Environment Canada and 
Saskatchewan each contribute up to a maximum of $350,000, 
for $700,000 annually. 
 
Compensation to farmers suffering water-fowl crop damage is 
available through a separate program administered by 
Agriculture Canada and Saskatchewan Crop Insurance. A 
five-year water-fowl compensation agreement signed on March 
21, 1984, provides compensation to a maximum of $70 per acre 
to $13,000 per farmer. Claims are filed through the local 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance offices. 
 
We feel that both programs are highly effective and have been 
well received by the farming community, with positive 
implications for habitat retention programs. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In regards to 
water-fowl in general, and the fact that obviously tourism is a 
big industry in Saskatchewan, we have a number of heritage 
marshes, and I have two of the very first in my constituency – 
Ponass Lake and Foam Lake. Could you outline to me the 
operation of the heritage marshes and how they affect the 
surrounding municipalities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll give the member a 
little bit of background, and then I’ll perhaps describe some of 
the marshes in place. The purpose of the Saskatchewan heritage 
marsh programs is to preserve and improve major wetlands for 
wildlife in the province. It also ensures that crop damage 
control for landowners in the vicinity of a specific marsh 
through provision of bait stations, lure crops, scare cannons, 
and compensation measures. 
 
The November 1981 heritage marsh agreement with Ducks 
Unlimited Canada, Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, and the 
Saskatchewan Natural History Society include five marshes. I 
can arrange to have physical descriptions of the areas and all of 
the projects and the costs and benefits sent over to the member 
for his edification, if that’s agreeable, and I can also arrange to 
have it sent to members of the opposition. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Mr. Minister, one final question with regard 
to wildlife and problems with farmers, and that regards elk. And 
a number of my farmers are very close to the provincial forest 
and have suffered some problems with elk this past year coming 
out and getting into their bales and into their feed supplies. 
Could you outline to me what steps you plan to take to maybe 
prevent this or to help the farmers out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Now this is problem not only in this 
particular member’s area, Mr. Chairman. We are also having 
problems in the south-west part of the province, the Cypress 
hills area, because of the large elk contingent down there. 
 
Basically what the department attempts to do is to prevent 
damage from happening. If we’re contacted, we’ll have officers 
go out and meet with the individual farmers and take a look at 
fences and crops and anything we can do that would try and 
prevent the animals from getting into the farmers’ fields. 
  



 
May 16, 1986 

1363 
 
 

(1115) 
 
Once damage has taken place, the maximum compensation 
available is $2,500. Personally I feel that that type of a program 
would be better operated under the auspices of crop insurance. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. A question I have: 
could you give me an update on your current negotiations with 
the federal government regarding what is the standing on the 
grasslands park? Last year’s estimates, the bottom line was that 
some exploration needed to be completed to determine the gas 
and oil and coal reserves in the park area, and they were going 
to argue about that. And that sounded like the only hold-up to 
go ahead with the park. Can you give me an update, what’s 
happened during the past year, and if they grasslands park is on 
hold, or if it’s dead, or what’s really happened sine your 
government has taken over this one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — An excellent question, Mr. Chairman, 
and it’s been rather a ticklish problem for my department. As 
the hon. member would recall from last year, and ongoing 
discussions, we are very anxious to conclude an agreement with 
the federal government for the operation of grasslands national 
park, and we would like it up and running. And the problems to 
which the hon. member alluded have, in fact, been ameliorated 
in the last 12 months. 
 
Unfortunately, we stumbled across one other problem, and at 
that time I didn’t even know it existed, and that is jurisdiction of 
river bed land. The federal government, let’s say Canada, wants 
control, to effectively manage the park, of the river bed land. 
But Saskatchewan, the provincial government, would like to 
have control to effectively mange water supplies in 
drought-prone areas. It has boiled down to a legal argument 
right now, and we’re very hopeful that there’s room for 
compromise here because both levels of government want that 
park. And I think as long as we’re all going to be reasonable 
and deal with each other as reasonable men and women, there 
should be room for compromise, and we should be able to bring 
about the desired outcome, which is a new grasslands national 
park. 
 
Mr. Engel: — What is a new time frame. We’re years behind 
the time frame that was in place when I can remember the 
original signing with Jean Chretien and John Kowalchuk. We 
had a good understanding between the federal and the 
provincial governments. And the studies proceeded. They’d 
rented office space, they’ve put people in place, and all of a 
sudden I drive around and I see nothing happened, and all that’s 
there is some frustrated farmers. 
 
How long do you really think you can keep this issue alive 
before you can resolve something? On behalf of the constituents 
that are in my portion of the park, on the east wing of it, I would 
like to say either get on with it or announce that it’s dead, it’s 
not going to happen any more – one or the other. 
 
I think taking back to 1967 is long enough. You know, this is 
;87. Twenty years have gone by that I’ve been promoting and 
fighting and pushing, and honestly, Mr.  

Minister, along with the ranchers down there, we’re getting 
tired of the delays and the reasons and the excuses you can find 
to hold it up and to not proceed with it. So could you give me a 
little bit of an indication of when do you expect you’ll be able 
to resolve this? 
 
There’s no excuse, because this is the first time since the 
grasslands park has been an issue that there have been 
governments the same in Saskatchewan and in Canada. And 
surely, if your Premier is saying, keep up the good work, Brian 
– surely there’s no excuse for not getting it resolved now to the 
issue that’s out there. Give us a time frame and a time line and 
what you think is going to take place to resolve the issue one 
way or the other. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, there may be a federal 
and provincial government of the same political stripe. It isn’t 
the politicians who are holding us up. If it were up to the 
politicians, I suggest that this matter would have been resolved 
many years ago whether it had been an NDP provincial 
government, a Liberal provincial government, or a Conservative 
provincial government. It’s not the politicians who are holding 
it up. 
 
I don’t like to point fingers, but there has been some 
constitutional argument; there is only one issue, and I wasn’t 
even aware it was an issue at this time last year, remaining to be 
resolved. I am still awaiting a reply of my letter to my federal 
counterpart of March 17. To date I haven’t had a reply from 
him, at which time we suggested maybe we should be looking 
at a compromise to get this river bed situation settled once and 
for all. We are as anxious as the federal people are to get this 
park up and running. But I can assure the hon. member that it’s 
certainly not a partisan political issue. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Can you tell me who – the people that are on the 
ground negotiating with the feds now – can you give me the 
names of the people that are involved in the process at this 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Hon. member, there’s more than one 
agency of government involved. Justice had been involved, 
because of constitutional discussion, and the water Crown 
corporation. I can tell you who’s handling negotiations on 
behalf of my department – under the auspices of the deputy, 
John Law, and the director of parks, Alan Appleby. But from 
the other departments there are two or three lawyers involved. I 
can undertake to find names and send you a letter on the whole 
situation. You can have it by Monday or Tuesday. 
 
Mr. Engel: — If you would give me a letter so that I can show 
a farmer that comes along and says, what’s happening, I can 
say, well here are the issues, these are the points we have 
resolved, this is what’s still left open for discussion and at this 
time . . . Or give us a time frame as to when you think those 
things might be happening. When do you expect the meetings 
will be taking place between the various officials and so on. 
 
Let’s try and put a little package together because it looks like 
in the very near future there’ll be all kinds of politicians running 
around the country, and I don’t want this to be political issue. I 
think the park is one that has never cropped up as a political 
issue as far as the South is  
  



 
May 16, 1983 

1364 
 
 

concerned. We’ve had amiable meetings. But the only thing 
that’s happened in the last four years is there’s been little 
excuses been brought up and, oh, this is now a major 
road-block, and then that was a major road-block, and then 
somebody else had a major road-block. Surely, surely you can 
say to the people that we believe in a park, or we don’t believe 
in a park, and let’s do it. If you want to just keep holding up a 
flag until, you know, it’s some great thing we’re going to 
develop a park some day, it just has been very, very frustrating 
for the people concerned. 
 
I can show you, if you want to come down with me, Mr. 
Minister, I’ll show you a quonset in a package, laying on the 
ground of a farmer, that is 20 years old today – 20 years this 
spring since he ordered a quonset and was going to build a 
quonset on his farm. The thing is in a box. The package is there, 
and it’s laying in the in the weeds because the guy has given up 
and said, why should I build a quonset here and develop my 
farm if they’re going to make a park and take my land away 
from me. And these guys are frustrated. They’ve given up on 
governments over 20 years to try and bring things together, and 
surely, now that we’ve got Conservatives in Ottawa and Regina, 
your officials can get together and put a package with some 
instructions there. If the instructions are there from both 
officials, you put it together or kill it. Do one or the other, but 
don’t drag it on for ever. 
 
I’m sure you know here I stand on this issue. I would love to 
see a beautiful wilderness park down there, a grasslands park. I 
think the ideas that I’ve heard, when I think back at some of the 
federal officials and federal people that have been involved, and 
Ron Malis putting years and years of effort on behalf of the 
federal government, worked hard at it. All of a sudden it died; 
we got a change of government. Since that time I don’t see a 
federal person on the horizon that’s waving a flag and being 
aggressive about trying to get this thing solved. I just see little 
road-blocks coming up in the way. 
 
So if you can put a little time letter together saying: this is what 
we’ve done, here is where the negotiations are at, here are the 
people that are meeting, and these are the possible dates of 
meetings, and this one we expect the thing to be resolved, I’d 
appreciate it. And do it in light of the fact that I might show that 
to a rancher or two. This is basically what I need. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’ve got no problem with what you’re 
suggesting, hon. member. I think it’s important to note that 
there is already 50 square miles being purchased in the area for 
the park. Some of the road-blocks to which you’ve referred are 
not really small ones. They’ve been around for quite a number 
of years – oil and gas exploration, mineral rights, that type of 
thing, and one by one they’ve all been resolved. And it boils 
down now to ownership of river bed where the province says a 
river bed belongs to the province, and the federal government 
saying, we would like the control of the river bed for 
management of the park. 
 
However, I think, and I think you would agree, because you’ve 
already intimated, maybe not in so many words, surely there is 
room for compromise. I believe there is. On March 17th I wrote 
to the federal minister suggesting compromises and indicating a 
willingness to meet and  

saying, please come to Saskatchewan; we’ll discuss it; we’ll 
sign up right on the spot and it will be done. 
 
And if you do have constituents, and I’m sincere about this, 
who do have problems or questions, if you’d direct the inquiries 
to my office, we’ll make sure we can draft a response either 
from my signature or from yours to explain the situation. 
 
And if I may digress, Mr. Chairman, I sent some information 
over to the hon. member for Athabasca, the information which I 
promised him last night. I trust it’s satisfactory. 
 
Mr. Engel: — One more quick question on that. Is the acting 
park superintendent still in place down in that area and working 
out of that office, or have they phased that out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — As far as we know, yes, that’s 
continuing. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to ask the 
minister a question about the campsites which the House has 
heard a lot of discussion about. Some two weeks ago, Mr. 
Minister, my colleague, the member from Athabasca, asked you 
for a list of . . . or the names or the list of the campsites which 
you have, through your budget, decided to close down. Do you 
have that list, and can you provide it for us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I do not have a complete 
list of the entire plan because some of it is still under review 
and nothing is carved in stone right now. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I guess if you don’t have 
the list you can’t give it to us, although the question was asked 
two weeks ago. I’d like to ask you, sir: is one of the campsites 
that you department operates, one called the Piwei 
campgrounds, which is located six miles south of Somme; it’s 
off Highway No. 23 – is that one of the campsites that your 
department operates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — That’s a campsite we’ve been 
operating, yes. We’ve been doing the maintenance on it. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Have you done any maintenance on it 
this year, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I beg your pardon? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Has any maintenance been performed on 
this campground this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I should make the hon. member aware, 
it’s not a campground; it’s a picnic site, and there hasn’t been 
maintenance performed that I’m aware of. There was a plan to 
remove . . . I think there was one outdoor toilet. Let me just 
check this for one minute for you. I’m going to look up and see 
exactly what was in the campground. 
 
In response to the hon. member, the facilities that exist at this 
picnic ground: five tables, six barbecues, four garbage cans, one 
outdoor toilet, and a wood bin-cum-picnic shelter. 
  



 
May 16, 1986 

1365 
 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, that’s what exists at the 
campground, you say, at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — As far as I’m aware, the plans were 
made to remove those particular facilities. I’m considering 
putting some of them back in, and there’s a local group 
apparently would like to administer it. 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, let me get this correct. You 
are considering putting those facilities back in. What was the 
rationale, what were the reasons that you decided to . . . Well let 
me ask you another question first. 
 
Is this one of the campsites that you determined – campground, 
picnic ground; I’ll call it a campground; you can call it a picnic 
site, and we’ll both know what we’re talking about – but is this 
one of the sites which you determined to be one of those that 
was to be closed down this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — There are no camp spots at Piwei. It’s a 
picnic ground; so it’s not a campsite. However, it had been 
identified, I am advised, by department officials as one that was 
underutilized and facilities could be removed and maintenance 
discontinued. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Do you have information . . . I think you 
answered this, Mr. Minister, but I want to make it crystal clear. 
Did you indicate which facilities have already been removed, if 
any? I’m not sure whether I got that clear. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The picnic tables, barbecues, and the 
items to which I’d referred had been taken out, but we’re 
currently negotiating with the town to put them back in. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Why, Mr. Minister, would you not have 
negotiated with the town before you moved these facilities out? 
Surely you are now going to spend an unnecessary amount of 
money if, indeed, this transpires. Why would you have 
arbitrarily – and I only assume that’s how you did it – gone into 
the campground, moved out the picnic tables, the barbecue 
stands, or whatever, Mr. Minister, without negotiating with 
somebody in the local community first? It seems like a 
backward way to operate, and it’s certainly not a good 
management of taxpayers’ money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — This particular picnic site is situated 
approximately 20 miles from the town, the town to which you’d 
referred. It is not a particularly good road; it was being 
underutilized. And we decided, yes, we could go ahead and take 
their facilities out and move them some place else where it’s 
more heavily utilized. Subsequent to that there was some 
contact from the town. The said they would be interested in 
taking over management, and we’d like to oblige them. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Is that the usual procedure of your 
government, and in this case your department, that if you decide 
to move out a campground or picnic site or whatever you have 
closed, that you go in and move it out  

and then wait for the community to protest or express concern, 
and then you negotiate? Is that the normal procedure that you 
use, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — It’s not. And this is one department, I 
can safely say, has conducted a tremendous amount of 
consultation with local groups, whether it be through open 
house, through white papers, through meeting with individual 
groups. 
 
And if you want to run down the program areas for which this 
department is responsible, take any of the areas you like – take 
wildlife. I have met frequently with the wildlife federation; 
officials have met with them. We meet with their executive on a 
regular basis, which no minister had done before. I attend the 
president’s council. I met with the northern outfitters’ 
association and all of the groups, all of the client groups with 
whom we normally deal. In the case of SARM, I think there 
was probably an oversight – unfortunate, but we’re quite 
prepared to make amends if that’s what the community wants. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, that is a very shock 
oversight, if indeed it was an oversight. I can only conclude, 
Mr. Minister, that this is a practice that’s been happening in 
other places. And I asked you twice what facilities you have 
removed because I am somewhat familiar with this area. I 
happened to have grown up in this area, not too far away; in 
fact, I am familiar with this campsite. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Picnic ground. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — You call it a picnic ground. It’s not the 
point here. The point here is that you arbitrarily closed down a 
campsite, or a picnic ground, among the many others which you 
have closed down, while you’re trying to promote tourism, and 
did not even as much as talk to the local people. You come in 
the dark of night or whatever, with equipment, and you move 
out facilities without the community even being talked to. That 
is what’s wrong, Mr. Minister. 
 
What I find particularly peculiar about your answers here today 
is that you simply say you’ve removed tables, barbecue pits or 
stands, and toilets. That’s what you said. Well, Mr. Minister . . . 
And I’m sure you can ask the member from Kelsey-Tisdale, 
who I’m sure has heard about this, because the community 
affected has been extremely concerned and upset. And I know 
that there has been a letter written to the local newspaper – I 
think in this case it’s the Hudson Bay Post-Review – which I 
want to read to you. 
 
And then I want you to, after I finish reading the letter, explain 
why you have only mentioned tables, barbecue stands, and 
toilets, when in fact that is not the facts, Mr. Minister. And I 
would like you to correct yourself and explain why, in this 
House, you would not give the full explanation of what’s 
happened here. 
 
You have said that the picnic ground in this case was 
underutilized. I submit to you those are not the facts either 
because the local people have indicated, and they should know 
better than you do, sir, that indeed those picnic  
  



 
May 16, 1983 

1366 
 
 

grounds were well utilized and were very popular. 
 
And here is the letter, and I will read it without interruption so 
that you can get the full thrust of it. It’s titled, “To the editor,” 
and I received a copy of it today, with a phone call several days 
ago expressing some concern. And the reason that the phone 
call came to me is because the local member, the member from 
Kelsey-Tisdale, would not provide the time of day to these 
people so that they could express their concerns. 
 

The Piwei campgrounds (and note, Mr. Minister – I’ll 
start again – they say “campgrounds”) 

 
The Piwei campgrounds, six miles south of Somme in 
the forest, off highway 23, consisting of a kitchen, 
tables, 2 barbecues, and outdoor bathroom, and a 
beautiful campground, believe it or not this last week 
this property has been destroyed by the provincial 
government. They brought in a backhoe and a crew of 
five men, spent two days (two days) to mutilate all of 
this property. They hauled the wood, after smashing 
things to pieces, a quarter of a mile, piled it up and 
burned it. The cement was pushed into a huge heap, 
fairly close by. This building was painted just two 
years ago and repairs needed were done. This building 
was built in the mid-fifties, being a unique part of our 
community and just a very beautiful, peaceful, and 
restful spot with a stream flowing close by. This 
campsite was a well-used campsite. It has recently 
been used by riding clubs, tail riders, by individual 
groups, schools, tobogganers, and 3-wheeler riders, 
members of the Saskatchewan Natural History 
Society, of which some very outstanding work has 
been done by the people in our community, and many, 
many families in our own area, tourists across Canada 
and to the United States. 

 
Our own family hosted a couple from Ontario who 
had with them people from England. We spent time at 
this campsite and hiked through the trails, when 
returning to England they wrote us saying this was the 
greatest highlight of their trip, which they had covered 
from east to west coast. 

 
Our parks are very over-crowded, and little campsites 
like this give people a chance to enjoy nature and get 
away from the hustle and the bustle of over-crowded 
places. 

 
I have been told the reason for destroying this 
campsite was the expense of trimming the grass which 
was not a big area, and the grass had terrific 
competition from the trees surrounding this little area, 
and no more than two cuttings in the summer would 
be necessary. 

 
After taking millions of dollars of wealth from this 
rich forest, would it be too much to expect to leave 
this little campsite for the people of this province? 

 
There are organizations in this area who would have 
seen to it that the grass would be cut rather than this 
campsite being destroyed. 

We have been told by good authority that there are 
lots more of these campsites in our province to be 
destroyed by the provincial government. 

 
Why not cut the grass in these campsites and utilize 
our young people who cannot get jobs? No person in 
our community was notified of this vandalous 
destruction. 

 
By destroying campsites such as this, the government 
is destroying the essence of our culture in tune with 
nature. 

 
Mr. Minister, can you explain . . . It’s signed by a citizen of 
Carragana. I’ll see that you get a copy of the letter; it was in the 
newspaper. Mr. Minister, can you explain how you would 
respond . . . why you would respond in my questioning and 
attempt to mislead this House and say only that tables, barbecue 
pits, and toilets were moved away, without telling the full story 
of the destruction that has happened at this campsite? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Quite a few points came up there from 
the hon. member and by needs be, Mr. Chairman, this is going 
to be a lengthy reply. First of all, I want the name read into the 
record of whoever wrote the letter. And if you don’t have the 
guts to put the name in the record, then strike it from the record. 
 
The second one . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If you’ve got a 
question to ask, get up on your hind legs and ask it. The second 
one: phone call to you, sir, strikes me as a partisan issue. A 
letter to an editor with not contact with my department or 
contact with my office is blatantly political, and I would suggest 
to you, sir, it’s not beneath you to have inspired that letter to the 
editor and bring up the phone call yourself. There’s no question 
in my mind that’s how it came about. 
 
It’s absolutely scurrilous for you to say that that constituent 
from Kelsey-Tisdale could not contact the minister, the member 
for Kelsey-Tisdale, because he wouldn’t give him the time of 
day, and I note, in your usual cowardly fashion, you wait until 
the member is not in the House to bring it up. I notice that’s the 
way you’ve always operated. So it’s no surprise that you would 
choose this particular forum and this particular occasion to raise 
that. 
 
It is not a campsite; it is a picnic site. And half of what you read 
into the record is garbage, when you talk about tourism. You 
were the member who stood in this House – and check Hansard 
if you don’t believe it – and said we were closing 75 parks and 
related facilities. Not one park, but you said 75 parks. You were 
deliberately misleading the House and trying to make a partisan 
issue. You have not succeeded by raising this issue in public 
and trying to do a little mud-raking and getting down in the 
grubby dirt where you belong – but I don’t, so I refuse to get 
down to your level. 
 
Now, you said this community is extremely upset; the whole 
community’s upset. I haven’t had one letter from that 
community – not one – if they’re extremely upset.  
  



 
May 16, 1986 

1367 
 
 

You say that we’re closing parks all over the province. No 
we’re not; not one. What has been decided is 75 camping spots, 
comprising 10 campsites which are underutilized, would not be 
maintained. At the same time, the savings generated from that 
are being put into other areas that are utilized – heavily utilized 
– so we can expand our facilities. 
 
And just recently, apart from the announcement of five new 
provincial parks, which is what the public want, we have also 
put in campgrounds in other parts of the province and upgraded 
existing facilities. And I may say the five parks that we are 
adding are the kind of facilities people want. You say this 
department isn’t co-operating, which of course is a slur on the 
officials, nothing less, when you say that. Again that is your 
wont. 
 
I remember 1971 with blood-letting that took place when you 
and that bunch of cutthroats took over there. I remember the 
blood-letting that took place. It’s conveniently been forgotten 
about somewhere with the passage of time. Cast your mind 
back; you remember. You were part of it. In fact, I remember 
talking to you. You don’t remember the conversation when I 
was a head coach of the Legion track camp out at Humboldt. 
You don’t even remember the conversation. When I asked you 
a question and you took a note, I never did get a reply from you. 
And that’s the way you ran office when you were in 
government. And you say we don’t co-operate. Well let me just 
read into the record, and I’ll put the name of the man who 
signed the letter, because I’m not afraid, unlike you: 
 

Northern Lights Lodge, Box 832, Flin Flon, Manitoba. 
 

Dear Mr. Maxwell: On behalf of Northern Lights 
Lodge and its staff, I’d like to take this opportunity to 
invite you, Ross MacLennan, and Ross Duncan to the 
official opening of the first fully accessible wheelchair 
camp in northern Saskatchewan. 

 
We, Northern Lights Lodge and the Saskatchewan 
Abilities Council, would be thrilled if you would 
officially open a campground for the disabled at the 
south-east arm of Deschambault Lake. To you, sir, my 
personal thanks for your input. It is my hope to spend 
some time with you . . . (etc., etc.) 

 
And you say we don’t co-operate. It says: 
 

In closing, I would like to thank you and your 
department for what I can only call super 
co-operation. Yours truly, Ted Ohlsen. 

 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, really. This is an 
interesting day in the House. The minister waves his arms and 
goes into a tirade when he knows that the policies of his 
government are causing a lot of concern in the public. 
 
Mr. Minister, you did not answer the question after your speech. 
The northern house lodge letter had nothing to do with this 
particular campsite, which is similar to many others which you 
are closing. And I noted with particular interest that today you 
talk about 75 camping spots. The other day in this House when 
we questioned you were  

talking about 75 parking stalls. 
 
(1145) 
 
An Hon. Member: — No I wasn’t. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, you were, sir. Yes, you were. 
 
Why do you keep changing your story? Earlier today in my 
questioning your story was that at this Piwei campground you 
moved tables, moved barbecue stands, and closed a toilet 
facility. There is evidence now to show that you did not tell the 
whole story, that in fact you went in there and you totally razed 
the campground. 
 
Mr. Minister, the buck stops there with you. The buck stops 
with the minister of the department who establishes the policy 
and stands responsible for the activities of his department, as 
the cabinet table stands responsible for the activities of the 
government as a whole. The buck stops with you, sir. And if at 
least something goes wrong, Mr. Minister, at least have the 
decency to stand up in this House and give the full answers. 
 
You tried to mislead the House by not giving the full answer. I 
ask you again the question, Mr. Minister, which you did not 
answer and instead went into your speech. 
 
The question is: how do you explain your not giving the full 
answer to my previous question when we have evidence here 
which shows that you actually destroyed this campground, 
leaving nothing there for the local community to be able to take 
over and run any more? You not only took out the toilets, you 
not only took out the barbecue stands, you not only took out the 
parking tables; a backhoe was moved in there, destroyed and 
tore up all the concrete, piled it up in a pile, defaced the whole 
area which has been here since the early 1950s. And now you 
decide you’re going to destroy this. 
 
Mr. Minister, how do you justify your explanation with what, in 
fact, are the real facts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The real facts – you said toilets, plural; 
there’s one. Who can believe you anyway? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, I think we see the height of 
irresponsibility here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You are saying that the opinions of the people who live in 
Somme and Carragana, and Porcupine Plain and all the 
communities, Weekes, all communities who have utilized this 
facility, local people, people who have come from a far away as 
Europe, people who have come from the United States and still 
come from the . . . Well the minister shakes his head. 
 
This is the minister who, in conjunction with the Minister of 
Small Business and Tourism, spends $3 million of advertising 
to promote tourism. Well your department maybe doesn’t – 
we’ll get to that – but your government spends $3 million in 
advertising to promote tourism so that your favourite 
advertising agency can make themselves an awful lot of money. 
On the one hand you do that, and then on the other hand you 
have facilities that have become widely known and appreciated 
by people  
  



 
May 16, 1983 

1368 
 
 

who come, and you close them down. 
 
And all you can stand up here in the House, is not give the full 
information. I will ask you one more time, Mr. Minister; why 
did you not give us the full answer when the question was first 
asked? Were you deliberately misleading the House? Were you 
deliberately misleading the House, Mr. Minister, or were you 
not well enough informed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Don’t you ever give me any lectures 
about misleading the House when you stood there and said we 
were closing 75 parks. Your credibility is totalling non-existent. 
I did not bulldoze anything at Piwei picnic grounds. I personally 
didn’t go in there with a cat and a bulldozer. As a matter of fact, 
I didn’t even know that action had been taken until some time 
after it had happened. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, I’m glad to know that you’re in 
charge, Mr. Minister. This kind of activity only happens 
because the people who do the work for your department follow 
policies and moods and temperaments established by your 
government. That’s the only reason it’s done. Do not now, Mr. 
Minister, try to take it out on the local staff who did what they 
were instructed to do. They acted in the true form of the way 
your government operates. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me just again highlight – let me highlight how 
you have attempted to twist and turn to try to hide what’s been 
happening with this whole issue. You said the other day, and 
it’s on the record, that your department closed 75 parking stalls. 
You said today you closed 75 camping spots, 
 
In your letter of May 1st, 1986 to the mayor of the northern 
hamlet of Dore Lake, you said, 75 campsites in small, 
underutilized areas will be closed, at a total of almost 9,000 
campsites in the provincial system. 
 
Dealing with this one issue you have given it three different 
definitions. You call it once camping spots today. Another time 
you called it parking stalls. In your letter of May 1, 1986, you 
talk about 75 campsites. Now, Mr. Minister, which is it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — If you care to look back through 
Hansard you’ll find it was my colleague, the Minister of 
Tourism and Small Business, who said parking stalls. I have 
always said it’s 75 camping spots or camping sites – not 
campgrounds, not parks – campsites, meaning an individual 
little plot where you can put your tent, a campsite or a camp 
spot, which I think is fairly synonymous in all but the minds, 
except the tiny minds, of you and your colleagues. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m not going to 
pursue this much longer because I think it’s clear . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The member from Saskatoon has something to 
say about this. She might want to . . . 
 
Mr. Minister, can you explain how you can talk about and 
promote tourism, on the one hand, and close down some of 
these facilities which tourists in Saskatchewan will use? And 
don’t give me the tirade about, oh, the kind of accommodations 
that tourists are looking for has  

changed because, Mr. Minister, you know as well as I do that 
there are many kinds of tourists. There are those who like to 
come and stay in the motel with the water-slide and that kind of 
recreation. There are those who like to go to the outdoors and 
do some camping and move from one campground to another; 
take their family for a walk, do a little roughing, see what this 
province is all about. There are those kind too. Why have you 
not considered them an important priority in your tourism 
plans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well you just led into what could be a 
half-hour speech. We have provided for those people. We’re 
providing for a wide range of experiences and activities. In 
some areas there were five and six small campgrounds, all 
within 20, 30 kilometres of each other, not all being utilized. 
Those were the ones we looked at for closure or for 
discontinuing the maintenance on them. 
 
At the same time, we are accelerating some of the other type of 
camping facilities that we want to make available, whether they 
be for recreational vehicles or, indeed, with the wilderness park, 
for the type of experience people want there. And we do have 
other campgrounds, remote campgrounds, that are being 
utilized. 
 
To suggest that tourists are coming from Europe specifically to 
find one small campground, I find just a tad difficult to believe. 
And if they are, and they want that information, either myself or 
my colleague, the Minister of Tourism and Small Business, 
would be more than delighted to provide it and explain to 
people exactly where to find those particular campgrounds and 
parks. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, after destroying and razing 
this campground, you say that you now, because the local 
community, finding this out after the fact, has expressed an 
interest in the park, can you tell this committee, Mr. Minister, 
how much it’s going to cost the government to rebuild this park 
so that the community can then be able to manage it? 
 

Just a . . . I used the word “park.” I wouldn’t want the minister 
to get confused with “campground.” 
 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, it’s a matter, if we so 
choose, of putting back in the picnic tables, the toilet in the site 
– which is approximately two days of activity for employees of 
the department – in the picnic site. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Did you tell me . . . did you answer the 
question, how much will it cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — It will be done by employees who are 
on staff in any event – because of the wet season, probably by 
fire-fighting crews who are on stand-by, who are not otherwise 
employed fighting fires. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Are you saying, Mr. Minister, some of 
this equipment that was destroyed, some of the wooden 
facilities that were destroyed, are not going to have to be 
replaced? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Would the hon. member please inform 
me which wooden facilities were destroyed? I’m not aware of 
destruction of facilities. 
  



 
May 16, 1986 

1369 
 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, clearly, as the letter 
indicates, this picnic site might have been a good place for you 
to have your youth convention. The vandalism . . . The letter 
indicates this vandalic destruction of this park. 
 
In the letter, Mr. Minister, in this letter it indicates very clearly 
that wood . . . Well I’ll wait till the minister’s ready to listen. 
Mr. Minister, in the letter it indicates that wood and other 
facilities were pushed down – and I’m not quoting it word for 
word – and then taken somewhere, put on a pile, and burnt. Are 
you suggesting that some of the stuff that was burnt is not going 
to have to be replaced? Mr. Minister, can I have your attention? 
Are you suggesting that some of the stuff which was burnt is 
not going to have to be replaced? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — You’re quoting from a letter which I 
haven’t seen, and you haven’t given the name of the author. For 
all I know, your research staff wrote the letter. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, the letter was printed in the 
Hudson Bay Post-Review. I’m sure that you have been given a 
copy of it by the member from Kelsey-Tisdale because I 
suspect he probably has had some concern about it. I will 
indeed have a copy of this letter made right promptly and make 
sure that you get a copy of it, as I indicated earlier that I would. 
 
The gentleman who writes the letter on behalf of many other 
people not only has sent me the letter; he has also had it printed 
in a local newspaper – so certainly he is not trying to hide 
anything. But he does indicate here that wood . . . I mean, these 
campgrounds have wood that your department puts up, Mr. 
Minister. That was taken and burnt . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . But let us assume it was. Let us assume it was, okay? If it 
was, how much does your department estimate it will be costing 
to replace this? — never mind the staff time who would 
normally be doing something else. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Look in your Hansard for May 12, 
1986, page 1226. 
 

Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, a couple of 
comments. At least in that lengthy discourse the member 
has obviously ended his efforts to try to convince people 
that 75 parking stalls are 75 parks. 

 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals, Minister of Tourism and Small Business 
– not I. So don’t try and mislead people to say that I was using 
the phrase. I wasn’t. Someone else was using that phrase. 
 
The hon. member gets down in the muck again and he refers to 
a youth convention, a young Tory convention that took place in 
Regina at which point a sink was destroyed in a hotel. And then 
he says, well perhaps this park, or campsite, or picnic ground, is 
the kind of place we should be taking these young 
Conservatives because that’s where they fit in. It’s not been 
pointed out yet, but the investigation is still taking place about 
what happened in that hotel, and the evidence points out to 
some interlopers having arrived. And knowing the current state 
of desperation of the NDP party, I wouldn’t be surprised where 
those interlopers arrived from or  

where they were motivated. 
 
However, maybe this would be a more fitting type of activity 
out there, if you want to get into this type of debate. And I’m 
looking at The Commonwealth, not a rag I would normally care 
to be associated with. But there was an article that interested 
me, talking about the NDP youth gearing up for the election. 
And what did they say? What resolution did they pass? They 
passed a resolution calling for the legalization of prostitution 
through the formation of worker-owned co-ops. Perhaps you are 
wanting a lease on this site to have your worker-owned co-op 
for prostitution. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. I would like 
to ask the minister what his department has contributed towards 
the Saskatchewan Trappers’ Association in this estimate before 
us. As well, while we are on that subject, I would also like to 
ask you whether or not you have provided any encouragement, 
any incentives, towards the wild rice industry. 
 
(1200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — To deal with the question relating to 
trappers first, Hon. member, the financial contribution this year 
is $70,000, which is the same contribution as last year towards 
trapping education and development. 
 
And the wild rice – we’ll just check those figures for you. 
 
Mr. Yew: — The trapping industry this past year, Mr. Minister, 
has been very poor. The industry itself is very volatile. The 
income, the production of fur, and the income to the individual 
people that rely on this industry, has been very, very drastically 
poor. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, in light of the fact that your government 
can provide funding to millionaires such as Peter Pocklington – 
you provide a lot of incentives and tax and royalty holidays to 
people like Peter Pocklington and also to major oil companies – 
I wonder what type of incentive, or compensation, if at all you 
have considered compensation, what type of support you have 
given that industry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — As relates to trapping, trapper training 
programs and course material have been upgraded. Three new 
trapper training instructors have successfully completed the 
trapper training instructor course at Lac La Biche, and during 
the winter of 1985-86, 20 trapping schools were run with 393 
students in attendance. 
 
Mr. Yew: — In terms of the trappers’ association itself, Mr. 
Minister, in terms of the Saskatchewan Trappers’ Association, 
and also individually, in terms of the trapping blocks, the fur 
blocks, could you provide me with the figures, financial 
assistance that you may have provided to these areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The figure is 45,000 – fur blocks. We 
also contributed 500 to the association for the annual meeting, 
plus we sent representatives to assist with it. And for fur bearer 
and trapper education, the figure was $80,000. 
  



 
May 16, 1983 

1370 
 
 

Mr. Yew: — Do you not agree, Mr. Minister, that that is not 
consistent at all with the former administration. I personally can 
recall funding that was provided to the trappers’ association 
with an annual funding assistance of $121,000. Why has that 
been eliminated, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The hon. member referred to a figure in 
1981 when the trappers’ association received $120,000. And, 
yes, that grant had been reduced considerably, but the STA 
(Saskatchewan Trappers’ Association) cannot be considered to 
represent all the trappers of Saskatchewan, since less that 1,000 
of the province’s 20,000 trappers are members of that 
organization. 
 
We have decided that we’d like to see the money spent and 
spread among all the trappers rather than funding one 
organization, which represents just a small percentage of the 
total number of trappers, and that’s why we’ve put it into 
trapper education, development incentive, and to fur-bearer 
programs, which comes to $150,000, plus our support for the 
forest institute of Canada, to the tune of $15,000 a year to 
promote humane trapping. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, I think there’s a fundamental 
difference here of the type of trapper we’re talking about. You 
know, the people I’m referring to are people of native ancestry. 
Trapping, hunting, fishing, has been their traditional way of life. 
And they . . . for many of them they have no education; they 
have no skills or qualifications to enter into the professional job 
market. This is their sole livelihood. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you know, I take it that your government 
has no commitment at all to urge the people in the northern 
administration district. They rely on this industry as an 
important industry and an important source of income to 
supplement some of the other seasonal work that they manage 
to get, you know, in other areas like commercial fishing, etc. 
 
I look, Mr. Minister, at the overall economy of our government, 
our province, and what the Devine government made from our 
northern resources. And, Mr. Minister, for the record, northern 
people are asking, you know, however, whether there is an 
adequate return to northern people from those resources, and 
whether there is adequate participation and consultation in the 
development of those resources. 
 
I look for an example, Mr. Minister, figures released by your 
government for the year 1983. The value of uranium produced 
for that period was $120 million. The value of forest products 
produced was 171 million. And the value of receipts from 
tourists, etc., from other parts of Canada and so on, receipts 
came up to $212 million. And much of that, Mr. Minister, was 
due to the tourist appeal of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Again, Mr. Minister, your government collected significant 
revenues as well from . . . looking at your ‘84-85 estimates, Mr. 
Minister, you collected $17 million in uranium revenues for that 
particular year. And then we can go on to other areas such as 
licences and permits for forestry, fishing, and trapping, and so 
forth, you collected  

$11 million. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, the people of the North are asking, where are 
the jobs? Where are the economic opportunities for northern 
people? You know, just how much are you putting back into the 
North? The top half of our province which is populated by 44 
communities, people who rely on traditional pursuits, have got 
nothing back from your government. 
 
On one hand, you can spend millions and millions and millions 
of dollars to provide incentives, tax breaks, royalty breaks, 
compensation, to oil companies, to the Peter Pocklingtons of 
Alberta, to the Manalta Coal of Alberta, the Husky Oil of 
Alberta – 390 million was it? 
 
And then you also, just the other day when we were under 
estimates for Environment, I noted that your government is 
prepared to spend $23 million to pay from the Saskatchewan 
treasury to oil companies such as PanCanadian, Canadian Roxy 
Petroleum, for 32 oil wells that would be affected by rising 
water. 
 
Mr. Minister, you know, you’ve got a mixed-up priority back 
there. You are not looking at the social and economic 
conditions of people back in the northern half of this province. 
Those people are in dire straits. They need help, and they need 
help today. They don’t need help over a five-year program. 
Your government continuously reiterates hollow promises of 
major facilities or programs that they want to initiate. Well I’ll 
tell you, Mr. Minister, your mandate is out. It’s run out. It ran 
out a month and a half ago. 
 
With all sincerity, Mr. Minister, I ask you: what can you do? 
Have you got any commitment to help alleviate the high social 
and economic disparities in the northern administration district 
where we have high unemployment – as high as 99 per cent in 
many of the remote communities? There is nothing but welfare 
dependency rates that are going up. You know, unacceptable 
welfare dependency rates. 
 
Now that is something you and your government and your 
colleagues can snicker at it, probably, but that is a serious issue. 
Those people need help. You just don’t provide help to the rich. 
That’s not the way it should be. But your government has a 
policy of capitalism. And I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, capitalism 
does not work in northern Saskatchewan. I’ve said it before and 
I’ll say it again. This big policy that you’ve come up with, this 
fancy policy of yours, this open for big business, just doesn’t 
jibe with the people up North. Sure we’re not against 
development, Mr. Minister, but we haven’t got the capital to 
help ourselves. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: have you made any attempts at 
all to look into the industries in question and to seriously 
provide some revenue, some working capital, significant 
working capital – working capital that will start building a 
sound economic base for the native communities in the northern 
administration district, a sound economic base? 
 
Well I’ll stop at that for now, Mr. Minister, and maybe get a 
reaction. If you have any commitment, I’d sure love to  
  



 
May 16, 1986 

1371 
 
 

hear it. I’m sure the people in the North would love to have 
some information if you do have any concerns about the North. 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well certainly, Mr. Chairman, we do 
have concerns about the North. Northern programs in 1986-87, 
we have committed $22,402,860 from my department alone in 
programs in the North. So it’s definite there’s a commitment. 
 
Your other far ranging questions would perhaps be more 
accurately directed to my colleague, the member for Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
Mr. Yew: — What was the figures, Mr. Minister? I missed out. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — $22,402,860. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, in which areas specifically are those 
funds directed to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — That is put into all the services our 
department would be provided, including grants, trapping, fur, 
etc. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, could I have the information in 
detail in writing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — That would take a fair piece of intricate 
bookkeeping, but yes, I’ll direct officials to put some details 
together, and whenever it’s ready, I’ll make sure it’s forwarded 
to you. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, I want to go on. As I 
mentioned earlier, the fur industry, the production, the income 
to the individuals involved here in the top half of the province, 
the industry is very poor. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if your 
department has given any consideration towards restocking 
some species of wild game in the northern administration 
district. 
 
I noted with interest that we’ve had programs before like, for an 
example, the swift fox was classed as being extinct in this 
province, and there was a program that provided for the 
restocking of this fox in this province. I think this was a year or 
two ago. 
 
In conversation with people up North, trappers themselves, I’ve 
had some concerns expressed to me that there is a possibility 
here that we could help the industry in terms of restocking 
species like lynx. Now there’s a high-priced fur, but there was 
little or no lynx in the annual harvest for this past trapping 
season. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you would consider restocking the 
trapping industry with game animals that are in demand and 
that can provide income for the trappers themselves. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’m not sure of the feasibility of that 
particular suggestion. Was it only lynx you had in mind, or 
were there some other species? I’m hearing behind me from the 
biologists that there would be some difficulty  

with lynx as a stocking program. So I as wondering if there are 
some other ideas you had in mind, perhaps other fur-bearing 
animals. 
 
I know the hon. member is himself involved in trapping and he 
realizes that we don’t dictate fur prices; they’re dictated by the 
fashion houses of Europe. And when a particular species is in 
demand, the price goes up and when the demand drops off, the 
fur prices drop off. Right now we’ve got more beaver, in 
certainly northern Saskatchewan, than we had at the height of 
the fur trade; consequently the prices have dropped for that 
particular species. 
 
But if there’s a species you have in mind, hon. member, if it’s 
something that we can discuss or we can look at, certainly we’d 
be happy to look at that situation. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s my understanding that in 
this province, and possibly in other parts of the country, we’ve 
been successful in restocking some areas with the swift fox. I 
don’t know if it’s a success. But in other areas such as moose or 
elk, buffalo, there’s been some success; and also the fish 
stocking program. There are some areas here that relate to the 
issue at hand. 
 
I was referring to lynx, Mr. Minister. I could have maybe 
suggested other species of fur, such as . . . the discussions I’ve 
had dealt with fur like lynx, fisher, marten, possibly mink. And 
in some areas, Mr. Minister, the beaver population is relatively 
low as well. Maybe it’s high in the southern areas, and maybe 
it’s a pest to the farmers in the southern areas – I hear some 
vibes about it once in a while – but in some of the northern 
areas they have become pretty rare. 
 
I don’t know what your officials have in terms of the surveys 
that they have on game population. I really can’t dispute or 
question that, but from my experience and from discussions 
I’ve had with the trappers, the fur in itself is relatively poor in 
the northern areas. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — As the hon. member would be aware, 
an animal such as the lynx depends primarily for its food supply 
on the snowshoe hare. And the snowshoe hare has a 10-year 
cycle, so it goes high cycle, low cycle. Therefore, the 
population fluctuates according to food supply, and when the 
snowshoe hare is in low supply, consequently, concomitantly, 
we have a dip in the supply of lynx. 
 
To introduce lynx, to try and promulgate the species, perhaps, 
in northern Saskatchewan, could be difficult if there is not an 
adequate natural food supply for the lynx. 
 
If there are other animals . . . You mentioned big game. If you 
know of an area, for instance, that would be suitable fore the 
introduction of elk, we’d be pleased to look at that area with 
you. That’s the kind of thing we feel competent that we can do, 
both from a human management point of view and a biological 
point of view. 
 
One or two other areas present difficult – maybe not impossible 
or insurmountable, but certainly difficult biological problems. 
  



 
May 16, 1983 

1372 
 
 

Mr. Yew: — I would certainly like to see if you have any 
plans, if you are going to consider any plans, Mr. Minister. As 
far as I can conclude, you haven’t made any firm commitment 
at all. I’m very sorry to hear that when, on one hand, we can 
supply the rich with so much incentives and dollars out of our 
provincial treasury, I just can’t accept the policy of your 
government; I simply can’t. 
 
I want to go on to the . . . The people of the North are desperate 
in terms of income and in terms of jobs. Their only other option 
now is to try to make do with what they have. 
 
The other question I want to get into, Mr. Minister, is the wild 
rice industry I referred to earlier. Have you provided any 
funding to date to boost that industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — What we have done is we’re working 
on a wild rice policy which would suit the people and the area, 
and we’ve taken out the royalty system and substituted it with a 
rental system of 10 cents per acre for the first four years. That’s 
instead of royalties, which we think is a fairer break to the 
producer, and we’ve also lengthened the term of the lease to 10 
years so there can be some stability within the industry. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I understand, Mr. Minister, that there’s a review 
of the policy for the industry, the wild rice industry. To this 
point in time I gather that you have some new regulations for 
leases — for getting leases and permits, etc. — and also in the 
policy of funding, Mr. Minister, and the provision for seeding. I 
wonder if I could ask you to provide me with a copy of your 
updated status of the industry — I mean a copy of your policy 
for the industry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The regulations have been approved, 
have been printed, and I’ll undertake to send a copy over to you 
as soon as I can find one. 
 
Mr. Yew: — In terms of reforestation, Mr. Minister, I again 
was quite concerned when I talked with a number of trappers in 
the North who related to me that a lot of their. . . My colleague 
from Athabasca raised this point as well, you know, that a lot of 
our forest wildlife habitat is being cut bare. In some areas, Mr. 
Minister — and I’m not trying to exaggerate here — but in 
some areas as I drive I can notice a distinct difference between 
what the natural environment looked like some 10 years ago, in 
comparison to what it looks like today. 
 
Some of these places are just like a barren desert, Mr. Minister. 
That is, to me, not a good practice. I distinctly remember my 
colleague talking about the clear cutting policy just yesterday 
evening. And, Mr. Minister, I wonder if that policy is under 
review, and if not, why not? And the other question is, Mr. 
Minister, in terms of forestation, reforestation or silviculture or 
whatever you want to phrase it, tree planting — I’ll put it more 
in laymen’s terms — just how much emphasis are you putting 
in that program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — As indicated to your hon. colleague last 
night, over the course of this summer we will be putting out a 
white paper as a precursor to a new forest Act which will more 
accurately reflect not just  

current policy, but current thinking and research in the area of 
forestry which would, of course, reflect silviculture, which is 
the care and management of the forest and reforestation. 
 
There’s no question that we have to have a commitment to 
reforestation. I’m not going to point fingers or lay blame on 
anybody, but there has been a lack of reforestation over a long 
number of years for a variety of reasons. And we’re very 
anxious to play some catch-up and get into the business of 
reforestation. This year we will have 10 million seedlings 
grown in Saskatchewan for planting at our nurseries. The 
government program will exceed 7 million and be somewhere 
close to 8 million in planting this year. 
 
(1230) 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, in terms, of the contracts and the 
tenders for those tree-planting jobs, I would like to ask you . . . 
You know, I noted in 1983-84 your government provided 
contracts to two firms from B.C. for tree planting. It was noted 
by the people in La Ronge, and I’m referring specifically here 
to the Lac La Ronge Indian band, who have a lot of experience 
in that area, who were neglected and were not given the option 
to carry out the work. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, if you would take that into 
consideration and look at your own backyard first before you 
start providing for others out of the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I assure the hon. member that we 
haven’t given a B.C. contract since I’ve been minister, and I 
think this is the second time around we’ve been doing tree 
planting contracting under my auspices. I don’t directly get 
involved with that aspect of the department. That’s under the 
control of the deputy minister and the executive director of 
forestry, and they recommend the contracts be awarded based 
on, of course, tender price and also capability of delivering and 
doing good work. And as you’d be aware yourself, there are 
some outfits that are pretty shoddy, and they don’t meet our 
very exacting standards. Therefore they don’t get contracts. 
 
The B.C. company to which you referred — I believe it’s Tawa 
— for the last two years haven’t been able to compete with our 
own Saskatchewan tree planters, and they haven’t had a 
contract. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Yes, that’s what I’m saying. Mr. Minister, there’s 
a lot of people that were very upset about that decision, that at 
one time . . . And I have the documents to provide to you if you 
require, the documentation about the firms in question. As I was 
saying, the people were upset because of the fact that there was 
such high unemployment in those northern areas. They were 
neglected; they weren’t given the contract at the time. 
 
The other matter that really upset the people was the fact that 
they were available; they had the expertise and the experience 
to do the job. So I would caution the minister and advise you: 
let’s look at the local areas, the people at the local level directly 
affected and try to provide some incentives and some 
opportunity for them next time around. 
  



 
May 16, 1986 

1373 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — One of the contracts given out this year 
— I’ve just been handed it — was to a native group. We are 
interested in pursing native tree planting contractors. There has 
been some training and assistance provided in the past, and 
we’re willing to pursue that. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, when 
we’re talking about forestry, I have a couple of questions on it. 
And one is some of the problems that had appeared along 
settlements in the northern part of my constituency where there 
has been some clear cutting being done in areas where it was 
previously left along and not being cut out by the large forestry 
corporations, but was left for some of the independent foresters 
so they can go in and cut some of the logs for lumber for 
themselves. 
 
In the area north of Swan Plain, last year, that problem surfaced 
where a logging company was allowed to come in and just clear 
cut everything in there and leave nothing for the local people 
that were at one time somewhat dependent on getting some 
lumber out of there every year, going in there and being able to 
log some of that lumber or the trees out of there. 
 
Mr. Minister, have you formulated some policy on how you’re 
going to deal with some of the independent foresters, and will 
you be setting aside some areas for them where they can get 
logs for lumber for themselves or for selling a little bit of it, and 
not in an area that would be somewhere 10 or 20 miles in the 
forest but somewhere where it would be a little close to the area 
where they live so that they wouldn’t have to have that far to 
travel, and let the large corporations go further into the forest? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, a good suggestion, and we have 
been acting on it through the new forest management licence 
agreements, the FMLAs, the acronym for short. We are making 
allowances for small operators, Again I could dwell at some 
length on the misfortunes of small operators in the last number 
of years, but it is certainly the intention of this government to 
allow them back into the bush and back into operations. And 
that is being reflected in the FMLAs that are being negotiated. 
 
I may say to that end I’ve had numerous meetings with the 
Saskatchewan Council of Independent Forest Industries, very 
positive meetings, and they seem quite pleased . . . with the 
initiatives we’ve been taking to make sure their quotas increase. 
 
When I became minister, they had less than one-half of 1 per 
cent of the total allowable cut. In one year that moved up to 6 
per cent and now it’s approximately 8 per cent, and there’s 
much more room for movement on that again. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Mr. Minister, I totally agree that there 
should be some consideration given to the independent 
foresters. 
 
The other question that I had, which you refused to answer or 
didn’t answer at the time, was: are we going to be looking at 
areas that they can get close to the are that  

they may be operating from, rather than being sent into the 
forest and into areas where the large logging companies don’t 
want to go or don’t want to bother going into? 
 
Let’s not send them into swamp areas or into areas that are 
difficult to get to, but let’s reserve some of the other areas 
closer to the settlements for them, and let the large logging 
companies go back into the bush because they’ve got the 
equipment to do that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — There will be bona fide quotas 
provided. It won’t be garbage areas. They do salvage work, and 
they have done salvage work. There will be good areas set 
aside, and we have two reserves where we have set aside a 
sizable quota for the smaller operators. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — And another area, Mr. Minister, deals with 
some of the . . . specifically one. You talked about campsites a 
while ago, and I’m not sure I got the kind of information out of 
the answers that you gave to my colleague as to what one would 
have wanted. 
 
And I’ll just . . . I’d like to get something clear on the 
campsites, Mr. Minister. You mentioned that you were talking 
about 75 campsites. And your interpretation of a campsite was 
— and I think it would be close, very close to what you said — 
you said that a campsite is an area, a site, where someone can 
put up a tent or park a vehicle and spend the night there. Is this 
what you say you are closing — those kind of individual 
campsites? Or are we talking about a larger area that could 
accommodate a number of such campsites? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — . . . speaking 75. Your definition was 
more or less accurate, or your paraphrasing what I’d said, and I 
have no quarrel with your description. The 75 are spread over 
10 different facilities, so 10 into 75 gives you the rough average 
of the size of the campsites to which we are referring. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — That was my question. What you are saying is 
that you have closed 10 different facilities amounting to the 75 
campsites within those facilities. That was what I wanted to get 
clear. 
 
Mr. Minister, the other thing is, I think it would be a shame if 
the department would do to all 10 as was mentioned in a letter 
from someone from the area. I don’t have the letter, and I don’t 
know what really happened there. But if that is happening at 
these campsites, I think that maybe it would beneficial for you 
to take notice of that and go into those areas — if they all 
haven’t been destroyed at this point — and go the local 
communities and ask them if they would like to take over these 
campsites and try to maintain them. Leave that equipment in 
there because it’s not going to be that costly, and if you’re 
going to destroy a lot of that anyway, then why would we want 
to do this? But allow these communities to take them over. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I assure the hon. member you got my 
attention today. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, one of the other things that I 
would like to ask you to do is to look at smaller areas, and again 
it’s a specific one that I have in mind, and it’s a boat 
  



 
May 16, 1983 

1374 
 
 

 launch just south of Togo, a town in my constituency on the 
Assiniboine River, the Shellmouth reservoir area, or the Lake of 
the Prairies as it’s called. 
 
The community has written you a letter regarding that boat 
launch, and it’s not an expensive project, but there are many 
people that come to that area that would like to launch their 
boats. But there was one at one time — it’s been eroded a bit by 
the water — and either the community has to go and build a 
boat launch, or someone from the department would have to go 
in there and build a launch where the people can come in and 
unload their boats. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s not a costly item. I think it would be 
worthwhile for the department to consider it and go in there and 
build that boat launch so that people that come into the area 
would be able to get to unload their boats and be able to load 
them easily once they’re done their fishing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Well, hon. member, I don’t recall the 
letter. I’ve asked one of my staff to search the files and see if 
we can find the specific letter. But yes, we’d be pleased to take 
a look at that for you. I’ll have one of my staff take a look. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — It’s from the community of Togo, Mr. 
Minister. And if you could look into that, I’d appreciate it. 
 
There’s one other area that has been a bit of a problem and that 
area is the Porcupine forest reserve, Mr. Minister — that’s the 
Woody Lake area and the Townsend Lake. There’s a number of 
lakes in there. That’s been a real problem and the biggest 
problems there are the roads leading to that area from the south. 
The roads are well built up from the north, from Hudson Bay, 
but when you go to the south area, and there aren’t a lot of 
people using that road from the south, when they go into that 
area they have to hope that they get a nice weekend. Because if 
they go in and it starts to rain, the roads are in bad condition. 
What they need basically is gravel. People can’t get out of that 
area. They have some difficulty getting out of there. So, Mr. 
Minister, I think everybody in that area and the people that have 
some cabins at the Woody Lake area would like to get that road 
fixed up; get some gravel on it so they could be able to drive in 
and out regardless of what the weather might be like. 
 
I think the biggest problem there is the logging trucks that use 
that road, and it doesn’t take long when you’ve got heavy trucks 
hauling on there to get rid of the gravel that may be put on. So, 
Mr. Minister, if you could get your department to look into it 
and to see if you can’t spring a few dollars for that area and get 
some gravel on that road. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Yes, I’m pleased to inform the hon. 
member that we have had an ongoing program of upgrading on 
that road each year. And unless memory fails me I did meet 
with a group from that area last year in my office. We discussed 
it and we’re putting $110,000 on the road this year. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — What are you going to do specifically on that 
road with that $110,000? 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Gravelling and upgrading. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Will that cover the whole road? One hundred 
and ten thousand doesn’t seem like much, but if it’s . . . Okay, 
go ahead. I see you have an answer, so I’ll let you answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — What we do is we do a piece of it every 
year. We’ve found ourselves being responsible for a variety of 
roads around the province. Personally I’d like to give them to 
my colleague, the minister in charge of the Department of 
Highways, but we have traditionally maintained a certain 
number of roads. And on the budget we have, we’ve split 
among various roads. That particular road will be 110,000 this 
year, and gradually we’re building them all, to the best of our 
capability. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — With that $110,000, just how much do you 
estimate you will be able to do on that road? It basically needs a 
gravelling all the way through. Now how much will $110,000 
accomplish? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — We anticipate rebuilding and gravelling 
on four miles as well as the maintenance on the rest. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — I suppose four miles is better than nothing, Mr. 
Minister. It’s hardly going to do what the people require on that 
road, because four miles may get some of that road gravelled 
and will be able to get . . . they’ll be able to drive on it. But I 
think the biggest problem is the rest of it that needs a gravelling. 
 
And I know you’re not going to do that this year, but I hope that 
you would see if you have some reserve in that department, 
some money left over from somewhere that you can try and put 
a little more into there and try and spread a bit more gravel on 
it. 
 
(1245) 
 
One of your colleagues said they’ll do that next year. Well I 
think by next year there might be an election. And if there is, I 
would tend to guess that we’ll get most of that road fixed up 
from the South. 
 
Some Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, one of the other concerns that I 
have is the staffing at some of the major parks, and one is 
Madge Lake in my area. And I think we’ve been finding an 
increasing problem there regarding staffing, an insufficient 
amount of staff to do the work that has to be done. 
 
And I know you’re going to be talking about saving money and 
everything else, and I can understand why you would be 
wanting to save money. But when we look at the kind of waste 
that has been going on within this government, I think what we 
could do is cut back on some of that waste within government 
and put some of the money into parks and into roads where it 
would do more good for the general public, the taxpayers of the 
province, and maybe cut back on some of the advertising as we 
have heard in some of the departments when you’re looking at 
not only a few hundred thousands, but when  
  



 
May 16, 1986 

1375 
 
 

you’re looking at advertising going into the millions of dollars. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, if we could take some of that advertising, 
in fact if we could have taken one-third of the advertising of the 
Tourism budget — and most of it becomes political advertising 
when it’s out there — if we could take one-third of that, we 
would be able to fix up that total road from the Woody Lake to 
the South. 
 
So there is a lot of money there, Mr. Minister, that you could 
take out of the government, out of really excessive spending in 
some areas of government, and put it into some useful project 
that would provide a better service for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’m not sure I can respond to that. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — I beg your pardon, Mr. Minister. I didn’t get 
your answer. What was that again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’m not sure of what kind of reply you 
were looking for on that particular aspect. The Tourism budget 
is under the auspices of the Minister of Tourism and Small 
Business. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Mr. Minister. I think what I was 
referring to was that possibly you could take the initiative to cut 
back on some of your own advertising and ask some of your 
colleagues to cut back on some of the wasteful advertising that 
they have been doing. And when you run into millions of 
dollars in advertising, I think you would have to agree that 
some of that is maybe a waste, and there’s no question that it’s 
a waste when we have reviewed some of the advertising that 
has been done. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’m just saying that you should maybe talk to 
your colleagues and instruct them to save some of that money 
from the advertising. Forget about the political benefits that you 
hope to gain out of all that advertising and see if you can put 
that money into benefits for the people of Saskatchewan . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Like some of those campsites that 
you closed down; some of the staff cuts that you have made 
within the parks that do create some hardships; some of the road 
systems within the parks that need to be fixed up that aren’t 
there; many services within the park system, and other areas of 
this province, that could be improved if you would only use 
some of the money that this government has been spending — 
and not spending in a way that taxpayers would expect them to 
spend it but spending it in a way that taxpayers, I’m sure if they 
knew, would certainly disagree with. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Chairman, I have examples of the 
type of advertising which my department does, and I’m going to 
send them over to the hon. member. And these are just three 
examples. We have brochures for every park in the province, be 
it historic site or provincial park, recreation areas. We have all 
kinds of information that goes out to commercial fishermen and 
sports fishermen. Just a variety of information, for which it 
costs our department $262,000 a year. And this is the kind of 
advertising we are doing. Any other type of advertising to 
which the hon. member has referred, he would have to  

bring up with other ministers. 
 
This is the kind of stuff we do to promote our parks and to 
promote fishing and hunting within Saskatchewan. Personally 
I’m proud of it, and I’d like to send it over to the hon. member 
for his perusal. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Mr. Minister, I have seen some of the 
advertising and I don’t disagree with the advertising that 
provides information for tourists and for people of this province 
that may live closer to the parks. I disagree, however, Mr. 
Minister, with advertising that would appear to be more 
political — and maybe I shouldn’t accuse you of doing it; I 
don’t know — but your government as a whole, the government 
as a whole certainly has been doing that. They have been 
spending millions of dollars on advertising that is a waste, a 
total and absolute waste. And, Mr. Minister, if advertising was 
cut back, the kind of political advertising that we have seen was 
cut back, then I think we would have done a lot more in 
providing park facilities, campgrounds. And it would take just a 
small amount. Those campgrounds that you shut down — the 
10 of them, the campsites — 75 campsites, if you want to put a 
different interpretation on what a campsite is or a campground, 
those that you shut down, Mr. Minister . . . It would be a lot less 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . As my colleague says, if we 
want to look at what it cost for one individual on a contract, for 
Ron Ryan, that would have been able to keep every one of these 
facilities open and would have been providing a worthwhile, 
very worthwhile spot for tourists and a place where they can 
stop and rest and have a little bit of a picnic as they are driving 
along the highways. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I am just saying that that is the kind of waste 
that we have seen in this government that should be directed 
elsewhere. And I would hope that you would make the move as 
the Minister of Parks, and tell your colleagues that we need this 
money to provide better service within our parks; we need that 
money to provide better roads within those parks. And certainly 
I could go into the highways that lead to the park, but I won’t 
do that today. 
 
But at least within the parks, Mr. Minister, if you could try to 
get some of your colleagues to release some of that advertising 
money that they have been wasting and some of the special 
contracts that they have been giving out and put some better 
roads and facilities for people — taxpayers and tourists of this 
province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are you going to answer, or are you 
going to sit there like a stump? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — The nonentity from Regina Centre is 
wanting to get into the exchange of insults here. I thought the 
hon. member from Pelly was merely making a closing 
statement to his questions and his remarks and I was going to 
give him the courtesy of having the last word. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I want to begin by making a 
comment in general terms about the stewardship of this 
government with respect to renewable resources. It doesn’t 
matter whether one’s talking about parks or game or the 
northern Saskatchewan where . . . It  
  



 
May 16, 1983 

1376 
 
 

doesn’t make sense to talk about parks in that sense — it’s all a 
wilderness area. What this government has done to our 
renewable resources will take, I think, many years of a more 
responsible government to undo. 
 
In virtually every area, Mr. Minister, you’ve cut back, you have 
utilized resources which in another sense take some 
considerable period of time to regenerate. You have utilized 
them. You have cut back on services. You have maximized 
taxes. And many of the public . . . I see the minister, the 
member from Swift Current, looking at me with a quizzical 
look. Many of the public are wondering where on earth is the 
money going. 
 
Camp fees, the fees for camping, have doubled, and the parks 
are open for a shorter period of time. The swimming pools are 
only open on weekends, and that for twice the money. So many 
of the public are wondering where the money is going. 
 
The money is going to the likes of Ron Rath and the other 
recipients of Tory patronage, and it exists in the same extend in 
your department as it does in others. People are paying more, 
they’re getting a good deal less, and they’re wondering, what on 
earth has gone on. What has happened? 
 
What has happened over the last four years? Why are services 
more expensive? Why have the park fees gone up? Why are 
they open for a shorter period of time? Why are they paying for 
firewood? Why have you got this ridiculous reservation system 
that nobody can make work? What has happened? Part of this is 
basically the incompetence of this government. You can’t even 
manage something as straightforward as parks without lousing 
it up. 
 
For year after year after year, decade after decade, the park 
system ran itself. We have a park system that this province was 
justifiably proud of it. It was like our financial situation. We 
thought that nobody could louse it up. the Premier said on a 
broader scale that you could afford to mismanage Saskatchewan 
and still come out ahead. Well the last four years proved him 
wrong. I think there were a number of people who thought you 
could afford to mismanage this province’s parks — they were 
so strong and it wouldn’t matter — and the last four years have 
proved you wrong. They’ve also proved you wrong with respect 
to renewable resources, with respect of game. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are increasing volume of complaints from 
the public. Here a park opens — at least it is what you describe 
as a voluntary registration system in the sense that there are 
people there taking registration and looking after the place — it 
opens a little later. You’ve got a swimming pool — the Buffalo 
Pound, for instance, the place where we always go — they open 
for a shorter period of time. You’ve got other parks in other 
areas that are being cut back. You’re chiselling and hacking and 
chiselling and hacking, all the while increasing costs. 
 
And you claim it is the hard times. You claim it’s external 
events that have made your life so miserable. Well I say, Mr. 
Chairman, and members opposite, it is hard times but they’ve to 
some extend been induced by an incompetent  

administration that cannot run something as straightforward as a 
set of parks — the finest in North American, if not in the world 
— which the former administration built, which you people are 
in the process of lousing up. There are fewer services; the parks 
are not as well maintained . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What garbage! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It is not garbage. If you people would get 
out of the Air Canada airplanes and you’d stop going to Swift 
Current and having the taxpayer pay your vacations; if you’d 
spend some of your vacation time in Saskatchewan in 
Saskatchewan’s provincial parks; and if you weren’t so high 
and mighty; if you were in contact with the public who use 
those parks; you’d know that all is not well. But you’re not. At 
taxpayers’ expense you vacation in Switzerland and in Saudi 
Arabia and in San Francisco, anywhere but in Saskatchewan. 
 
I say what the minister out to do is spend some of his vacation 
time in Saskatchewan, spend some of your time at these parks, 
and you’ll know that there are some real problems, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
There are problems, as well, in the area of hunting, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sit down, Ned. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Once again, you’ve . . . Mr. Chairman, I 
don’t know if I’m going to be interrupted by members opposite 
or not. 
 
There are problems, in addition, with respect to hunting. 
You’ve done the same thing. The hunting licences have 
increased. And I intend to suggest later on that the game, big 
game, has not been adequately managed. In fairness to the 
government, Mr. Chairman, in fairness to the government, you 
people didn’t bring upon the white-tailed deer the hard winter 
which they had a year and a half ago. 
 
But neither, Mr. Minister, did you do anything about it. The 
wildlife association, the Saskatchewan wildlife association 
made a valiant attempt to keep the white-tailed deer alive during 
that hard winter. Mr. Minister, the problem, I think they will 
admit in retrospect, the problem was a bit too big for them. 
 
What’s the member on his feet? I’m on my feet. 
 
Hon Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I move that the committee 
rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:01 p.m. 
 
 


