


















































April 29, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 29, 1986 
 

945 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 
to you and to members of the House nine adults, residents of the 
cancer patient lodge of the Allan Blair Memorial Clinic 
associated with, or close to, Pasqua Hospital in the constituency 
of Regina Elphinstone. I know all hon. members will wish to 
welcome them to the House. I express the hope that they enjoy 
their stay here. I will look forward to meeting with them at 
about 2:30 when we’ll have an opportunity to chat and consider 
the proceedings which they will view in the next half-hour. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Myers: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 
to introduce to you, and through you, 35 students from a school 
in Saskatoon which is in my riding. Hugh Cairns school. 
They’re accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Sulatyski. And I 
would hope that they have a very informative stay here in the 
Legislative Building and that all members join with me in 
welcoming them to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rousseau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and to the members of the Assembly 41 grade 
7 and 8 students from the St. Matthew School in Whitmore 
Park, I believe, accompanied as well by their teacher, Mr. Stan 
Crawford. I will be meeting with them at 2:30, and I’ve asked 
the new candidate for Regina South to join me in meeting with 
them for refreshments. I would ask the members to join me in 
welcoming the students to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

U.S. Policy on International Wheat Sales 
 

Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
directed to the Deputy Premier, in the absence of the Minister 
of Agriculture, and it has to do with the efforts by the United 
States to steal traditional grain customers from Canada. 
 
I have here copies of a document, Mr. Speaker, from the 
Mulroney PC government which show that the U.S. has been 
selling wheat and other grains at fire-sale prices to traditional 
Canadian customers such as Syria, Algeria, Egypt, and Yemen. 
In addition to the low sale prices, the Americans have been 
providing subsidies of up to $54 a tonne on some of the sales. 
And since these documents prove that the Mulroney 
government is aware of what’s happening, can the Deputy 
Premier tell us what specific action he’s aware of that the 
Canadian government plans to take in protecting Canadian 
markets? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as we all know,  

there is only one world price for a bushel of wheat. And the 
actions of the U.S. in the market-place are the direct result of 
their efforts to get rid of some huge surpluses that they have in 
their inventory in the United States and, I think also, an effort to 
in some way bring some discipline to the actions of the 
European Economic Community in agricultural commodities in 
marketing those particular commodities. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that it . . . I think that it augurs well, Mr. 
Speaker, for the arguments advanced by our Premier on several 
occasions in the past, where he has argued that it is necessary 
that we in the western producers — Canada, United States, 
Australia, and others — should come to some international 
grains agreement so that we do have some clout in the 
international market-place, rather than cutting one another up in 
the international market-place. 
 
And as it relates to the record of this government, Mr. Speaker, 
in support of our farmers here in Saskatchewan, we will 
compare the support of this government with any other 
government in Canada, particularly that, Mr. Speaker, of 
Manitoba, where the National Farmers Union has asked the 
government of Manitoba to provide a $25 an acre cash subsidy, 
and our friend, the Minister of Agriculture in Manitoba, has 
said no. 
 
What he says, Mr. Speaker, what the Minister of Agriculture in 
Manitoba has said is that it’s up to the federal government to 
keep the agricultural economy healthy. Manitoba isn’t 
interested in keeping the agricultural economy healthy; he says, 
up to the federal government. While we may agree in part with 
the federal government helping to keep the agricultural 
economy happy, we in Saskatchewan have put our treasury 
four-square behind the agricultural community, and we intend 
to continue, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why our Premier has 
worked and worked tirelessly in co-operating with the federal 
government to bring initiatives to help our agricultural 
community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — New question to the Deputy Premier. Mr. 
Minister, you talk about all the programs that may be offered 
provincially. My question to you specifically was: — what is 
the federal government going to do to protect our markets? 
They are now fully aware that this is happening. Their own 
documents show it. Are they going to sit idly by, Mr. Minister, 
while the so-called friends of ours south of the border steal our 
traditional markets. Is this what the federal government is going 
to do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t speak with 
firsthand knowledge. The Premier is our Minister of 
Agriculture, and I know that he has lobbied long and hard with 
the federal government. And I know as well, Mr. Speaker, that 
his efforts in lobbying for help for the western Canadian farmer 
from the federal government have paid off in large measure, 
and I can name a few, but I won’t bore you with them. You’ve 
heard them several times before in this legislature, and I’m sure, 
Mr. Speaker, that our Premier and this government’s continued 
lobby at the federal level will bear even more fruit in the future. 
 
  



 
April 29, 1986 

 

946 
 

Mr. Lusney: — A question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, are you 
saying that at this point you are not aware of any kind of action 
that the federal government has been prepared to take, or is 
going to take, regarding losing these markets because of what 
the U.S. government is doing? We know, Mr. Minister, that the 
Americans are so-called acting against the European subsidies. 
Now, Mr. Minister, why are they not going after the European 
markets rather than after the Canadian ones? What is Ottawa at 
this point, that you are aware of, doing to try and save our 
markets from the U.S. of A.? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I say in all honesty that 
we in Saskatchewan are doing far more as it relates to 
protecting our agricultural community than are our neighbours 
in Manitoba. And I mean that is clearly demonstrated, clearly 
demonstrated, a matter of record for anyone that wants to look 
it up. 
 
As it relates to what Ottawa may or may not be doing this very 
moment in protecting the markets . . . and true, they may be 
traditional markets of Canada, but for him to say that they’re 
exclusive markets of Canada clearly indicates to this House that 
that member doesn’t know how the market-place works . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . and that may be true as well. 
 
As it relates to what Ottawa may or may not be doing at this 
particular moment, I’m not prepared to answer. I say, with all 
the honesty that I can muster, that I have been a little 
preoccupied as of late. I am not the Minister of Agriculture, and 
when the Minister of Agriculture is here, I’m sure that he’ll be 
more than pleased to deal with that question. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — A question to the Deputy Premier. Mr. 
Minister, can you give a short, quick answer then to something 
you should be aware of? It seems that your government has 
made no representation. Has the Premier of this province, the 
Minister of Agriculture, made any representation to Ottawa 
urging them to take some action to protect the farmers of 
Saskatchewan and the farmers of Canada so that we would not 
lose our traditional markets in the market-place? Have you done 
any of that, Mr. Deputy Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I know, and the Premier 
has told you in this House, some of the things that he has 
lobbied for in Ottawa are to bring in an enhanced, two-price, 
domestic wheat . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . He’s not 
interested in the answer. I don’t know why he asked the 
question. 
 
The Premier has lobbied for the federal government to remove 
all taxes from farm fuel. The Premier has lobbied for the federal 
government to accelerate pay-outs from the western grains 
stabilization plan. The Premier has lobbied the federal 
government to get rid of capital gains tax on the transfer of farm 
land. The Premier has lobbied for all kinds of things, some with 
varying degrees of success. There will be more fruit borne by 
these lobbying efforts in the future. 
 
One thing about the Premier is he does have an excellent 
relationship with the government in Ottawa, something  

that members opposite could never have, because their breed of 
cat will never find themselves sitting on the benches of power 
in Ottawa, and they’re sitting right where they belong here, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think they’ll be sitting there for a very long 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a 
question to the Deputy Premier, in the absence of the Minister 
of Agriculture. Sir, the Reagan administration has recently 
attacked European governments and others for continuing to 
trade with Libya and its allies. I ask you, sir, do you not see that 
stand as somewhat surprising when the Americans, behind the 
scenes, are trying to steal away traditional Canadian customers 
like Syria, who many would see as Libya’s strongest ally? And 
if you agree with that, will you not put this argument to the 
federal government, and will you not ask your friends in the 
federal government to stand up for Saskatchewan farmers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, the 
marketing of Canadian wheat is done through the wheat board, 
and they work very hard in not only maintaining our existing 
and traditional markets, but developing new markets. And I 
fully expect that with the market being finite, that some of the 
new markets that we are trying to develop are, in fact, 
traditional markets of United States and the European 
Economic Community. And I fully expect that if you develop 
an understanding for how the market-place works, you will 
come to understand that in a free competitive market out there 
in the international market-place, from time to time you come 
head to head with a competitor. And I’m as offended as anyone 
by the subsidies and the fire-sale prices, as you’d say, that are 
being offered by United States and by the European Economic 
Community. And yes, we have lobbied the federal government 
to take whatever measures necessary to protect our western 
Canadian farmer, and we will continue to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Deputy Premier. I 
take if from your answer, and I ask you, sir, do you then agree 
with the actions of the United States government in: — (a) 
urging Canada not to trade with Syria; and (b) moving into 
Syria and taking our traditional markets? And if you do not 
agree with that action of the United States government, would 
you lobby with the federal government at Ottawa to see whether 
they will stand up for Saskatchewan farmers and western 
farmers to see whether they will at least argue with their 
American colleagues on behalf of Saskatchewan farmers who 
are being hurt by these particular predatory trade practices on 
the part of the United States? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I think that all 
fair-thinking people are offended by predatory marketing 
practices. If what you say about the United States is true as it 
relates to Syria, clearly what they’re doing is hypocritical, and 
we should be offended by that as well. 
 
As it relates to the market-place, we would love for them to 
vacate it altogether so that we could have it all to ourselves, but 
that’s not the reality of the world; it’s not likely to be for at least 
my life-time. And you know . . . (inaudible  
  



 
April 29, 1986 

 

947 
 

interjection) . . . No, I won’t get into that. 
 
I saw an old friend of mine sitting in the gallery that has a lot of 
experience in marketing potash, and I was going to talk about 
that for a while, but I’ll leave that for another time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Premier, are you aware of any representations made by 
your government to Ottawa with respect to grain markets in 
Syria? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t speak with any 
first-hand knowledge of that at all. The Premier is the Minister 
of Agriculture and, you know, he talks to Ottawa on a regular 
basis, on an ongoing basis. And I don’t know whether he’s 
talked to them today, but I know that he talked to them earlier 
this week, and we are meeting with some federal ministers later 
this week. You know, as it relates to the specific question, the 
answer is I don’t know. 
 

Closure of Provincial Campsites 
 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my 
question to the Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources. It 
seems the minister was much more forthcoming outside the 
Assembly yesterday afternoon than he was inside the House. 
Can the minister confirm that his department plans to close 
down 36 roadside camp grounds and picnic sites and rest stops 
around the province this year? And will be provide the public 
with a full list of the facilities he plans to close down? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, the department will 
continue to operate 17 provincial parks, 101 regional parks, 253 
campsites. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Answer the question. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
apparently didn’t hear the question that I put to him. Can you 
explain how your decision to close down 36 roadside camp 
grounds, picnic sites, and rest stops around the province will 
encourage tourists to spend more time and money in our 
province? If such facilities are closed down, or not maintained 
properly, won’t tourists be given a poor image of our province 
and its people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, of the 36 sites to 
which the hon. member has referred, only 10 are campsites 
involving — and camp spots — some 75 camp spots, out of a 
total of close to 9,000 camp spots within the province. 
 
Before any action was taken . . . Before any rationalization was 
done, Mr. Speaker, we consulted with the Department of 
Highways; we consulted with the Department of Tourism and 
Small Business, and they assured us that we would be doing no 
damage whatsoever to the tourist industry. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — New question, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
talks about the campsites that he’s closing down, that a small 
proportion of them are campsites. But I want  

to remind you by way of information that not only are they 
campsites but they’re picnic sites where groups of Boy Scouts 
and Girl Guides go there on their trips for picnics. 
 
And by way of information, Mr. Speaker, on my new question, 
the minister indicated yesterday that he wanted to pass the camp 
grounds on to local service clubs, municipalities, or private 
operators. If they want them, they can have them free. 
 
Further, for information, if no one wants the sites, Mr. Speaker, 
the department will leave them open but not necessarily be 
responsible for maintaining them, he said. 
 
Now my question to the minister: — if you are going to leave 
these campsites open, you’re not going to maintain them; or if 
somebody wants them free, then we have fee for services; or if 
you don’t maintain them, you can just imagine what’s going to 
happen after citizens go in there and camp and the bears start 
going into the garbage cans and throwing it around and the 
ravens spreading the garbage all over, that we’re going to have 
one real mess on our hands. And that is not what these 
campsites are for. 
 
In view of these facts, Mr. Minister, will you reconsider your 
decision to leave these campsites open and have your 
department officials maintain them for the summer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the 
hon. member for expressing this new-found interest in tourism, 
which seemed to be somewhat lacking in the number of years in 
which they were in office. 
 
The kind of campsites that are being talked about here are 
places that have very, very low utilization. Some of them have 
four, and indeed three, tent spots. We’re not talking about big 
recreational facilities, Mr. Speaker. Some of them are out of the 
way; they’re not used. To the best of my knowledge, Cub 
groups and Scout groups and Girl Guides aren’t using those 
particular sites. The only sites that are involved in this are the 
ones that people don’t want, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we’ve found in the last three years in the 
rationalization system was people wanted new provincial parks. 
They wanted upgraded facilities in their regional parks. They 
wanted more electrified sites put into the popular places. And 
that’s exactly what we’ve done, and that’s the process we’re 
going through when the new parks Act will be tabled in this 
legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Further to that, the type of sites we’re talking about are not the 
ones the public are going to in great droves; they’re hardly 
utilized at all. Some of them, in fact, are in areas where they’re 
only being used for parties on weekends. Then my department 
has to go in there the following week and it becomes a game. A 
weekend a group moves in; there’s all kinds of damage — 
breaks up the outhouses, knocks down the barbecues, steal the 
firewood, steal the picnic tables. The following week my staff 
are in there doing all the repairs, putting it all back together 
again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just by taking those small picnic sites which  
  



 
April 29, 1986 

 

948 
 

are not currently being used, we will save the taxpayers of this 
province $100,000; just on that small modification alone with 
little, if any — if any — inconvenience to the travelling public. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — New question, Mr. Speaker. I have never 
heard such a statement. When a minister stands up in this House 
and insinuates that the citizens of Saskatchewan and the tourists 
of this province are going out and destroying . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Does the member have a 
question? The member is making a statement. Order, please. 
The member is quite capable of speaking for himself. Does the 
member have a question? 
 
Mr. Thompson: — New question, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
indicated that the campsites that were being closed down were 
all small, underutilized, and not really important. And my new 
question is to you, Mr. Minister. Are you saying that the 
Beaupré Creek campsite and the Shirley Lake campsite — 
Shirley Lake which is a lake off the highway into Doré Lake, 
where many campers use that to fish trout; that lake has been 
stocked with trout and it’s used, and I’ve been there many 
times. The Beaupré Creek is a historic campsite where Boy 
Scouts and Girl Guides throughout this province have used that 
campsite, and citizens and senior citizens in this province have 
used it for the last 30 years, and you say that they’re small and 
they are unimportant. I ask you once again, Mr. Minister, will 
you reconsider shutting down these campsites until you could at 
least have a full investigation and continue to maintain them for 
the rest of the summer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, we have done a full 
investigation. The hon. member, who is capable of speaking for 
himself without the assistance of the nonentities over there, has 
made a point about Beaupré Creek and Shirley Lake. Mr. 
Speaker, if there are troops of Boy Scouts and Girl Guides and 
Cubs and so on going to Beaupré Creek, I rather wonder where 
they were camping, because there are only three tenting spots at 
Beaupré Creek. There is no historic site there. There is no 
intention to close down access to the lake for fishing, and that’s 
not the intent. 
 
We’re not claiming that the Boys Scouts and the Girl Guides 
and the Cub groups were going there and inflicting damage or 
vandalism on those spots. Those weren’t the particular spots I 
was referring to; there are others. And during estimates no 
doubt we’ll get into some of that debate, and I don’t mind 
getting into and pointing out which ones we’ve had more 
vandalism damage with. 
 
The point is, in that particular area to which the hon. member 
has referred, currently there are five sites, cheek by jowl, and 
we’re saying that two of them, one with three camp spots and 
one with six camp spots, are not really vital to continue either 
tourism interest in the area or the best interest of the locals in 
the area. The fish will still be in the lake, Mr. Speaker. The 
locals can go fishing any time they wish, and we will not 
interfere with that; in fact my department will act in the best 
interests of the resource for conservation, management, and 
enhancement as we  

have always done. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a supplement to the 
minister. I wonder if he could confirm that the people who are 
wrecking these camp grounds are the Boy Scouts and Girls 
Guides, or whether they are Young Tories going there, as they 
did to the Regina Inn, and wrecking them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I would say no, it is not 
the Boy Scouts or the Girl Guides or the Cubs. But I do 
remember a newsletter from the member for Shaunavon going 
out to his constituents, inviting people to come out for a picnic 
and a beer garden . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — And by way of information, Mr. Minister, 
when you talk about these campsites being cluttered close 
together, I want to say to you that you have not been up into 
that area to see where Beaupré Creek is, Shirley Lake, Sled 
Lake, and Cowan dam. Now they are not clumped together, and 
there are many, many people that utilize those sites. And I ask 
you once again — and you did not answer the question — will 
you reconsider closing down these sites, especially the historic 
sites at Beaupré Creek and Shirley Lake, and continue to 
maintain them for this coming year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, once again the hon. 
member has referred to the numbers of people using these sites. 
That’s not the information we have, either locally or in 
information that’s been gathered down here by other means — 
by surveys, by consultation with transportation department, by 
consultation with Tourism and Small Business. 
 
Secondly the hon. member has inferred that somehow I’ve 
never been north of Prince Albert. That’s entirely erroneous. 
I’ve spent some considerable time in northern Saskatchewan, 
and once I even stopped in to stay hello to you and you weren’t 
home. 
 

Salaries of Cabinet Ministers’ Assistants 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the absence of the 
Premier, I’d like to address my question to the Deputy Premier, 
and it deals with salary increases for the cabinet ministers’ 
assistants. They are, in large part, the political aides or political 
cronies, as they’re known, who are already being paid 
45-50,000, some of them 70,000 a year out of the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers’ taxes. 
 
And so I ask the Deputy Premier, can you confirm that there has 
been a general salary increase for the cabinet minister aides in 
recent weeks, and can you confirm that some of those increases 
have been made retroactive to October of last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I have no knowledge of any increases, 
and I’ll therefore . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’ll therefore 
take notice of the question. 
 
And in response to the member from Assiniboia, I can say that 
my particular . . . from Shaunavon — the fellow from 
Assiniboia wouldn’t even understand this one. My assistant, 
Mr. Speaker, who is very well paid and has been  
  



 
April 29, 1986 

 

949 
 

with the government for 14 years, when he came to work for me 
he was deputy chairman of land bank, and he came over to my 
office and has been with me ever since, and I think that he has 
earned several increases since then but, Mr. Speaker, he has in 
the last three years, Mr. Speaker, had one increase. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 03 — An Act to incorporate Holy Resurrection 
Orthodox Church 

 
Ms. Zazelenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 03, An Act to incorporate Holy Resurrection Orthodox 
Church, be now read a second time, referred to the Standing 
Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 2 — Business Contribution to Economic 
Recovery 

 
Mr. Glauser: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with pleasure 
that I stand in this Assembly, perhaps for the last time, and at 
the end of my remarks will be moving a motion: 
 

That this Assembly commends businesses, be they large or 
small, for the contribution they have made for economic 
recovery in this province and the long-term jobs they are 
creating. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it has been a pleasure to represent the constituency 
of Mayfair over the past four years, a constituency that houses 
many businesses. Some are large; some are small. But whatever 
they were, large or small, they played certainly a large part in 
the recovery of the economic situation in Saskatoon. 
 
I dealt with many of them on a firsthand basis. I met with them 
on many occasions. I belong to their business association. And 
throughout the four years, I would say that there were very few 
left that I have not discussed matters with at one time or 
another. 
 
And small businesses, like agriculture, small business is one of 
the major locomotives that drives both the Canadian and, 
indeed, the Saskatchewan economy. Indeed, like the province’s 
families, small-business people are dedicated, determined, and 
are visionary. They are an asset to our province and they always 
will be. That philosophy and personal support towards small 
business sector characterizes the government, the government 
that has been in place for the last four years, in their 
commitment to the entrepreneurial spirit in Saskatchewan. 
 
But let me tell you what the alternative is. The NDP formed a 
committee. They formed a committee that  

would go about meeting business. Well it was sort of an ad hoc 
thing to begin with, and then they decided that this should 
become more formal. And the purpose of this committee was to 
meet with small business. Now the committee has been meeting 
with them periodically and the idea emerged for a 
small-business policy that the NDP, I suppose, could use in the 
next election. But the problem members on the NDP 
small-business committee face is somehow finding a way for 
the party’s socialist ideology to make concessions. 
 
Now this was an item that came from the Leader-Post, provided 
by one Dale Eisler. And they fail to realize what the economy 
of Saskatchewan is like and that it is, as I said earlier, one of the 
locomotives that drives the economic situation in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The crux of the matter is that there is a core of people within the 
NDP party who are members because they are socialists. And 
their ideology does not allow them to accept private enterprise 
and profit. They do not accept private enterprise as the 
entrepreneurship that goes into making a business tick and is 
part of our social fabric in so far as creating jobs and 
opportunities for young people. Well, the result of this internal 
tension is only becoming more clear because simply, I suppose, 
because the NDP are not in power, and they’re struggling for an 
issue. And they know that they need the strength of the small 
business in order to create an issue for themselves, and they are 
finding that they are not rushing to them that quickly. 
 
So what they’ve done for themselves is created two positions 
that seem contradictory. One is embodied in the small-business 
committee and its guarded talk of free enterprise, and then, on 
the left, the party who believes free enterprise should be 
replaced by a socialist’s economy. So there’s their dilemma. 
 
But we don’t have any dilemma when we talk to small business, 
because in Saskatchewan 45 per cent of all private sector 
employees are employed by business with fewer than 50 
employees. So the employees, as well as small business, 
understand each other. 
 
More than 90 per cent of all new ventures in Canada start with 
fewer than 50 employees. Between 1975 and 1982 small 
manufacturing companies, those with less than 50 employees, 
created some 400,000 jobs across Canada. And the Mayfair 
constituency in Saskatoon contributed to a large measure for the 
numbers of jobs created in that small constituency in Saskatoon. 
 
And what has helped these small businesses to accomplish this? 
Well I suggest that the venture capital program, the 8 per cent 
money, previously nine and five-eighths. I suggest that those 
things have added tremendously to strengthen the framework of 
the private enterprise business and has created jobs like they 
haven’t been created before. And they were jobs that were 
created, Mr. Speaker, not by big government, not by 
all-powerful government creating jobs in the civil service to 
perpetuate themselves in power, but a government that provided 
funds to help industry create permanent jobs in the private 
sector, and not a burden on the taxpayers of this province. 
 
  



 
April 29, 1986 

 

950 
 

Saskatchewan currently has the highest employment rate in 
Canada, and that, too, can be related to the inspiration, the 
entrepreneurship and the industrious private sector, as I set out 
in the motion that is on the book. The best job record in Canada 
is right here in Saskatchewan. The lowest unemployment rates, 
1982, ’83, ’84, year over year over year. And again, all in the 
private sector. 
 
And again, they are to be commended for the tremendous job 
they have done. They saw the task and were able to get it done. 
And even here in Regina, best job creation record in western 
Canada. In 1982 to ’84 it ranked third and fourth in all of 
Canada. 
 
People are returning home. They are returning home because 
there is that opportunity. I can cite so many examples in the city 
of Saskatoon, and particularly in the Mayfair constituency. I 
recall talking to one individual who was in the small 
manufacturing, and he was able to put in place — with a used 
machine that he brought over from Germany — he was able to 
put in place a mechanism that would turn out gears for the 
potash industry. 
 
He was turning these gears out at a cost that was less than half 
of what it was costing to bring them in from across the border. 
These are the kinds of things that are going on in the industrial 
area of the city of Saskatoon in the constituency of Mayfair. 
 
I must commend the previous minister, the member from 
Regina North, who, when he was in charge of that department, 
garnered a tremendous reputation with the people of this 
province, and indeed the people of the Mayfair constituency. 
They found him most helpful and aggressive, something they 
understood, and contributed greatly to that department during 
his tenure as minister of Tourism and Small Business. 
 
Now we talk about jobs, and that also is mentioned in my 
motion. And since this government was elected in 1982, there 
have been 45,000 new jobs in our province. And I want to 
remind the people of Saskatchewan that these jobs were not 
created at their expense by placing them on the pay roll of the 
government in perpetuity. 
 
(1445) 
 
The amount of money that was committed to the employment 
development fund helped to maintain that momentum that was 
started in ’82, ’83, ’84, and came into place in ’85, that assisted 
the small-business man, the entrepreneur, to again create more 
and more jobs. 
 
And the oil industry is well represented in my constituency — 
the suppliers, the manufacturers — and they, too, felt the impact 
of the movement that was made in the oil patch to create the 
jobs and, of course, the supplies, the material; and again, the 
spin-off of jobs in the manufacturing was tremendous. And 
these people were prepared and took up the task and created 
many, many jobs. 
 
There’s just one other thing I want to cover, as I know there are 
others who would like to get into this. It goes on like this . . . 
One only has to read success stories in a wide  

variety of magazines, and you can pick them up in your office 
any day of the week, recognizing the growing role and potential 
of small business in North America. That is particularly so in 
the service industry and in the scientific and technological 
fields. 
 
And when we talk about the technological fields and as that 
relates to the Mayfair constituency, I think of one of the largest 
employers of people and that is SED Systems. And SED 
Systems, as you know, has just obtained a large contract, one 
with Brazil, the other one with the development of the frigates 
for the navy in Canada, and that again has expanded the number 
of employees that they have had to acquire. 
 
Small business has been a launching pad for success in these 
areas, and many more. It was not by chance that this 
government made major innovations in two of the fastest 
growing businesses, recreational and educational areas, when it 
is meshed in the real tourist development and promotional 
programs with small business, and established the ministry of 
Science and Technology; and that was also a good move 
considering the high-tech industries that are prevalent in 
Saskatoon. Saskatoon is quickly becoming known as the silicon 
valley of the West. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure at this time to move: 
 

That this Assembly commends businesses, be they large or 
small, for the contribution they have made for economic 
recovery in this province, and the long-term jobs they are 
creating. 

 
Seconded by the member from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — This must be the last hurrah. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — No, it’s not the last hurrah. It’s just a few 
comments I want to make, Mr. Speaker, on the motion that was 
moved by my hon. colleague. And just to cover the motion for 
the members opposite so they know what we’re talking about 
here, Mr. Speaker, we’re commending, through this motion, the 
businesses in this province, be they large or small, for the 
contribution they’ve made for economic recovery in this 
province and the long-term jobs they are creating. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to go over the motion briefly, 
just so that we are very precise and clear in what we’re 
discussing in this motion today. We’re talking about economic 
expansion; we’re talking about growth; we’re talking about 
co-operation. We’re talking about consultation, in particular 
with the business people, the small businesses and large 
businesses, and how they have in partnership with the 
Government of Saskatchewan — in partnership with the 
Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — been able to 
bring this province to the forefront, not just in this country, but, 
Mr. Speaker, in the world. 
 
This province — as we used to say some number of years ago, 
not too long ago, when we were in opposition — was the 
best-kept secret anywhere in the world. Well it’s not  
  



 
April 29, 1986 

 

951 
 

any more. And we’re developing, Mr. Speaker, on all fronts. 
We’re developing in agriculture and research. We’re developing 
in health care. We’re developing in all kinds of high technology 
industries, like the member had just spoke about in Saskatoon 
— the so-called silicon valley, if you like, of the West. We’re 
starting to break through into new frontiers that this province 
had never thought could ever be possible, Mr. Speaker, under 
11 years of the previous administration. 
 
And we’re not doing that, Mr. Speaker, just as a government 
alone. No, the government can’t do everything — not at all, Mr. 
Speaker. In fact we hold quite the opposing view of the 
members in opposition, of the NDP. And, of course, when they 
were in administration, they believed at that time that the 
government was the be-all and the end-all to everything in the 
province in terms of its economic expansion. Well it isn’t, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You know, we don’t share that view. We don’t accept that it’s 
the government looking after you from the cradle to the grave. 
We don’t believe in that at all. What we believe in, Mr. 
Speaker, is the people. We believe in the people of this 
province. We believe in them, their ability, their own particular 
expertise — whatever field that may be — to work in 
conjunction and co-operation with their government to build for 
themselves. 
 
And we believe, Mr. Speaker, that individuals should be 
allowed to bear the fruits of their labour as individuals. They 
should become as much or as little as they themselves choose to 
be. And, Mr. Speaker, through small businesses and large 
businesses which individuals of course are a part of, that can be 
possible. 
 
So rather than take the approach that the previous 
administration did, that we would just create one big 
humungous bureaucracy to run everything for the province, 
which resulted in, of course, massive tax increases and stifled 
growth in this province, certainly stifled economic growth. It 
stifled it, Mr. Speaker, quite to an extent that the people look at 
the province of Saskatchewan — at least they did, I should say, 
in the first year of our administration — and they were a little 
hesitant about coming onto this new-laid ice in the province, if 
you like, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They were not sure if it was firm enough to hold, or if maybe a 
socialist government would come back in again and crack it and 
they’d fall right through. They were not prepared to come in 
and build in this province, Mr. Speaker. Not until they were 
sure, sure in their minds, Mr. Speaker, that this province had 
froze over tight so that they could support economic 
development. 
 
And that now is here, Mr. Speaker. That confidence is in this 
province. The people now are sure to come in; they’re confident 
to come in; they’re trusting that the people are going to return 
this administration to power so the kinds of economic policies 
that we’ve had in place over the last three years, in particular, 
will continue through into a new administration of a renewed 
mandate for a Conservative government. 
 
And as I said, Mr. Speaker, in that first year business 

people were very, very sceptical about coming into this 
province that had been NDP for so many years. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, it was well-known that that administration for 11 years 
was against business. It was against business whether it was 
small or whether it was large. 
 
That was evidenced on so many occasions — certainly when 
they drove the potash industry out, it was evidenced that they 
were against large business; certainly the fact that there was not 
economic development at the local level throughout rural 
Saskatchewan in small communities and hamlets where they 
were at that time dying, dying and withering away, small 
communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why that’s not happening any more. We’re revitalizing rural 
Saskatchewan, and we’re revitalizing rural Saskatchewan by 
assisting small-business people to flourish. They’re providing 
that base, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s a point that needs to be made, Mr. Speaker, with 
regards to the result of this kind of administration that we have 
now and what it has been able to accomplish through 
co-operation with small business. 
 
We take a look at what we have now. We see the interest rates 
are down, Mr. Speaker. We see inflation is down; we see that 
food costs are down; we see that gas prices are down; we see 
the tax on clothing has been able to be removed. We’re not 
increasing taxation; we’re reducing taxation. Because we’ve got 
more people making money, business has been activated. 
We’ve broadened the tax base, which is so necessary. And 
when you broaden the tax base, more people making money, 
then you can afford not to increase the taxation levels. That 
point is very, very vividly, if you like, displayed if you take a 
look at the kinds of personal income tax rates that were made 
when the previous administration was in power. And look at the 
kinds of increases that were imposed on the people of 
Saskatchewan. If I remember right it was something like 37 to 
51 per cent — something in that neighbourhood — a 
tremendous increase in personal income tax. 
 
Well the reason for that, Mr. Speaker, was because there was 
not economic growth. That tax base had been just taken and 
squashed, brought right in, narrowed. We’ve been able to take it 
and broaden it now again, by consultation and co-operation and 
building confidence in the private sector with small businesses. 
 
It’s resulted in building; it’s resulted in jobs. Whenever this 
province sees a project being built — when you see the holes 
being dug, laying the foundation, buildings being erected — 
whenever that kind of activity is taking place, Mr. Speaker, you 
can be sure that there are going to be jobs created. And it 
wouldn’t matter, quite frankly, if it was a government project 
that was 70 or 80 per cent funded by the government, in other 
words, almost solely a government project, or whether it was a 
joint venture, or whether it was a venture that was solely or 80 
per cent private sector. In either event, whenever a construction 
starts, you know it’s going to finish — or at least it will under 
this administration — and you know that’s going to create jobs. 
And jobs have been created — capital projects, Mr. Speaker. 
 
  



 
April 29, 1986 

 

952 
 

I cannot recall in my time in this province when so many capital 
starts and completions ever happened in this province. I cannot 
recall a time when we saw the kind of growth that we’ve been 
able to be witness to and part of in the last four years. 
 
Minimum wage is the highest in the province; the highest in the 
province, Mr. Speaker. And again, that’s something that you 
can do because there’s economic growth; there’s a demand for 
the kinds of people and skills that are available in this province. 
And obviously other people throughout the country saw it 
necessary to gravitate to this province, if you like, because they 
did; they came here. And it was under this administration, Mr. 
Speaker — and I want to remind you of that — it was under this 
administration that the population of this province went over the 
one million mark. So it grew; it grew because economic 
opportunities were here. They were made available, as I’ve said, 
through co-operation with the private sector. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s some other things that need 
to be said. And you have to identify, Mr. Speaker, all of the 
reasons, not just one or two of the reasons, why we have this 
kind of growth. You do not just have a government that gets 
elected and comes into office and all of a sudden there’s 
economic activity. That doesn’t happen that way. Any new 
administration taking office must have somewhere, deep-rooted 
within itself, some kind of pride and meaning for the kinds of 
projects that it proposes to go into partnership with, the people 
that it very much so represents. 
 
(1500) 
 
And so I want to take a moment to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, 
that this Progressive Conservative government and the small 
business community have a very deep sense of pride that runs 
right throughout each and every individual, a pride in this 
province. And, Mr. Speaker, that pride is growing; that pride 
and confidence in this province is growing. 
 
It’s a sense, Mr. Speaker, that I get when I go out to the riding, 
that people are optimistic. And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, they 
are optimistic in the wake of all kinds of disasters throughout 
the world — one recently, of course, the nuclear disaster, if you 
like, in Russia. There’s all kinds of wars going on about. 
There’s all kinds of need for gloom and doom. There’s the NDP 
opposition to be considered. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in spite of adversity, the people of this 
province reach deep inside and they pull out from within 
themselves the pride in this province that has been able to keep 
this province going through good times and through tough 
times. And, Mr. Speaker, what more could one say on that, 
except that one would have to be awfully proud to be a person 
that’s a resident, not only of Saskatchewan, but of this country. 
 
We believe that through the individual initiative of 
Saskatchewan people, great accomplishments can be realized, 
Mr. Speaker. We actually believe that, and we have reason to 
believe it. We do not subscribe to the view  

that people in this province require a bureaucracy to direct 
them, not in any matter. Not in any mater do we believe that. 
We just do not. I’m going to be running over this very subject 
more than once, Mr. Speaker, because it’s very important that 
it’s understood — that we do not believe that government is the 
be-all and the end-all for the province of Saskatchewan. We just 
do not believe that. We do not believe in big government. We 
believe in running an efficient government, as I said, in 
partnership with the private sector. 
 
Back to the pride, Mr. Speaker. We have, and the 
small-business people have, a pride and optimism that’s rooted 
in faith, a faith in individuals, Mr. Speaker; a faith in their 
families, in their home, Mr. Speaker, and in their community. 
They’re not of the view that they’re going to move to Regina or 
move to some major city, necessarily. They take a look at the 
community they are living in or that their family roots were set 
in many decades ago. And they say, well, this is my home; this 
is my community. My family is here and my friends are here, 
and this is where I’m going to build a life for myself and my 
family, Mr. Speaker. And they do that. They do that in their 
own communities because they’re proud — proud of 
themselves, proud of their province, and proud of their country 
— and they’re optimistic. And as I said, in the face of all of the 
reasons that one could take a look at that are before us every 
evening on the national news for us to be negative. 
 
But these people in Saskatchewan just aren’t made that way. 
They are cut from unique cloth, Mr. Speaker, a cut that I’m 
proud to be taken from as well. And that’s the very essence of 
this government, and it’s the very essence of small business and 
why it continues to build and grow and develop the economy of 
this province. 
 
The unfortunate aspect is, Mr. Speaker, that the former 
government in this province failed to really appreciate the pride 
of Saskatchewan people, and I believe that that is something 
that was almost damning in a, if you like, in a long-term way. 
People in this province were almost being brought to that point 
in their lives where they were actually starting to think different 
than they had for generations. And that was almost a disaster, 
created by a previous administration, Mr. Speaker. That’s been 
set back on track. 
 
Now let me emphasize that we, in this government, not only 
recognize that pride, but we share in it, and we’re proud of this 
province and of its people. We know that citizens from one end 
of Saskatchewan to the other believe we can be first-class and 
hold our own with the rest of the world. And we are. 
 
An Hon. Member: — World class. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — And the member from Regina North East 
suggests we’re world-class, and I agree with him. We are. 
We’re first-class, and we’re world-class. 
 
As I said, we were at one time, under 11 years of NDP 
administration, the best-kept secret in the world. We’re not any 
more. We’re flying the flags. We’re standing up and we’re 
standing tall and we’re saying, yes, we’re from Saskatchewan; 
you bet we are. 
 
  



 
April 29, 1986 

 

953 
 

Now what today is about to epitomize is the very essence of our 
province and what has been happening here over four years 
through economic development and small business and the 
government co-operating with small business, not threatening 
them, not kicking them out of the province, encouraging them 
to build and helping them to build, providing seed money where 
it’s necessary. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, this is why our government is 
making a positive commitment to Expo ’86. For the first time at 
a world’s fair, Saskatchewan is to have its own pavilion. I know 
that every citizen who visits our site during the fair will be 
proud of Saskatchewan’s presence there. Even now our pavilion 
is the talk of the whole Expo ’86 organization . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the NDP members, the member for 
Quill Lakes says, oh, now what has this got to do with the 
resolution? I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, I can appreciate the 
comments from the member for Quill Lakes because there is 
only one province that’s not represented at Expo ’86 — only 
one province — and that is the province of Manitoba, the only 
province in this country with an NDP government. So I can 
appreciate that. Oh, they don’t want to share in the fact that this 
province has a record of building. They don’t want to share in 
the pride that these people have in their province because they 
put a pavilion at the Expo ’86 in Vancouver. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I just believe that that’s unacceptable. 
That’s unacceptable to me; it’s unacceptable to the people of 
this province. Now Mr. Speaker, I’m trying to indicate that the 
whole Expo pavilion is in fact epitomizing what Saskatchewan 
people stand for and how that growth and development can take 
place and that we’re not prepared any more, as this province 
once was by the previous administration, jammed under a rock 
and hidden if you like. We’ve climbed out from under there; the 
lid’s been lifted; we’ve said, yes, we’re not going to hide this 
province any more. We’re going to put it on display, not just for 
this country, but for the world. And we’re putting it on display, 
Mr. Speaker, for the world at the Expo ’86 pavilion. 
 
And I say we just need to be proud of that, proud of 
Saskatchewan people, proud of Saskatchewan talent that is 
going to be there to perform. And all of the ethnic origins can 
be represented, and all of the various cultures can be put on 
display so that we can again, you know, stand up and say yes, 
we’re proud to be part of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now if being proud of Saskatchewan and the kind of building 
sense that they have, and have had for many years — although 
it was once almost stifled by the previous administration — is 
something that should be scoffed at, like the NDP members, the 
member for Quill Lakes, who doesn’t like Expo ’86, I think it is 
just totally unacceptable. 
 
This government is developing a tourist trade. And if the 
member for Quill Lakes doesn’t believe, Mr. Speaker, that a 
tourist trade doesn’t have something to do with economic 
development, then obviously that member  

won’t be speaking on this motion, or at least I should hope he 
isn’t, because he doesn’t understand economic development. 
 
If there is a tourist industry developing in this province, if there 
are people coming here, then it’s reasonable to assume you will 
have to build facilities. Well this government isn’t going to 
build all the facilities for them. We’re share in partnership with 
small business to build those facilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the tourism industry is very important. And small business 
has not let us down in that regard. Certainly we’ve not been let 
down by Saskatchewan talent at Expo ’86. So for the first time, 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is actually being promoted in other 
provinces and in the United States and around the world. And 
this makes good economic sense, Mr. Speaker. Tourism, as you 
understand, brings new dollars into Saskatchewan’s economy, 
and it creates new jobs along with sustaining thousands of 
others. 
 
But there is also another reason why, Mr. Speaker, this 
government believes in the potential of a tourist industry in 
connection with economic development in the small business 
sector. And that’s again because I said we believe in 
Saskatchewan. We know that this province is special, and it has 
a tremendous heritage to offer visitors. 
 
We’re a big province. We’ve got lots of room to grow; we’ve 
got lots of room here for people, Mr. Speaker. And we know 
that is something to be proud of, and we know that’s something 
that others envy us for. It’s just very unfortunate that the NDP 
members in opposition envy Saskatchewan people for that 
traditional heritage that they have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m confident that the renewed optimism that we 
threw out for small business through the throne speech will 
strengthen that pride as it continues to demonstrate the 
leadership of our Premier, Mr. Speaker, and, of course, the 
leadership and direction of this government this administration 
has taken — a leadership based on the faith and optimism of 
our people, and a leadership of which we can all be proud 
because it recognizes the importance of individual people 
through all parts of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if I can just provide some more information 
as it regards the development of small business in our province 
and the commitment that they have made to sharing in the 
building of this great province. Let me remind members that 
they do that with a variety of means. It isn’t just something 
where they jump out of bed in the morning and decide they’re 
going to go out and build Saskatchewan. As I said earlier, they 
must be motivated; they have to have some basis and some 
reason for doing such, Mr. Speaker. And unlike some members 
of this House in opposition, it should be noted, Mr. Speaker, 
that the people of this province love their province, and they 
love it because it is free — and that is important. 
 
The member for Quill Lakes laughs at freedom, and that’s fair 
enough. He laughs at freedom, and he laughs at profit — 
they’re negative. 
 
  



 
April 29, 1986 

 

954 
 

An Hon. Member: — I’m not laughing at that . . . (inaudible) 
. . . I’m laughing at you. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — And if he’s laughing at me, that’s fine, Mr. 
Speaker. He says he’s laughing at me, and that’s good, because 
I’m not much to be laughed at. He’s not hurting me at all, and 
he thinks I’m a joke, and that’s fine. We’ll see what the public 
think. I don’t mind. 
 
Have you anything else to say, Mr. Member for Quill Lakes? 
You know, call me a few more names if you like, because we’ll 
see. The people of Saskatchewan have judged me, and we’ll 
just see how it goes. So anyway, Mr. Speaker, I’ll just wait a 
little while until they get a little more bothered, and I’ll pick up 
on them again. 
 
But in any event, Mr. Speaker, we believe in . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well it’s pretty hard, Mr. Speaker, to 
understand the NDP opposition. First they criticize me, and then 
they turn around and applaud me, so I can’t follow them. 
 
In any event, Mr. Speaker, the NDP members in opposition, and 
in particular the member for Quill Lakes, needs to be reminded 
that politics is about the future — it’s not about the past. So 
we’re not going to go back to those old traditional values that 
the NDP adhered to of big government and big bureaucracy. 
We’re not going to do that. We’re going to have faith in the 
people of this province. Whether they like it or not, we’re going 
to have the confidence in the people that they deserve, and 
we’re going to do everything in our power as a government to 
help them build. 
 
Now they may not want to do that. They want to tear down the 
province, turn it all into a big, dictatorial, bureaucratic 
government; that’s their business, that’s their concern. If the 
people of this province, come the next election — and I suspect 
it’s coming fairly soon — will choose to turn back into office 
an NDP administration that was absolutely inept at anything as 
it related to small business and economic development, then I 
will go back to an old saying: that the people in politics, when 
they go to the polls, deserve what they get. And surely they do. 
 
(1515) 
 
If we have not been a good administration, well my goodness, I 
mean, the people have themselves to blame for that. That’s 
freedom, Mr. Speaker. The people have a right to choose in the 
government of their choice, and certainly they do. So, I 
suppose, if they want to go back to an NDP administration that 
was not able to develop and share in partnership with small 
business, that’s entirely up to them. I’m not concerned about 
that at all. I’ll let the public be the judge of that. 
 
I do not share the opinion of the member for Regina Centre, 
who says in fact that the public of this province, the people of 
this province made a mistake by electing a Conservative 
government in ’82. I don’t share that view at all. He said they 
made a mistake. Well maybe they did, but it’s their mistake to 
make; they have a right to make that mistake at election time. 
 

I don’t say they made a mistake when they elected an NDP 
government for 11 years; they chose to do so, and they have 
that right, and that’s what I’m talking about is: what kind of 
people do we have in this province? We have people in this 
province that believe in rights; they believe in freedom; and 
they believe in sharing and co-operating and consulting. They 
do not believe in big government; they do not believe in the 
“big daddy” government concept and the big bureaucracy. They 
don’t believe in any of that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to move into some very interesting 
material that I know that the members opposite will want to 
hear. Well they may not want to hear it, but it will be quite 
educational if they’ll listen. This government, Mr. Speaker, as I 
said, has been working with small business like it’s never been 
done before, and small business has risen to the challenge. We 
threw it out there, and small business has risen to the challenge. 
And what has resulted from that small business development? 
As I had indicated, when you have building taking place, you 
have jobs being created, and that’s absolutely essential. The 
NDP members in opposition are always crying about, oh, 
you’ve got to create jobs, why aren’t you — you know, where 
are you creating jobs; you’re not doing this and you’re not 
doing that. 
 
Well let’s get back to the basics again, Mr. Speaker. My 
grandfather came to this country in 1904. Now when he came 
over here, there was no guaranteed minimum wage, no, that 
wasn’t in place. There was no guaranteed job. Do you know 
what there was when he came here from the old country, from 
England? There was an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, for him to go 
ahead, develop a family, develop a farming operation, to grow, 
to have as much or as little as he chose to have, because there 
were opportunities here in this new land at that time. 
 
Now he did that, Mr. Speaker, and there was no guarantee that 
the job was there or that it would be there for 10 years or 20 
years or even a day. Now all of a sudden we seem to have come 
full circle, and I will say this — not in being critical of the 
NDP; I’m going to be very candid about this. It has come to be, 
Mr. Speaker, that in this country for some reason the people 
believe it is the government’s sole responsibility to create jobs 
through economic development. Well, Mr. Speaker, I do not 
believe that it’s the government’s sole responsibility to create 
jobs. Because if we were to create one, it may or may not be 
meaningful, and whatever it was it would be paid for by 
taxpayers’ dollars. So you have to understand the basis for it, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So having said that, then we understand that the government’s 
responsibility for creating jobs is not just on its back, but rather 
something to be shared with the people of this province. That’s 
what we’ve been able to do, to share with small business, with 
all of those people out there that want to be part of putting this 
province together again and making it grow, making it happen, 
making it have a national and an international presence. 
 
A Progressive Conservative government, Mr. Speaker, has a 
deep commitment to creating jobs and opportunities for the 
people of this province; to help all  
  



 
April 29, 1986 

 

955 
 

Saskatchewan residents from all walks of life gain 
independence, optimism, and prosperity. This has been a prime 
concern of our government since 1982, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And statistics indicate that the government is being successful 
in achieving its goals. Under the leadership of our Premier, Mr. 
Speaker, in co-operation with small business, the government 
has been able to create 23,000 additional jobs since 1982. 
Twenty-three thousand people have gained a renewed sense of 
optimism and independence, Mr. Speaker, through new-found 
employment; independence from a big bureaucratic government 
through new job creation shared with small business — 23,000 
new jobs. And as I said earlier, for the first time in our history 
we were able to peak the 1 million mark. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those kinds of figures, I understand, are not 
pleasing to the NDP members in opposition. But be that as it 
may, they are the facts. And I want to raise these issues in 
connection with the motion and its tribute, if you like, through 
the motion to small business and the part they’re playing, 
because I believe that through that kind of economic growth, 
broadening the economic tax base, creating jobs, then we’re 
able to break loose from the big government. The people of 
Saskatchewan, they’ll have that renewed independence and 
freedom that I so much want them to have. 
 
I’m just looking, Mr. Speaker, at a report that one of our own 
members had put out, and he has some interesting statistics. 
They’re not right up to date. I had just given the information 
indicating 23,000 new jobs. At that time, just up to including 
’85, it was 21,000. We’re up to 23,000 now. And I want to 
point out the difference, Mr. Speaker, that the previous 
administration was able to build up in terms of its record. 
 
What was it able to do? If we created 23,000 — or in the same 
time period 21,000 — what were they able to create? They’re 
the ones that almost every day get up and talk about creating 
jobs. They’re all now starting to talk about small business, 
which is really interesting when you had 11 years in office and 
you didn’t do one thing to help small business. All of a sudden 
they’re asking us as a government to do something for small 
business, which, of course, we’ve already done. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the three-year record, just taking a 
three-year record of the previous administration, 1979-81, they 
only created 4,000 jobs — just 4,000 jobs. So, Mr. Speaker, I 
think that that points it out very clearly that under an NDP 
administration who would not play ball with the small business 
sector, not at all, they were only able to create in the 
neighbourhood of 4,000 jobs. Under this administration where 
we are prepared to work with the private sector, we are prepared 
to provide seed money for small business to get started, we 
have been able to create 23,000 jobs. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker, that’s a marked improvement over the 
previous administration. 
 
And we’re not going to stop there, Mr. Speaker. I’m not in any 
way implying that we’ve got the job done; not in any  

way. What I’m saying is that we’re on the right track; we’re just 
getting started, and we’re going to continue to build on our 
future into the future. 
 
We’re ready to meet the future head-on, Mr. Speaker, and since 
1982 this labour force in this province has grown by 36,000 
people. Now think of that. The member for Canora would want 
to take note of that. The labour force has grown by 36,000 
people, Mr. Speaker. So when they start banting around 
unemployment figures and trying to indicate that we’re not 
doing our job, they’ve got to be reminded, Mr. Speaker, that we 
as a government, in consultation and partnership with the small 
business sector, cannot create jobs as fast as the people are 
coming onto the labour force. 
 
So Mr. Speaker, if you yourself were wondering why 
unemployment figures change from time to time and in fact, as 
a percentage, they’re somewhat and slightly higher now than 
they were, I want to remind you and to help you, Mr. Speaker, 
to understand, as I do other members and the people of this 
province, why that is. If you’re creating jobs at a rate less than 
the numbers of people coming into the work-force, then it’s 
understandable that you’re going to have an increase in 
unemployment figures. And also, Mr. Speaker, you have to go 
back and ask yourself this question: what would full 
unemployment be? What would full employment be? What 
would that be? 
 
Now I don’t know what they believe it would be. In fact, I don’t 
even know what my own colleagues believe full employment 
would be. I’m kind of . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, all 
right. I hear a comment made that the Leader of the Opposition 
said that he felt full employment in this province was 6 per cent. 
 
Well now, I just haven’t checked what the unemployment rate 
is today, but I’m sure someone will clue me in from behind 
what the unemployment rate is today but let’s say it was 8.5 or 
. . . what is it? 7.1? I’m told it’s 7.1 per cent, Mr. Speaker . . . 
7.1, and the Leader of the Opposition says the full employment 
is 6 per cent, so in fact that’s only 1.1 per cent of the people 
unemployed, by the Leader of the Opposition’s own statement. 
 
Now that’s very interesting, Mr. Speaker. So when we hear the 
NDP get up and talk about these terrible unemployment figures 
that we’re dealing with, then they themselves need to be 
reminded that the leader of their party believes that full 
employment — that would be if you had two jobs for every 
person to match every skill that that individual had — you’d 
have 6 per cent unemployed. 
 
Now I hope, Mr. Speaker, that you understand that, because it’s 
fairly complicated, but it results in the fact that there’s a very 
low unemployment rate in this province given, number one, the 
full employment figure that can be considered and taken in as a 
factor, and also, taking in the second factor — and I think is a 
more significant one — and that is that we have such a growth 
in the labour force. 
 
So Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s a tremendous challenge — a 
tremendous challenge to this government. It’s certainly a 
tremendous challenge to small business and to the private  
  



 
April 29, 1986 

 

956 
 

sector to try and create the kinds of economic activity and 
growth that are necessary when you have those kinds of 
increases into the labour force. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, every day more and more people are finding 
work. For example, I’ll give you, during the month of February, 
2,000 new jobs created; 2,000 jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker; 2,000 
jobs created in just one month. In just one month, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, 2,000 jobs — new jobs and opportunities for people. 
And in February our unemployment rate dropped to 7.6. As I 
just indicated, and my members advise me, my colleagues 
advise me today, it’s now down to 7.1 — second only to 
Ontario, in all of Canada. 
 
And now over 92 per cent of our labour force is actively 
employed. Now think of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker; 92 per cent 
of our labour force is now actively employed. It couldn’t be 
done, Mr. Speaker, by government alone. No, it could not, not 
by government alone. It could only be done by this government 
providing the kinds of incentives and seed money, co-operation 
and consultation with individuals in small business that it has 
been able to do in the last four years. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to be making it very clear to 
you that I congratulate the people of this province, and I’ll be 
candid again — not so much the government. I’m not going to 
so much congratulate the government. That’s not so much what 
the motion’s about as it is congratulating the people of this 
province, their abilities, and their ability to rise to the challenge 
of such an ever increasing labour force, and so many more 
people coming back into the province. The labour force, as I 
indicated, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that has been busy since this 
government took office — on an average the lowest rate of 
employment in all of Canada. If you take the average since we 
became government, we’ve had the lowest unemployment 
record of anywhere in Canada. 
 
So if you were coming to this country and you were asking 
yourself, where will I settle in this great land? Where will I 
settle? Will I settle in Prince Edward Island or will I settle 
Ontario or Quebec? Will I move into Manitoba? Will I go to 
Alberta or British Columbia? 
 
(1530) 
 
If you look at all the facts considered, look at where economic 
development is taking place, look at where the growth is taking 
place, look at where there’s a pride among the people of the 
land, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you would most assuredly look to 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, where Saskatchewan was 
once a follower, it is now a leader. We were following. We 
were almost like the tail on a dog, if you like. Not any more. 
We’re right up at the front, and not just in this country but 
throughout this nation, throughout the world. The Progressive 
Conservative government’s commitment to creating jobs and 
opportunity is as strong today as it was in 1982. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think it’s unfair to say that this 
government and small business is obsessed with creating  

jobs. It’s absolutely obsessed with creating jobs in economic 
activity. 
 
I want to, just if I can, Mr. Deputy Speaker, very briefly slip 
back just momentarily to show the contrast. I mean, it’s one 
thing for me to stand here and indicate to you the kinds of 
things that have been taking place in the small business world 
— and of course large business included — how this 
government has been able to take part in that and let it happen. 
But I believe it makes it all that much more significant when, in 
fact, we point out the contrast. 
 
And that contrast, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is between this 
administration in four years, and the NDP administration that 
had 11. The success of the Progressive Conservative 
government in job creation is, as I said, in sharp contrast to that 
of the previous administration. Bits and pieces of the previous 
administration can still be found loitering, as a matter of fact, 
within these Chambers, and I advise members of the previous 
administration, now the opposition, to listen closely. 
 
As was pointed out earlier, this Progressive Conservative 
government has maintained on average, since 1982, the lowest 
rate of unemployment in Canada — on average the lowest rate 
of unemployment in Canada. So they can say what they like 
about unemployment. They can criticize us for not having 
worked with the small business sector. They can criticize us if 
they like. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the record in itself is all I’m 
concerned about. As the old saying goes, “The proof is in the 
pudding.” 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let us just more closely examine the 
record of the previous administration. In the period October 
1978 to May 1982, the previous administration could not lay 
claim to the lowest unemployment rate in Canada. It could not 
do that. Despite better world market conditions for uranium, 
potash, wheat, and despite less severe drought and grasshopper 
problems, the previous administration could not equal the 
consistent performance of this government. 
 
Now let me build on that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What I am 
trying to say here and make very clear to this Assembly is that 
in spite of severe conditions — economic conditions — in spite 
of adversity, the people of this province, in co-operation with 
their government, were able to continue, not only to continue to 
develop and build, but to increase economic activity. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you have to ask yourself: what would 
it have been like if we had been the government through 
buoyant economic times? Can you just imagine the 
development that would have taken place in this province. In 
fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, during the last 12 months of the 
previous administration, the labour force increased by only 
7,000 people, and 1,000 people lost their jobs. As I said, 7,000 
people is the only amount of growth that we were able to 
witness under an NDP administration. So I repeat, Mr. Speaker, 
1,000 people lost their jobs. The administration which bragged 
about creating jobs for the average person was the same 
administration responsible for the loss of 1,000 jobs in this 
province. 
 
Now the same bunch of political dinosaurs whine and  
  



 
April 29, 1986 

 

957 
 

complain about our job creation record. Not all wines get better 
with age, Mr. Speaker, especially when whining and 
complaining about the creation of 21,000 jobs and the lowest 
average unemployment rate since 1982 in all of Canada. What 
I’m trying to point out here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that the 
NDP opposition like to stand up and make a lot of noise about 
the issue, but they do not have their facts straight. And what I’m 
trying to give you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are the facts. 
 
I want to share with you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the result of the 
kind of economic activity that we’ve been able to witness in this 
province. And if we take a look at this province, we take a look 
at . . . i.e. Saskatoon. You yourself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, had 
indicated the kind of development that’s taking place in the 
high-tech field. Well there are many other developments that 
are taking place. 
 
The University of Saskatchewan, of course, which is a major 
centre for development, a major centre for the creation of jobs, 
and certainly a centre where many people are employed, 
certainly a centre where the private sector and small business is 
required — we have a College of Nursing. I’m just going to list 
a few, Mr. Deputy Speaker — animal resource centre; drama 
department expansion; physical education building; agricultural 
sciences building; geological sciences building; western Canada 
veterinary college; physically disabled facilities improvement; 
administration building restoration; the Thorvaldson building 
renovation. 
 
There’s the College of Agriculture building; geological 
sciences; City Hospital; St. Paul’s Hospital; Saskatoon cancer 
clinic; University Hospital addition; hospital computer system; 
special care facility in Saskatoon; Intercontinental Packers; 
SED Systems Inc. complex; Canada Packers poultry plant; 
Norcan jet service; SaskTel data-pak switch; Circle Park Mall; 
Scotia Tower; multipurpose sports facility. 
 
I’m talking about economic development. I’m talking about the 
kinds of things that are happening in this province that never 
happened under an NDP administration because they never had 
confidence in the people. They simply wanted to rule them 
through a big government. We do not accept that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I want to take just a moment to identify a few of the projects, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, here in Regina. University of Regina — 
we have the student centre walkway; addition to the arts 
building; renovations to heritage building; renovations to Darke 
Hall; University of Regina, Darke Hall; Regina General 
Hospital; CT scanners; South Saskatchewan Rehabilitation 
Centre; NewGrade upgrader; ammonia plant; Interprovincial 
Pipe Line; slab caster facility at Ipsco; Supercart International; 
Twin Towers; Mackenzie Art Gallery; auto claims centre 
construction. I’ve just given you a few of the many economic 
development starts and completions in the two major centres in 
this province. 
 
Now if anyone thinks that that happened just because of the 
government, then they’re sadly mistaken. It happened because 
small business, because the people of this province through 
small business, and yes, large business  

were able to take advantage of the opportunities that we were 
able to make for them. I think they were able to take advantage 
of the obstacles that we removed and let them proceed. And, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s that reason, it’s not just the 
government, that those kinds of projects, all of those kinds that I 
just listed off, were able to happen. 
 
There are others. I mean, I have lists here in Estevan, 
Lloydminster, Moose Jaw, northern Saskatchewan, of course, 
North Battleford, and then a whole long list of economic 
up-starts in southern Saskatchewan. 
 
So let’s take a look at just a few. The one in North Battleford 
particularly pleases me, the Gainers bacon plant; the North 
Battleford youth centre. And in southern Saskatchewan: 
Saskatchewan natural gas distribution program; private line 
calling; SaskTel switching network; highways construction 
program; Kalium potash mine expansion; PCS fertilizer plant; 
Ocelot Industries; natural gas drilling program; Swift Current 
shopping centre complex; Nipawin Union Hospital; Lakeside 
Nursing Home; Canapharm Inc.; special care home, Saltcoats; 
Weyburn flood control project; Cypress Hills pool complex; 
Cypress Lake irrigation project; golf course and country club. 
 
We’re going on and on with economic development — this 
province growing, moving into the future. In Lloydminster: an 
enhanced oil recovery program; the Lloydminster Hospital; and 
certainly the work that’s being done there to bring about a 
major upgrader facility. Moose Jaw: Phillips Cables Ltd.; St. 
Anthony’s Home. 
 
And of course in the Premier’s riding in Estevan we weren’t 
about to leave him entirely out of matters either. As the 
economic development swept across this province, it certainly 
wasn’t about to sweep over Estevan. So we have the Rafferty 
and Alameda dams and the Estevan airport, a couple of major 
projects. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me make one thing very clear. Let 
me make one thing very clear — that I am not just taking the 
time of the House to list off a whole long list of small programs, 
or developments, rather, but I’m talking about major. The ones 
that I just read into the record, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know 
are not just small operations. We’re talking about some very 
significant and major economic projects in this province. 
 
And one can only say thank you — thank you to the people of 
this province and thank you to small business and thank you to 
large business in the way they’ve co-operated with this 
government in building on the very strengths that we have in 
this province. 
 
It’s something, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I’m very proud of. 
And I think it’s unfortunate and I think it’s very sad, quite 
frankly, that members in the NDP are not in favour of 
development and expansion, and in growth. Whatever would 
you want to do with a province if you’re going to drive the 
people out, as they have, if you’re not going to allow business 
to grow, if you’re not going to provide incentives for them, if 
you’re going to be for ever critical of the word “profit”? 
 
  



 
April 29, 1986 

 

958 
 

I don’t understand that. I never did. I never could understand 
why the New Democratic Party was against development and 
against small business. It could be, and I suppose it’s maybe 
slightly off the subject, but it’s maybe improperly named, New 
Democratic. There’s nothing democratic about your 
administration over 11 years. And today I can tell you there’s 
nothing new about them. There’s nothing new about them and 
there’s nothing democratic, and they want to get back to some 
of their old ways. And as I said earlier, politics is about the 
future, not of the past. 
 
So there’s not a lot of good in me spending any time talking 
about the terrible record of the NDP. I only throw a few 
comments out from time to time to show the contrast, i.e., 
employment records. More important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
should be, as I said, talking about the future. How do we build 
the future and how do we go ahead? 
 
(1545) 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to just go back to some of the 
comments that I had made earlier with regards to jobs, and the 
programs and the initiatives. The Progressive Conservative 
government is committed to ensuring anyone who wants to 
work has the opportunity to do so. 
 
Now again, if you can recall earlier in my comments, I said that 
I did not believe it was the government’s sole responsibility to 
create jobs. So when I say that we want to make a commitment 
to ensure that anyone in this province who wants to work will 
have the opportunity, I am trusting and trusting in a very large 
way that the private sector, that the small business initiatives, 
will be there — not to take the full burden, not to take the full 
responsibility, but that it will be there to share with us, to act as 
one pillar, if you like, and we the other, to support that 
commitment. 
 
Now we’re committed to giving our youth a future as well — a 
future full of employment and opportunities much like, if you 
like, not unlike that future that was there for my grandfather 
when he came to this country in 1904. We want to create 
opportunities for people. We want to create jobs and 
opportunities. And that has to be done with consultation with 
small business — employment which enhances their career 
development so they can build our province through their career 
contributions. 
 
Most importantly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government is 
committed to the long-term economic development of this 
province. And with economic development comes jobs and 
opportunities; jobs and opportunities for all Saskatchewan 
people, people from all walks of life; jobs in the rich 
agricultural fields of Saskatchewan; jobs in our oil; jobs in 
small business; and jobs in construction and manufacturing. 
Jobs in our schools and our hospitals and our civil service and 
jobs for people from all walks of life, in all sectors of our 
economy. 
 
The Progressive Conservative Government of Saskatchewan is 
committed to ensuring jobs and enhancing opportunities, but 
we’re going to make that commitment arm in arm, stride for 
stride, in partnership  

with small business. We’re going to do it that way, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We’re not going to do it by building some, as I said 
earlier, some big humungous bureaucracy where they’re going 
to tell us all what we’re going to do; where we’re going to live; 
how big a house we’ll live in; how big or small a car we’ll drive 
or what make it will be or what colour it will be. No, I don’t 
want that kind of government. 
 
For me, the less government that I have over my shoulder, that I 
have to look over at, is the better. And that doesn’t necessarily 
mean that you could just eliminate government. Certainly 
there’s a need for government. A government is there to set 
rules and regulations and guide-lines by which free people will 
work and play in a free society — something I believe in; 
something the NDP in opposition do not understand. They do 
not understand that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the programs and initiatives that we’ve 
designed to help the Saskatchewan people are working; 
programs and initiatives which reflect the strong commitment 
of this government and of small business; programs and 
initiatives which work in consultation and co-operation with the 
people of our province; that combine the talents of those 
involved and utilize these talents to the fullest. Programs and 
initiatives, much unlike those of the previous administration, 
programs and initiatives which build bridges with the people of 
Saskatchewan and not burn them down. 
 
And you know the NDP aren’t just into burning bridges, but we 
know they’re burning American flags and those kinds of things 
as well. 
 
Programs like our government’s winter works program, an 
innovative program enthusiastically received by both the public 
and the private sector, with the greatest response incoming from 
the business community, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the response 
by farmers and rural people as well, has been very encouraging. 
 
Last year this program created over 5,000 jobs for 
Saskatchewan people. It even helped many hard-pressed 
farmers to obtain employment for the winter months, and the 
extra cash flow generated continues to be of great assistance to 
farmers and communities alike. 
 
These kinds of projects, like I’ve identified, the winter works 
projects, are not projects by government or programs where we 
send out bags of money to individuals and say there, you’re 
good for the winter. No, we don’t do that. We provide, as I said, 
incentives for the private sector, for small business, to create 
jobs. That’s our role — not as a government to create the job 
itself but to create the opportunity, and not only for the young 
people, but for all ages and for all talents. 
 
Another reason is the Employment Development Agency and 
the employment development fund. For the first time ever 
Saskatchewan has a fully operational and well-planned, 
long-term employment strategy — a $600 million five-year 
strategy for job creation. And again, not a program that just the 
government is doing. Certainly it’s a job creation program. 
Certainly there’s 600 million being put up front, cash right up 
there on the front. That’s  
  



 
April 29, 1986 

 

959 
 

being put there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But it’s not going to be utilized effectively unless there’s the 
kind of co-operation and consultation that’s going on, on an 
ongoing basis with government to make good use of that 600 
million. 
 
During 1985-86, a program which created and sustained some 
31,000 jobs in Saskatchewan — 31,000 jobs, Mr. Speaker — 
jobs for people from all parts of this great province. This 
innovative employment development fund also contains 
medium-term programs for Saskatchewan people in need of 
educational training or retraining or in need of landing that all 
important first job. 
 
And the results of these programs keep pouring in, Mr. Speaker; 
2,300 Saskatchewan youths found jobs under the youth access 
program. The Opportunities ’85 program helped 10,000 
students go back to school in the fall by helping them receive 
employment in the summer. 
 
People on social assistance have a new sense of optimism and a 
desire to work. And that’s very important, Mr. Speaker. The 
skills extension development program has helped 1,400 people 
on unemployment and social assistance gain new independence 
and optimism. The employment development fund is just one of 
many job creation efforts of the Government of Saskatchewan, 
and I must say again, Mr. Speaker, it’s a job creation effort on 
behalf of this government but not one that could be successful 
— it could not begin to be successful — if it did not have the 
confidence of the people of this province, if it did not have the 
small-business people out there prepared to, as I said, join 
hands with us and go in partnership and to build. It couldn’t do 
it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Governments must not make people rely solely on them for 
employment, but should help individuals gain a job and 
independence that goes with it. And that’s important. I’ve often 
said, Mr. Speaker, that any government that claims that it gets 
its support from the poor and the underprivileged and the 
ravaged, is a government that has a reason to keep them that 
way. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not the kind of government you have 
in Saskatchewan today. Not at all, Mr. Speaker. You had that 
kind of a government for 11 years. That’s been epitomized. 
 
We’re trying to work with small businesses that create jobs. The 
previous administration want us to increase the welfare rates. 
Oh sure, that’d be great. You know, we could get those rates so 
high it’d be better just to sit on welfare than to go out and be the 
kind of person that maybe you were born to be, that God 
wanted you to be. Maybe that could be, Mr. Speaker. But not 
under an NDP administration. 
 
Sure they want to increase the welfare rates. They’re the highest 
in the country now. They want to know why so many people are 
on welfare. If you doubled the rate, wouldn’t you have more 
people on welfare? Isn’t it better not to have people on welfare? 
I don’t want people in this province on welfare, Mr. Speaker. I 
want them employed. I want them to have a job. I want them to 
do what they want to do in life, not to be stifled by socialism. 
No, not  

ever again. 
 
I saw it for 11 years; that was enough for me. I don’t ever want 
to see it again in this province, and by some stroke of genius or 
luck or whatever it might take to get the NDP back in office in 
this province. I’m going to tell you now, Mr. Speaker, people 
are asking me, what are you going to do? Well I’ll tell you what 
I’m going to do. I am going to be, as long as I’ve got a breath of 
life left in me, prepared to fight socialism and the NDP at every 
turn. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve always believed in 
partnership with people. The difference is that we believe in 
people, Mr. Speaker. And the corner-stone of our government’s 
commitment to keeping Saskatchewan strong is our belief and 
feeling that Saskatchewan people are proud of themselves as we 
are. It is this partnership for progress which has spurred small 
business to hire new employees. It is this partnership for 
progress which has created 7,000 jobs in the oilfields of 
Saskatchewan and hundreds of millions of dollars of provincial 
revenue every year. 
 
And you know, I talk of hundreds of millions of dollars, Mr. 
Speaker, and I believe that is very significant. Just in the oilfield 
alone, 7,000 new jobs. Well it took the private sector, the 
engine of the private sector, it took that kind of co-operation 
there as well to develop 7,000 new jobs in the oilfield. 
 
It is this attitude of provincial consultation and participation 
which is preparing future jobs and opportunities for the people 
of Saskatchewan. And the people of this province are the 
number one concern of this government. I mean, who else, you 
know, would the government be concerned about if it were not 
the very people that elected them to office. That’s the very 
reason that we’re here is because they placed their trust in us. 
And in return, we’re placing our trust in the people of the 
province. We’re trusting them to build and develop and take 
advantage of some of the small . . . And I won’t give our 
government great, great tributes, if you like, for what they’ve 
done, but we have at least done some things that have cleared 
the way for small business, cleared the way for this province to 
build, and I’ll commend our government for that. 
 
If the people of this province have jobs and opportunities, then 
we’re well on the way to a more prosperous tomorrow, Mr. 
Speaker; a prosperous tomorrow for all Saskatchewan people 
and from all walks of life. A more prosperous tomorrow, Mr. 
Speaker, I believe is being built today — is being built today by 
small business. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, being built through the Progressive 
Conservative government’s commitment, the future hinges on 
the creation of jobs and opportunities for the Saskatchewan 
people. And it is becoming a reality to the success of a wide 
range of innovative programs and initiatives, programs and 
initiatives which are securing jobs and opportunities for the 
people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there was ever a time for us to recognize where 
we are in the course of our history, it is now. We  
  



 
April 29, 1986 

 

960 
 

must, Mr. Speaker, become all one or all the other. We are 
either in favour in this province of a government that believes in 
the people and trusts in the people and that does not want to 
dictate to them and rule them for ever, or we’re going to believe 
in socialism. 
 
I have laid out through this motion, that I am so pleased to 
second, that we have been able to restore the confidence and 
allow the people of this province to build. That’s now 
happening. What I am saying, Mr. Speaker, is that it cannot 
happen under an NDP administration. This is not something to 
be compared with health care. 
 
It was once said that only a socialist government could, in fact, 
build social justice programs — of course health care rolled into 
that. Well that’s not true. It was proven that this government, 
not a socialist government, was able to build on health care for 
this province. And the building that’s taken place in health care, 
with all of the nursing homes and the hospitals that are being 
built across this province, have been creating jobs and 
opportunities for suppliers — the lumber companies, creating 
employment in small communities like in my riding, Mr. 
Speaker. I would identify the two nursing homes, one in 
Whitewood, one in Wawota. Well those two projects, Mr. 
Speaker, to whatever extent they could, used local supplies. 
That helped to maintain jobs and to create new jobs in those 
supply related industries, notwithstanding of course, Mr. 
Speaker, the professional expertise and personnel that was 
required in the facility itself to care for our aged. 
 
So when I say that our record and the record of small business 
is something that would be, in fact, put to death in certain terms 
by an NDP administration, I say it’s not something that can be 
compared to health care, not at all. 
 
(1600) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to make it very clear that if an NDP 
government gets back into office in this province, which I hear 
comments being made will never happen . . . and I hope they’re 
right, because I have reason to believe that the people of this 
province have a right to make that decision, and I believe 
they’ll not only have the right but that they’ll make a right, and 
a very right, decision when that time comes. 
 
When you move, Mr. Speaker, to what could be the situation as 
I said, and we fear it, but if ever, through whatever reasons it 
might happen that an NDP was in power in this province again, 
people who have invested millions of dollars on the future of 
Saskatchewan could very well be lost. You would see industries 
and big businesses being bought up. Their motto is: if they see 
something that’s running well, then it’s something that they, as 
the government, should take over. And they do. They take over 
things. They take over businesses and practices that quite 
frankly should be in the private sector, that are running well in 
the private sector, and as soon as they take them over, then 
they’re not running well. 
 
I challenge you, Mr. Speaker, to show me a place, where the 
private sector today exists, where the government of any party 
could do a better job. The private sector and the small-business 
people are far more efficient, far more effective, than any 
government could be in the  

development of this province. So, Mr. Speaker, we’re not going 
to rest our case on being the big daddy government like the 
previous administration was. We’re going to rest our confidence 
and our case in the people of this province, and that’s where it 
should be. 
 
This province, Mr. Speaker, is a province that cannot be divided 
against itself, but on a daily basis we see NDP members in the 
House rising to try and find some reason to be against 
everything that the people of this province are trying to build. 
They’re against a bacon plant in North Battleford. They’re 
against that. That’s economic development. They’re against the 
enhanced oil recovery that we have going on, in particular, in 
the south-eastern part of the province. They’re against the 
upgraders. They against the Co-op upgrader in Regina. They’re 
certainly against the upgrader in Lloydminster, and they’re 
against all kinds of projects. 
 
There’s some projects that I understand they’re against in 
Saskatoon . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The Saskatoon arena, 
yes. They’re against that. Now I don’t know whatever would 
you be against the Saskatoon arena for. I mean, you know, that 
would be like being against the Stanley Cup playoffs or being 
against the World Series or being against the Roughriders. And 
maybe they are, I don’t know. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what I’m trying to point out, and I went 
through a whole host of information here which I think is made 
very clear that this government has done its share in providing 
opportunities and incentives for the small business, meaning the 
people of this province, to in themselves and by themselves 
create jobs and opportunities and build on the growth of this 
province. And if we ever get an NDP administration in, then all 
of that is going to be lost. We’re going to see the oil industry 
not only shut down, but it’s going to be squeezed right out south 
of the border. That’s where it’s going to go. They’ll close all the 
potash mines. They’ll close them down. They’ll close the 
uranium mines down. They’ve made that decision now, to close 
the uranium mines down. And then they’ll close the potash 
down. That would come next. 
 
Well I think, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t think, I believe that that’s 
just not what Saskatchewan people want. Not at all. Now I 
could throw out some interesting comments on that subject, but 
I’m not going to. I’m going to leave them because they’re so, 
quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, damning of the NDP members in 
this legislature that in all probability I could be called to order 
because they’d be almost unparliamentary remarks. And so I’m 
going to stay within the tradition of parliament. I’m not going to 
break any of the rules in Beauchesne. I’m going to stay within 
those rules, and I’m not going to mention them. And it’s against 
great temptation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But there is one comment that is within the rules, and I believe 
it needs to be made. I think the NDP members need to be made 
aware of it. Certainly the people of this province need to be 
made aware of it. 
 
I was just looking at an article today — it fell across my desk a 
couple of days ago, but I never had an opportunity to take a 
look at it until today — it’s an article by Michael  
  



 
April 29, 1986 

 

961 
 

Farraby out of Ottawa and it’s just a comment here, and I’m not 
going to take the time of the House to read all of this to you, 
Mr. Speaker, but if I could just read what I’ve marked out in 
yellow here. It says, 
 

On the issue of electioneering, Mr. MacDonald seems to 
have his greatest trouble with the party, reflecting 
uncertainty among others within the party about the basic 
objectives of the NDP. He is concerned that the NDP is 
beginning to quack, waddle and gabble like any other 
party for whom winning elections is the goal. 

 
So, you know, they’re talking about quaking and waddling and 
gabbling, and we’ve had evidence of that right here in this 
House from NDP members. And I don’t believe, Mr. Speaker, 
that that kind of conduct by NDP members of the opposition 
contributes in any meaningful way to the development of small 
business. I mean I don’t know what the connection is. I do not 
understand what the connection is between those kinds of, you 
know, with those kinds of conduct, if you like, and small 
business activity. 
 
The people of this province realize that they are paying the 
salaries of each and every one of us in this House. They expect 
us to be responsible, and when we’re not, they expect us to do 
honourable things. And we do honourable things like resigning 
or apologizing. They expect us to be honourable. 
 
When you get a letter in your office, Mr. Speaker, it’s “The 
honourable member” from wherever. Here in this House we 
address each other as honourable members so we have to 
assume that, in fact, the members are honourable. And the 
public expects us to be honourable. They expect us to be 
honourable; they expect us to be honest and they want to trust 
us. And I believe that’s very important. 
 
But when you get members of this Assembly and the opposition 
doing things that quite frankly take a swipe at the very root of 
that trust that is with the government — with the members — 
then I think it’s very destructive towards the concept of building 
and consulting and co-operating and trying to build the kind of 
trust throughout Saskatchewan that the people want to have in 
their government. 
 
And I’m not saying it about any political party. It doesn’t matter 
what the political party is, quite frankly. I’m speaking 
conceptually, Mr. Speaker. The people want to believe in their 
government, and they want to be able to trust in them. They do 
not want to see them acting irresponsible in the House. It’s as 
simple as that. And members in opposition have acted 
irresponsible in the House. It’s very unfortunate that they do 
that because it contributes not one thing to economic 
development. Not one thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to remind members of the Assembly that 
strong people cannot be defeated. It’s as simple as that. Strong 
people cannot be defeated. So, Mr. Speaker, given that, one has 
to understand that regardless of the tactics, if you like, taken by 
the NDP members, the strong individuality of Conservative 
members cannot be defeated. The strong individuality of the 
people of this  

province cannot be defeated. Strong people, Mr. Speaker, 
cannot be defeated. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what I want to suggest is that we broaden, if 
you like, our new beginning. Now let us broaden our new 
beginning. Does that not seem, Mr. Speaker, like a good thing 
to do? Is that not better than being negative and critical, as the 
NDP members do, to get up and consistently criticize the 
government of the day, which is for ever, and has been for ever 
since 1982 — when I say for ever, I mean since we became 
government in ’82 — has been doing the kinds of things that we 
should do, and that’s to act responsible for the people of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take a little bit of time to build further on 
some of the kinds of things that I believe the people believe in, 
and how we can inevitably go from there and continue to build. 
As I said, I listed a whole array of projects, and there’s a great 
number of them. And I want to touch on that a bit more. I want 
to tell you that this government is pro-growth, Mr. Speaker. 
This government is pro-family, Mr. Speaker. This government 
believes in the province. 
 
Low, long-term interest rates that we have guaranteed are the 
basis for a continuing economic growth. We have done 
everything that we can do, Mr. Speaker, to reduce costs — costs 
to the building that is taking place in this province . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to have the interjection by the 
members in opposition, because I needed the time out to have a 
drink of water. I want to tell you . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Clean water. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Yes, an one member said, clean water, that’s 
true. Now, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Come on, use that old one. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — No, I didn’t say that. As a matter of fact, it’s 
the very first time that I have indicated that this government had 
anything to do with providing clean water for the city of Regina 
in this House. That’s the first time I’ve ever said it. There might 
have been other members, and I’m sure there have, that have 
spoke about the kinds of things we’ve done for this province, 
and one in particular, you know, providing clean water. 
 
Well I guess it’s reasonable to assume that that’s a good kind of 
thing to have done as well, because if you’re going to build 
through this economic development activity that we have in the 
province, it would be reasonable to assume that you’d want to 
have clean water as well. 
 
We must, Mr. Speaker, continue to build — continue to build in 
co-operation and consultation with the people. We must 
continue to do that, and we’re going to continue to do that. As I 
said, we’re going to start and build now towards a new future. 
 
I had indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, that opposition members 
were quite in opposition to the kinds of projects that we’re 
undertaking here in this province, that they’re  
  



 
April 29, 1986 

 

962 
 

against almost everything that we do. And keep in mind, Mr. 
Speaker, that what we’re doing is what the people of the 
province want us to do. So we didn’t just wake up some 
morning and have a grandiose idea that was dredged from some 
ideological belief — in particular, you know, as the NDP would 
have, a socialist ideological belief. We didn’t do that. We got 
up and we went responsibly to work and we were busy with 
committees and task force reports and reviews and studies 
around this province, visiting with people to find out what kind 
of shape and direction they wanted this province to take. 
 
Having found that out, Mr. Speaker, then with confidence in the 
people we embarked to build just that kind of a province. And 
that’s very important. That kind of attitude never prevailed in an 
NDP administration. If it had ever have prevailed in an NDP 
administration, somewhere in the 11 years they had to be in 
power, that they were in power, somewhere along there one of 
them would have been bright enough to figure a few things out. 
They would have figured out that we needed a new 
multi-purpose arena in Saskatoon. They would have figured that 
out. That would have been, Mr. Speaker, had they been 
listening to the people. Well, we were told by people in 
Saskatoon that this was something that they wanted, was 
something that was beneficial to the people, and subsequently 
that project is under way. 
 
(1615) 
 
How often, Mr. Speaker, do we hear members in the opposition 
criticize us for the potash industry and its development, and 
Canpotex. Well Canpotex, the international marketing agency 
for Saskatchewan potash, moved its head office from Toronto 
to Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. As well, the Potash-Phosphate 
Institute of Canada is moving its headquarters and research 
office from Toronto to Saskatoon. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s think on that for a moment. We now 
have head offices locating in Saskatoon — from Toronto. Well 
how often have I been in Toronto — quite; I have a brother in 
Toronto — and how it irritated me to drive through Toronto and 
see these great big buildings, and all these people being 
employed, processing, Mr. Speaker, raw products that came 
from this province. Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that it’s 
pretty good news for me to hear that we’re having head offices 
now in Toronto . . . from Toronto coming to Saskatoon. 
 
Now the NDP, you know, they don’t believe in that. They’re 
laughing again. They don’t agree with Canpotex having its head 
office in Saskatoon. You know, the head office in Saskatoon is 
now just an empty building with windows in it. It has people in 
it, people that have jobs. And I say I’d rather have people 
working here in this province in a head office in Saskatoon as it 
relates to Canpotex, than I would have them in Toronto, 
notwithstanding the kinds of jobs that were created, and the 
opportunities that were created in building that centre in the 
first place. I mean, they didn’t move it down here on the nearest 
train that was coming by Saskatoon. They just didn’t ship the 
head office down. You know they didn’t package it up and send 
it over there. They actually had to build the thing. Well that’s 
jobs and opportunities. 
 

Seven million dollar refurbishment for the Western 
Development Museum, Mr. Speaker. Eight new child care 
incorporations in Saskatoon alone have provided pre-school and 
day-care services to approximately 300 new families. 
 
New $17 million cancer clinic, 100 per cent financed by the 
government, but who was going to build it? Well I don’t see the 
member for Athabasca over there building it. No, the private 
sector, Mr. Speaker. We can provide dollars for the kinds of 
developments that are taking place, but it’s the small-business 
sector that has to come right in and get the job done. 
 
New geological sciences building at the University of 
Saskatchewan, and that was a fairly significant expenditure, as 
well, of 18.6 million. A new $78 million, world-class, 
agricultural building for the University of Saskatchewan, and 
it’s interesting. Here’s a party in opposition, the NDP, who on a 
daily basis are criticizing the government of the day, hollering 
at us about what are you going to do for agriculture. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, they had 11 years to build that kind of a facility in 
Saskatoon and they couldn’t do it. Eleven years and they 
couldn’t build it. Well we had four, and they’ve got themselves 
a new $78 million — and I say, yes, and proud of it — 
world-class, agricultural building for the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
A science research unit is being built at the College of Medicine 
at a cost of 1.6 million; $31 million College of Engineering 
building. Forty-three new advanced technology firms have 
located in Saskatoon since 1982. Now let’s think on that for a 
minute, Mr. Speaker — 43 brand-new advanced technology 
firms located in the city of Saskatoon since we became 
government, with another eight existing firms moving into 
advanced technology fields. 
 
Two hundred and two point nine million dollars worth of 
planned and ongoing hospital construction in Saskatoon for 
expansions at St. Paul’s, University, and the construction of a 
new City Hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
Since 1982, over $41.2 million worth of school construction 
and renovations has taken place. 
 
School construction: building centres for people to be educated, 
so they can go out and take advantage of the opportunities 
which the small business is taking and providing through the 
incentives of this government in economic development and 
opportunities — those facilities again being built by small 
business. 
 
So they themselves have a good circle going the right way — 
the right way for them, Mr. Speaker. And they’re taking up the 
challenge and they’re to be commended for it. As I said, 41.2 
million — just since we became government — worth of school 
construction. Well those are significant dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
Those are significant . . . it’s a very significant expenditure. 
 
Four hundred and thirty-three special care home beds being 
constructed under the five-year special care home construction 
program. All of that building is now going to take place in this 
province over the next five years. If the  
  



 
April 29, 1986 

 

963 
 

NDP were in office tomorrow, that five-year program would be 
scrapped. Nursing home construction which small business 
could participate in would be gone. You would have a 
moratorium on nursing homes, as was the case under the NDP. 
You’d have an 11-year moratorium — that’s what you’d have 
— stop building nursing homes for 11 years. 
 
Think of it. Think of the disaster for the people of this province. 
I think it’s something, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly, to be feared. 
And to be quite honest with you, Mr. Speaker, I do fear it. I fear 
for the people of this province if an NDP administration ever 
comes back to power. 
 
May I itemize a few more, Mr. Speaker? Over $40 million in 
the science and technology research located to 12 research 
infrastructure facilities in Saskatoon; 1,230 new jobs created 
through Saskatchewan employment development program of 
Social Services, just in Saskatoon; 1,500 increase in day care 
spaces in Saskatoon; and over 354,000 in grants to seniors’ 
organizations in Saskatoon; and the kinds of building that takes 
place for senior centres all over this province — over $11 
million in grants to organizations in support of handicapped in 
Saskatoon; and nearly $20 million of urban assistance from 
Department of Highways to Saskatoon since 1982; and over 2 
million on highways in the Saskatoon area alone. 
 
You know, and again I’m going to stop, because I’m just trying 
to itemize some of the things that are taking place in the various 
parts of this province, whether it’s Saskatoon, Regina, Estevan, 
Moose Jaw, Lloydminster, Nipawin — around the province we 
go — and even in my riding in the constituency of Moosomin. 
All of the kinds of building that’s taking place. And it’s 
something, Mr. Speaker, to be excited about and it’s something 
to be thankful to small business for. 
 
It’s certainly something, Mr. Speaker, that will stop dead in its 
tracks when an NDP government comes back to rule in this 
province — whenever that is. And that could be a long time and 
I hope that the judgement of the people will be fair and 
reasonable and that they won’t get that opportunity, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Call an election and find out. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Well I’ve mentioned a few construction 
starts in Saskatoon. I don’t think it’s fair to leave out Regina. 
 
The member for Regina North East mentioned that we should 
call an election and find out. Well, the people of this province 
will certainly have their opportunity to decide who they want to 
be government, and they certainly made that decision on April 
26, 1982 when they took an 11-year-old NDP administration 
and they kicked it right out of office, right out of office, and 
they did so because you absolutely refused to listen. You 
absolutely refused to listen to the people. They know that 
you’re not listening now. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, not only did that NDP administration get 
thrown out of office for those reasons that they could not listen, 
but they got thrown out of office because they,  

quite frankly, took advantage of the electoral system. They had 
elections when it was appropriate for them to have an election. 
 
When I got elected in ’75 I thought I was going to be there for 
four or five years. Keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, the legal 
mandate for a government is five years — five. Well I got 
elected and I was all excited about it. I thought, oh my 
goodness, I’m going to be an MLA for five years. Why, three 
and half years later we were having an election because they 
thought it was politically popular to go to the polls at that time. 
 
They were not concerned, Mr. Speaker, about getting down to 
the business of administration that they were elected to do by 
the people. You just simply got elected and then started to play 
a whole bunch of politics so that you could orchestrate and 
organize your own re-election. I think that’s unfortunate, Mr. 
Speaker. But that’s what happened. 
 
Well if that wasn’t bad enough, I got elected again in 1978 and 
I thought, well now this time — this time — I’m going to be 
there for a while. But oh no. No, no. Not to be. The NDP called 
another election in three and a half years. So what has been the 
net result of this? 
 
Well, there’s two things. Number one, the people of this 
province did not get good government when they were there 
because they were too busy politicking, figuring out how they 
could, you know, move things around to be politically 
expedient for them to get re-elected. That’s what they were 
doing. That was the net result of it — poor administration. And 
I just don’t think that that was good for the people of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I believe, Mr. Speaker, that more significantly what it did, it 
had now got the people of this province believing that when a 
political party gets elected, that they’re not there to provide 
good government, number one, and that they’re only there for 
three years. I’ve got some people that even ask me if a term of 
government is two years, because they used to have elections so 
often, because they were trying to just have them when it was 
politically expedient for them to get re-elected. 
 
Well I’m going to just set the record straight. An election 
period, a legal election mandate, when a party is elected to 
govern, they are elected to govern for five years. That’s how 
long they’ve got to be in office. So, Mr. Speaker, we’re right on 
time. We’re right on target. We’ve been in office four years. 
And they’re going to get an election. The member for Regina 
North East, you know, he’s saying, any time. And he’s the same 
member that likes to get up in this House and talk about what an 
arrogant government that we have over here, and he just says 
that when we’re all sitting here quietly, trying to do our work 
and be a good government. He says that. Well, who’s being 
arrogant? Who’s being arrogant now, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The member for Regina North East is being arrogant when he 
gets up and says, oh, call an election. Because he’s still hot 
because of his big by-election win. Well, you know, we did the 
right thing. We got up in the House and we congratulated him 
for his win. We did that. We congratulated him. We 
congratulated the member for  
  



 
April 29, 1986 

 

964 
 

Regina North East for his victory. We were honourable. But we 
don’t want to spend the rest of our time in government dwelling 
on the Regina from North East’s victory because that makes no 
contribution to economic development — none whatsoever. It 
makes no contribution to economic development. 
 
And now he’s wanting to have an election. Now he doesn’t 
really care if anybody else gets elected, as long as he does. He’s 
not concerned about his colleagues or who is government — 
whether we’re government or the NDP are government. He just 
wants to make sure that he gets elected again. Because he 
believes if he can get re-elected again, whether or not they’re in 
government or in opposition; he’s going to get a crack at the 
leadership. 
 
(1630) 
 
And that I say, Mr. Speaker, makes no contribution to small 
business, no contribution to economic development. It is not 
responsible in any way, shape, or form, Mr. Speaker. And he, 
you know, says, don’t be chicken, call an election. And you 
know, we’ve had enough of the chicken act from the NDP 
members in opposition. 
 
I’m going to stay right on topic, Mr. Speaker. I want to talk now 
about some of the economic development projects that have 
taken place in the city of Regina. And the member for Regina 
North East might want to take note of that, because of course 
that’s the city that he represents a riding in. 
 
The Regina NewGrade heavy oil upgrader, the largest project in 
Saskatchewan’s history, the $650 million project will create 
3,000 new jobs in the construction phase alone. The 50,000 
barrel-a-day heavy oil upgrader will increase Saskatchewan 
crude oil purchases by $480 million a year — $480 million a 
year. 
 
And the members in the NDP opposition, Mr. Speaker — and I 
want to make sure this goes on the record — are opposed to that 
upgrader. They don’t want to see anything developed with 
regards to that upgrader. There’s nothing they would like to see 
than to have the whole thing saboteured by terrorism. Sure, 
that’s what they’d like to see. It wouldn’t matter to them if it 
was blown up. It wouldn’t matter if it was just put to rest for 20 
years. That’s what they want to see. 
 
The only way, Mr. Speaker, that they can find their way back 
into government is over the back of crisis and poverty and bad 
things happening. They don’t want to . . . You know, every time 
something good happens in the province we try to be happy 
about it and be proud of Saskatchewan people, proud of the way 
that the small-business people have worked into that whole 
economic scheme of things. But what do we get? 
 
Every time we have a ministerial statement on some of these 
issues, some of these projects which I’ve listed . . . And, you 
know, already they’ve forgotten that I said that only 10 or 15 
minutes ago. I listed off three or four pages of them, and now 
they’ve forgotten. Oh, what projects? Or, when was there a 
statement? Or, what happened? Even now they’ve forgotten — 
even half an hour. Mr.  

Speaker, it’s very difficult when you got such slow learners like 
that in opposition — slow learners. Those are not the kinds of 
people that you want to build for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let me be clear that the city of Regina is 
building. It’s building as a part of this province, and so is this 
government, Mr. Speaker. I listed the Regina upgrader. Just 
moments ago the NDP members were congratulating us for 
having cleaned up the water situation in Regina, and that was a 
$15 million carbon filtration plant at Buffalo Lake, and it’s part 
of the PC commitment to good drinking water for Regina. 
We’ve done that in three years, and the NDP had 11 and they 
failed. So it’s just another case, just in drinking water alone. 
What you failed to do in 11 years we were able to do in three. 
 
I’ve talked quite a bit about nursing homes. We were able to 
build more nursing homes in the province of Saskatchewan in 
seven months than you people did in seven years- in seven 
years. Now think of that, that kind of economic development 
and activity in this province, more in special care home 
construction in seven months than the NDP could do in seven 
years . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Canora would like to know if 
I’m going right through till 5. I’m going to go right through 
until I’m finished making my comments about what is very 
important to the people of Saskatchewan. I know it’s not very 
important to that woebegone, lost in the night WCC party. I 
know it’s not very important to the NDP members. I know there 
are not too many of them here to listen to me, and I’m not 
concerned about who else would be listening, but the NDP, 
they’re not here to hear this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when I complete my remarks, quite frankly, 
is quite irrelevant to anyone in this House except myself, 
because I have a number of comments to make and I’m going to 
make them and I believe make some contribution to indicating 
to members in opposition, for their benefit, the kinds of things 
that are happening in this province. 
 
They need to know that, because obviously they don’t 
understand and they don’t know what economic development is 
all about. They don’t understand small business. They had 11 
years to figure it out and they couldn’t figure it out. 
 
What I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, is that we have on this side 
taken a consultative approach; a co-operative approach with 
small business and building is taking place. You’re seeing the 
results of that in the province of Saskatchewan. Oh, NDP 
members don’t like it. They don’t like to see developments. 
They don’t like to see building. Not at all. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, consider $100 million as well in a expansion 
at the Kalium mine — $100 million. 
 
Regina has one of the best job creation records of any city in 
Canada and certainly the best in western Canada, and that 
means better than NDP Manitoba. So we’re going to make it 
clear, Mr. Speaker, that we must be doing the right  
  



 
April 29, 1986 

 

965 
 

kinds of things. 
 
Over $42.5 million of new school construction and renovations 
in the city of Regina since the PC government came into office. 
Since 1982, school starts — the Regina Centre member and, of 
course, North East member would want to be interested in this 
— $42.5 million. I believe that’s good for the province. I 
believe that’s good for the city of Regina. I believe it’s good for 
the people of this province, and certainly it’s good for small 
business and suppliers. It’s good for economic development and 
activity and opportunism. It’s here in this province. 
 
Over $95 million committed for health care projects in the city 
of Regina alone — just in the city of Regina. And yet, Mr. 
Speaker, this government and members of this government, in 
particular the Minister of Health, have to be subject to such 
defamation from the member from Regina Centre as being told 
that he’s letting health care deteriorate. And I think that’s 
unfair. 
 
The member from Regina Centre now understands, he now 
understands that there’s $95 million that was committed for 
health care in the province of Saskatchewan — 95 million. 
That’s in the city of Regina. That’s the Regina Centre member’s 
very own city. That’s where Regina Centre is, in case he’s 
maybe lost track of it. It’s right within the boundaries of the city 
of Regina — 95 million for health care. 
 
And yet — being a slow learner and poor memory and the like 
— he’ll be right up tomorrow saying, oh it’s terrible that you’re 
doing nothing for health care; or he’ll be up after my comments 
today saying, oh it’s terrible you’re doing nothing for economic 
development; oh it’s terrible what you’re doing to the 
small-business people; it’s terrible what you’re doing to the old 
people; everything is terrible. Well it is terrible to the NDP — 
the whole world’s terrible. In fact, I believe, Mr. Speaker, that 
life itself is likely terrible to the NDP — likely. 
 
Well it’s not terrible to me. I get up in the morning and I say, 
we’ll it’s a bright day. And if I’ve got a pain — and quite 
frankly, I have got a pain, but be that as it may — you know, I 
get up and I say, well isn’t it wonderful I can feel the pain. If I 
couldn’t I’d be dead, and I’d rather be alive than dead. And I’m 
happy to be alive, and I’m happy not to be NDP. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, you know, I mean, I don’t know how they can 
just take that approach and that’s the very approach, the very 
essence if you like, of the NDP that just stifled economic 
development — just put it right down and ground it right in as 
low as it could go. Then they rise up, you know, like a teeter 
totter — you jam one end down and the other end comes up — 
now they’re jumping on the other end of the scale, and they’re 
saying, well, now we are all for small business. My goodness 
sakes. Well you know, good old switch you know and on comes 
the light. Well they’ve got little lights on their desks, but the 
lights hardly ever come on. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what else is happening? Home ownership 
and new home construction increased since 1982 in the city of 
Regina as a result of the mortgage interest reduction program 
— 11,860 Regina home  

owners — almost 12,000 Regina home owners received over 
$18.6 million in benefits. That’s an average of $1,570 per 
household. And since 1982, Mr. Speaker, over 1,200 Regina 
families received grants from the Build-A-Home program for a 
total of 3.5 million. 
 
If the NDP, Mr. Speaker, had their way, that money would be 
taken away from them because again, they had 11 years in 
office, with the interest rates away up there in the 18, 20, 22 per 
cent — even higher in some cases, 24 and approaching 26 — 
and the Leader of the Opposition wouldn’t pay any attention to 
that at all. The NDP members wouldn’t pay any attention. Not 
in 11 years could they figure it out that families, Mr. Speaker, 
that families were suffering because they couldn’t recognize 
that interest rates were getting too high. 
 
They never did a thing. They only thing they ever said was, 
well, don’t pay your mortgage if the interest rates are getting 
too high. That’s the only thing, Mr. Speaker, that’s the only 
thing they ever said. Now then, Mr. Speaker, I believe that’s an 
unacceptable approach to be taken by elected officials of this 
Assembly, very irresponsible, and totally unacceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we moved in to government in 1982 and 
recognized that interest rates were a key factor to building 
economic activity and to laying out very quickly help for 
families in building their homes, we were able to stimulate 
economic growth in this province. 
 
In particular, and again I say it for the benefit of the member for 
Regina Centre, we certainly brought about some economic 
activity in the city of Regina. We got building starts up. We got 
them up in this city, and we got them up around this province. 
That’s something that he doesn’t want to see happen. It would 
please the member for Regina Centre if those home owners did 
not have that kind of interest rate reduction, because then he 
would know that if they didn’t have it they wouldn’t build 
homes, and he would know that if people weren’t building 
homes then there would be no construction and no spin-off 
benefits in economic activity and jobs and opportunities for the 
people of this province. And he would like that. He would like 
that, Mr. Speaker, that people would not have jobs and 
opportunities. He would rather the people of this province be 
beholding to the government, be beholding to each NDP 
member that ever got elected. 
 
Well, I’ll tell you, I’ve never been beholding to any NDP 
member, and I never will, and nor will any member on the 
Conservative side of this House. I won’t speak for the member 
for the WCC party that’s here today. He says he doesn’t want to 
be getting down on his knees to them either, but I wonder about 
that. But anyway, you know, it’s strange what politics does to 
people . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . He says that he doesn’t 
want to agree with them, but be that as it may. 
 
You know, we’ll take a look at some of the things that compare 
with the NDP and . . . rather, our record with the NDP . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The member for Athabasca, I’m 
thankful he reminded me now, just now, Mr. Speaker. He 
reminded me that they themselves, when they were in power, 
left us with a terrible debt. And  
  



 
April 29, 1986 

 

966 
 

I thank the member for Athabasca for bringing that to my 
attention. He’s the only one in that group that would ever be so 
honest as to speak out in this House and indicate that they had 
left us with a terrible debt. 
 
When we took office there was no Heritage Fund. No, no there 
wasn’t. The cupboard was bare, and we have been struggling 
through tough economic times. And at least the member for 
Athabasca has recognized, acknowledged here in this House 
today, that we were left a terrible debt by the previous NDP 
administration that had 11 years in office and couldn’t take the 
opportunity to build on the strengths and the growth that was 
taking place in this province at that time, Mr. Speaker. They 
couldn’t do that. In 11 years they couldn’t do that. No, they 
couldn’t build on that opportunity that they had. Had they built 
on it, they would have had a 10 or $15 billion Heritage Fund. 
They would have had money set aside. 
 
(1645) 
 
And if you consider what we’re doing now, Mr. Speaker, what 
we’re doing now to assist small business to be the main engine 
for economic recovery in the face of adversity, just imagine 
what we could have done if we’d had had a 10 or $15 billion 
Heritage Fund to draw on — one that should have been in place 
if the NDP administration had have administered effectively 
and efficiently and responsibly on behalf of the people they 
represented, on behalf of the taxpayers. 
 
They didn’t do that, Mr. Speaker, so we’re in a pretty rough 
shape because of it. Or we were. I should be more candid about 
it than that, and more specific. We would have been, but we’re 
not. Small businesses, as I said, have risen to the challenge. 
 
The NDP jobs record meant misery for many. Their figures are 
an absolute disgrace. And when you look at the job record of 
the NDP, you know that economic development must have been 
pretty goldarned low. It wasn’t doing the kinds of things it 
should have been. Saskatchewan, as I said earlier, currently has 
the highest employment rate at 92 per cent. And that of course 
is . . . 92 per cent, rather, of any province in the nation. Between 
the NDP years, ’75 to ’82, Saskatchewan unemployment rate 
increased by — and I want them to get this — 114 per cent. 
 
But if the unemployment rate was going up, economic activity 
was going down. Well I understand why. Because the NDP are 
against small business. They do not like small-business people 
and they did nothing in 11 years to help them. And I haven’t got 
one reason, not one reason to believe they would ever do 
anything if you gave them 22 years. You could give them 50 
years and they couldn’t come up with one original idea for 
small business. 
 
The NDP record, Mr. Speaker, in this area of economic 
development and jobs and those kinds of things, is an absolute 
shame to the people of the province that they themselves 
represent. The relentless climb of unemployment even during 
the boom years of the ’70s is shown in this table which I have, 
Mr. Speaker, wherein, it says below, when unemployment 
climbed to 114 per cent; look at some of the specifics: 1975, all 
right, we  

look at 11,000 jobless; and go up to 1982, 28,000 jobless; 
150,000 people unemployed in seven NDP years of prosperity. 
 
Now all of those good years, the so-called boom years as my 
colleagues call it, you know, were entirely lost. They never took 
the opportunity to go ahead and build on the province as they 
should have when they had that golden opportunity. 
 
So it’s fairly clear, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province 
would be very, very hesitant about giving them an opportunity 
to go ahead and ruin . . . You know, what we’re now moving 
into is another boom period. We’ve put it on the right track. 
We’re moving now back into a boom period in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and they want to destroy that. They don’t want 
to see it happen, and I think that’s not acceptable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s touch on a couple of more projects before my time runs 
out on my comments. I want to make these clear and get them 
onto the record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Lewvan has been expanded from Regina Avenue to 
Highway 1 at a cost of $5,689,115 — 100 per cent financed by 
the provincial government. The Premier, of course, wants this 
province to have the best transportation system in the country 
and that’s why this government has financed the Lewvan 
Expressway in Regina. And I use it quite often. And again, they 
had those 11 or 12 years in office to do something about the 
Lewvan Expressway and they just promised and promised and 
promised, and never delivered. That reminded me of the former 
prime minister Trudeau, who in his campaign said, I promise 
you nothing. And in fact he was right on believe in fact he 
delivered nothing. 
 
So at least I can say for the former prime minister, at least he 
was honest. These people in opposition promise to do all kinds 
of things. Certainly they promised that they would do 
something for the city of Regina’s water problem. They 
promised the Lewvan Expressway. Certainly they made 
promises in economic development. But did they deliver? No, 
they didn’t deliver. 
 
So the people, Mr. Speaker, I believe, want a government that 
doesn’t make promises. They don’t want to hear their promises. 
They want to hear the announcements. They want to hear the 
announcements; they want to see the construction starts; they 
want to see the digging taking place; they want to see the cranes 
being erected. Certainly they want to see the bricks being laid, 
the foundations, the walls going up. That’s what they want to 
see. 
 
Well I’ve listed off, I’ll bet you, 100 projects here today, Mr. 
Speaker, that were just promised by the NDP and delivered by a 
Conservative government. And they’re real and they’re there. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s a few more that I want to touch on. 
 
I want to talk briefly about the kind of excitement that we’re 
looking at now in northern Saskatchewan. The member for 
Athabasca’s here today and I know he’s right on side with me 
on this issue as well. And it’s a real tribute to any government 
to get NDP members voting on their  
  



 
April 29, 1986 

 

967 
 

side and to get them speaking out on the side of government, 
where the whole Assembly is coming together in the best 
interests of the people. 
 
Gold development, Mr. Speaker, taking place in northern 
Saskatchewan — gold development. And the member for 
Athabasca is right behind us in that as well — and that again 
being done by the private sector, being done by the private 
sector, Mr. Speaker. We’re examining some of the records now 
and taking a look at what’s happening in that kind of expansion. 
We’re looking at the private sector having invested upwards of 
7 and $8 million just in gold expansion and exploration, Mr. 
Speaker — private sector, small businesses involved in that 
total exploration of the North. You know I’m moving to the 
North on this now because I’ve touched on all of the things that 
have happened in Saskatoon, Regina. I talked about Moose Jaw 
and Estevan, and on and on. 
 
I touched on all the major centres, and by and large basically 
rural Saskatchewan, and I’m not going to leave out northern 
Saskatchewan. The member for Athabasca wanted me to 
include this in my remarks and I’m going to. He wanted me to 
tell of the development of the gold in the North, something that 
couldn’t happen under an NDP administration because they 
were fiddling around through SMDC — a bunch of government 
employees I guess trying to look for it and not knowing where 
to find it. SMDC went ahead in partnership with the private 
sector; they brought in their expertise as well. They undertook 
to employ residents of northern Saskatchewan and to develop 
the North and to develop gold in the North. 
 
And I want to just raise and bring into the record, Mr. Speaker, 
a news release, February 13, 1986: 
 

Mining Development Corporation — Star Lake Surface 
Lease Approved. Approval has been given for the surface 
lease for the Star Lake gold-mine and mill in northern 
Saskatchewan. 

 
That’s going to be jobs and opportunities I say to the member 
for Athabasca and I’m glad to see him here today agreeing with 
me. He knows its jobs and opportunities for the very people that 
he will be representing, if he’s successful in winning the next 
election, people that he’s representing now. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, their policy is of course to close down any 
kind of development in the resource sector. Their policy is to 
close down uranium — close down the uranium. Oh, they stuck 
$600 million of our money, Mr. Speaker, $600 million of the 
taxpayers’ money, they plucked right from the pockets of the 
young and of the old, the middle-aged; they didn’t leave anyone 
out. They invested it into the uranium industry. They sent it all 
away to those big companies they hate so badly and those 
Americans they hate so badly, whose flags they burn; sent it all 
the way down there and we’re still trying to get it back. And 
what do they want to do? Is that developing economic activity 
in the North? No, not at all, not at all. 
 
They want to close uranium mines; we’re not going to do that. 
They want to closure uranium mines. Well I can only assume if 
they stuck 600 million into uranium and then turned around and 
decided they want to close it . . . I’m  

kind of excited, and I know other members are, about gold 
development in the north. That’s always something that’s 
caught the imagination of the people. What’s going to happen? 
The NDP would take out Star Lake and they would close it. 
Close the gold industry. Would that be good for the people of 
this province? Shut down a gold industry that is long overdue in 
the developing? Not at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What would they do with the 
paper-mills? 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Now, Mr. Speaker, my colleague sitting 
beside me has just asked me, he says: I wonder what they’d do 
with the paper-mill? 
 
An Hon. Member: — They’d shut that down, too. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Well that’s right. I guess we have a 
paper-mill that’s under way and being developed now in Prince 
Albert and I can be sure that if they’ve closed down uranium 
mines, they’ve closed down gold-mines, they’d close down a 
paper-mill. I mean, there wouldn’t be much to closing down a 
paper-mill. If you can get a uranium industry shut down and get 
a gold industry shut down, shut down the oil industry, scare 
them all off to that terrible Yankee-land to the south, sure, do 
that, too, or else over to Alberta and we’ll all be recalled. We’ll 
be all recalled right now as I tell you what they did when they 
were in office. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition is here and that’s great to see him 
here, because he understands this, Mr. Speaker. He’s not like 
the member for Athabasca, you know — the member for 
Athabasca agrees with me. The member for Elphinstone doesn’t 
agree with me most often, but at least he understands what I’m 
trying to say. He understands that. 
 
I recall when we were in opposition and asked a very simple 
question, why we couldn’t do something for small business in 
this province by allowing natural gas to be developed in this 
province and making it available for Saskatchewan people; to 
reduce the costs for farmers and small-business individuals 
operating in this province. But oh no, we couldn’t do that. No, 
no, no, that would be no good at all. 
 
This proposal was of course, Mr. Speaker, at that time, that it 
was much more prudent to pay — and I say exactly five times, 
five times the cost to Alberta producers as they would to 
Saskatchewan producers; to import two-thirds of our natural gas 
from Alberta, import two-thirds of our gas from Alberta, and of 
course, keep our reserves here. 
 
And I remember it was the member for Kelsey-Tisdale, the hon. 
member for Kelsey-Tisdale — Jack Messer was his name. 
Happy Jack we used to call him. He was the only NDP member 
that I ever met that was happy. But he was. He was happy Jack. 
He used to come strutting on down that aisle there. And he was 
pretty smart, but not quite smart enough to know that it was 
smart to take our own resource and develop it. And we should 
have done that at a time when it was much less expensive to 
develop. But oh no. Maybe he was smart enough, but he was 
guided by the Leader of the Opposition, the then premier . . .  
  



 
April 29, 1986 

 

968 
 

(inaudible interjection) . . . guided or directed, whichever. It 
doesn’t matter much; it gets you to the same place. 
 
But be that as it may, he must have been under that direction 
where he was told that oh no, Mr. Member for Kelsey-Tisdale, 
you’re the minister of Energy, but we’re not going to let you 
use any of your intelligence and develop Saskatchewan natural 
gas which would be good for Saskatchewan business and good 
for Saskatchewan economic activity. We’re going to pay those 
Albertans — God bless them; we love them all — but we’re 
going to pay them five times what we were paying our 
producers for two-thirds of the natural gas requirements of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Where did that money go, Mr. Speaker? Where did it go? You 
bet, it piled right up into a Heritage Fund. We should have had 
that money, as I said earlier, in a Heritage Fund here. That’s 
where it should have been, in a Heritage Fund here, not in 
Alberta. 
 
Now maybe what we should do is send the Leader of the 
Opposition over there. Maybe he can go over there and speak to 
the soon-to-be elected Premier of Alberta, Mr. Getty, and ask 
him if maybe he could give us a bit of that heritage money so 
we could use it to help our small-business people. I doubt it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the incentives program expands industry 
and creates jobs. And I want to before, as I said, my time is up 
on this debate, enter into some more information, Mr. Speaker. 
I want to maybe come close to closing on this. That would be 
depending on the NDP members in opposition of course. 
 
Economic Development and Trade — I’m just going to quote if 
I could quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Economic Development and Trade Minister, Bob Andrew 
(I read his name because I’m quoting, of course, and not 
breaking any rules), said today that Saskatchewan 
industrial incentives program is continuing to spur 
industrial expansion while at the same time creating 
hundreds of jobs for Saskatchewan people. 

 
Hundreds of jobs for Saskatchewan people. 
 
As I said quite some time ago now in my discussions, we in this 
side of the House as a government are obsessed with creating 
jobs. The private sector is obsessed with creating jobs. No 
amount of job creation could ever be enough to satisfy us. We 
will go on creating jobs as long as we can, notwithstanding the 
fact, of course, the Leader of the Opposition believes full 
employment is 6 per cent. Notwithstanding that. We’ll go on 
and we’ll create his 6 per cent . . . jobs for his 6 per cent as well. 
 

In just two years the industrial development program has 
encouraged more than 300 manufacturers and processors 
in 74 Saskatchewan communities to expand their business 
and create permanent jobs. 

 
Permanent jobs. They were not there under an NDP  

administration and they are there now, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Approved projects represent a capital investment of 110 
million by the companies and a commitment by them to 
create more than 3,500 permanent jobs. For doing so, 
they’ll earn incentives totalling $20 million. 

 
Incentives. I wonder if the NDP members can now understand 
that. Create incentives. That’s what this government has done. 
We have not just taken and said, we’re going to be the big 
government. We’re going to look after everyone in this 
province. Don’t you do anything. We know what’s better for 
you than you know best for what’s good for yourself. 
 
We don’t agree with that philosophy, Mr. Speaker. We don’t 
agree with it at all. Their philosophy is to nationalize matters 
and go against the free enterprise system, go against the private 
sector, go against small business, and go against economic 
development. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we disagree with that on this side of the 
House. Mr. Speaker, I, would you believe, have quite much 
more to say on this topic and I just would ask, Mr. Speaker, 
leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 
 


