


















































December 17, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 December 17, 1986 
 
 

303 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Net Migration Rate of Saskatchewan People 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a 
question to the minister responsible for the Employment 
Development Agency. Mr. Speaker, as the minister will know, 
Saskatchewan had the worst net migration rate in Canada in 
1985. We’ve lost more than 6,000 people, on a net basis, to 
other provinces. The latest figures from the provincial 
government’s own bureau of statistics suggest that we’ll suffer 
an even worse population drain in 1986, and this will again be 
the worst population drain in 1986, and this will again be the 
worst in the country. Is the minister aware that during the first 
11 months of this year Saskatchewan suffered a net migration 
loss of 12,900 people – a loss of 38 people a day. Are you 
aware of that, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well the statistics are public. I think a 
lot of people would be aware of the situation in Saskatchewan 
where the price of commodities, in particular agriculture, are 
very low and are taking a heavy toll, in particular on rural 
Saskatchewan, and that’s starting to filter into the cities. It is not 
the fault of this government. We have done many, many things 
to alleviate that problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. In view 
of the fact, Mr. Minister, that between January and November, 
while 11,400 people moved into Saskatchewan, 24,400 moved 
out of the province, producing a net loss of over 12,900 people. 
In view of that, can you explain why, for the second year in a 
row, Saskatchewan is number one in people leaving, number 
one among the provinces in the number of people leaving this 
province? In fact, they’re leaving in droves. Can you explain 
that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well I can’t explain everything but I 
can explain most of it. I don’t have all the answers, as you 
suggest you might have, but I can tell you this, that not only is 
there difficulty in agriculture, there have been thousands of jobs 
lost in the oil industry due to the low price of oil, which has had 
a small benefit for Saskatchewan consumers but has cost this 
province very, very much in jobs and income. 
 
So these are things that are cyclical. You know that; you were 
government long enough to see both sides of the cycle. And this 
government is taking measures, many measures. We have taken 
them and we will continue to take measures to alleviate the 
problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the 
minister aware that nearly half the people who have left the 
province are younger working people between the ages of 19 
and 34? And can you explain, sir, why so many young people 
are leaving this province in search of employment in the light of 
the programs which you say have created jobs but which very 
obviously haven’t? 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well this province has the second 
lowest unemployment in Canada. It’s even slightly lower than 
Manitoba. I’m not sure where exactly they’re all going, but they 
are seeking opportunity where they think it is, and it is certainly 
not in most parts of Canada. 
 
We have done an awful lot to improve the lives of the people of 
this province. We now have a population that’s still in excess of 
a million people. And we have done many, many things, and 
there’s only so much a government can do. Some things the 
people have to help do for themselves. Some things are a matter 
of attitude. And this government hopes to have an attitude in 
this province that will encourage building and encourage people 
to stay. 
 
It seems to me that since we have received a new mandate on 
the 20th of October that there is a better attitude, a more degree 
of permanence in the economy of this province and that you 
should see things improving considerably with our new 
mandate. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. It’s to the minister 
responsible for cycles and for unemployed in this province. Mr. 
Minister, you just said, you just stated that some things people 
have to do for themselves. Are you now saying to the young 
people of Saskatchewan that they have to go out and produce 
their own jobs and that it’s not the government’s responsibility 
to provide job creation and lead job creation in the province? Is 
that your response to the young people who are leaving 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I remind the member opposite that my 
grandfather was once a young person. When I knew him he was 
an old person. There were many, many people like him who 
built this province, and it wasn’t the government that built this 
province. They built it on an attitude . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — . . . they built it on an attitude of 
building, people doing things for themselves, people owning 
their own industry, people owning their own farms. They did 
not built it on buying holes in the ground, as was your 
philosophy. And I was with your government when I told your 
potential leader, sitting right there, he should not buy holes in 
the ground because they would not create any new jobs – and 
they didn’t. And you created a liability for this province under 
which our people are now staggering. 
 
So, therefore, the attitude has to be an attitude of building. And 
this government is moving this province in the direction of a 
building attitude, and you will see building for the next 8, 10 or 
12 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. My question 
  



 
December 17, 1986 

 

304 
 
 

is to the minister again. Mr. Minister, you talk about people 
building. How is it, sir, how is it that people can build 
Saskatchewan by leaving? That’s my first question. Can you 
explain to us how people can build Saskatchewan when they are 
leaving the province? 
 
Secondly, won’t you agree that the population drain that we’re 
experiencing in Saskatchewan at this present time is in fact 
hurting the efforts to build Saskatchewan by reducing our 
competitiveness when the brightest and most skilled people 
have to leave the province to go seek work elsewhere? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — It’s possible that some people left 
because they thought there was a faint chance that you might 
win the last election. Because you were not in favour of 
building an upgrader; you were not in favour of building a 
paper-mill; you were not in favour of building a bacon plant; 
and just the other day I heard your member saying, cancel the 
power plant at Shand. 
 
So can you tell me how cancellation of projects that will 
employ people will help the situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Post Office Closures 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister of Rural Development, and it has to do with the 
Mulroney government’s plan to close a number of rural post 
offices across Canada, including closing some rural post offices 
here in Saskatchewan. Can the minister tell us what assistance, 
either financially or through representation to Ottawa, the 
Government of Saskatchewan has provided to the rural 
communities that are fighting to save their rural post office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the question 
from the hon. member. In regards to rural post offices in rural 
Saskatchewan, I’m sure the member’s aware that over the last 
few years there’s been two or three that, in southern 
Saskatchewan, that have both been not closed because of 
pressure both put on by our government and by the people of 
the area. 
 
And I think that’s important to recognize, that the governments 
must go to the people of the area in regards to closures of 
anything. And I believe, sincerely believe, that if the member 
opposite just took a serious look at all the different things that’s 
either been opened or closed in this province, that usually the 
people are involved a great deal more now than they used to be. 
 
So in answer directly to his question in regards to the closure of 
the post office, I’m unaware of the post office closure in regards 
to particulars of it, but I’m certainly aware that here is some 
closures and has been some closures over the last few years of 
different post offices all over the province. And I’m sure that 
the people in the area are concerned. 
 
But at the same time, we deal with the rural municipalities 

at that level. We talk to them; we discuss with them their 
concerns. And in fact I just met with some of the SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) executive 
last night and there were other issues other than that that we 
talked about. It wasn’t brought up to me that time, but I could 
go back to them and go back to the people of the area and see 
what they feel about it. And at the same time, Mr. Speaker, I’d 
be prepared to bring it back to the House at a later date. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Just in case the minister didn’t hear the 
question –he obviously didn’t address the question – I ask you, 
Mr. Minister, specifically: can you tell us what assistance that 
you have been giving to the rural communities who are indeed 
fighting to save their post office? Have you made any 
representation to Ottawa? Are you providing any financial 
assistance in order that they in fact can mount a campaign to 
oppose the closing of these post offices? 
 
In your own admission you indicate that there are a number of 
them closing. I ask you: what is the assistance? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Speaker, I said a few moments ago, 
and I’ll say it again, that we have, as you know, a few weeks 
ago or a few months or so – a couple of months ago, I believe it 
was – wrote a letter to the Postmaster General in regards to the 
closure of the post office he’s referring to. There has been post 
offices that were proposed to be closed that we have asked the 
minister responsible to in fact take another look at it. They have 
done it, and some of the post offices are now in operation. 
 
There will be, as you know . . . In rural Saskatchewan – I know 
the member comes from rural Saskatchewan or represents a 
rural Saskatchewan seat – but in rural Saskatchewan a lot of 
things are going on out there, Mr. Speaker. The usage of the 
post office, the roads, the highways, everything has changed in 
the last 10 or 15 years. The designation, the receiving of our 
goods, have all changed. 
 
And sometimes, Mr. Speaker, sometimes even post offices have 
to change because the people of the area in fact do not maybe 
use it as much as they used to. In fact they use other areas more. 
As you know, the Wheat Pool has closed many elevators and 
probably some more will close, just to give you an idea of how 
the area and how rural Saskatchewan has changed over the last 
10 or 15 years. 
 
And I think if the member opposite just sat down and realized 
that there’s many, many opportunities out there to build on rural 
Saskatchewan, and if a post office needs to be saved to build on 
it, then I’m prepared to go to bat for it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Supplemental, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you 
indicated in the last couple of words of your comments that 
you’re prepared to go to bat. Would you outlined to this House 
the details of how you are prepared to go to bat on behalf of 
rural closures of post offices in rural communities? 
  



 
December 17, 1986 

 

305 
 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Speaker, you know that post offices, 
whether rural Saskatchewan or urban Saskatchewan, are a 
federal responsibility, first of all. 
 
Second, we would certainly . . . I have no . . . We have already 
sent a letter to the Postmaster General in regards to the post 
office in question. And I am prepared, I am prepared to do a 
little more than just go to bat; I’m prepared to go the SARM 
executive and to the rural municipalities and to the urban 
municipalities and talk with them and see if there’s any way in 
which we or the Department of Rural Development can assist 
them, can assist them in retaining their post office or an 
alternative if that’s what they wish. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Final supplemental. Mr. Minister, are you 
aware that in other jurisdictions and other provinces, for 
instance in Newfoundland, that the Premier of Newfoundland 
sent a telex to the Prime Minister indicating to him and urging 
him not to close rural post offices in Newfoundland? I’m asking 
you: are you, and will you entice your Premier to take similar 
actions and concrete actions, concrete actions, to support the 
rural post office in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in answer to the hon. 
member’s question, over two weeks ago our Premier did send a 
telex to the Postmaster General asking him to reconsider the 
closure of the post office. So in fact, Mr. Speaker, we have done 
even better than what he asked; we’ve already done it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A final supplemental. In view of the fact the 
Premier has in fact sent a telegram, would you be prepared to 
table that so that we have indeed . . . and all your 
correspondence in respect to this particular problem, in order 
that the people of Saskatchewan can see whether or not there is 
a real attempt being made to support the rural post office? Will 
you table it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Speaker, we don’t have to table . . . 
We can’t table in question period anyway. And second, we 
don’t necessarily have to table it because we’ve already done it. 
It’s been two weeks ago; it’s been sent. And then if the member 
wants to . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Speaker, I guess they don’t want to 
hear the answer. 
 
The thing is, the telex has already been sent – over two weeks 
ago. What he has asked has already been done. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the people in the area will know when, if in fact it 
happens, that the closure, it doesn’t come about that . . . And 
they do know, Mr. Speaker, that the telex has been sent, I’m 
sure. And they realize that we’re working on their behalf for the 
people of rural Saskatchewan. 

Proposed Closure of Saskatoon Sanatorium 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question, I 
think is to the Minister of Health, although perhaps the Minister 
of Government Services might also be an appropriate minister – 
but, I believe, the Minister of Health because he has been the 
former Minister of Government Services. And it has to do with 
the Saskatoon Sanatorium in my constituency and the 
government’s announced plans to close, early in the new year, 
the sanatorium and, as I understand it, to vacate the residents 
thereof. 
 
And my question, very simply put, to the minister is: is there 
any way at all, is there some way at all, that the or the 
government can assure the House that there is a possibility of 
keeping open the sanatorium by way of renovation or by way of 
other physical improvement to it so that the residents don’t have 
to be moved, especially in light of a very lengthy waiting list, 
and especially in the light of concerned action by citizens’ 
groups and others? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as the member will 
know, the reason that the sanatorium has even been under 
discussion in recent months is because of the new 238-bed bed, 
level 4 home which is being built in Saskatoon, on the west side 
of Saskatoon. That home was very . . . was waited for by the 
residents of Saskatoon for a good long time, and I know the 
member realizes that. 
 
As it relates to the sanatorium and its future, the consultation is 
still going on. So I can say to the hon. member that there is no 
decision and there has been no announced plan for the future of 
the sanatorium — at least a definitive one. Consultation is still 
going on, and the future use and the future way in which the 
sanatorium building and property can be used is still under 
review. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. I 
acknowledge the new 238-bed facility. I think the hon. minister 
would agree with me that the facility, however, still does not 
meet the demand. I don’t say that in any partisan sense. 
 
When you give me the answer that the Saskatoon Sanatorium is 
still under consultation, my question specifically to you in this 
regard is as follows: when you say consultation, does that 
consultation embrace the possibility of keeping the current 
residents in the current sanatorium in their current place, 
notwithstanding what appears to be the announcement of 
vacating them early in the new year? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I think the one of the things . . . 
and I’m just going a bit by memory here since my days in 
Supply and Services, and it has been some time since I was 
involved in the Department of Supply and Services. One of the 
concerns that was expressed and it has been expressed for some 
time, was the construction of the sanatorium and the major 
renovations which would be needed in there, and the major cost 
factor of the renovations that would be needed in there in order 
to bring it to a standard that would be acceptable for residents to 
remain there for a prolonged period of time. And that’s 
obviously been a concern of the government. I believe it was a 
concern prior to us taking office if I 
  



 
December 17, 1986 

 

306 
 
 

remember correctly. 
 
So what I would say to the member – the consultation that is 
going on will be under the auspices of the present Minister of 
Supply and Services, and I know that that is going on. And 
that’s about all I can say about it at this stage, Mr. Speaker, 
without some further research. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, perhaps a new question 
to the appropriate minister. I want to clarify if I can, Mr. 
Minister, what consultation means. I realize that one aspect of it 
is consultation as to what to do with the site and the current 
building. Let’s leave that aside. I want to know whether or not 
consultation embraces the prospect of keeping the current 
residents located where they are in the sanatorium and keeping 
the present sanatorium open in the light of the obvious need for 
more nursing home beds in Saskatoon. Can I direct that 
question to you, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Actually you’ve directed the question to 
the wrong minister. I will answer. The consultation from my 
perspective now as the Minister of Supply and Services is that 
there is some concern in that neighbourhood as to what might 
be a future use of that property. I’ve given a commitment to the 
people of Saskatoon that if there is to be a different use, if the 
San is not to house people . . . and that question as to whether 
it’s going to house elderly people is best addressed to my other 
colleague. But if that is not the case, the consultation with the 
people in that neighbourhood will take place as to any future 
use of that property. That’s what I mean by consultation with 
the people in the area. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, then I come back to a new 
question to the Minister of health because while I’m concerned, 
and the people in my constituency, and in Saskatoon I might 
add, are concerned about the future use of the property, my 
more immediate concern is about the residents on the current 
San site. Now you, sir, are the Minister of Health, and I want to 
ask you now: will you assure the House that the residents of the 
sanatorium, as currently housed, will remain there for the 
duration and that in consultation nothing will be done except 
but with the consultation of their families, the concerned senior 
citizens groups, and the various community organizations from 
that region who want to have that sanatorium left open. Will 
you give us that assurance please? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what I will say, and 
as I said in my earlier answer, one of the concerns, and it’s been 
a long-standing concern, not just a concern that’s come up in a 
recent number of months, while the construction of the new 
238-bed home is being built – construction which was initiated 
by us after taking power, I might add – construction which was 
supposedly contemplated for some time by them . . . 
 
This is not a new question, Mr. Speaker. The question of 
whether or not the present sanatorium facility can house the 
seniors who are now there, and house elderly people for a long 
period of time, is one based on the facility itself – on the 
suitability of the facility for that type of use over a long period 
of time. It’s not a new question. 

 
There is a serious concern among many about the safety of the 
location without major renovations, and the cost of those 
renovations are something that have to be taken into 
consideration. So, Mr. Speaker, I cannot say, as the member has 
asked today, that I would give an absolute assurance to the 
member and to the people of Saskatoon that the sanatorium will 
be used for its present purpose into the foreseeable future – I 
can’t say that – but I will not as well, Mr. Speaker, I will not 
say that it won’t be used for that purpose. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, one final supplementary to the 
Minister of Health. I am going to interpret that as at least some 
positive hope that the current sanatorium will be left open. My 
question is as follows, just in the eventuality that that 
interpretation is incorrect . . . 
 
My supplementary to you sir is as follows. Undoubtedly, you 
are aware that a lot of the residents, many of the residents, are 
either senior or seriously incapacitated or debilitated by illness 
or disease, such as Alzheimer’s disease. A number of the 
residents have that very debilitating disease. I'm advised, sir, by 
people who know something about it in the area, that 
movements of these kinds of patients in the middle of winter, 
where familiarity of circumstances is so important, is a highly 
dangerous exercise which could, without exaggerating it, 
threaten their lives. 
 
Will the minister at least give us a definitive yes or not to this 
question? Will you at least, for those residents who are located 
there, undertake to make sure that there is no movement out of 
the San until at least spring or summer of 1987, in the course of 
the consultation that you’re prepared to undertake. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, what I would say to the 
member is the following. I won’t necessarily take his 
interpretation in order to raise undue expectations of people 
who live there or who have family members living there. I 
won’t take that interpretation necessarily. I will say to the 
member that professional people in the care of the elderly, and 
so on, in the Department of Health or within the province and 
who have contact with the Department of Health on an ongoing 
basis, will certainly be consulted on any of this type of activity, 
whether it be at that facility or at any other facility. When the 
care and the safety of the people involved is at stake, certainly 
that sort of professional opinion will be taken into 
consideration. And we would just leave it at that, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Senior Management of Saskatchewan Forest Products 
Corporation 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, if I might, while I’m on 
my feet, given an answer to a question which was raised, I 
believe, by the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake just the 
other day and I took notice of that question. The question was: 
what is the status of Ernie Lawrence and why is he still 
receiving salary today? 
 
The answer to that question, Mr. Speaker, is: Ernie Lawrence is 
no longer an employee of Saskatchewan Forest Products 
Corporation. His last day at work was August 26, 1986. A 
severance package based on his age 
  



 
December 17, 1986 

 

307 
 
 

and marketability for future employment at management level 
was arranged after consultation with Crown Management 
Board, who does this sort of thing throughout the Crowns, and 
the pay-out has been arranged to extend over several months. 
 
Another question was raised, Mr. Speaker, related to the 
payment to ship personal goods from Terrace, British 
Columbia, his former residence prior to becoming an employee 
of Sask Forest Products, to his present residence at Canwood, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The answer, Mr. Speaker: Mr. Lawrence had entered into an 
agreement with the general manager to ship the said equipment 
at a flat rate of $3,500. The payment was to be made in lieu of 
his accumulated vacation time and overtime. The shipment was 
made in early September of 1986. 
 
Another question, Mr. Speaker, on that same topic: the purchase 
of parkas or the question relating to the purchase of parkas. The 
Woodlands manager initiated the purchase of excellent parkas. 
An account has been opened to accommodate these employee 
purchases through the company, and that goes throughout the 
company. Each employee, including the general manager, must 
reimburse the corporation for any and all purchases. 
 
And the last question on this topic, Mr. Speaker: the purchase of 
seat covers. Seat covers were purchased by the Woodlands 
superintendent for installation on a new vehicle purchased by 
and owned by the corporation – total cost, $56.65, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask the minister, if 
Mr. Lawrence was no longer employed as of August, why was 
the cheque dated November? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I explained, I believe, Mr. Speaker, that 
the payment was arranged to be paid . . . the severance payment 
was made to be paid out over a period of several months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I might point out, just for the information of all 
members of the House and for the member from Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake, it’s come to my attention, and all of our 
attention here during the first question period, that the member 
had several documents which he waved and said, I have these 
documents and so on, which, because of the rules, he couldn’t 
table in question period. 
 
It’s come to my attention that the secretary in the constituency 
office of the member from Prince Albert worked, immediately 
before moving to that constituency office position, worked for 
Sask Forest Products. 
 
I don’t know anything about the legality of taking documents 
with one. I don’t know the legality. I’ve never been a lawyer, 
nor do I pretend to be one, but I do know something about 
ethics and something about common sense. And I would 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, that those documents going from Sask 
Forest Products with the person to her new job is not really 
ethical. 

 
STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 

 
Ruling on a Point of Order 

 
Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day, members will recall 
that yesterday before orders of the day the member for 
Saskatoon Riversdale raised a point of order, at which time I 
informed the Assembly that I would defer my ruling until a later 
date. I would like now to present to the Assembly my ruling 
regarding that point of order. 
 
The member for Saskatoon Riversdale raised the point of order 
stating that the recommendation in the report of the special 
committee appointed to prepare lists of members to compose 
standing committees, which deals with the matter of quorum, is 
out of order on the grounds that it is beyond the order of 
reference of the committee to deal with such matters. 
 
I refer all members to page 12 of the Votes and Proceedings of 
December 3, 1986, which contains the order of reference for the 
committee. The committee was empowered to consider the size 
and composition of standing committees. No specific reference 
was made to refer the matter of quorum of the committee. 
 
Until 1981 there was no rule in our Rules and Procedures 
respecting quorum in standing committees. It was a 
long-standing practice of the committee to recommend the 
quorum of the committee in its report. However, in 1981 rule 
90(1) was adopted, which provided for a quorum of one-third in 
standing committees unless otherwise ordered by the Assembly. 
 
It is my opinion that because rule 90(1) now provides 
automatically for the size of quorum in committees, the 
Assembly would have to specifically refer the matter of quorum 
to the nominating committees in order for that committee to 
consider and report thereon. 
 
I therefore find the point of order well taken and rule that the 
portion of the report dealing with the matter of quorum is out of 
order. The remainder of the report dealing with the size and 
composition of the committee stands. As a result of this ruling, 
the amendment dealing with the matter of quorum is also out of 
order. 
 
However I wish to raise one further point on this issue. In my 
opinion, the point of order was raised at a very late stage, after 
considerable debate in this House. I refer members to paragraph 
237 of Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms. 
Paragraph 237: 
 

A point of order against procedure must be raised 
promptly and before the question has passed to a stage 
at which the objection would be out of place. 
 

In view of the fact that the point of order was raised before the 
vote, I rule that the point was not out of place. I do caution 
members, however, that points of order in the future must be 
raised promptly at the time that the rules of this House were 
breached. When taken up, the debate will continue on the main 
motion. 
  



 
December 17, 1986 

 

308 
 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order. 
And having regard to your recent ruling that points of order 
should be raised in a timely way, I want to raise a point of order 
with respect to the last reply given by the member from 
Meadow Lake. 
 
And I want particularly to address this because the member for 
Prince Albert-Duck Lake had asked a narrow question of: why 
was the cheque sent in November? The member for Meadow 
Lake answered it and then went on to say: it has come to my 
attention that some papers here, some papers there, somebody 
worked here, somebody moved his job – allegations. 
 
My point of order is this: that is clearly not in response to the 
question, did not even claim to be in response to the question, 
but was clearly debate, and clearly out of order. And I would 
ask you to rule on that for the guidance of the member who 
apparently needs frequent guidance in this regard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I believe, in response to the Leader of the 
Opposition’s point of order, I would once more like some time 
to check the record and then come back with a ruling. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I would move that 
Motions for Returns (Not Debatable), items 1 through 86, be 
converted to Motions for Returns (Debatable). 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Debatable. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1 – An Act to amend The Farm Land Security Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The Bill before us today, The Farm Land 
Security Act, is a Bill, Mr. Speaker, that was originally passed 
in this House in December of 1984. The purpose of it coming 
before us today is to have the legislation extended until 
December 31, 1987. 
 
There’s a clause contained therein which will allow the 
Lieutenant Governor in council to extend the time, by order, to 
December 31, 1988, and subsequently to December 31, 1989, 
should a need continue for the protection of farmers accorded 
by the Act. 
 
I want to make a few comments with respect to the Act, Mr. 
Speaker. All sides of this House will know that history records 
the humanitarian worth of people by how they assist their 
neighbours in time of trouble. Indeed, Saskatchewan was settled 
by pioneers who, we all know, assisted one another in times of 
adversity or prosperity. I submit that the pioneering spirit of 
helping one another 

has carried over from our forefathers and exists today in the 
souls of Saskatchewan people, and certainly in the members of 
this legislature and this government in particular. Governments 
are measured by the same yardstick. 
 
I’m proud to say that this government can stand tall in its efforts 
to assist farmers during adversity. In the face of drought, 
grasshoppers, flood, interest rates – high interest rates I might 
add – high debt, increasing input costs and declining world 
prices, the farmers of Saskatchewan have been put through and 
experienced one of the most difficult times in the history of 
agriculture in North America. 
 
History will show that this government extended the helping 
hand to our neighbours, that we acted to deliver programs to 
assist agriculture that were both short-term or immediate 
solutions, and others were of a very long-term nature, and I 
speak obviously of the national agricultural strategy. 
 
The Farm Land Security Act was designed to restrict 
foreclosure actions against farm land and to provide an 
independent third party review of a farmer’s financial affairs by 
a producer-represented Farm Land Security Board; provide a 
proper background so that all sides of this House, I trust, 
unanimously will support the continuation of the impact of this 
legislation. We’ll deal first with the history of the Act, and 
second, with its working effectiveness today and its need for its 
continuation. 
 
The government introduced The Farm Land Security Act in 
December, 1984, as what we perceived was a short-term 
measure, Mr. Speaker. Due to the pressures on farmers through 
high interest rates and falling land prices, coupled with 
grasshoppers and drought, we became concerned with the 
increased farm foreclosures and repossessions. 
 
The Hon. Lorne Hepworth, the minister of Agriculture at that 
time, reported to the House on December 11, 1984 that between 
April the 10th and November the 30th, 1984 there were 271 
farm foreclosure actions commenced on 1,000 and 1,000 had 
started in the previous three and a half year period. The 
government felt that a farmer required an independent review 
prior to losing his land to foreclosure. 
 
The Act compels the lender or mortgagee of farm land to give 
120 days notice in writing to the Farm Land Security Board of 
their intent to apply to the court to commence foreclosure 
proceedings. Upon such notice the board does the following: 
first, investigates the financial affairs of the farmer; second, 
attempts to mediate between the farmer and the mortgagee. 
Many cases are mediated at this point and an arrangement for 
restructuring the debt occurs at that time. Third, in the even the 
mediation is not successful and the mortgagee wishes to carry 
on to court, the board is required to prepare a written report for 
the court including all relevant matters and its view as to 
whether the farmer (a) has a reasonable possibility of meeting 
his obligation sunder the mortgage; and (b) is making a sincere 
and reasonable effort to do so. The court is obliged to give 
primary consideration to the report, Mr. 
  



 
December 17, 1986 

 

309 
 
 

Speaker, and that’s an important point. 
 
In practice, if the report favours the farmer, the creditor often 
chooses not to proceed to court. Further negotiations may occur, 
but if the board’s report is not supportive of the farmer on these 
points, the case normally moves to the court for the decision by 
a judge. 
 
The Act was designed to deal with land only for two basic 
reasons, Mr. Speaker. First, provinces under our constitution 
have jurisdiction over land. Other farm assets, such as 
machinery, livestock, vehicles, etc., and the right of lenders to 
take these items as security, fall under both federal and 
provincial jurisdiction. Our government chose to deal with the 
situation in an area where it has primary jurisdiction on the 
land. 
 
Secondly, while there was some urging from the opposition to 
deal with all farm assets declaring a similar moratorium on all 
farm debts, the government chose to deal with land only. If the 
moratorium was place don all farm debts, the fuel dealer, the 
machinery dealer, and other small businesses could experience 
significant hardship in cases where they could not collect on 
their billings. Small business supplying farmers would have 
cash flow problems. 
 
Our thinking, therefore, was that with a moratorium on land 
foreclosure and a probable restructuring of the land debt, the 
Act would provide an opportunity and dollars to restructure or 
satisfy the farmer’s other obligations. 
 
I think we should take a moment, Mr. Speaker, and visualize 
and conceptualize the mental anguish, the worry, the anxiety 
imposed on a farm family faced with foreclosure. Through 
perhaps little or no fault of their own, a farmer is threatened 
with the loss of his land, his entire life’s work, his occupation, 
indeed his hopes and his dreams, and in many cases land or 
property that may have been in the family for generations. That 
farmer sees that foreclosure proceeding as a loss of virtually 
everything they’ve had in their life. 
 
Despite all I’ve reported, Mr. Speaker, the opposition farm 
critic of the day stated in Hansard in part, and I quote: 
 

We made it clear before Bill No. 1 was ever drafted by 
the government that it’s not going to work. 
 

Well I have no particular quarrel with that, Mr. Speaker. It’s of 
course the job of the opposition to offer an opposing view to the 
government’s. But I trust, as I move to my second point, the 
Act’s working effectiveness today and the need for its 
continuation, members opposite will appreciate that the 
opposition’s view at the time was not accurate, that it indeed is 
working, and it is a good piece of legislation. 
 
It’s working, Mr. Speaker, and I want to point out why. 
Between January 1, 1985 and November 30, 1986 the board has 
received 840 notices of foreclosures involving 713 farmers. 
These are more notices because some farmers may have two or 
more mortgages. Of the total received, 497 cases are completed, 
with the balance 

being the current case-load. Of the 497 cases completed, 218 
farmers have had their problem successfully mediated. Court 
reports on the balance of 279 cases were prepared by the board 
in keeping with the Act. Of the 279 cases where court reports 
were prepared, 52 farmers requested no further representation; 
55 reports went forward favouring the farmer; 132 reports 
favoured the mortgagee; 40 reports were neutral due to 
mitigating circumstances. 
 
Well, if we examine the success carefully, we see the following. 
From the depths of despair for the farmer, where the mortgagee 
has taken a stern, legalistic approach with the farmer, the Farm 
Land Security Board is seen as an impartial body who will 
examine the farmer’s financial affairs and his future prospects 
and make the findings know to the court. In these difficult 
situations the board has been successful in 273 of the cases – 
218 successfully mediated in 55 court reports favouring the 
farmer, or 55 per cent of the cases, Mr. Speaker. In over 
one-half of these cases the board has been successful in saving 
the farmer’s land. One wishes all could be saved, but rational 
men and women on both sides of this House recognize this is 
not always possible. 
 
Others perceive the Act to be successful legislation for many 
reasons. The federal government has established the federal 
Farm Debt Review Board this past summer. Farmers in 
financial difficulty that may lose assets other than land, such as 
machinery, livestock, produce, etc., may now apply for a 
financial review. The federal board does not provide the degree 
of protection of the farmer’s land which the Farm Land Security 
Board does, because no reports are provided to the court by the 
federal board. The provincial board must, therefore, be 
maintained. 
 
The federal and provincial governments are working very 
closely, Mr. Speaker, and together on this difficult situation. 
And indeed the two boards are complementary in terms of the 
protection they provide farmers from one end of the province to 
the other. I do not propose to explain the federal program in any 
great detail, but wish to give the House the idea of how well 
they are working together. 
 
In Saskatchewan both the federal board and the provincial 
board use the same field men and panel members. The board 
members are also common to both boards. A farmer in 
difficulty feels far more secure working closely with two or 
three people on his financial problems than he would if he were 
dealing with a whole conglomerate of different people. 
 
Shortly, both the federal and provincial boards will be located 
in one building to facilitate good communications and speedy 
services of these matters to the public. 
 
(1445) 
 
Finally, just let me say this, Mr. Speaker, I stated early in my 
remarks that this Act was put in place as short-term assistance 
to farmers. Falling world prices, high interest rates, high debt 
loans, declining farm asset values, and resultant continuing 
financial problems for many Saskatchewan farmers makes it 
imperative and necessary 
  



 
December 17, 1986 

 

310 
 
 

that the continuation of this legislation be addressed. We must 
keep our helping hand out there for a longer period of time. I 
urge all members of this House to support the legislation before 
you to extend The Farm Land Security Act for two reasons: 
firstly, Mr. Speaker, it’s vitally needed; and secondly, it’s 
working. 
 
I move second reading of an Act to amend The Farm Land 
Security Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome this 
opportunity to rise and speak to this Bill, this amendment to the 
government’s original Farm Land Security Act of 1984. This 
Bill before the House, of course, is quite simple and 
straightforward and essentially extends the revision of the Act 
for a further period. That in itself, Mr. Speaker, is hardly worth 
a comment. It simply shows that the original Bill made unduly 
optimistic assumptions about the severity and the duration of 
the financial crisis facing Saskatchewan family farms. 
 
It is constructive to remember that the present Act now being 
amended is not the first legislative attempt in Saskatchewan to 
deal with the financial security of family farms. There have 
been others before. As far back as 1933 the Conservative 
Anderson government passed The Debt Adjustment Act to deal 
with the crisis during the depression. That’s right – a debt 
adjustment, far more than is allowed for in the present Act. And 
in 1971, Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic government passed 
The Family Farm Protection Act which provided a moratorium 
on payments as well as a moratorium on foreclosures. 
 
So this present Act here being amended does not go very far. It 
hasn’t stopped the hardships. I suggest not. The member 
opposite gave us his interpretation of the numbers; in a minute 
I’ll give you the facts. And in view of the very severe financial 
crisis facing Saskatchewan family farms, this Bill represents, 
essentially, a stop-gap measure, an ad hoc solution to what is a 
crisis situation right across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In 1985 Saskatchewan farm income hit its lowest point in 13 
years and now family farms are feeling the pinch. Now some 17 
per cent of our farmers are estimated to be in moderate financial 
difficulty, and 10 per cent are classed as being non-viable. This 
year’s disastrous low grain prices, and now the latest news 
about durum wheat, means even more pressure on family farms. 
 
Some indication of these pressures, Mr. Speaker . . . I will refer 
to the economic review of 1985. The number of farms in the 
area of 400 to 559 acres, in 1971 there was 11,780; in 1981 
there was 7,718; four-thousand-some farms, an average of 400 
per year, Mr. Speaker, that we’re losing. This is being 
accelerated in the last couple of years despite the fact that we 
have legislation to stop foreclosures. 
 
Net income, Mr. Speaker: 1981, total net income of $1.5 
billion; in 1984, $274 billion. This is the kind of pressure that’s 
being exerted on family farms, putting the number of farms 
smaller, the number of families on farms moving 

 elsewhere to find employment. Operating expenses, Mr. 
Speaker: total operating expenses 1974, $726.6 million, and in 
1984, $2.6 billion – over $2.6 billion. 
 
Figures like this, Mr. Speaker, along with the fact that 
outstanding farm debt in 1972 was in the range of under a 
billion dollars, and in 1983 was four and a half billion dollars. 
All these pressures are being exerted. And simply having the 
farm land – security on farm land alone – does not alleviate the 
fact that people are being pushed off the land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another fact is that the major chartered banks seem 
to be doing all right. It is not the banks that are in trouble. They 
seem to manage to have significant surpluses every year. And 
they have also encouraged, in the past, farmers to extend 
themselves, and now ask for complete . . . They ask for 
complete charges be paid back. I say that there is some 
responsibility incumbent on these banks. They are now in a 
position to foreclose on rural Saskatchewan. And yet this 
government, this Conservative government, seems willing or 
unable to even acknowledge the urgent need for debt 
adjustment or debt restructuring for many Saskatchewan 
farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Without that, without the security, there is a 
great danger that Saskatchewan will lose not only a generation 
of able young farmers, but will lose thousands of family farm 
units. And then what happens to the face of rural 
Saskatchewan? I will get into this in detail a little later on, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Members opposite may like to pretend that the existing Act is 
really effectively protecting farmers from foreclosure. This 
simply is not true. First, it does not effectively protect against 
seizure of machinery or livestock. And second, the machinery 
under the existing legislation appears to be heavily biased in 
favour of the banks and against the farmers. 
 
For example – and I will repeat the example the member 
opposite used – of the 279 cases reported by the courts, reported 
to the courts by the Farm land Security Board, 55 cases were in 
favour of the farmer; 132 cases favoured the creditor. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, that is more than a 2:1 bias in favour of the banks. I do 
not believe that this Act is effectively representing the needs of 
the hard-pressed family farms of Saskatchewan. 
 
The board’s function, Mr. Speaker, is to assess the individual 
operations and report whether this farm is a non-viable farm, 
whether it is a viable farm. 
 
Let me set up to you one case. Let’s say, for example, if a 
farmer is in a bad financial way and he has livestock and 
machinery – one or the other – and a lending institution that has 
no restrictions on whether they can or cannot foreclose comes 
in and forecloses, takes away the machinery, takes away the 
livestock. Then the board comes along and has to assess 
whether this is a viable or non-viable operation. 
 
Well I suggest to you that, without machinery as an asset and 
without livestock as an asset, this board has no other 
  



 
December 17, 1986 

 

311 
 
 

choice than to say that this is a non-viable operation. And that, I 
think, is set out clearly in the numbers, where 2:1 of the cases 
favoured the creditors. 
 
What we need, Mr. Speaker, is a farm asset security. Farm size 
is changing, and the control of farm land is changing. If this 
happens, we have great stress put on our small towns. In fact, in 
many cases they’ll be finished. And the population numbers in 
our small towns are proving this, in the fact that they’re going 
down steadily. 
 
Greater distances between towns produces greater hardships for 
those left on the farm. It sets up a situation, Mr. Speaker, where 
we are now seeing a move towards venture capital in 
agriculture. We are moving from stalling the foreclosures in 
some cases to a point where the farmer is to his wit’s end on 
knowing what to do. And so what do we do? We create a 
climate where he can sell his land off to someone else. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Speculators. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Speculators, to make gain on that land if there 
is any. 
 
This scenario, Mr. Speaker, I tell you, is not what this province 
needs. We are moving the families and other people into other 
areas. We are moving them off the land on a slow, slow pace, 
moving towards agri-business in the area of farming – not the 
area we want to go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have deficiency payments recently announced, 
we have stabilization, we have crop insurance, we have lowered 
interest rates, tax credits, but when the conditions are right for 
other people to get involved in agricultural industry, as 
conditions are now right, the government is not there to back up 
the farmers of this province by saying: no, you cannot touch 
them right now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we cannot let a downturn in the economy dictate 
the structure of the family farm, the agricultural landscape in 
this province. A simple downturn in the economy which will 
last for a number of years should not be allowed to restructure 
the face of this province. It will not be allowed to restructure it 
to the detriment of family farms, not allowed to restructure it to 
the gain of multinational agri-business. 
 
Government opposite did not let a downturn in the oil industry 
restructure . . . a downturn in oil restructure the oil industry. 
The same applies to agriculture. 
 
We are also, Mr. Speaker, being confronted with a free trade 
implication. Talks are going quickly. They’re being pushed by 
some Americans and some Canadians for a quick, free trade 
agreement. And if I am right, this free trade agreement will 
virtually bankrupt hundreds of farmers in Saskatchewan. It will 
affect the people under the marketing boards – poultry, eggs, 
beef, hogs. It will create an unstable atmosphere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need time for these people, if this free trade 
agreement goes through, to reassess their operations and 
restructure their operations, and simply giving security on the 
land will not allow these people to 

 restructure their business in such a manner that they can 
effectively compete and keep going, if that’s possible, with a 
free trade agreement. Mr. Speaker, we need the security of 
assets – all farm assets. 
 
Another indication of this government’s failure is the deficiency 
payment and the need of $4 billion. What do we get? — $450 
million. This is only marginal, and what it does, it creates an 
atmosphere where we get this slow drifting away, a slow 
drifting away from viability; or, I like to term it, slow starvation 
of the farmers of this province. This slow movement away from 
a viable operation, Mr. Speaker, needs more than security of 
farm land. 
 
Again I repeat, we need security of farm assets. Farmers need 
time to sustain their operations and solidify their long-term 
agricultural programs, as we solidify the long-term agricultural 
programs of the past and develop long-term programs for the 
future; programs that will offset the current trend to world 
markets. 
 
(1500) 
 
The member opposite refers to the long-term plan. I say we 
need long-term plans. But before we get there, Mr. Speaker, we 
must be sure that those farmers on that land have the security of 
a government behind them saying that we will not allow you to 
go bankrupt; we will not allow you to have your livelihood 
plucked out a bit at a time right before your eyes. I say plucked 
out before your eyes, Mr. Speaker, and that’s exactly what’s 
happening. And this in turn is creating undue stress on the 
family farms of this province. Families on the farm are being 
reduced, and this in turn reduces the number of families in 
towns. This in turn produces greater stress on the school system 
because we all know the numbers game the school system is in. 
It puts greater stress on the income of the people to be involved 
in community activities. It’s a slow trend, a trend that is 
reshaping the face of this province, a trend that I do not like. 
Farmers have to look for off-farm employment. If their 
machinery is seized, or their cattle, and they have to keep their 
land, what do they do? They are encouraged to, and they have 
to go out and find a job somewhere else – husband and wife, 
kids, sometimes up to four or more people. 
 
What does this do? It sets up an atmosphere where that farm 
family is competing with his friends and relatives in the cities. 
This rural-urban competition, Mr. Speaker, creates friction, 
because rural people say, we need the jobs. You know, we have 
to get out there and compete. We have to get out there and save 
our land because the government is not . . . although we can 
keep our land, we can’t keep our machinery. Urban people say, 
you farmers are getting all the breaks anyway, and then you 
want to come and take my job too. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of the uncompleteness of this program we 
are getting a situation where again we have a division in this 
province, dividing the people, which is very, very unfair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have pressure now on the Canadian Wheat 
Board. We have eliminated the stability of a low freight rate. 
We are threatened with a variable freight rate which again is a 
method to restructure the face of this 
  



 
December 17, 1986 

 

312 
 
 

province. We have the onslaught of agri-business. This all lines 
up with the depopulation of rural Saskatchewan, in my 
estimation. And rural depopulation, to me, is totally 
unacceptable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, this brings me back to my point 
that we need a farm asset security to ward off all the threats to 
the restructuring, to the reorganizing of the face of rural 
Saskatchewan – effects not only in the rural areas but also in the 
urban areas. 
 
What will be the cost to the government with already 10 per 
cent of the people looking for work? What will be the cost to 
accommodate, due to the lack of security, a further influx into 
the urban setting? Will this government follow the example of 
their federal counterparts and pay farmers to retrain and 
relocate? We must remember that as the actual farm numbers go 
down so does the number of people and business in small 
towns, as I have said. 
 
Again, what will they do? Will they be paid to relocate? And 
what is the cost? What is the monetary cost, what are the social 
costs. Of a program that is a step in the right direction but only 
half a step? The costs of farm security are much greater, Mr. 
Speaker, than the costs of security of assets to maintain a viable 
operation. All the government programs are supposedly to help 
farmers, but when push comes to shove, this government does 
not go to the wall as it said it would to defend rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Programs like – and I have a bunch of them here: ag 
development fund (ARDA); financial assistance for livestock 
and irrigation; prairie drought assistance program; farm 
purchase program; guide-lines for farm employment standards – 
sounds like an ad – feeder association loan guarantee; 
production loan; SHARP; investment livestock; irrigation 
programs; beef marketing – all these programs, Mr. Speaker. In 
the short term – and the members opposite, I’m sure they know 
the problems – programs that are of absolutely no good unless 
we assure that that farmer is going to be on the land, and 
without, Mr. Speaker, the assurance of farm land security, 
livestock security, machinery security and, in general, total 
asset security, these programs, although many of them are 
short-term, ad hoc programs, are insignificant. 
 
And this leads me to believe, Mr. Speaker, that the motives 
from this barrage of short-term, ad hoc programs are purely 
political. Yes, I repeat. You have a bunch of ad hoc, short-term 
programs; you do not back them up with the security that the 
farmers need, not only with land but their other assets, and I 
would conclude that they’re purely politically motivated. 
 
This government appears to be afraid to step up to the banks 
while letting farmers slip into foreclosure and elimination. The 
banks contributed a substantial amount of money to the 
Conservative election fund, and I wonder if this has any bearing 
on the fact that the government refuses to go to the wall for 
farmers. Over the past years the federal government has altered 
the Bank Act at the request of the banks, in consultation with 
the banks, and 

to the benefit of the banks. The banks have maintained their 
profit while family farms have had an increasing number of 
foreclosures. Now, Mr. Speaker, the problem that I see with this 
Bill is, although outlined a few minutes ago that there’s no 
problem with this, this is essential and goes far enough -–I 
disagree. For the reasons that I’ve mentioned, I will be 
opposing this Bill at this stage. I find the existing legislation 
inadequate to the problems facing us. The legislation is 
inadequate. I made a mistake. I’m not opposed to the Bill, but 
I’m opposed to the fact that it does not go far enough. 
 
I am a farmer and I know the problems. As I said, I’m sure 
many of my friends across the way do, too. Then I ask, why do 
we not go the full distance? What’s the reason? And, Mr. 
Speaker, I stand on this side of the House because I have the 
answers to many of the problems that I feel will create an 
atmosphere. And the answer is this: long-term solutions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — With that, Mr. Speaker, I will . . . I have some 
suggestions to make at the committee stage. And as I said, I 
find the legislation inadequate to the problems facing us. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to make a 
number of comments in respect to the Bill and to concur with 
many of the remarks that have been made by my colleague from 
Humboldt, the agricultural critic. 
 
The Premier in his remarks indicated that in December ’84 the 
Bill was introduced. That was a short-term solution. Now what 
he is doing is extending the Bill into ’87, to the end of 1987; 
also to extend it into ’88 and ’89 by order in council. I think 
what it clearly indicates here is the nature of the problem that 
exists in agriculture and the inability of these members opposite 
to address agriculture in a meaningful way. 
 
I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that here are other indications 
going on in respect to agricultural land which demonstrates the 
crisis that exist. Recently it was reported that in 1986 
agricultural net farm income was down 9 per cent from the 
previous year. This year it’s indicating that the net farm income 
will have been decreased another 27 per cent. 
 
And what we have here, as my colleague indicated, is half a 
Bill. It addresses the question of the foreclosure on the land, but 
it does not in fact address the question of seizure of other assets 
of the farmer – the machinery, the grain, the bank account, and 
the list goes on. And how can it possibly . . . How, possibly, can 
a farmer continue to farm if the bank is given the right to go in 
and seize his equipment? 
 
I want to say that in 1971 we introduced legislation to protect 
farmers, and in that we put a moratorium on the payment of 
debt, and we also prevented the foreclosure of land, and also as 
it related to the machinery and other chattels which are 
absolutely necessary for the farming operation. 
 
As I was saying, there is a tremendous crisis in agriculture, 
  



 
December 17, 1986 

 

313 
 
 

and I don’t think that the Premier addressed or indicated in any 
significant way how his government is going to approach the 
difficult times in agriculture. The Wheat Pool has indicated, as 
I’ve used before, there’s about 10 per cent of the farmers are in 
very severe financial crisis. There are 9 per cent which are 
non-viable going under; in other words, actions have been 
commenced against them and their net income is decreasing. 
 
What we see in rural Saskatchewan today is not government 
addressing the major crisis. But what we find is new ventures, 
new means of taking over land which farmers are losing. And 
what they have devised here now is a venture capital set-up to 
buy out land from farmers and to take land from farmers who 
are in very difficult financial straits. 
 
I have an article here where the Wheat Pool in fact opposes the 
use of venture capital as a way to save farms. And it indicates in 
this article – I just want to read one point of it – is that a 
$300,000 investment saves $90,000 for the investor, while the 
farmer gives up 49 per cent of his operation. Independent 
farmers are reduced to share-croppers. That is one of the 
proposals that is being promoted in Saskatchewan by the 
present government. But more than that, what is in the horizon 
to indicate how we are not in fact meeting the crisis in 
agriculture which the Premier addressed. 
 
(1515) 
 
I have also the proposal that is being put forward by the Credit 
Union Central, and this is equity for agricultural production. 
And what they’re proposing here is to set up a 
private-structured company, and as the farmers are going 
bankrupt, rather than the bank having to move in or the credit 
union to foreclose, they’re going to have a private company 
selling shares on the stock exchange. And this company, this 
private company, will be purchasing the land from the farmers 
with the potential of leasing it back. 
 
I want to say that the purpose of this, this structure, which is 
being, I understand, assisted and financed by the provincial 
government, indicates what’s happening in rural Saskatchewan 
– that farmers are losing their land. Venture capital 
arrangements are being used; and secondly, they’re setting up a 
private company, selling shares, to take over the land. 
 
And the purpose of this, I just want to read to you, the purpose: 
 

Foreclosed land held by a credit union would be 
placed into a holding company at market value, with 
some cash pay-out with the remainder in shares in the 
holding company. 
 
Two, the land could be leased to the foreclosed farmer 
or another farmer to make sure it stayed in production. 
 

But who is going to own it is the private company. Every effort 
would be made to establish a formal lease buy-back agreement. 
The lease could be on a cash basis. Cash income would be 
utilized for the operation and to pay a dividend to the doctors 
and the lawyers and the engineers 

and the bankers who would invest in this company. 
 
So why I’m putting forward these points is to illustrate what is 
happening in Saskatchewan. It’s a direction which I oppose. But 
I think it also is an indication that by the very nature of the 
crisis that exists there that the actions that have been taken by 
this government to date have been ad hoc, they’ve been 
patchwork and they haven’t addressed, as my colleague has 
indicated, what the young farmers in my constituency have told 
me. 
 
And I want to say that I got tremendous support from the rural 
areas in my constituency. But I talked to the young farmers and 
why some of these programs are welcomed, whether it be 
deficiency payment or the $25 an acre at 6 per cent. 
 
One of the essential things that has to happen is a restructuring 
of some of the debt for the young farmers. And the problem that 
happened is that it’s not a question of lack of management, Mr. 
Speaker; it’s not a question of lack of management, it’s a 
question of the timing of making their investments. They 
bought land at a relatively high price and interest rates 
sky-rocked on them, and as a consequence they’re caught in a 
debt situation from which they can’t, in fact, surface. 
 
I was talking to one farmer and he said, I have a $200,000 debt. 
I said what agricultural program should we bring forward in the 
election? I’m asking you, in your age group, what is the 
concern? And he said, well, I have a $200,000 debt at 12 per 
cent. And he said, if you could subsidize or restructure that debt 
for me, even if you could cut it back from 12,000 to 8 per cent. 
He said I’d save 4 per cent on that; that’s approximately $8,000 
a year. He said, I could practically live on that amount of 
saving. So there has to be, in fact, some restructuring of the 
debt. 
 
Now this Act here obviously goes part way, as I have indicated, 
and I certainly concede that it goes part way. But to the life of 
me, I don’t know why they want to protect foreclosure of land 
without protecting the farmer’s capacity to be able to farm that 
land and to prevent the foreclosure or the seizure of the chattels 
– the farming equipment, the grain, the bank accounts, and what 
other necessary equipment that farmer needs in order to conduct 
his operation. 
 
And so I say to you, Mr. Speaker . . . The Premier talks about 
his national agricultural strategy, and it seems strange that there 
are so many contradictions that’s going on. On the one had, 
here we have a Bill which puts a moratorium, or at least another 
procedure of consideration before foreclosure can proceed in 
the normal court. And at the same time what the Mulroney 
government in Ottawa is doing is abandoning, totally 
abandoning the farmers to the extent that what they’re doing is 
setting up a transition. In other words, they’re giving them cash 
to get off the farm; to throw up their hands; give it up and we’ll 
help you, give you – I think they have a fund of $47 million to 
help to relocate young farmers, who are on the farm, off of the 
farm. 
 
And that’s the problem. And so what I’m saying here is that 
while this Bill does address one problem, but if you 
  



 
December 17, 1986 

 

314 
 
 

take a look at – as the Premier indicated and he thought it was 
such a tremendous success -–the cases handled as of November 
30, 1986, the Farm Land Security Board had received 840 
notices of lenders’ intentions to foreclose, that is as of 
November 30, involving 713 farmers. And of the 713, 497 cases 
are completed. Of the 497, 219 were mediated; foreclosure did 
not proceed to court – not even a half that didn’t proceed. In the 
279 cases, reports to the court were prepared and, as indicated 
52, requested no representation; 55 cases to the board wrote a 
report favourable to the farmer, and 132 cases to the board 
wrote a report favourable to the creditor and, as indicated, in 40 
cases the board remained neutral; it could not make a decision. 
 
What I’m saying to you here, if you look at the statistics, 
whether it be the farm credit statistics or whether you look at 
the statistics provided by the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool in their 
very comprehensive survey, there are a tremendous number of 
farmers that are in very, very serious financial strait. And the 
exodus of farmers is going to be massive in the next two or 
three years unless the government does, as we’re 
recommending, become serious about keeping young farmers 
on the land and in fact looking at the restructuring of the debt 
load that some of the young farmers have. 
 
It’s primarily the young farmers that have the heavy debt. And 
what I’m saying to you, Mr. Speaker, this government has an 
obligation to allow a new generation of farmers to take over. 
Otherwise, what we’re going to have is a continuation of 
foreclosures. And this doesn’t stop foreclosures, because less 
than a half were mediated out of the 49. So it reduced it 
somewhat during that period. 
 
But I’ll tell you, the situation is so serious at the present time 
because of the low cost of commodities, prices for commodities 
and the subsidization that the American government is paying 
to their farmers, and the European economic community is 
paying to their farmers. And here we sit in Saskatchewan with 
some of the best farmers in the world, efficient farmers, and a 
new generation that were moved onto the farms, back to the 
farms in the ‘70s and the early ‘80s. We run the risk, unless we 
take more precise and determined action, of losing many of 
those young farmers. 
 
And by the very statistics that the Premier put before this 
House, this Bill that we have here will not even save one-half of 
those that foreclosure actin is proceeding against. And I predict 
it is going to be very, very much worse in the year ahead. And 
so I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, that I think 
that if they’re serious about really assisting the farmers in very 
difficult times, that . . . and we will be raising it, an amendment, 
whereby we will give protection to the farmers in respect to 
their farm equipment, and to their bank accounts, and their 
grain, from foreclosures by banks. 
 
I’ll tell you, the banks in this country have made their money on 
the backs of the farmers, and it seems to me that it’s time that 
we have a government that will stand up and say: we’re going 
to do some restructuring of debt, and, Mr. Banker, you’ve made 
millions on the backs of the farmers; you’re going to make a 
contribution in the restructuring. And that’s the action that we 
have to do. 

 
But really what this does here is mediate in a way for the banks. 
Rather than going through the normal court procedure and then 
foreclosure, now they have a mediating body. And so it takes 
the pressure off the banks actually going, because you’ve got a 
mediating board that is recommending whether or not 
foreclosure should proceed. 
 
So it’s partly, in a small way, helping farmers. But I’ll tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s also protecting their friends, the banker, from 
having to foreclose because they put a mediating body in there 
to take the heat off the banks. 
 
So I’m saying to you that we will be moving an amendment. 
We did it previously. I want to say, in this legislature the former 
agricultural critic moved seven months prior to when they 
brought this Bill in, and we had a more comprehensive Bill, and 
the government opposite turned it down. And then in December 
of ’84 they brought in this half-baked Bill, not giving total 
protection to the farmer, and so we’re going to be bringing in an 
amendment. 
 
What I’m asking the farmers – and you’re talking about how 
many farmers and rural seats you’re representing – I’ll tell you 
that you can help them substantially by adopting our 
amendment which we will be bringing in whereby we will, in 
fact, be giving protection to the farmers from the seizure of their 
equipment and their grain and their bank accounts, and on and 
on. How can you possibly expect a farmer to farm if the bank 
comes in and takes his equipment? You’re going to keep his 
farm, supposedly, and give him no equipment – doesn’t make 
sense! 
 
So what I’m saying to you is that we’re going to support this 
Bill in principle. But I also want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that 
we will be bringing an amendment. And certainly we ask those 
in rural Saskatchewan to join with us to give more teeth to this 
Bill – more teeth in this Bill so that we can in fact protect the 
young farmers who are being driven off by the inadequacy of 
the policies and the insufficiency of this Bill. 
 
I ask you to reject your counterpart’s proposal in Ottawa where 
they’re asking and paying young farmers to go off the land. 
That’s what they’re doing. I ask you to reject that. I ask you to 
take a look at this Bill and put further teeth in it. We urged you 
to do that during the last four and a half years. You didn’t do it. 
The consequences are there to be seen. And I say that with the 
crisis that we have in agriculture today, that that is going to 
compound itself. 
 
And so I urge the government to take that into advisement. 
We’ll bring forward the amendment, and we’ll look forward to 
the support of the members representing agricultural seats 
throughout this province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
anxious to take part in this second reading debate for a few 
moments this afternoon. 
  



 
December 17, 1986 

 

315 
 
 

The legislation that is now before us comes at a very serious 
time for Saskatchewan agriculture as has already been 
acknowledged in this House today. The legislation is a band-aid 
and stopgap measure which the government now seeks to 
extend by the amendment which is presently before us. That 
extension, Mr. Speaker, is all right in so far as it goes. But it is – 
and I think it’s acknowledged by the government – it is a 
stopgap; it is band-aid; it treats the symptom, not the cause of 
Saskatchewan’s agricultural crisis. 
 
(1530) 
 
The original legislation and this amendment before us at the 
present time are predicated upon some presumptions that are 
turning out, sadly, to be false. The presumptions obviously 
were, when this legislation was introduced a couple of years 
ago, that in the following years that weather in Saskatchewan 
would be perfect; that prices would go up; that markets would 
be strong; and as a consequence, the problems facing farmers 
would somehow just go away by themselves. But that 
experience since 1983 and 1984 has shown that those 
presumptions have not turned out to be valid. Indeed, just the 
opposite has been true, and conditions have worsened; they 
haven’t got better, and the problem has certainly not gone away. 
 
And we’ve recently had that confirmed, Mr. Speaker, by the 
agricultural outlook conference which was held in Ottawa about 
a week ago, where the forecasts were put on the table about 
what the conditions will be for agriculture in the coming year, 
and the very disastrous prediction was there that the net 
incomes of farmers in Saskatchewan are forecast to drop by 
something like 27 per cent in the coming year. 
 
And that gives you in just one brief detail, Mr. Speaker, a bit of 
the flavour of the magnitude of the problem with which we are 
trying to deal in coping with the difficulties facing farmers. And 
obviously this piece of legislation by itself is insufficient to 
cope with the magnitude of the difficulty. 
 
When you look at the problem, Mr. Speaker, it comes in many 
layers for farmers – one layer heaped on another, heaped on 
another. Any one of them would be bad enough. The difficulty 
is that they’ve all come at once, and the problem is that much 
more severe, compounded. There’s the problem of low 
commodity prices, largely created by that international trade 
war that rages on between the United States and Europe. 
There’s the problem of high and escalating farm input costs that 
continue somehow always to get worse and never to get better. 
And that, coupled with the declining commodity prices, of 
course creates the classic cost-price squeeze. 
 
There have been, in this period of time that we’re discussing, 
Mr. Speaker, as well a series of periodic natural disasters, from 
flood on one side to drought on the other and grasshoppers in 
the middle and just about everything else that one could 
imagine befalling the farm community. There is, as well, 
accumulated over the last number of years, the burden of farm 
debt and the corresponding problem of a lack of stable, 
affordable, long-term farm credit. 

 
In addition to that, in another layer of the problem we are in a 
period now of fierce and predatory international competition 
which is putting our farmers in a very severe predicament, 
particularly when the treasuries of our governments claim to be 
insufficient or inadequate or unprepared to fight fire with fire 
with what the Americans are doing, or the Europeans are doing, 
or other competitors around the world. 
 
And then finally, finally, we are confronted with another layer 
of the difficulty – the problem of rapid and constant 
technological change which affects agriculture just as it does 
affect every other form of industry and business and enterprise 
in our country. And obviously keeping up with that changing 
technology and preparing for a future that is going to be much 
different than anything we’ve experienced in the past, makes 
the current problems that much more difficult to cope with. 
 
So that is a brief description, Mr. Speaker, of the layers of the 
problem that are involved in the agricultural crisis in our 
province and in our country today. And the type of legislation 
that has been on the statute books of this province for the last 
couple of years and the extension which is proposed now in the 
amendment which is specifically before the House at the 
present time, touch upon just the fringes of that problem, touch 
upon just a few of the symptoms of the problem. Unfortunately, 
neither the legislation nor the amendments to the legislation will 
get to the root of the problem and try to do something 
meaningful about it. 
 
There’s a problem, Mr. Speaker, I think a persistent problem, in 
the way in which this government has tended to approach 
agricultural issues over the last period of years. As I said, there 
seems to be an underlying set of presumptions that what is 
perplexing agriculture at the present time is just temporary; that 
it’s a problem with weather; or it’s a problem with prices; or it’s 
a problem with markets; and if we can just wait long enough 
and do a few superficial things to tide things over, in due course 
all of that will turn around and everything will be wonderful. 
 
Those presumptions are obviously naïve, and they’re obviously 
not a legitimate representation of the true situation. The 
government has always been so very slow in getting its act 
together to deal with farm problems; never able to anticipate a 
situation in advance; always trying to play catch-up after the 
fact. The government has lacked a clear and co-ordinated thrust 
in its agricultural policy. It seems to lurch awkwardly from one 
crisis to another crisis; from one program to another program; 
from one situation to another situation; literally, on some 
occasions, scribbling down policy on the back of an envelope. 
 
The government has also, in its dealing with agricultural issues 
– and I am sure that is not intentional, but it has, unfortunately, 
turned out to be the fact – the government has tended to foster 
what is a damaging and very counter-productive rural-urban 
split in Saskatchewan that has sadly, in some occasions, pitted 
farmers against their non-farm neighbours. And certainly that is 
a terribly unhealthy thing for this province in every respect. 
  



 
December 17, 1986 

 

316 
 
 

The government has also tended to pursue what I would 
describe as a debt-oriented set of policies which are likely to 
turn out in the long run to be ineffective and, worse, could end 
up just digging the hole deeper for farmers rather than solving a 
problem. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, my further criticism of the 
government’s approach would be that it has been timid and 
hesitant and slow to take on the federal government when 
federal action was required to deal with agricultural concerns 
that stretched beyond the borders of this one, single jurisdiction 
alone. 
 
Well, with those comments in mind, Mr. Speaker, I would urge 
the government, beyond attempting to do what it is attempting 
to do with this rather modest and minor amendment, to pursue a 
policy in relation to agriculture that is much bolder and more 
vigorous, that will in fact deal with that issue of commodity 
prices. We have now the announcement of the deficiency 
payment from Ottawa is so far as that deficiency payment is 
going to go. But the Premier, in this House, in response to 
questions and on other occasions, has indicated his concession 
that it’s not a perfect solution; it’s not an adequate solution; that 
more is required and, indeed, further deficiency payments in 
future years may well be required of larger and larger and larger 
amounts. 
 
What I would hope the government would also do, Mr. Speaker, 
in addition to the focus upon deficiency payments and that 
infusion of cash into the farm economy on the short-term basis 
– I would hope that it would also get serious and take serious 
the pursuit in the world of a new international grains agreement 
that would, in addition to having some common understanding 
about market shares in world grain markets, would also have 
with it some decent minimum world price guarantee. 
 
I asked the Premier that question in question period some days 
ago, as to whether or not this was on the government’s agenda, 
and whether or not his government would be pursuing that idea 
and pursuing that idea and urging the federal government to 
pursue that idea to seek a new international grains agreement 
that would have those provisions within it that I described. And 
the Premier, I felt rather unfortunately, tended to down-play the 
suggestion; tended to say, well we might get lucky and sort of 
fall into a new international grains agreement. 
 
But it didn’t seem to be the kind of item, Mr. Speaker, that was 
high on his agenda. And I would urge him to reconsider that 
position because I believe that an international grains agreement 
is something that holds obviously very considerable potential 
for farmers in this province and farmers across the country. It 
would make a major contribution to dealing with that 
commodity price issue that lies at the root of much of the 
agricultural problem that we are facing. 
 
And it seems to me that we are entering now a bit of a window 
of opportunity with the United States in terms of selling them 
on this idea – selling them on this idea because they are now 
between their many elections. They seem to be constantly in 
one form of campaigning or another, or one form of election or 
another. They’ve just finished one campaign. There’ll be a 
period of some 

months now, perhaps a year or a year and a half, before the next 
campaign gets fast and furious. And it might be a timely 
moment now to proceed with them to obtain an international . . . 
or at least to try to persuade them to come along with us in an 
international grains agreement and by doing so substantially 
bolster commodity prices for critical agricultural products in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Obviously, if we were able to achieve that negotiated agreement 
with the United States, it would mean substantially higher grain 
prices in the world, substantially higher grain prices for our 
farmers in Saskatchewan, and it would reduce the necessity in 
future for the kind of legislation that we are presently 
discussing. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, in addition to what the government is 
now talking about in this legislation, I would hope we would 
see from the government some specific action in relation to a 
whole range of cost to production issues. During the course of 
the last year, the government talked a lot about cost to 
production issues, the high cost of farm inputs. Indeed, there 
was a special committee of the government travelling all over 
Saskatchewan collecting ideas and input from farmers and 
others in a highly publicized exercise right across the length and 
breadth of Saskatchewan. That committee has produced a 
report. 
 
In addition to that, we were treated to a four-part television 
series last spring, paid for by the government, which largely 
focused upon cost-to-production questions and issues, and yet 
very little of substance has flowed out of that exercise. There 
was the PR exercise; there was the consultation exercise with 
the hearings, but in terms of specific and concrete proposals to 
deal with those issues related to cost of production, the high 
cost of farm inputs, very little has been forthcoming. 
 
There is one paragraph in the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, 
which talks about reducing farm input costs by encouraging the 
manufacture of farm chemicals and fertilizers here in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and that is a laudable statement of 
objectives but quite frankly, it is a very long-term process that 
the government is talking about in this regard, and we’ve seen 
the first testing of this process already fall by the wayside with 
the news that the promised ammonia plant to be constructed in 
Regina alongside the Co-op heavy oil upgrader is, in fact, not 
going to proceed, at least certainly not going to proceed in the 
time frame and in the form that it was originally announced 
some months ago. 
 
So if the government thinks that it can put all of its eggs in one 
basket in dealing with farm input costs by that one line in the 
throne speech which argues for the reduction of those costs by 
the production of those chemicals and fertilizers right here in 
Saskatchewan, it seems to me that the government is drawing 
an awfully long bow to think that that is going to be a solution 
to the problem, at least in the time frame, or in any time frame. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — What’s the point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I believe that the subject matter of the Bill 
was The Farm Land Security Act, and it strikes me that 
  



 
December 17, 1986 

 

317 
 
 

we’re getting a rather far-ranging speech, more of a throne 
speech response from the hon. member, and the rules are that 
the subject matter under debate is what should be debated. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, on that point, the fundamental 
deficiency with this Bill is the fact that it touched only on the 
fringes of the problem, and it is by no means a solution to the 
dilemma that farmers are facing. The Premier, as Minister of 
Agriculture, and others in the government, have described that 
dilemma on other occasions. I have seen the Premier in person 
and through the media do that. And quite frankly, if the 
proposal that is here . . . 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I have listened to both sides, and I believe that 
both sides have some validity in what they are saying. 
However, I have been listening to the member’s remarks, and in 
truth he is beginning to make a wide-ranging and far-reaching 
speech which is questionable whether it all relates to the Act 
under discussion. And therefore, I would just like to caution 
him to please try to confine his remarks to the Act being 
discussed. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I will certainly take your advice 
on that point. I hope in doing so, though, the seriousness of the 
subject before us is not minimized. 
 
I’ll move then from the point about farm input costs, which I 
still believe to be a very important point that the government 
has not addressed, and move to another aspect of a series of 
proposals that I would make to the government, that directly 
relates to the legislation and the subject under consideration this 
afternoon, and that is the problem of the accumulated, unfair 
burden of farm debt in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
This legislation, as it was originally introduced a couple of 
years ago, and as it is now being proposed to be extended, again 
skirts around the fringes of the problem, deals with the 
symptoms rather than with the cause, and it doesn’t get to the 
root problem of what is wrong. 
 
And what I would like to specifically ask the government, 
rhetorically at this point in the course of this debate, and later 
on in more specific terms, is why the government has chosen 
this particular route to deal with a problem which obviously this 
legislation is incapable of dealing with, because it’s far too 
modest, rather than pursuing some advice which I’m sure has 
been given to the government, as I’m sure it’s been given to all 
political parties, from some of the financial institutions in this 
province. 
 
Those financial institutions, going back a few months, tended to 
minimize or deny the nature of the farm debt issue. But then 
during the course of 1986, some of those very financial 
institutions who had been saying some months earlier, it’s no 
big problem were now coming back to people in government, 
people in the opposition, people in the political process 
generally, and saying, we have changed our mind a bit; we 
think it is a bit bigger problem than we were saying a few 
months before. 
 
And I know they came to me with a specific proposal, Mr. 

Speaker. I presume they came to the official opposition; I 
presume they came to the government; I presume they were 
lobbying in Ottawa and elsewhere for something that might be 
described as a Saskatchewan farm debt rearrangement plan 
which had within it, as its essential component, the severing and 
postponement of a portion of accumulated farm debt when that 
farm debt had grown to such large proportions that it was 
literally driving certain farmers, particularly young farmers, 
right out of the farming business altogether. 
 
The proposal, Mr. Speaker, I think is too detailed and too 
complicated to wade into in any detail this afternoon. But I 
think it is significant that the proposal came not from a farm 
organization, not from anybody actively involved in a political 
party and getting ready for an election campaign – it came from 
certain major financial institutions themselves, including one 
which had previously been one of the most critical of farmers 
on the public record here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the proposal was by no means perfect, but it did have 
within it an arrangement where government would do a bit, 
farmers would do their bit, the lending institutions would do 
their bit, and together in a joint approach, a co-operative 
approach, everyone would assume a portion of the burden. And 
the net result would be a significant reduction in that burden of 
farm debt that has accumulated rather unfairly and for many 
farmers in a very difficult situation, severely, over the last 
decade or so. 
 
And that kind of proposal, in addition to the housekeeping 
measures that the government is talking about today, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s that kind of a proposal that I would recommend 
that the government begin to take very, very seriously. Because 
as I said at the beginning of my remarks, they’re fundamental 
presumptions that if they can just put their finger in the dike and 
hold it there for a year or two, and the weather is going to be 
great, and prices are going to be great, and markets are going to 
turn around, and the problem will just go away – obviously, 
those presumptions have turned out to erroneous. And in the 
meantime the problem has just grown worse. 
 
And so some of these broader and bolder measures, Mr. 
Speaker, I would strongly recommend to the government for 
consideration, because this Bill in itself simply touches the 
fringes and doesn’t get to the fundamentals of what is wrong. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will just make a brief 
closing comment or two with respect to The Farm Land 
Security Act. The Act was designed for a specific purpose. It 
was designed to help protect farmers in some difficult 
circumstances. We are asking here to have that Act carried on 
for another year and, hopefully not, but in the case that we want 
to have it extended for the year after and the year after that, that 
we can do that through Executive Council. 
 
We have heard the same arguments before, Mr. Speaker, with 
respect to why we don’t include farm machinery and others. 
The land is the most important, and this legislature has debated 
that on many occasions. And while we want to protect rural 
Saskatchewan in general, rural 



 
December 17, 1986 

 

318 
 
 

Saskatchewan obviously is much more than just the farm 
because it’s the neighbour who sells them supplies and the 
machinery and all the parts, and services the industry. And we 
have to protect those people as well, and I believe they should 
be. And the people out there are saying that what this Act does 
is doing just that. And over half the farmers have been given a 
new lease on life and have been allowed to pay their bills, 
which allows all those that service them the possibility to 
receive some income as well, and they’re not just cut off at the 
knees. And I believe that’s important. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, with respect to providing cash to this 
part of our economy and providing cash to this part of the 
country, fi we look at just the recent payments of in excess of 
$400 million to the province of Saskatchewan, I remind the 
hon. members opposite that it will virtually double net farm 
income in 1987. About $450 million in Saskatchewan net farm 
income forecasted by the federal government for 1987, and you 
add another $415 million, that’s $4865 million, Mr. Speaker, 
that is allocated to the province of Saskatchewan, as a result of 
efforts that we have taken to put cash in the hands of people. 
 
So anybody that says opposite, or any place for that matter, 
saying that we’re not doing something in the short run, 
obviously has missed the point that there’s something like 
400-and-some million dollars, the lion’s share of a billion 
dollars, is coming into this province. 
 
And I don’t think it’s fair, Mr. Speaker, to complain on one 
hand that the policy is too short-run because it’s $400 million 
cash, plush several other measures that have had immediate 
effect, and then turn around and say, but it’s too long-run 
because you’re going to make chemicals here and you’re going 
to manufacture here and you’re going to reduce the costs; or 
you’re going to provide individual line service, or rural gas, or 
burying power lines, which are long-run structure things. Those 
have been argued that it’s too long. 
 
Well you can’t have it both ways, Mr. Speaker. I believe that 
you must do both. You should be able to respond as quickly as 
you can to international conditions or conditions of drought and 
deal with them, as we have, and have legislation that will allow 
us to deal with them. 
 
At the same time you have to have long-run strategy and long-
run mechanisms. And if it takes us some years to reduce the 
cost because of rural gas distribution systems or because of the 
other measures we’ve taken to provide utilities, individual line 
service, or several years to provide fertilizer and chemical 
manufacturing here, then we should be doing that. 
 
So this Act, Mr. Speaker, fits in with both the short- and the 
long-run strategy of this administration and of the federal 
government that provides a great deal of money to make sure 
that farmers today can have extra power and extra levels to deal 
with the circumstances as we look at the long-run solution. 
 
I would point out that the national agriculture strategy looks 
very favourably on this legislation. In fact, the national 
government has adopted and followed this administration, and 
it’s been received well across Canada 

by NDP governments and Liberal governments and 
Conservative governments from one end of the country to the 
other. Social Credit government. It fits the national strategy and 
it’s part and parcel of what is now enshrined, if you will, and 
written and signed by all the premiers and the first ministers of 
this country, on national agricultural strategy. 
 
So the combination of drought assistance, flood assistance, 
national-international strategy, the manufacture of chemicals 
here, is part and parcel of the short-, the long- and the medium-
term activities that we have to look at. 
 
With respect to the international changes that we have to deal 
with, I was reading in the paper today . . . I think my seat mate 
just sent the paper away with a note on it. The paper today, Mr. 
Speaker, pointed out that in the European Economic 
Community they have made the most historic change since the 
common agriculture policy was started in 1962. They are now 
going to begin to reduce the surpluses in beef and in butter in 
the European Economic Community as a result of the pressure 
that Canada and the United States and others are putting on that 
community. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s historic, the fact that finally the 
international politicians are starting to deal with some of the 
bizarre and unfair measures they’ve taken to the public with 
respect to their agriculture policy . . . are starting to have an 
impact. And we see that. 
 
So it’s in that context, Mr. Speaker, that we have this legislation 
designed specifically to protect the people of Saskatchewan and 
the farmers here in conjunction with what we do with the 
national legislation. 
 
So I just say in summary, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that this 
legislation be passed that will continue this piece of specific 
legislation to protect farmers, and I could only urge all members 
of this Assembly to support the legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas - 57 
 
Devine Neudorf 
Muller Gardner 
Duncan Kopelchuk 
McLeod Saxinger 
Andrew Britton 
Berntson Blakeney 
Lane Prebble 
Taylor Brockelbank 
Smith Shillington 
Swan Koskie 
Muirhead Romanow 
Maxwell Tchorzewsk 
Hodgins Rolfes 
Gerich Upshall 
Hepworth Simard 
Hardy Solomon 
Klein Kowalsky 
  



 
December 17, 1986 

 

319 
 
 

Meiklejohn Atkinson 
Pickering Anguish 
Martin Hagel 
Martineau Lyons 
Sauder Calvert 
Johnson Lautermilch 
Hopfner Trew 
Petersen Smart 
Swenson Van Mulligen 
Baker Koenker 
Toth Goodale 
Gleim  
 

Nays - Nil 
 
The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 
Whole at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 2 – An Act to amend The Farmers’ Counselling and 

Assistance Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take a few 
moments to speak to the counselling and assistance for farmers 
Act and the amendment to that Act. 
 
The Bill was originally passed by this House in April 1984 and 
amended in 1985. The intent of this Act is similar to the intent 
afforded by The Farm land Security Act, in the following 
fashion. First, it was originally designed as a shorter-term 
solution for farmers in financial difficulty. Secondly, it provides 
a helping hand to farmers who in many cases, through adverse 
market conditions and production difficulties and little fault of 
their own, find themselves unable to raise sufficient operating 
funds from their normal financial sources. 
 
The original Act was a three-year mandate. It offered 
counselling to farmers and loan guarantees to qualified 
producers. The Act must be amended in order to continue its 
assistance to the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
The amended Act before you extends the Act until December 
31, 987. There is a clause contained therein which will allow 
the Lieutenant Governor in council to extend the time by order 
to December 31, 1988, and subsequently to December 31, 1989, 
should a need continue for the protection of farmers afforded by 
the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all members will appreciate, I am certain, that the 
dates of this Act correspond with those in The Farm Land 
Security Act. The government feels that both Acts should be 
reviewed by cabinet in a similar time frame in that both 
programs involve short-term solutions to farm financial 
difficulties influenced by the same market conditions. 
 
We look to the main body of the Act, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
outline the following: how the legislation operates when a 
farmer applies, who effective the program has been, and how 
the need for the legislation to continue is important. 
 
First, let me deal with the application by a farmer. An 

individual producer, a partnership, a co-operative, or a 
corporation are eligible under the Act. Any of the foregoing 
may apply to the program chairman for assistance because they 
cannot raise sufficient operating capital to carry on. 
 
The farmer could become aware of counselling assistance for 
farmers by a Saskatchewan Agriculture publication, by an 
agricultural representative, by word of mouth, or perhaps even 
by his credit union or his bank. Mr. Speaker, this farmer is not 
in any desperate financial straits as the farmer before the Farm 
Land Security Board. In this case, for the same market reasons, 
past high interest rates, drought, flood, falling land prices, 
grasshoppers, increase in input costs, and lower market prices, 
he may no longer be able to raise the operating capital 
necessary to fund his operation. He has probably operated well 
under a number of years, but has been caught in the cost-price 
squeeze and needs a helping hand. 
 
That farmer or applicant is required to develop a tentative farm 
plan outlining the following: expenses associated with the 
farming operation; regularly scheduled principal and interest 
payments payable associated with that farm; current year’s 
interest on principal and interest outstanding and payable on 
loans associated with farming operations; and the applicant’s 
living expenses. 
 
To be eligible, the individual applicant must be a Saskatchewan 
resident, have a net worth of not more than $500,000; his net 
worth may not be more than 60 per cent of his total assets. A 
corporation, a co-operative or a partnership with more than one 
member principally involved in farming will be eligible if the 
net worth is not more than $1 million and his net worth is not 
more than 60 per cent of the value of the assets. 
 
If the program chairman decides the applicant is eligible for 
counselling assistance or a guaranteed operating loan and 
counselling assistance, he designates three or more members of 
the CAFF (counselling and assistance for farmers) committee to 
sit as a panel to review the application. 
 
Panel members are recognized, successful farmers, probably not 
known personally by the applicant, who meet with him and 
provide counselling. Many applicants have expressed glowing 
compliments. And I say that again, Mr. Speaker – glowing 
compliments in the fact that they are dealing with their peers as 
a panel of members and have received bouquets from them. 
And I have, and the members of the legislature have I’m sure, 
right across the province, as a result of the counselling that has 
gone on by farmers sitting on this panel. 
 
Either the panel or the designated lending institution provide a 
written report, of course confidential, to the program chairman, 
and includes the following: its assessment and 
recommendations to the applicant’s production practices and 
their financial management skills; its assessment and 
recommendations regarding loan guarantees and the farm plan 
prepared by the applicant. The program chairman can then 
authorize, in the case of the individual, an operating loan 
guarantee in one hand or for consolidation of a loan on the 
other. 
  



 
December 17, 1986 

 

320 
 
 

The maximum amount of a guarantee in any one fiscal year for 
both operating and consolidation is a loan of $200,000. Security 
is offered on these loans of course, Mr. Speaker, and that’s self-
evident. For a partnership, a co-operative, or a corporation, 
these maximum amounts are doubled. The result of course in 
most cases is that the farmer now has operating capital and can 
proceed with his farming operation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let me deal with how effective this program 
has been. Between April 1 of 1984 and October 31 of ’86, Mr. 
Speaker, 2,044 applications have been received by 1,520 
farmers. There have been 1,556 panel hearings – and I repeat – 
1,556 hearings held, and 1,136 guarantees offered. The total 
guarantees are almost $84 million for an average guarantee of 
$73,700 per farmer. In the current year to October 31, 564 
applications resulted in loan guarantees of $34,785,000 for an 
average guarantee of $69,700. 
 
The counselling and assistance for farmers program, Mr. 
Speaker, is working. Farmers are being helped, are continuing 
in their livelihood, and are remaining productive. The success 
of this program once again points out, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government continues to initiate programs that support 
Saskatchewan’s most important industry at a time when world 
agricultural prices, agricultural inputs are rising; farm land 
values are falling – all at the same time, which has an adverse 
effect on normal operations in agriculture. 
 
I’ll deal with why this program should continue, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s true that interest rates are down and inflation is down as 
well, which affects input costs dramatically. They’re operating 
at more reasonable levels, but all members of this House 
recognize what has happened to world prices. Subsidies and 
import restrictions have driven revenue to impossibly low 
levels. We need short-term solutions like this Act in place while 
we endeavour to bring sanity to the world market conditions, 
Mr. Speaker. We should design, and continue to design and 
carry on legislation that allows us to cope with difficult 
situations as we deal with the national and international 
problems we face. 
 
(1615) 
 
In conclusion, let me say this. We have good farmers in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We have productive farmers; we 
have farmers temporarily caught in a cost-price squeeze that is 
the farm economy today. And as we as government, we as the 
House know – yes, it is a problem. We as the people together in 
this legislature and across the province and across the country 
must join together to ensure that our farmers have that helping 
hand, that where, with all activities, we can continue to be 
among the most productive in the world if given an opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I urge all sides of the House to support the 
continuation of the counselling assistance for farmers Act. I 
move second reading of an Act to amend the counselling and 
assistance for farmers Act of Saskatchewan. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to make a few comments in respect to this particular Act also. 
And as the Premier indicated, some substantial guarantees were 
made in respect to the provisions of this Bill, or as a result of 
the provisions of this Bill. 
 
And no doubt, as the Premier will know, the debt the farmer has 
– there’s no doubt about it. Lots of debt. Five billion dollars of 
debt and rising. And all I’m saying to you, Mr. Premier, that the 
farmers out there cannot stand any further debt. And as I’ve 
said in the previous debate, is what they’re looking at is to take 
a look at the possibility of restructuring some of the debt, 
particularly to the young farmers. And that’s what they have 
been asking. 
 
And certainly, while it has given some assistance – and I readily 
will admit that – all I’m saying is the crisis that we face in 
agriculture is so substantial and we’re going to lose many, 
many, many of our farmers this year and next year if in fact the 
commodity prices don’t turn around. And so I think that we 
have to . . . 
 
In ’84, when you looked at this particular proposal, it was of 
some assistance, although very few received any assistance. But 
the circumstances have changed, because the farmers today 
have a tremendous problem because of the reduction in the 
price that they get for their commodity. And so putting in a 
program in ’84 and maintaining it on the same basis, an 
accumulation of debt over ’84, ’85, and ’86, I just say the 
magnitude of the problem really requires a much more thorough 
addressing. 
 
The Premier seemed to indicate to the House that it is working 
so well. And I just want to say that we will remember when the 
program was brought in. It was set up in April of 1984, and it 
was hailed by the government as the salvation to the 
hard-pressed farm families. And there were hard-pressed, 
financially hard-pressed farm families, Mr. Speaker, throughout 
Saskatchewan. Because when it was brought in, the Farm Credit 
Corporation indicated in their extensive survey that some 8,500 
Saskatchewan farm families were in serious financial difficulty, 
and many of them would face bankruptcy, foreclosure, or 
forced auction sale. 
 
So we have this counselling and assistance Act passed, and it 
goes into operation in April, or thereabouts, of ’84. And after 
one year of this program in ’84, this program which the Premier 
hails as being so significant in its assistance to those farmers in 
very severe financial shape, after one year the program had 
arranged 100 loan guarantees for 110 farmers. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, only 110 farmers received the 
assistance. Not the 8,500 that the Farm Credit Corporation say 
are in desperate trouble, not the 1,000 who have to leave the 
land each year, but 110 farm families received some help from 
this program. That worked out to less than one in five of the 
farmers who became extensively involved in the program 
seeking financial help. Hundreds of other farmers made 
inquiries about the program, only to be told they couldn’t 
qualify. 
  



 
December 17, 1986 

 

321 
 
 

So in April of ’85, a year after the program began, amendments 
were made in respect to the Act, the eligibility requirements and 
the default guarantees offered lenders for bad debts. And in 
April of 1985 the minister of Agriculture said, the revised 
program, he said, would assist another 3,500 financially 
distressed farmers. That’s what the former minister of 
Agriculture said. 
 
So that program operated for another year. And this time the 
figures were about as dismal as before. The Leader-Post carried 
a story on February 4, indicating that in the previous nine 
months only 512 farmers had received loan guarantees under 
this program; not the 3,500 as outlined by the minister; not the 
8,500 in serious economic troubles according to the Farm 
Credit Corporation; and again not even half of the number of 
farmers we lose off the land in a bad economic year. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, when we take a look at the fact that 
. . . the realization that five farmers go through the whole long, 
involved process for every one that is helped, it is still 
necessary for the vast majority of farmers to have to put up with 
their farmer panels coming to their home and an examination of 
their personal affairs, and only one out of five have been 
qualifying. And so I say that the program, while it has given 
some assistance, I want to indicate that it has not been the 
sweeping success that the Premier tries to indicate in the House. 
Very few farmers received the assistance under this program. 
 
Another area of concern for us will be the cost of administration 
of this program. Do you realize that in the first year of operation 
it was costing more than $4,000 in administration costs for 
every farm loan that was given out? I say that’s a high figure, 
even for a government that has a record of overpaying its 
political appointees and administrators of its programs. 
 
So I say, Mr. Speaker, in closing my comment sin respect to 
this amendment, I want to say that while it has given some 
assistance to the farmers, that this program, what it is doing is 
compounding the problem, as I indicated earlier, of increasing 
the magnitude of debt which farmers are not able to service. 
 
Secondly, I say that it has not been a sweeping success as the 
government tries to indicate, because in over its first two years 
of operation very limited number of farmers qualified. And so 
I’m saying to the government opposite, certainly farmers are 
heavy in debt, and I’m saying to you that programs of 
compounding debt is not a solution to the agricultural problem. 
 
I would say that if this government had any backbone what they 
would have been doing is demanding from Ottawa substantial 
payments – deficiency payments to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. That’s what they should have been doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You’re coming forward with a Bill that has 
only limited application, and they sit on their hands and demand 
no further assistance from the federal counterparts. That’s what 
they should be doing. The U.S. government is; European 
governments are. And they are  

saying with the income of farmers going down 36 per cent in 
two years, they’re going to be able to survive. I’ll tell you, 
increasing debt is not going to be the final answer. 
 
And I say to the Premier, while we’ll support this legislation as 
we did in the past, I’m asking if you will, in fact, get serious in 
addressing the problem of agriculture by getting a substantial 
deficiency payment and support from the federal government to 
save an industry, because I’m predicting here in the House, as 
sure as I’m standing here, that many of our farmers are going to 
be driven off the land over the next years, and I’ll say this 
counselling Bill does not in fact address that problem, and that 
is the concern in Saskatchewan today. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, again I hope that the government will 
heed the remarks, the requests of farmers across this province 
who are saying, if you can get a billion dollars for a bank, 
surely for 60,000, 65,000 farmers here in Saskatchewan you 
don’t have to drive them further into debt, but get them some 
money to help them through this crisis without incurring further 
debt. And while this is a measure of success, I’ll repeat, 
administratively it has been a nightmare, cost-wise — $4,000 
for an applicant. And I’ll say secondly, that it hasn’t reached out 
to the number of farmers to the extent of the problem that exists 
in the agricultural economy today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to be 
able to speak to this Bill, The Farmers’ Counselling and 
Assistance Act. I would just like to say a few words on this 
matter starting with today’s scenario out in the country. We 
have our input costs rising steadily – the chemical, the 
fertilizers, fuel, and parts. All these things are going up, which 
is putting a heavy debt load on our farmers. Along with that we 
have, of course, a steady decline in our commodity prices, 
giving us this high, high debt. 
 
We have seen this government take a back seat to Ottawa when 
it comes to generic chemicals, a long-term solution that would 
bring down some of this debt. I predict that we will see the 
same response when it comes to the plant breeders legislation 
which will be coming up – something that will put further debt 
to Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
With this high debt we have to have a semblance of 
restructuring, Mr. Speaker – restructure this debt in such a 
manner that it will alleviate the problem of the high debt load. 
While . . . as Mr. Premier indicated his great success with the 
program, it does not help the situation as far as reducing the 
debt. We need programs to do this, to reduce the debt. 
 
Our foreclosures are getting more numerous every year, and I 
say that the banks have some responsibility. What we see here 
is a government that says: Mr. Banker, the fact that the farmers 
of this province are in debt has nothing to do with you. I say it 
does. I think each and every member of society in 
Saskatchewan has a responsibility to the agricultural industry. If 
we all had crystal balls and could gaze into the future, I’m sure 
we would do it to our best advantage. But we don’t, so we have 
to provide measures whereby the long term is dealt with today, 
and if we don’t deal with it today, we’ll be in  
  



 
December 17, 1986 

 

322 
 
 

further trouble tomorrow. 
 
(1630) 
 
Where is this leading us? I think it’s leading us to a situation 
whereby we’re digging a hole for the rural people in the 
province. We’re creating a crater that will eventually erupt and 
throw the rural society into complete disorder. And simply by 
dealing with the symptoms of a disease, we add to that problem. 
 
By giving assistance, more credit, we add to the problem we 
already have. We do not create a situation whereby the farmers 
are feeling better about it – simply setting it over here, take 
another step. I maintain that this leads to a big fall, and I’m 
very, very apprehensive about the fact that it does not address 
the problem. 
 
We must co-ordinate, Mr. Speaker, these programs with other 
government programs. I had a phone call saying, from one 
individual, I was counselled not to grow wheat, so I grew pulse 
crops. But now when the deficiency payment comes out, 
because I took the initiative to diversify, I do not get the benefit 
of a deficiency payment. 
 
I would urge the Premier and his colleagues, when doing these 
types of things, please co-ordinate the activities so that the 
farmer who needs assistance and is getting assistance has some 
idea of what he’s getting himself into. 
 
So I think in wrapping up, Mr. Speaker, we must address the 
problems. We simply can’t take dollars from the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, guarantee the banks a significant income, and 
virtually putting the problem off, setting it aside for a while. 
While I agree with the intentions of this Bill, I disagree with 
where it is leading us. Mr. Speaker, with that I beg leave to 
adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 3 – An Act to establish a Mortgage Protection Plan 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today and move second reading of the Bill respecting the 
Mortgage Protection Plan. Mr. Speaker, on August 28th, 
Premier Grant Devine announced the introduction of the 
Saskatchewan home program. The three significant components 
of this initiative include: non-repayable grants for home 
renovations; a $10,000 home renovation loan at a six per cent 
interest rate; and the mortgage protection plan. The 
government’s mortgage protection plan provides nine and three-
quarter per cent mortgage interest rate protection for the next 10 
years. The Saskatchewan home program has proven to be 
overwhelmingly popular with the people of Saskatchewan. Our 
citizens have shown that they are willing to invest their own 
money in improving their homes. At the same time, your 
government has helped them carry out these renovations and 
greatly stimulate our economy. Untold numbers of jobs have 
been created, lumber and home renovation supply dealers are 
busy, contractors are busy, plumbers, carpenters, electricians, 
carpet layers, painters, and many others involved in these  

home renovation projects are busy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in early 1982 mortgage interest rates were at rates 
of 19 per cent and higher in Saskatchewan. The people of the 
province were suffering great economic hardships, and many of 
them were in danger of losing their homes. Prior to 1982 
nothing was done about this very serious situation. Nothing was 
done to relieve the hardships caused by exorbitant interest rates. 
However, in July of 1982 our government took the steps 
necessary to relieve the burden that 19 per cent mortgage 
interest rates caused Saskatchewan home owners. We 
responded to the needs of the people and introduced the 
mortgage interest reduction plan which effectively reduced 
mortgage interest rates to thirteen and one-quarter per cent on 
principal residences. The plan was originally intended to be in 
effect for three years, July of 1982 to June 30, 1985. However, 
in June of 1984 Premier Devine announced the extension of the 
plan to June 30, 1988, another three years of interest rate relief. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to report to you today that the 
mortgage interest reduction plan has been an overwhelming 
success. More than 44,000 Saskatchewan home owners have to 
date received in excess of some $63 million in direct cash 
benefits from that plan, interest rate relief that has allowed them 
to keep their homes and to enjoy a better standard of living. 
Fortunately, mortgage interest rates are no longer at record high 
levels. One year closed mortgage insured by CMHC are 
available today at rates of nine and three-quarter per cent for 
most lenders, including the major chartered banks, major trust 
companies, and credit unions. Immediate interest rate relief is 
not required. However, there is a need to provide long-term 
stability for mortgage interest rates, and this is the objective of 
the government’s mortgage protection plan. 
 
The mortgage protection plan will provide long-term protection 
in the form of nine and three-quarter per cent interest rates for 
the next 10 years. Home owners must negotiate their mortgage 
at the lowest rates available in the market-place to receive 
maximum protection from the plan. The mortgage protection 
plan will be available to protect Saskatchewan home owners 
when they negotiate a new mortgage for home purchase or 
renew an existing mortgage on or after September 1, 1986. 
 
The plan applies to the first $50,000 of mortgage outstanding on 
a principal residence in which a home owner, his or her spouse, 
or wholly dependant children permanently reside. The home 
must be located in Saskatchewan, and it may be a house, a 
condominium, a mobile home, a duplex, a three plex, or a four 
plex. Included is land up to 65 hectares, or one quarter section. 
 
The mortgage protection plan will be efficiently implemented 
and administered, as the rules and procedures are nearly 
identical to those of the mortgage interest reduction plan. Direct 
cash benefits will be electronically deposited in the bank 
account of the home owner’s choice. 
 
The mortgage interest reduction plan will remain in place to 
provide relief to home owners currently receiving benefits on 
existing mortgage until such time as the  
  



 
December 17, 1986 

 

323 
 
 

mortgage is renewed. However, a person may not receive 
payments under both the mortgage interest reduction plan and 
the mortgage protection plan on the same mortgage at the same 
time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is another indication of our government’s 
commitment to respond to the needs of the people of 
Saskatchewan. Mortgage interest reduction was necessary in 
1982 and this government provided it. This Bill provides long-
term mortgage protection which will guarantee today’s rates for 
the next 10 years – protection that allows our home-makers to 
plan for the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this program is a further commitment of the 
government of the province of Saskatchewan, a commitment 
that was reiterated in the throne speech recently approved by 
this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, it therefore give me great pleasure 
to move an Act respecting the Mortgage Protection Plan to be 
now read a second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I would like to say a 
few words about the Bill that’s before the House right now. The 
member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden has discussed a number of 
points in the Bill which I would like to also talk about and 
perhaps ask some questions on. It seems to me that there are 
some consensus, or some feelings on this side of the House, that 
our party has and does continue to support mortgage assistance 
for home owners. I think it’s a very important element in our 
society. We believe in that policy primarily because we believe 
that shelter is a basic right for all individuals in Saskatchewan, 
and in Canada as well. 
 
I think the Bill is putting forward a program which has been 
commonly called a pale imitation of the program that has more 
meat, has more honourable objectives, and will have more 
effect in terms of creating jobs and stabilizing the economy of 
Saskatchewan, namely the 7-7-7 program that our party put 
forward in the last election, and I believe was widely accepted 
in areas that it was used on a door-to-door basis, in particular, in 
the constituency of Regina North West where we were able to 
contact many people, all people in the constituency at least once 
on their doorstep, as opposed to spending a great deal of money 
in the media. 
 
Our program addressed an issue which is fairly key in terms of 
housing – the issue that long-range interest rate stability is 
important for those that do have mortgages. We recommended a 
7 per cent mortgage for a seven-year term. We provided meat in 
terms of job creation efforts through the $7,000 matching grant 
for renovations which would bring more dollars into the 
economy because individuals would be providing a large sum 
of money for major structural renovations as opposed to minor 
ones, thereby creating a great deal more activity economically. 
 
The Bill before us, Mr. Speaker, in my view doesn’t address the 
housing start problem in the long-term job creation aspect. In 
comparison to the 7-7-7 program, ours provided a $7,000 grant 
to first-time home buyers which would encourage the house 
building industry. The Bill  

itself doesn’t provide decent affordable housing to those who 
are in a low income bracket or those that are elderly – those 
least able to afford housing in our province at the moment. 
 
In my view the Bill does have a means test. The members 
opposite have gone on record as publicly and universally 
opposing a means test. They have made accusations that any 
program former governments in this province introduced to 
help individuals to help the economy had means tests. This Bill, 
in my view does have one, and I’ll say a few words about that 
in a few moments, Mr. Speaker. And I finally, Mr. Speaker, will 
try and put forward a position that the Bill does not protect 
everybody, as the members opposite claim. 
 
Bill 3 is an interesting Bill from the point of view that the 
members are saying it’s going to create thousands and 
thousands of jobs. They’ve talked about, and I’ll get to those 
points in a few moments as well, but basically bragged about 
their record on job creation. They’ve bragged about the terrific 
performance of the government in increasing the number of 
housing starts. I refer members to a document which has been 
put out by the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation – by this 
government – which outlines very clearly, Mr. Speaker, that the 
housing starts in Saskatchewan have been dismally low over the 
last number of years. 
 
From 1984 to 1985, for example, there was an increase of 100 
dwelling units – I should say, housing starts – which is the 
lowest it’s been since the early 1970s. The Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation has put forward a table which clearly 
indicates that in the last two years of this government – the last 
two years, Mr. Speaker, of this government – there were 10,500 
dwelling starts in Saskatchewan; and the last two years of the 
’79, 1980, there were more than 18,000, a substantial decline in 
the number of housing starts. And we have seen, Mr. Speaker, 
that the number of housing starts will continue to remain stable, 
or at a stable low level, and will in effect decline. 
 
(1645) 
 
In question period this afternoon, the member from Melville 
talked about how there are few opportunities left in 
Saskatchewan. And that is certainly substantiated, Mr. Speaker, 
by the information that again the Saskatchewan statistics Stats 
Canada has put out, outlining very clearly that there has been a 
10.3 per cent increase in the number of people leaving this 
province over November ’85 to November 1986, from 343 
families to 378. And I think that’s a clear reflection on the 
government’s policy in terms of housing. 
 
There are no housing starts increasing in this province; there are 
fewer opportunities in that respect. And I think that it’s a real 
disappointment on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, that they 
have not addressed the broader question of creating jobs. 
 
The Statistics Canada labour force survey that has come out 
recently, as of December 5, outlines again their dismal failure in 
creating jobs, in particular in the housing market. There has 
been a five and a half per cent increase in the last 12 months in 
number of people out of work. 
  



 
December 17, 1986 

 

324 
 
 

They have gone from 38,000 to 36,000. The number of people 
who are working in this province has declined substantially. 
How can they claim to have an effective housing program 
without having any evidence to provide what they’re saying, to 
support what they’re saying? 
 
The total number of people that are employed from November 
’85 to November 1986 on this Statistics Canada survey that I 
have here shows that Saskatchewan is the only province that 
has had fewer people working – 2,000 fewer people working 
this November compared to last November than they in the last 
year. Every other province in Canada . . . Newfoundland had 
1,000 more working; Prince Edward Island had 2,000 more 
people working, and everybody else in Canada, provincially, 
had more than that. So I refer members to that sort of document 
which is again a little bit of evidence to the government that 
their housing program has not been very effective. 
 
The member from Arm River yesterday, in his remarks about 
the home program, talked about how they were the first 
government to introduce a housing grant to start up or to 
provide down-payment assistance to home owners or 
prospective home owners. Of course we know in this province 
that the New Democratic Party government had instituted that 
long before they came around. 
 
But the member from Arm River indicated in his remarks, Mr. 
Speaker, about the home program that he projected and the 
government projection . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please! The member seems to be 
wandering from the topic off and on and I have been 
overlooking it. But I must remind him that we’re not discussing 
the home program; we’re discussing the mortgage protection 
plan. And I would like you to confine your remarks to the 
mortgage protection plan. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll do that, as I believe I have 
done. But the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, the minister 
in charge, had indicated that he was talking about the $1,500 
matching program and I feel that I would like to comment on 
that but . . . 
 
The minister claims that there will be thousands of jobs . . . the 
government claims that there will be 25,000 jobs created as a 
result of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, as a result of this program. And 
I feel that that is a projection which is not based on reality. If 
you look at the statistics that I’ve just talked about; if you look 
at the fact that housing starts are on the decline as opposed to 
the incline; if you look at the fact that skilled tradespeople, 
electricians and carpenters and dry wallers that the ministers 
referred to, that these people are, in effect, now starting to get 
some work as a result of the home program. 
 
But I ask you and all members to talk to tradespeople that you 
know, ask them very simply how many weeks they have 
worked in the last four and one-half years – not years – but how 
many weeks they’ve worked in the last four and one-half years 
as a result of the housing program previously of this 
government, and how many weeks they believe they’re going to 
be working as a result of this program. 

My information, Mr. Speaker, from the tradespeople I’ve 
spoken to, indicate that it’s a short-term job creation effort. It’s 
a short-term effort in terms of providing assistance to families. 
And the minister himself this afternoon, moments earlier, 
indicated to this House that 44,000 home owners have taken 
advantage of the program, which is 25 per cent of the homes in 
this province. And if we’ve seen in this province 25 per cent of 
the home owners take advantage of the matching grant in the 
first three or four months of the program, you can conclude 
from that, Mr. Speaker, that it’s not going to take long for the 
balance, those that are able to afford to take advantage of the 
program, to take advantage of it and thereby being a short-term 
effort in terms of job creation. 
 
The member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster mentioned on the 
home program, with respect to the elements in Bill 3, a few 
items about housing objectives of this government – that the 
government has five objectives, the targeting of direct . . . 
Number one, the targeting . . . and I quote from Hansard, Mr. 
Speaker, “The targeting of direct housing subsidies to those 
most in need”, number one. Bill No. 3 does not address that. 
Those in need cannot afford the matching $1,500 program. 
Those in need, the low-income people and the seniors, are 
scrambling for an adequate supply of housing right now. 
 
The November 25th issue of the Leader-Post outlines what city 
council in Regina have clearly defined as a major housing 
program in this city alone. A study done by the city’s 
community planning department over the summer and fall show 
that approximately 2,000 families are on waiting lists for 
subsidized housing, plus about 150 seniors. And this is, in my 
view, Mr. Speaker, a shame that the government is not able to 
address this issue, a government that is not able to resolve the 
issue of low-income housing. I maintain, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Bill put forward to this House and that we are speaking about 
right now is not resolving the problem of those in most need. So 
I think their first objective is complete failure. 
 
They go on and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The targeting of direct housing subsidies to those most 
in need (again a failure), providing a safety net to 
ensure that basic housing needs are met. 

 
Well the City of Regina has identified 2,000 families that do not 
have their basic housing needs met. It goes on: 
 

. . . stimulating the housing sector to ensure delivery 
of appropriate housing – quantity and quality. 
 

Well, it’s not stimulating housing starts, Mr. Speaker. There are 
very few housing starts that are being undertaken at the moment 
in this city that I’m aware of, as well as very few throughout the 
province. 
 
I’d like to during the course of the committee, but certainly now 
just raise some questions which I had about the Bill, the 
question being: who does it really protect? It doesn’t say in the 
Bill who it protects. Under close scrutiny of the Bill, I note that 
those who have mortgages  
  



 
December 17, 1986 

 

325 
 
 

above the nine and three-quarter per cent rate are locked in and 
those that have a lock-in feature of five years and four years, 
and three years and two years, they will not benefit from this 
Bill. It will only be for those who will be renewing their 
mortgages over the short term, and for some of these people it’s 
going to be a bit of a hardship. 
 
In my view it does not protect everyone. Those who are not 
working, as I indicated, will not be protected; those that are in 
the income bracket of $16,000 to $18,000 will not be protected 
either because they’re struggling to obtain decent low-income 
housing for their families. 
 
So I maintain, Mr. Speaker, that there is a means test in this 
Bill. The means test is evident and there is no evidence in my 
view that the people I’ve referred to – those that are out of 
work, those that are in a low-income situation – will be 
benefitting nor will their families. 
 
The question I’d like to raise with the minister and the 
difference in Bill 3 as compared to the former Bill which 
covered interest protection – the mortgage interest rate 
protection program – is that Bill 3 does not provide a section for 
appropriation of funds. I am curious to know why that is not 
there. I will be raising that question when it comes to the 
committee, Mr. Speaker. I am also curious as to . . . that there’s 
no legislation, no items in this Bill which outlines the $1,500 
matching grant or the $10,000 loans at 6 per cent which, Mr. 
Speaker, I would maintain is something we should be looking 
at. 
 
I am curious to know why the Bill that we’re discussing this 
afternoon – the elements of the Bill – why the elements of the 
Bill were introduced in such a hurried fashion. During the 
September period there was a quick announcement on the 
provisions that we are now debating today. 
 
There was, in my view, probably a very high cost on the part of 
the government in order to make arrangements with the banks 
to provide $10,000 loans at 6 per cent. I think those 
arrangements are arrangements which we should be looking 
closely at. I would sure like to know what kind of deal for the 
fees to transact these loans were negotiated with the banks, and 
with the government. I’d like to know whether or not this is a 
premium rate that they are paying to have these loans looked 
after. 
 
The Bill doesn’t tell us this, and I think if they had been in such 
a hurry – or I know that they were in such a hurry – that they 
could not possibly have struck a decent arrangement with the 
banks in order to provide a lower cost of administrating the 
program to the government and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
It’s been reported that the banks are likely in the receiving end 
of a windfall of around $75 million as a result of this quick and 
hastily negotiated arrangement. 
 
I would sure like to know whether minister has considered 
using, or did consider at that time, using the other organizations 
that were set out that may have provided the delivery of this 
program at a cheaper rate – for example, municipal offices, or 
the government departments themselves. We have a fairly 
active civil service. We have a number of people employed in 
that area, and I think that they would have delivered the  

service at a much more reasonable cost than the banks that we 
now are likely paying a dear rate. But we’ll be getting into that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other comment I’d like to make about the Bill is that there 
is an item in there or two, that I agree with. I think that section 4 
of the mortgage protection plan outlines that those who will 
receive benefits under the mortgage protection plan Bill, that 
those in the MIRP Bill, which is the former one at thirteen and a 
quarter per cent, they were provided assistance subsidization 
from thirteen and a quarter per cent to the high rate. This Bill, 
this item, section 4 of this MPP, Bill No. 3, does say very 
clearly that you cannot receive relief from both Bills. So I think 
that’s a good element that is worthy of note, that we would 
certainly support. 
 
I have a few other things I’d like to say, Mr. Speaker. I’d at this 
point beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 
 
 


