


















































May 20, 1986 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 20, 1986 
  
 
 

1377 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a pleasure for me 
to introduce to you, and through you to the rest of the members of 
the Chamber, 12 grade 12 students from the largest town in my 
constituency. They're from Central Butte High School. They're in 
the east gallery. They are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Ron 
Richardson, and I'd just like to welcome them here today to watch 
question period and the debate of the Chamber. 
 
I will be meeting with you at 2:30 for pictures and drinks and to 
answer any questions which you might have which arise from the 
proceedings of the day. I'd like all members to join with me in 
welcoming the students from Central Butte High. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a pleasure for me to 
introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, 47 grade 12 students from the Yorkton Regional High 
School. They're seated in the west gallery and accompanied today 
by their teacher, Mr. Ed Magis. And I'd just like to tell the 
Assembly that Mr. Magis has made a habit of doing this as long as 
I can remember, and I want to commend him for bringing his 
students into the legislature. 
 
I will be meeting with them at 3 o'clock for pictures, and in room 
255 for some refreshments after question period. I hope you enjoy 
your stay in Regina and your attendance here at the Assembly, and 
I would ask all members to please greet these students in your 
usual manner. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Free Trade Negotiations 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a 
question to, I think it will be, the Acting House Leader. The 
question deals with the free trade talks, and it deals with 
negotiations which begin tomorrow in Ottawa between Simon 
Reisman, the Canadian negotiator, and his U.S. counterpart, Mr. 
Murphy. 
 
Can the Acting House Leader tell us whether or not 
Saskatchewan's free trade representative, Mr. Wakabayashi, will 
be present in the bargaining room when Mr. Reisman and Mr. 
Murphy begin their negotiations tomorrow? Could you indicate 
what the arrangement is? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can't indicate 
whether Mr. Wakabayashi will be in the room or not. I will take 
notice of the question on behalf of the Minister of Economic 
Development and Trade, and I'm sure he'll come back with the 
answer, probably tomorrow. 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I direct a 
question to the Acting House Leader in the absence of the 
Premier, the Deputy Premier, and the Minister of Economic 
Development. 
 
My question is similar to the first. Who do we anticipate will be at 
the bargaining table to make sure that none of the compromises — 
which is an element of all negotiations — none of them are 
harmful to the future of the Saskatchewan economy and 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
I take it members opposite are not relying upon Mr. Reisman, who 
is a long-time central Canadian federal public servant, some might 
call the quintessential bureaucrat. I hope we're not depending on 
Mr. Reisman to put forward the interests of Saskatchewan and 
have them at the top of his list. 
 
And my question then is: in the course of these discussions, who 
will be speaking for Saskatchewan, and how will this voice be 
made known? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier announced 
some weeks ago about the appointment of Mr. Wakabayashi in 
terms of representing Saskatchewan in the process leading up to 
trade talks between the United States and Canada. The member 
opposite gives his outline of Simon Reisman and his 
qualifications, and so on; I neither agree nor disagree with those at 
this stage. 
 
I would say to the hon. Leader of the Opposition he has had 
several opportunities to raise these questions. The member who is 
responsible for trade in this province, my seat mate, the Minister 
of Economic Development and Trade, has been in his chair, I 
would submit, almost every day since this House has been in 
session. That question was not raised with that member. But I will 
take notice of the second question, Mr. Speaker, and raise it with 
the Minister of Economic Development and trade, and he'll bring 
his answer back. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I raise another 
question, Mr. House Leader. In the report on the free trade 
negotiations which was published this morning in the Globe and 
Mail, Mr. Reisman has declined to release the 84 studies which he 
has had done on the impact of free trade on various sectors of the 
Canadian economy. 
 
What I say, sir, is: has Mr. Reisman released the 84 studies — the 
contents of the 84 studies — to the Government of Saskatchewan 
so that at least you may know the assumptions upon which Mr. 
Reisman proposes to carry on his negotiations, and if so, can you 
advise us whether or not some or all of the contents of those 
studies will be made known to the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I'll take notice of that 
question on behalf of the Minister of Economic Development and 
Trade, as I have done on two previous occasions. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the absence of the 
Premier and the Deputy Premier and the Minister of 
  



 
May 20, 1986 

 

1378 
 
 

Economic Development and Trade, I address it again to the Acting 
House Leader. And I ask you, Mr. House Leader, can you advise: 
who will Simon Reisman be reporting to as these free trade 
negotiations proceed, and what veto power do Saskatchewan and 
other provinces have over the Reisman's negotiation decisions? I 
wonder if you could advise us of those important matters. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, my understanding is 
that Mr. Reisman will be reporting to the federal government, the 
government of this country, as he should. And as the Premier 
announced in his appointment of Mr. Wakabayashi as 
Saskatchewan's representative to the trade talks, as it relates to the 
lead-up to the trade talks between the two countries, Mr. 
Wakabayashi will represent Saskatchewan's interests well — I am 
sure of that. 
 
I am not sure what I'm reading into the questions from the 
members of the opposition. Whether they disagree with the 
appointment of Mr. Wakabayashi, or don't believe that he will do 
the job that we believe he will do on behalf of the Saskatchewan 
people. I believe he will, and this government believes he will. But 
as it relates to who Mr. Reisman will report to, he will reporting to 
the federal government. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I asked a further supplement to the minister, 
which he has very adroitly side-stepped. I want to ask you, since 
Mr. Reisman is reporting to the federal government, can you 
indicate whether in fact Saskatchewan and other provinces have 
veto powers over the negotiations that are carried on by Reisman 
on behalf of the federal government? Does the province have a 
direct veto power? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I'll have the Minister 
of Economic Development and Trade answer in a more direct and 
more detailed way to the question. But I will say to the member 
that it is my understanding that there is no veto power for any 
province in the country. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A supplement, Mr. Speaker. I want to further ask 
you, Mr. Minister — we aren't getting much answers from this — 
but perhaps you can take it on to your colleague. I ask you again: 
will Mr. Reisman be reporting directly to the provinces after each 
negotiating session, as well as to the federal government? What is 
the mechanism that is established for involving the provincial 
governments directly in the free trade discussions? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, in direct answer to the 
member's questions, I am not sure of the exact reporting 
mechanism as it relates to every meeting or reporting immediately 
following every meeting. I am not sure of that. I do know there's a 
consultative process in place. In that process Saskatchewan is 
represented by Mr. Wakabayashi. I believe Mr. Wakabayashi will 
do, and is doing, an excellent job on behalf of Saskatchewan and 
the economy of this province. 
 
And as it relates to the very specific question that the member 
from Quill Lakes asked, I will once again take notice, and there 
will be a series of questions here that the Minister of Economic 
Development and Trade will be in a better position to answer, Mr. 
Speaker. 

Mr. Koskie: — I have a new question to the Minister, Mr. 
Speaker. As you are aware, the American negotiator in the free 
trade talks, Peter Murphy, has stated publicly that he believes 
everything is on the table in these negotiations. That, in our view, 
would include the future of the Canadian Wheat Board, the future 
of stabilization programs for a number of agricultural products, as 
well as medicare and other social programs. And this is the direct 
statement by Mr. Murphy. I ask you, how do you square Mr. 
Murphy's clear public position with your constant claim that none 
of these protections would be subject to negotiations in the free 
trade talk? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member makes 
reference to a quotation from Mr. Murphy, the American 
negotiator. I would say to him that I believe Mr. Reisman's on 
record; I believe Mr. Clark, the Minister of External Affairs, is on 
record as rejecting that view, as rejecting the view of what Mr. 
Murphy has said. Certainly the negotiations are just under way, 
just coming to the point of being under way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It's very, very interesting that members of an NDP opposition will 
be now talking about the details of a free trade arrangement, one 
which they do not believe should be taking place in the first place. 
They don't agree with free trade in any way, shape, or form, or any 
type of negotiations between two major countries on this 
continent. They do not agree with it. They have stated on many 
occasions that they do not agree with it, and yet here they come 
with trying to cut down and break into negotiations before they 
can even get under way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the view of Mr. Murphy that was expressed by him 
and what was quoted by the member from Quill Lakes was, in 
fact, contradicted by the Canadian representative, Mr. Reisman, 
and by Mr. Clark, the federal Minister of External affairs. All I can 
say is, let's have the negotiations carry on, and Saskatchewan's 
view will be well-known to Mr. Reisman through Mr. 
Wakabayashi. 
 

Trade Complaint Against Canadian Lumber Exports 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I direct my 
question to the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Forest 
Products. 
 
The United States, just hours before free trade talks are due to 
open in Ottawa, have shown they only like free trade when it's a 
one-way street. Yesterday in Washington the United States lumber 
industry filed a trade complaint against the Canadian lumber 
products. They have demanded that a duty of $54, United States, 
be slapped on each 1,000 board feet of Canadian lumber exported 
to the United States. 
 
My question to the minister is this: how much Saskatchewan 
lumber is exported to the United States each year? What 
percentage of our total output goes to the United States? And what 
specific action has your government taken to intervene in this case 
to protect Saskatchewan's lumber export and Saskatchewan's jobs. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 
  



 
May 20, 1986 

1379 
 
 

the specific questions about how much lumber and how many 
board feet of Saskatchewan lumber goes into the United States and 
so on, certainly I'd take notice of that question and come back with 
an answer, in terms of the annual amount of lumber that goes into 
the American market. 
 
I will say though, Mr. Speaker, it is a substantial amount. There's 
no question about that. There's no question as well, that when we 
see the protectionist view of the United States in terms of some of 
the countervailing duties, countervailing suits that have come 
against Canadian lumber and some other products which are very 
important to western Canadian provinces, it underlines the very 
reason for our country to enter into the free trade negotiations, 
which we just referred to in the early questions, the very reasons 
why our two countries should be into those kinds of negotiations, 
and I would submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP opposition 
is having it both ways. In one hand they want to talk about . . . 
they're against free trade, they're against all of the negotiations that 
are going on, and on the other hand now they want to talk about 
the countervailing duties and their concern for the protectionist 
winds which are blowing across the United States these days. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, the American lumber industry filed this trade complaint 
under the name: the United States Coalition for Fair Lumber 
Imports. Can you tell the Assembly and Saskatchewan people 
whether or not the Weyerhaeuser corporation is a member of that 
corporation? Also, is Weyerhaeuser one of the American lumber 
companies attempting to cut off Canadian exports to the United 
States? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Weyerhaeuser, coming 
into this province, and Weyerhaeuser with the marketing system 
that they have, I would submit to the hon. member that one of the 
best opportunities that we have in Saskatchewan, or that western 
Canadian resource industries have for going into the United States 
market is through already established marketing structures, which 
is one of the things that Weyerhaeuser brings to this process, and 
it's a very excellent record in terms of marketing and in terms of 
very many other processes in the forest industry. 
 
So I would say to the hon. member, he says there has been a 
complaint lodged. There was, I would remind him, a complaint 
lodged as it relates to hogs from South Dakota and so on; there 
was a complaint lodged as it relates to trade between our two 
countries before. Canada has won, to a significant extent, in that 
area. I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the members opposite, 
that Canada will win in this area as well, and we must continue 
our vigilance. And that's the reason for those negotiations to be 
going on. The very reason those negotiations need to go on is 
because of the kinds of things that are going on in the United 
States and the various industries now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a new question to 
the minister who is answering questions with respect to lumber 
exports, and I'll direct this to the Acting House Leader. As the 
minister will know, Simpson  

Timber Company Ltd. operates in this province. As the minister 
will know, it exports a good amount of its product to the United 
States, and as the minister will know, the Simpson Timber 
Company is a United States owned company with marketing 
arrangement in the United States. Would you be good enough to 
advise the House whether or not the ownership of the Hudson Bay 
mill by Simpson Timber Company Ltd. has facilitated our entry 
into the United States market or not. Has it made any difference, 
and will it make any difference in the case of Weyerhaeuser? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I'm not sure if it has made any 
difference as it relates to Simpson, Mr. Speaker, but I submit to 
this House that it will make a significant difference as it relates to 
Weyerhaeuser. 
 

Investigation of SGI Claims 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a new question to 
the minister in charge of SGI. It deals with the performance in this 
Assembly last week of the Premier, condoning actions of his chief 
political aide who had attempted to interfere in a Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance arson investigation involving a long-time 
friend and associate of the Premier's principal secretary. And I just 
want to get the government's position clearly on the record. 
 
As I understood the Premier to say, anyone in Saskatchewan who 
is under investigation by the police or some other agency can go to 
the Premier's office and lobby the Premier's political aides, and 
then these aides are free to do the following — and I want to direct 
this question to you with respect to SGI: to review all the 
confidential files involved in the investigation; share the contents 
of those confidential files with the person under investigation; 
contact the Department of Justice to inquire about the case; and 
pressure those in charge of the investigation to bring it to an end 
before it is completed. 
 
Now that is what I understood the Premier to say. And I want you, 
Mr. Minister, to say whether or not that is the policy of the SGI. Is 
it the policy of the SGI, when conducting arson investigations, to 
make available their files to the principal secretary of the Premier 
who may wish to investigate on behalf of a long-time friend, and 
to authorize that officer in the Premier's office to discuss the 
contents of the investigation file with the person being 
investigated? Is that the policy of the SGI? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, the simple answer is no. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, can you deny that that is 
what happened in this case? Can you deny that a confidential file 
of an arson investigation was made available by SGI to the 
principal secretary of the Premier, which principal secretary 
discussed the contents of that file with the person under 
investigation? Do you deny that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, the investigation is over, and I 
think the Premier outlined the case very well last week. And the 
Leader of the Opposition should know very well the answer for 
that. If you're looking for the  
  



 
May 20, 1986 

 

1380 
 
 

policy of SGI, you know what it is. The gentleman was fired. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — In the court proceeding with which the 
minister will be aware, Mr. Tkachuk gave this answer: 
 

I told him, (that is Mr. Townsend), from what I had seen in the 
file, that that there was nothing that I couldn't believe that he 
wasn't going to be paid, is what I said. 
 
Question: And did you tell him what you had seen on the file? 
 
Answer: Specifically, in a couple of instances, yes. 

 
Now that is what Mr. Tkachuk said on oath. I ask you, Mr. 
Minister: is that use of files of SGI when they're conducting arson 
investigations condoned by you and by the officials of SGI? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, I think it was outlined very good 
by the Premier last week, where the judge also said there the only 
person deserving of censure in this case was Mr. Ryan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I ask you 
again, sir, whether or not you condone the principal secretary to 
the Premier taking a file dealing with an arson investigation and 
sharing its contents with the person under investigation. I take it 
you do, since you feel that no one else ought to be subject to 
censure. I ask you: do you condone that use of the files of SGI? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, I believe the question has been 
answered adequately, and I guess we could go back to previous 
actions of the previous government, how they treated SGI files, 
and we can keep on going on that if you wish. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I ask you again . . . Mr. Speaker, I'm sure 
members opposite will want to get into the debate . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I asked for order in the House. 
Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, I ask you simply two 
questions. First, do you condone that use of the files of the 
corporation for which you are responsible? And second, are you 
aware that Mr. Tkachuk's interference in the investigation of this 
insurance claim included an attempt to call together the board of 
directors of SGI in order to have the decision of the president of 
SGI overruled? Are you aware of that? Do you condone it? And is 
that service available to anyone who is being investigated by SGI, 
and where the decision of the citizen is not agreed with by the 
president of SGI? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, what I'm aware of is that there 
was a case that SGI took to court. The decision was brought down 
by the judge, and in that the only person that he censured for his 
actions was that of Mr. Ron Ryan. The decision, the investigation 
is over. 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I ask you, Mr. Minister . . . I'm not now 
dealing with the issue which was before the Court, which was a 
limited matter. He was not dealing with the use of SGI files. 
 
I ask you again, Mr. Minister, are the same services which were 
available to Mr. Townsend, I.e., a look at the file when there was 
an arson investigation under way, an attempt to get a board of 
directors meeting to overrule the decision of the president. Are all 
those services available to all citizens of Saskatchewan, or just to 
friends of the Conservative party, and more particularly, particular 
friends of the chief secretary, the principal secretary of the 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, the investigation at that point 
was over. The answer has been given very adequately by the 
Premier what the position is, and the answer to the first question, 
to which I responded, still stands. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — On the matter of the unappealed portion of the 
judgement by Mr. Justice MacLean on the Townsend insurance 
claim, Mr. Speaker, it's very apparent that virtually everyone who 
became acquainted with SGI's file on this matter became 
convinced, along with the learned judge, that SGI's denial of this 
claim was unjust. These included the following people, and I'll just 
list them for the record: the original adjuster at SGI; the 
Saskatchewan fire commissioner; an eminent expert witness hired 
by the fire commissioner's office; an eminent expert witness hired 
by the plaintiff; at least one of the exports hired by SGI; the 
assistant to the minister in charge of SGI; the assistant to the 
president of SGI; the head of the investigating RCMP detachment. 
 
My question is to the minister in charge of SGI, who is here today. 
In light of the fact that Don Black, the president, who refused to 
read the file by his own admission, and that the head of the SGI 
legal department was not familiar with the file by his own 
admission, and that there were no written submissions on the file 
from SGI's special investigation unit, who in SGI was directing the 
denial of the payment of this claim? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, I think it's very clear on this that 
SGI proceeded with litigation on this case. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — By way of supplementary . . . the plaintiff was 
Mr. Townsend, so I'm afraid the minister is incorrect. But as a 
supplementary, why did SGI fail to comply with the 
Saskatchewan government regulations by not submitting the 
required report on the Townsend fire investigation to the 
provincial fire commissioner? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Speaker, in those specifics I will take 
notice and get back to the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 
wonder if we could have leave to proceed directly to public Bills 
and orders, second readings, and then to revert to motions under 
rule 16. 
 
I ask leave to do that in order that the Assembly may have 
  



 
May 20, 1986 

1381 
 
 

an opportunity to debate the important tax reduction private 
members' Bills that the official opposition put forward a couple of 
months ago, and in the understanding we would deal with second 
readings of those Bills and then revert back to rule 16. 
 
I wonder if we would have the privilege of the Assembly and the 
vote of the members of government to deal with these three 
important Bills that would cut the taxes to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Unfair Taxation Policies 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to have the 
opportunity to debate the motion before us in the Assembly today. 
This motion is about a central issue facing the people of 
Saskatchewan, and that is the Progressive Conservative 
government's unfair tax increases. 
 
All across Saskatchewan, in cities and towns and rural 
communities right across the province, we're hearing that more 
and more people are saying that they are deeply disappointed in 
this PC government. It promised tax cuts for working families and 
farm families, but it broke that promise by imposing the biggest 
and most unfair tax increases in Saskatchewan history. 
 
Now here in the legislature, even with its huge majority, it refuses 
to debate the private members' Bills on fair taxation put forward 
by my New Democratic Party colleagues. 
 
Saskatchewan people are particularly disappointed by what they 
see as this PC government's double standard — one set of rules for 
ordinary people, but a very different set of rules for the rich and 
the powerful and the political friends of the PC government 
opposite. 
 
PC members opposite may shout from their seats, as the member 
for Moosomin now is, but they don't want to hear more about what 
Saskatchewan people are suffering. They don't want to hear more 
about just how disappointed, how deeply disappointed 
Saskatchewan people are with this PC government and its double 
standard. 
 
But there have just been too many examples, too many instances 
where this PC government showed it had one set of rules for 
ordinary Saskatchewan people and a very different set of rules for 
its political friends. Saskatchewan people are with this PC 
government and its double standard. 
 
Just ask an architect or a consulting engineer or a contractor — 
just ask them about competitive tendering and the political friends 
of this government. They understand the PC policy of patronage 
all too well, for they've been its victims. 

Or just ask some small-business operators about the secret deal 
with an Alberta millionaire, Peter Pocklington. Reports say that 
there's $10 million going to Peter Pocklington, but there are no 
facts, no facts on the table, and none will be revealed. And Peter 
Pocklington doesn't know . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Peter Pocklington just happens to be a 
candidate for the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The members are calling for order. When I stand 
and get order, then it's the members themselves that continue to 
holler. And I'm going to ask for order on both sides of the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I am just saying, Mr. Speaker, that Peter 
Pocklington will be known to be very close to the councils of the 
Progressive Conservative Party because he was a candidate for the 
federal leadership of that party. 
 
Or just ask Saskatchewan working men and women, or farm 
families, about the $145 million loan guarantee to Manalta Coal 
Company Limited, without creating one single job — $145 
million guarantee; no single job. 
 
And now we have perhaps the most blatant example of all — the 
Premier's principal secretary and his hand-picked political 
appointee to SGI taking confidential government files to do a 
favour for an old political friend. 
 
One PC insider was directly criticized for improper behaviour by 
the judge who heard the evidence, and was fired for his 
misconduct. But the other person directly involved in taking these 
confidential files, the Premier's top political adviser, hasn't even 
been criticized by the Premier; he's being defended. 
 
And on what grounds? On the grounds that this was just the sort of 
routine help that any citizen might get by going to the Premier's 
office. As if ordinary citizens who were being investigated by SGI 
for arson could get the Premier's principal secretary to bully the 
president of SGI on their behalf. 
 
Or as if they could get the principal secretary of the Premier to call 
up the Department of Justice on their behalf. No way. And we all 
know it's no way the ordinary citizen would get that sort of 
service. It's a blatant double standard. 
 
This is just the latest example of how this PC government shows 
special treatment for the rich and the powerful and its political 
friends while imposing unfair tax increases on ordinary people. 
 
I'm sure that all members of the Assembly remember the PC 
promises in 1982, a 10 per cent across-the-board cut in income 
taxes. And in how many ads did that appear? And the complete 
elimination of the 5 per cent sales tax in the first term of office, 
and that's a quote. 
 
PC members opposite don't like to be reminded of these promises, 
but they made them, PC promises to the people of Saskatchewan, 
in newspaper ads, in pamphlets —  
  



 
May 20, 1986 

 

1382 
 
 

solemn PC commitments to the people of Saskatchewan. That's 
what they said. Well, I invite any PC member who wishes to enter 
this debate, and I would include former PC members under that 
invitation, to answer two simple questions: did they make those 
promises; and did they keep those promises? 
 
But they don't want to talk about those promises. They don't want 
to explain to their constituents and to the people of Saskatchewan 
that they were just political rhetoric, used in order to win an 
election but not intended to be kept. 
 
But the people of Saskatchewan have watched this government 
closely. They remember the PC promises of 1982. They remember 
the promise to cut income taxes by 10 per cent — a PC promise 
made; a PC promise broken. They remember the promise to 
completely eliminate the 5 per cent E & H tax — a PC promise 
made; a PC promise broken. They remember the bold promises 
about tax reform last year. Well we don't hear very much about PC 
tax reform these days; that's another PC promise made, and a PC 
promise broken. 
 
But let's look at their record. This PC government is now in its 
fifth year, the longest sitting government in Saskatchewan since 
World War II, and let's look at their record. Let's compare their 
promises with their performances. 
 
They promised to eliminate completely the 5 per cent sales tax in 
their first term of office. Instead they extended it to used vehicles, 
to used cars and trucks. And at the time, New Democrats and the 
people of Saskatchewan said this was an unfair tax, an unfair tax 
imposed upon those with the least ability to pay. But the Devine 
government didn't listen, and they were right ahead and they 
collected tax on 60,000 used vehicles. And finally, after their 
staggering loss in the Regina North East by-election, they 
cancelled the unfair tax at least temporarily — at least temporarily. 
Although they concede it's unfair, they refuse to refund the tax 
and, I think significantly, they've refused to repeal the law which 
provides for the tax. 
 
We note that the government has put forward before this 
Assembly a Bill to amend the sales tax legislation, but they haven't 
included in that Bill any repeal of the used vehicle tax. And why 
not? I invite any of the members opposite who may enter the 
debate to answer that question. 
 
And they've promised to cut the provincial income tax by 10 per 
cent across the board. Instead they've added a new and additional 
provincial income tax, the flat tax, the unfair flat tax which hits 
hardest at people in low and middle-income areas. Certainly those 
people are hit hardest by the flat tax. Not only did they break the 
promise to cut income taxes by 10 per cent; not only did they 
impose this new, unfair PC flat tax; now they have doubled the tax 
this year. In 1985, it was one-half of 1 per cent. In 1986, they've 
doubled it to a full 1 per cent. 
 
Now members know that the people of Saskatchewan know that 
the flat tax is unfair. The flat tax is not progressive. It's a flat tax, 
as its name implies. Second, it's  

levied on net income, so the sophisticated and wealthy investor 
can still take advantage of his loopholes, his film and video 
investments, his offshore drilling investments; but the ordinary 
wage earner, the working men and women of Saskatchewan, can't 
deduct allowances for dependent spouses and children, or 
extraordinary medical expenses, or charitable donations, or the 
fact that they may have an allowance because they're in a 
wheelchair. Oh, no! The flat tax comes first. Your deductions 
come after that. But not, of course, if you're having a frontier 
drilling credit. That, you're allowed to take off. 
 
And I'm sure that the PC members opposite have heard from many 
angry constituents over the last few weeks. I certainly have. And 
they have said that they don't like the flat tax. The nurse in 
Melville who had to pay $110 this year for 1985 and looks 
forward to her 1986 tax of $220; the welder from Saskatoon who 
had to pay $140 this April and looks forward without much 
anticipation to paying $280 next year — the people are angry 
about the unfair PC tax increases. People are disappointed in the 
Devine government. 
 
Let me turn for a moment to still another unfair PC tax increase, 
their effective increase. They have moved to increase property 
taxes, and they've done it by eliminating property tax relief. 
Members opposite may not want to discuss that and I can well 
understand why. But I invite them to listen to their constituents, to 
the farmers and the small-business operators and the home owners 
and the renters, who used to be able to get property tax relief, but 
now cannot. They'll hear what my New Democratic colleagues 
and I have been hearing from many people that the Devine 
government's elimination of the property tax rebates was another 
example of PC tax reform, another unfair PC tax increase. That's 
their record — promises made, promises broken; unfair tax 
increases on working families and farm families. 
 
Now on taxation, the New Democratic Party commitments are 
clear, straightforward, and unequivocal. A New Democratic 
government in Saskatchewan will refund the unfair PC sales tax 
on used vehicles. A New Democratic government will repeal the 
unfair PC flat tax. A New Democratic government will restore 
property tax relief for homes, farms, small businesses, renters. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are deeply disappointed in the PC 
government's record of broken promises, deeply disappointed in 
the PC government's unfair tax increases, deeply disappointed in 
the PC policy of a double standard — plums for their friends, extra 
burdens for ordinary people. They want a provincial government 
committed to fair taxation policies for ordinary people. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is the commitment which the New Democratic Party 
gives to the people of Saskatchewan, and that is the commitment 
we will be offering to the people of Saskatchewan in the next 
election. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by my colleague, the 
member for Pelly: 
 

That this Assembly regrets that the provincial  
  



 
May 20, 1986 

1383 
 
 

government's taxation policies are unfair to Saskatchewan farm 
families, working men and women, and small-business 
operators; and that this Assembly urges the provincial 
government to take immediate positive action to make the tax 
system more fair for ordinary Saskatchewan people by 
refunding the sales tax on used vehicles, repealing the unfair flat 
tax, and restoring property tax relief for homes, farms, small 
business, renters, and seniors; and further that this Assembly 
especially regrets that the provincial government is pursing tax 
policies that are unfair for Saskatchewan families at the same 
time that it is showing preferential treatment to the powerful 
and the political friends of the Progressive Conservative 
government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, in so moving I call upon PC members opposite either 
to support this resolution or to call an election and give the people 
of Saskatchewan an opportunity to vote on their record. 
 
I so move. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to support the motion 
put forward by the Leader of the Opposition, an issue that shows 
just how unfair this government has been when it comes to dealing 
with the people of Saskatchewan in regard to taxation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in '82 when they became the government they 
promised the people of Saskatchewan just about anything you can 
think of. They went out there and they made promise after 
promise, and they said that somehow they were going to make this 
an excellent province to live in. They said, there's so much more 
we can be. Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure that if you mention that to 
a lot of people in this province today, I don't think that they would 
be agreeing with the government that there is so much more that 
they could have been at that time. I think today the people will be 
saying, there certainly is so much more that we can be, because it 
certainly has been proven over the last four years that this 
government has not kept any of those promises. They have 
virtually betrayed the people of Saskatchewan when they said that 
they were going to do so much for them, and in fact they did the 
opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have to look at just what did happen over those 
four years. We have to look at the promises they made in taxes 
and the tax cuts that they were going to do, and we have to look at 
what actually happened over the four years. 
 
As my colleague has mentioned, instead of tax decreases we see 
tax increases, and we've seen that virtually in every area of this 
province. We can look at agriculture, Mr. Speaker, and that's one 
area where they continually talk about helping. And they say that 
they are doing so much for agriculture. Well when you look at 
how they've hit the people — the farmers of rural Saskatchewan 
— with taxes, one would have to agree that this government 
certainly was taking away with one hand and then offering with 
the other and giving nothing, in essence, to the farmers of rural 
Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, they are the government that put in the used vehicle 
tax instead of cutting back E & H tax or removing it totally as they 
said they would prior to '82. This government instead imposed an 
additional tax on there, 5 per cent on used vehicles, Mr. Speaker. 
That is what they did. And the farmers were hit pretty hard with 
that because every used vehicle they bought, be it a truck, a 
half-ton, or a large truck, they had to pay this tax. And a lot of 
farmers don't go out and buy new trucks; they made do with a 
used one, especially the way the economy has been in this 
province for the past four years. Those are the ones that got hit, the 
ones that could least afford it. 
 
People on low incomes, Mr. Speaker, they couldn't go out and buy 
a new car; they had to buy a used one. Who got hit with that tax? 
Those people got hit with it, too. And not because they could 
afford to go and buy a new one; no, it's because they couldn't, and 
they didn't have the money. They were already being hit hard and 
they had to pay an additional tax. That's what this government has 
done for the people of Saskatchewan. That's what they have done 
over the four years that they have been in power. 
 
And during all that time that they were in, they didn't only increase 
the taxes on the people, they built up a huge deficit in this 
province, a huge deficit that's going to be with us for generations. 
It's hard to eliminate a deficit, Mr. Speaker. It's easy to create one, 
and anybody will tell you that. Ottawa found that out, and this 
government has done the same thing. And now they are increasing 
taxes on the public because they have to somehow deal with the 
deficit that they have created. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, one could only ask why this has happened, 
why this has happened over four years. Four short years, that is 
what has happened to this province, Mr. speaker. That is what has 
happened by a government that refused to listen to people and to 
deal with the issues at hand in a way that would be responsible. 
And I suppose that's probably the key to it. This has been an 
irresponsible, incompetent government. They did not deal with the 
problems and deal with the resources of this province in a way that 
they wouldn't have to tax people. But they gave away our 
resources and taxed people instead. 
 
One only has to look at some of the things that have been 
happening, and one can use the oil companies as an example. I just 
see an article here from the Leader-Post. It says, "Exxon 
Corporation reported a $385 million increase in net income for the 
first three months of 1986." Mr. Speaker, when everybody else is 
going bankrupt, is finding it difficult to even feed their family in 
this province, the large oil companies are recording some of the 
largest deficits ever. That is what is happening, Mr. Speaker . . . or 
the largest profits, pardon me. 
 
The oil companies are recording the largest profits ever, and the 
government of this province is recording the largest deficits ever. 
That is what has happened. They have given it away to the oil 
companies and said, we're going to put it on the backs of the 
people. This is where the taxes are going to be — the farmer, the 
labourer, the small-business man, he is the one that is going to 
have to 
  



 
May 20, 1986 

 

1384 
 
 

pay it. They have used the people's credit card; they've virtually 
put their hands into his pocket, into his wallet and said, we're 
going to take this money, give it to the oil companies, and you are 
gong to have to pay for it. You will eventually have to pay for it. 
 
And the members opposite holler from their seats and say, who's 
going to believe that? Well, Mr. Speaker, I think Ottawa finally 
realized that when you build up a deficit, somebody is going to 
have to pay for it. And it eventually winds up as the taxpayer 
having to pay for it. And they are saying the same thing here: who 
is going to believe you? Well, Mr. Speaker, I think when you talk 
about deficits and taxation, the people are going to believe that 
sooner or later, through their taxes, they are going to be asked to 
pay for it. that's what this government is going to do. 
 
They ask for another term. They will be shortly, whenever they 
decide to call that election, and when they do, and if they should 
ever win government, Mr. Speaker, you can be certain that they 
are going to go to the people and say, now we have to get you to 
pay this bill because it can't continue that way. There's too much 
money that has to be paid back. We don't have it. We've 
squandered it, and we've got to raise the taxes on you now. 
 
Look at what's been happening recently, Mr. Speaker. One only 
has to look at some of the corruption that's going on, and I think a 
good example is what we've been talking about this past week. 
When you look at some of the patronage that's been going on in 
this province, by this government, the patronage that has been 
happening. We can deal with people like Ron Ryan, and he's been 
talked about quite a bit recently. Quite a bit, Mr. Speaker, and 
why? This is the same person that was in SGI, removed a file from 
there, took it to the principal secretary of the Premier; they 
reviewed it, and then he was fired. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that same individual after he was fired, what 
happens to him then? Did he have to go and try to apply for 
another job like anybody else would have to? No, he didn't have to 
go and apply for another job. The government gave him a nice job 
— a nice plushy job — and that is a contract whenever he wants it, 
for any kind of reason that they might decide, to make sure that he 
gets everything and all the money he wants. That is what happens 
behind the scenes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a contract . . . there's the same Ron Ryan that goes out 
and gets a contract then to do a survey for the Minister of Health 
about the laundry services in our hospitals. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 
think if you talk to any hospital, or if you talk to the Department of 
Health, I think they've got all the surveys that they need; they 
know what's required. All they need is action and money from this 
government. They don't need another study for $75 or $100,000. 
That's no more than a pay-off, in my opinion; that's all it is when 
you do that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Say it outside? 
 
Mr. Lusney: — And the members say, say it outside. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, all that they are concerned about is trying to cover up and 
cover up and cover up. Well some of those things should be said 
outside. And if this was a responsible government . . . 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It is my duty to inform the 
member that his time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think, Mr. Speaker, 
it's indeed regrettable for the Assembly, indeed regrettable for this 
Assembly and, Mr. Speaker, for the people of this province, that 
we have to be subjected to such derogatory comments coming 
from the NDP members in opposition. It's absolutely deplorable; 
it's disgusting, Mr. Speaker, and I don't know, quite frankly, how 
the public of this province can stand much more. 
 
You know they have been calling for an election, Mr. Speaker. 
And you know I'm beginning to think it's not a bad idea because 
there's nine of them in NDP, in opposition, and I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, if the people were going to be doing the right thing, 
they'd get rid of the nine that are left. 
 
And it's interesting too, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition 
moved this motion; he moved it. He got up in his place; he didn't 
talk to this Assembly; no, not at all. He's recalling the cameras 
though, yes sir. He's just shining himself right into that camera and 
looking real good. Well I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, I'm not talking 
to the people. I'm not going to look at the camera and brush my 
hair and make sure I look real good and make an election speech. 
That's what the Leader of the Opposition did. That's exactly what 
he did, Mr. Speaker, and he does it all the time. All he's trying to 
do in here is to score some political points; that's all he's trying to 
do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What does he . . . he gets up and he says: massive tax increases. 
And they do this all the time, Mr. Speaker. That's the part I believe 
is regrettable. Here is a government under the compassionate 
leadership of Grant Devine, the member for Estevan, Mr. Speaker 
— compassionate leadership — a man who cares about the people 
of this province; a man who does not believe that Saskatchewan 
people are ordinary, but rather, Mr. Speaker, that they're 
exceptional — they're exceptional people. That's what the leader 
of this party believes. That's what the Premier of this party 
believes. And that's what every member of this party believes, Mr. 
Speaker. That's not, obviously, what the Leader of the Opposition 
and his little happy band that follow him around — not all of the 
time, but some of the time — they don't believe that at all. They 
believe that there's a group of people there that are ordinary, and 
that there's a group there that are disabled and handicapped, and 
they want to keep them that way. I've always said, Mr. Speaker, 
any political party who claims it gets its support from the poor and 
the underprivileged has a reason to keep them that way. 
 
We don't believe that on this side of the House. We don't believe 
it. We believe in providing opportunities. And we've done that, 
Mr. Speaker, not by massive tax increases, as the Leader of the 
Opposition says on behalf of the NDP; we've done that by, in fact, 
tax decreases. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you right now that before I 
conclude my remarks today, I'm going to move this motion. And 
I'm going to move it, seconded by the hon.  
  



 
May 20, 1986 

1385 
 
 

member for the Battlefords, and it will read as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

That all the words after the word "Assembly" in the first line be 
deleted and the following substituted: 
 
congratulates the provincial government for its outstanding 
efforts (1) to improve the fairness of the Saskatchewan system 
of taxation; (2) to make the citizens of Saskatchewan one of the 
lowest taxed in Canada; and (3) to ensure that virtually all 
essential commodities are now free of provincial sales tax. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, that's the motion that I will be moving at the 
end of my remarks. 
 
(1500) 
 
Now I think, Mr. Speaker, that it's completely unfair, and that's the 
sort of things that I say, Mr. Speaker, is very regrettable in this 
House when the members of the NDP in opposition get up and 
deliberately mislead this Assembly — which isn't so regrettable in 
itself because we know better; we understand. But to mislead the 
people of this province as the Leader of the Opposition did, by just 
trying to stare into the camera and talk directly to the public and 
not be concerned about this institution whatsoever — no respect 
for parliament . . . And it's so unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that a man 
like that, who has lost complete control of his party and lets them 
mislead the people of this province on means and measures of 
taxation reform and policies that are being implemented by this 
government, it's just a sad day in the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what does he try to do? He tries to drive that 
proverbial wedge between the rich and the poor. Well there are 
people, unfortunately for the Leader of the Opposition — I say 
unfortunately — that make a profit. Well now I would like to just 
wonder if there would be any member in the NDP that could get 
up and explain to this Assembly, and of course subsequently to the 
people of this province, however would this province run on a 
taxation policy where none of the people in the province made a 
profit. Whatever do you think you tax in this province? All you 
can tax is profit. You can't tax losses. Now I've never understood 
their economic logic, because there is none. There's no logic to 
their economic policies whatsoever. None whatsoever. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to make another point very clear. It's a 
short debate. I don't have a lot of time, and I want to make a few 
very concise points. These comments coming from the Leader of 
the Opposition about this government imposing massive tax 
increases is nothing short of absolute hypocrisy. This is the same 
man who, when he was Premier, increased the personal income 
tax rate from 37 per cent to 51 per cent. That was the hon. 
individual, member for Regina Elphinstone, when he was the 
Premier. He's the one that introduced massive tax increases, not 
this Tory government, not at all. An NDP administration was 
responsible for hitting the people of this province with massive tax 
increases. And they were the ones, Mr. Speaker, that had that 
terrible tax on  

gasoline that took this government just 18 minutes into 
administrative to remove — just 18 minutes and it was gone — 
and it's not going to come back on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But oh, yes, the NDP are trying to back-pedal now. But we know 
that if they ever — and they won't, I'm sure, given the good 
judgement of the electorate of this province — if they ever did get 
into government, they want to put that gas tax back on. Well I tell 
you, Mr. speaker, make it very clear to the people then; we took it 
off and we're going to keep it off. And we know that they are 
going to put it back on. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, another thing that bothers me quite a bit is 
when they get up and they talk about this $10 million gift to Peter 
Pocklington — $10 million gift to Peter Pocklington. And they 
rant and rave in the House about that. Then they run on up to 
North Battleford and they say, oh, this is not a bad idea, building a 
bacon plant up there. Oh, they don't oppose it up in North 
Battleford — no, not at all. But down here's it's a $10 million gift 
to Peter Pocklington. I say that's unfair. That's unfair to speak that 
way. It's a double-talk any way you want to cut it. It's unfair to 
misled the people of this province that way. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I've heard quite enough about that $10 million 
gift to Peter Pocklington, and I want to leave that particular aspect 
of the discussions today, likely to the member for The Battlefords 
who I'm sure will clear that issue up, and very quickly, here in the 
House today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other thing that bothers me immensely, when 
they get up and talk about taxation, somehow or another they got 
back to their old bailiwick of castigating every individual in the 
province who ever had anything to do with the government. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, even you yourself, you pay your power bill and your 
telephone bill; you're having something to do with the government 
— and so does everyone else. And who will they castigate next? 
Everyone that had anything to do with the government in any way, 
shape, or form in helping us to build a strong economic base here 
gets chastised, castigated, muck-raked up and down one side of 
themselves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again, that's unfair. I don't care how you look at it. Those are 
nice individuals out there that mean well, trying to build on the 
economy and the strengths of this province, and they've got to 
drag them through the dredge. I think it's unfair. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the other thing that I want to make very clear 
— the Leader of the Opposition says this is a government who 
made a lot of promises and never kept any. I challenge, Mr. 
Speaker, I challenge the Leader of the Opposition to listen to a 
cassette recording of my nomination speech given prior to 1982. 
And everything in there I said we could do as a government has 
been done, and more, Mr. Speaker. And I challenge him, I 
challenge the Leader of the Opposition to review that tape. I'll 
provide the tape for him. I'll provide a ghetto blaster or whatever 
he'd like — a ghetto blaster would be a good idea — and he can 
listen to it. And if he can find one promise I made in there that 
hasn't been kept to date, then, Mr. Speaker, I would be more than 
happy to be  
  



 
May 20, 1986 

 

1386 
 
 

resigning my seat — more than happy. But if he wants to accept 
the challenge, of course I would expect him to do the same thing. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that's how much I believe in what I'm saying 
here today, and how wrong the Leader of the Opposition is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition was a man of integrity 
— he was a man of integrity. He was a man I respected and 
admired. He's not that kind of man today. He's fallen right into the 
same trap, with all the rest of his NDP colleagues in here, of 
misleading the public, and I think that's very fair, Mr. Speaker. 
Subsequently, I would like to take this time then to move the 
motion that I have read into the record. 
 
The debate continues concurrent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It's a 
pleasure to be able to participate in the debate today, particularly 
as it relates to an area that I'm very interested in, and that's 
taxation. The member for Moosomin mentioned that I would 
likely touch on the Gainers bacon processing plant in The 
Battlefords. I'll touch on it only to this extent. The people of The 
Battlefords and the people of the entire north-west corner of the 
province know where the two different political parties stand on 
Gainers. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition has been dancing all over this 
province trying to get out of the way from a little fire that he's 
drawn upon himself. When he was in The Battlefords not long ago 
he developed a new step that up there they're calling the 
"Blakeney back-off." And what he's done now to perfect that step, 
he's backed off on Gainers in North Battleford, and he's backed off 
on the Weyerhaeuser project in Prince Albert, and when he's down 
in the Estevan area, he's backing away from things there. 
 
Unfortunately, or maybe fortunately, depending on the side of the 
fence that you're coming from, he's not as light on his feet as he 
might have once have been, and he's not backing away very fast or 
very far. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we're here today to talk about taxes and tax increase. 
I want to just run through a little bit of the history of taxes and tax 
increases as I think that that is very pertinent to the debate today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we've heard a little bit of talk today about honouring 
campaign commitments. Well, Mr. Speaker, in 1971 in this 
province there was an election, and in 1971 the NDP promised to 
reduce personal income tax. At that time the personal income tax 
rate in the province stood at 34 per cent. They did not make one 
move to reduce that income tax. In fact by 1975, when there was 
another election in the province, the personal tax rate was 40 per 
cent. So in spite of their 1971 campaign promises, they did not 
honour it. 
 
In 1975 they came to an election and they again promised that 
they would be taking or lowering the personal income tax rate. 
Did they? No. And in 1978 they promised it again. Well the facts 
of the matter are that from 1971 until we took over office, the 
NDP had raised  

the personal income tax from 34 per cent to a high of 58.5 per cent 
and never once looked at reducing the personal income tax to the 
people of the province. 
 
In addition, they slid in their gas tax. They taxed our utilities. They 
taxed virtually everything we use, and in addition, Mr. Speaker, 
taxed our clothing, taxed building products, taxed everything. No 
programs for relief; nothing. They also couched a little bit of tax in 
the purchase of their uranium mines and potash mines which now 
is coming back to the taxpayer of the province to be paid for. 
 
What we've seen happen here today is a bit of what happens often 
in political arenas, and it's a tactic called the big lie. If you tell a lie 
often enough, and you tell a big enough lie, you hope that sooner 
or later people will believe it. And in listening to the Leader of the 
Opposition today the only thing that came to mind was a news clip 
I saw following his chat with the people from the Board of Trade 
in Saskatoon. when one individual stood up after Mr. Blakeney's 
comments — or the Leader of the Opposition's comments — and 
said, you know, I don't believe you. Well, Mr. Speaker, that's what 
people around the province have been saying. And they're saying 
it based on what they promised to do in '71 and '75 and '78 and 
never did do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they've been trying to make a great deal of hay over 
income taxes, and unfortunately this year I was late filing my 
income tax. I was a little busy with other matters, and I got all my 
information to the accountant, and it was there when I got home 
this weekend. And I was sitting in my office on Sunday thinking: 
now, I wonder, you know, I paid a certain amount of provincial 
income tax; and I thought, gosh, you know, I wonder how that 
compares to other years. So what I did was I pulled my income tax 
forms for other years. And all that I had handy were 1983, 1984 
and 1985, but I'd like to read into the record the amounts of 
personal income tax payable on provincial income. 
 
In 1983 I paid new Saskatchewan tax payable of $2,550. In 1984 I 
paid net Saskatchewan tax payable, $2,344; $206 less. And in 
1985 I paid $2,329 provincial tax, less again than the previous 
year. 
 
Now lest anyone think that I'm a high roller or a rich guy like the 
members opposite, most of whom are multimillionaire farmers, let 
it be known — and my colleagues here would certainly know — 
that I am the quintessential average taxpayer in this province. The 
average guy. The little guy who has to get up and go to work every 
morning to work for my bread on the table and pay my taxes. The 
guy in the middle. 
 
And every year under this administration my tax payable has come 
down. Has my income dropped? No. My income has gone up 
every year, Mr. Speaker. yet — yet my tax payable has gone 
down. And Mr. Speaker, that . . And I encourage other members 
of the House and anyone else around this province to do the little 
exercise that I did. Pull out your tax forms and flip to provincial 
tax payable this year, last year, the year before, however far you 
want to go. Because in my particular case, even though my 
income has gone up every year, I've paid less 
  



 
May 20, 1986 

1387 
 
 

tax, because we have a government in this province that did not 
raise — in fact, lowered — the provincial income tax rate. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they like to talk about flat tax. And they ran 
advertisements all over this province saying that we had 
introduced the flat tax, and it would cost the people 100 and 
however many dollars, $400 per person per year. Well, I'm an 
above average income earner. I'm an above average income 
earner. Do you know what the flat tax cost me? A hundred and 
fifty-seven dollars, about one-third of what I saved by not having 
to pay tax on gas; almost equal to what I saved by not having to 
pay tax on my power bill. 
 
(1515) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the facts — and I know the opposition don't 
like to deal with them — but the facts indicate that our tax rate in 
the province has gone down, that the taxes paid by individuals in 
the province have gone down dramatically. And that flat tax 
guarantees that poor people, people on the lower sector of the 
income scale, pay, in fact, no tax at many levels, and less tax up to 
about $25,000 per year. And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that that's tax 
equity. And finally, there's a mechanism to trigger into people who 
make the 50 and 60 and $70,000 a year that they like to talk about. 
 
Now when were there tax increases? Well in 1978, I believe the 
year was, the members opposite introduced a bunch of tax 
measures which cracked up the tax rates in this province by $200 
million. And they're hoping that everyone has forgotten. Well I 
don't believe they've forgotten, and I'd like to talk about some of 
the reductions, some of the additional reductions that our 
government has done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition goes into Battleford 
and talks to the council there and he says, we'd put the tax back on 
gas. And he says, fundamentally we believe in a sales tax and we'd 
either re-establish it, or we'd raise it, or both. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 
believe that a sales tax is not a particularly fair way to tax people 
because it hits the lowest-income people the most often. And what 
we have done is to remove the tax. We've got it off on clothes 
under $300, and that has a very significant impact for people — 
$23 million this year the people of Saskatchewan will save 
because of that tax reduction. And what do the NDP say? Well 
we'd put it back on, and we'd maybe raise it. 
 
Well they're running around spreading one story, depending on 
what town they're in on a given day, and another story here. And, 
Mr. Speaker, no one believes them because they have learned that 
they're untrustworthy; they have no credibility when it comes to 
talking bout tax relief and tax reduction; and frankly, they are 
cynical. We watch them in the House there on a daily basis, 
standing up dripping with sanctimony. And then what happens? 
They run up to Battleford and they say, we'd put the tax back on. 
We wouldn't create 200 jobs in your community. We'd shut down 
the . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. It's my duty to remind the 
member that his time is up. 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I'm very 
pleased to be able to take part in the rule 16 debate today. I just 
find it interesting the member from Battleford who just took his 
seat . . and I can see why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the polls up in 
Battleford show that this individual is running scared and that 
there has been a tremendous shift away from this member, and I 
can see why. 
 
The member from Moosomin, who spoke before me — I want to 
make a number of comments on what you said. But I first want to 
indicate that when the member from Battleford was talking about 
the leader of the NDP party and said that he was not as light on his 
feet any more, but I just want to say this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
when the Conservative government gets the courage to call an 
election, you'll just see just how light our leader is on his feet. And 
I'll tell you, you guys can run but you can't hide. 
 
I want to make a few remarks about the member for Moosomin 
who stood up in the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and he stood up 
and he moved an amendment to the main motion put forward by 
our leader, the member from Elphinstone . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . And if the member from Moosomin would just 
allow me to comment. I allowed him to proceed with his speech 
and I never interjected but, if the member from Moosomin would 
allow me, I would like to comment on some of the remarks that he 
made. 
 
He was referring to his leader, the Premier, and his compassion, 
the compassion that the Conservative government had in 
Saskatchewan as the leader of their party. And I just wonder, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, when he talks about compassion, if has discussed 
this at all with the 64,000 individuals in this province who are 
unemployed. I tell you, I just ask you where your compassion is 
there, Mr. Member from Moosomin, or the approximately 50,000 
citizens in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who are on the 
welfare rolls. They're on welfare because they can't get a job, not 
because of choice. They can't get a job; their unemployment 
stamps have run out because they couldn't get any work and, as a 
result, we have close to the 50,000. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and through you to the 
member from Moosomin: where is the compassion for these 
folks? And I don't see any compassion out there. The type of 
compassion that I see out there, Conservative compassion, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is food banks and the like. For the first time in 
our history . . And they're talking, the member from Moosomin 
was talking bout compassion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I tell you, 
when you talk about compassion and you see food banks for the 
first time in the history of this province, and you see that the 
advertisements that are going out on a daily basis asking for more 
food to feed the citizens of this province who are taking advantage 
of the food banks, and I say, where is the compassion? I ask you 
where that compassion is. 
 
Or if you see the lotteries that we have around the province and 
the advertisements from major hospitals up in Saskatoon, trying to 
raise funds for expansions in the hospitals, and we see this 
government shutting down  
  



 
May 20, 1986 

 

1388 
 
 

hospital beds, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You see them shutting down 
hospital beds. And he talks about compassion. And he 
congratulates the Premier of this province and his policies for the 
compassion that he has, and the fairness. And he talked about the 
fairness in taxes and this is what he was . . . And he accused us of 
deliberately misleading this House. And I say to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that on no occasion have we deliberately, or any 
otherwise, misled this House. We're telling the facts. 
 
And I say to the member for Moosomin — and I still have some 
of your remarks here that I want to touch on before I go on to the 
main motion. But when you talked about a fairness of taxes . . and 
then you also said, well how could we run a province if we didn't 
tax profits? How could we run a province if we didn't tax profits, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? That's what the member of Moosomin said. 
And he agrees with that. Well one just has to take a look at the 
state of the province that it's in right now. 
 
And I just want to go back a little ways and tell the member that 
there was profits to tax when we were the government. When we 
left this government in 1982, we left you, this government, with 
the $140 million in the bank. They had $140 million to operate 
with. And we had programs that were going ahead. And there was 
profits in this province, and the profits were going into the coffers 
and were creating jobs and were building better highways and 
were building hospitals and were building schools. 
 
But what did they do in four years? They're into the fifth year now, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. What did they do? They took our $140 
million that we had in profit that we left them, and they have now 
turned that into a $2 billion debt — a $2 billion debt, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Now I just wonder, if you're taxing the business community in this 
province on profits, how come if you're doing that, and things are 
so good as you say they are, why do we have an operating debt in 
this province of $2 billion? And I asked the member for 
Moosomin. he got up here and he said, well we run this province 
on profit; we tax profit. 
 
And I also want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I get to the 
main motion and the comments of the member for Moosomin, that 
when we left this government in 1982, we had an accumulated 
debt of $3.3 billion. We had an accumulated debt of $3.3 billion. 
And your policy now has got this province into debt to the tune of 
$9 billion accumulated debt — $9 billion — over and above the 
$2 billion on the operating debt. 
 
Now the member for Moosomin, to get up and say that they are 
compassionate and that they tax profits — well I don't know, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. It would seem to me that when we're facing the 
massive debt that you guys have created in the short four years 
that you have been in power — and the massive unemployment 
rate that we have in this province, and the massive amount of our 
citizens who are on social assistance, well I just wonder where 
your compassion, and I wonder where your open for business 
policy and your good business management is. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just don't think there is a good government 
policy. I think you had an opportunity when you had the member 
that was in charge of Tourism and Small Business. He had a 
business head on his shoulder and still has it — but what did you 
do with him? You kicked him out of cabinet. You ran him out. 
And here is a man who is capable; he knows business, and he 
knew that this government was going down the wrong trail — 
tried to correct it, but it didn't work. So what do you do? You 
dump him out. 
 
And I want to say that when you talk about compassion and you 
talk about fairness, I just don't for the life of me — and I'll tell you 
the citizens of this province don't — see where the compassion is, 
and they don't see where the fairness is. And I say to the member 
from Weyburn who is talking from his seat, you better believe it; 
the citizens of this province will make that decision, and they will 
make it loud and clear when you get up the nerve and you get your 
Premier to get up his nerve to call this election. They most 
certainly will make that decision, and it'll be loud and clear, and I 
can tell you that. 
 
But when we talk about leaving a province . . . We talk about taxes 
and unfair taxes, and when the NDP government can leave the 
province with the debt load that it had. And the debt load that we 
have in this province today is going to be a tax burden on my 
children and your children, and for generations to come, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that debt burden is going to be on our children 
and our grandchildren . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. It is my duty to remind the 
member that his time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, thank you for noticing 
that I wanted to speak on this important motion moved by the 
Leader of the Opposition, the member from Elphinstone. And I 
say important because indeed it is. And I will be supporting the 
motion, and I will indeed not be supporting the amendment moved 
by the member from Moosomin. 
 
And I noted with some care, the member from Moosomin in his 
remarks said, and I quote, "I'm not talking to the people." That's 
what the member for Moosomin said. Well I want to say, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that he may not want to talk to the people of 
Saskatchewan; I do. I do, and so do my colleagues in the New 
Democratic Party caucus. We want, and always have wanted, to 
talk to the people of Saskatchewan because it is our view that they 
have a right to know what their elected officials think and have to 
say. And so we don't hesitate to speak to the citizens of this 
province, and we don't hesitate to listen to them and hear from 
them what their concerns are. And as a result of that listening, Mr. 
Speaker, we have introduced this motion into this legislature today 
because it is this whole area of unfair taxation which is of 
uppermost concern in the minds of Saskatchewan people. 
 
And that's not unusual to some degree because it is right after the 
time of filling up of income taxes and the final assessments 
coming in. But that's not the only reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
There are reasons which have accumulated in this province since 
1982 when this government was elected. 
  



 
May 20, 1986 

1389 
 
 

(1530) 
 
Those concerns have grown and grown and grown and have 
reached the point now where this government is so fearful of what 
the people are viewing their policies like, that they are even afraid 
to call an election. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the issue, as outlined by our leader, the 
member from Elphinstone, is that of unfair taxes. Well I want to 
say, Mr. Speaker, that this government's, this Devine government's 
policy of unfair tax increases on Saskatchewan people has become 
so large, particularly when it's coupled with the unfair tax 
increases of the federal Conservative government, that there are a 
lot of people out there who are hurting very badly because they 
have lost some income to the government which they needed to be 
able to provide the needs that their families must have. 
 
And what have they got in return? Well the member, my 
colleague, the member from Athabasca stated very well; they have 
got the largest deficit ever seen in this province, all made in less 
than five years, in five budgets, Mr. Speaker, and they know that 
that's a debt that they're going to have to pay, and their children are 
going to have to pay, and their children afterwards are going to 
have to pay. 
 
So the issue of unfair taxation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a central 
issue in Saskatchewan today. And you even cannot deny, and 
neither will anyone else, that this Conservative government in the 
1982 election did indeed promise to cut the provincial income tax 
by 10 per cent. The member from Moosomin stood and he said he 
never promised it. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what more evidence is necessary than 
the ads that they ran in their election campaign, in their election 
program? In 1982 . . . and I only will use two examples. One is 
one run by a Mr. Boutin, it says in here, in the constituency of 
Kinistino — he's not running any more; he's recognized the errors 
of the ways of this government, so he's thrown in the towel — and 
it says, without any doubt, in this ad, "Elimination of the 5 per cent 
sales tax . . . " April 22, 1982, in The Wakaw Recorder. 
 
Every Conservative candidate ran that kind of an advertisement, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in their campaign. 
 
Here's another one, and I think that member is here. It says in this 
ad, "John Gerich, constituency of Redberry." What did Mr. Gerich 
say, along with all the Conservative candidates to the people of 
Saskatchewan who put their faith in this government when they 
elected them? He said: 

 
Phasing out the provincial sales tax (total elimination, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker), and a 10 per cent reduction in personal 
income taxes. 

 
Promises made, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and promises broken by this 
Conservative caucus and by this Conservative Party. That's why 
the people of this province have lost faith in them, and that's why 
this  

resolution is here today. And that's why I think it's important. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this debate here today highlights a very 
important point as well as a question of taxation. Two months ago 
the New Democratic caucus put on the order paper notice that 
were going to introduce three private members' Bills dealing with 
taxation. There was going to be a private members' Bill that was 
going to repeal the unfair PC flat tax. There was another Bill, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in which we said that an NDP government would 
refund the unfair Progressive Conservative sales tax on used 
vehicles. And you know, this government introduced some 
amendments to the legislation dealing with the sales tax, and they 
did not even include in that amendment a repeal of the sales tax on 
used vehicles. And I submit to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there 
is some concern that everyone in Saskatchewan should have about 
that, because by not repealing that law this government can by 
simply a passing of an order in council, without ever coming to 
this legislature, reinstitute that sales tax on used vehicles without 
having it debated and having it scrutinized by the public. 
 
And I suggest to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's why they have 
not introduced that amendment in the sales tax Act because it is 
every intention of this government, when they should decide it's 
opportune for them politically, to reintroduce the used tax on sales 
cars. And if that was not the intention, why would they not have 
brought in an amendment to repeal that provision in the sales tax 
Act. 
 
The third Bill that we have had, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the order 
paper in this legislature for two months, is the Bill in which we say 
that the government should, and a New Democratic Party 
government would, reinstitute the property improvement grant 
program — property tax relief. Those are three very crucial and 
important taxation Bills that are on the order paper for two 
months. 
 
And do you know what's happened? For two months on private 
members' day this government has put up speaker after speaker 
after speaker on their resolution, not allowing any of these private 
members' Bills of the opposition to be brought forward. They have 
used their vast majority elected in 1982 to attempt to muzzle an 
opposition of nine, and so every private members' day since the 
beginning of this session, this government has refused to allow 
resolutions, and it's refused to allow these three taxation Bills to be 
considered in this House. 
 
And not only that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in order to be able to 
move things along what the House normally does, it sits some 
evenings on a Tuesday evening. This government has refused to 
have this House sit on a Tuesday evening, adjourning in each case 
at 5 o'clock after they have used up the time of this legislature on 
private members' day. Now I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
that is an example of a government that cares not for the interests 
of the population and the taxpayers, who I suggest are extremely 
concerned about the unfair taxes which this government has 
imposed on them, while it has provided relief for those who are 
extremely wealthy and those in the large corporate sector. 
 
  



 
May 20, 1986 

 

1390 
 
 

There has been some debate here on revenues that government 
gets from taxpayers. I have here two documents, one which is the 
budget speech of 1982, which I had the honour of presenting in 
this House, and one which is the budget speech of this fiscal year 
presented by the member for Qu'Appelle-Lumsden. 
 
Well, would you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you draw some 
comparisons what has happened? In 1982 the revenue from oil 
was going to be $603 million. You know what it's proposed to be 
in 1987, Mr. Deputy Speaker? it's proposed to be $510,540,000. 
That's the budget of this government. They talk about getting more 
money for profits. Well in 1982 there was more oil revenue 
coming to the coffers of this province than is proposed by the 
Minister of Finance for 1987. And how did they make up the 
difference. You want to know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how they've 
made up the difference? Well I will show the House. 
 
And I'll not go back to 1982; I could because that would make the 
figures even more, of greater concern . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: Order. It's my duty to remind the member 
that his time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Meagher: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like 
as well today to join in the debate and make a few comments on 
this motion, that I think that — it's more than any other thing that's 
been discussed in the House in the past several weeks — it really 
exposes the fundamental difference here between the Conservative 
approach to people and to economics and the socialist approach. 
 
Some of the members opposite have spent a great deal of time 
discussing comments made by other members, and in particular 
the member for Athabasca when he responded to some of the 
things the member from Moosomin had said. It made me wonder 
if really we aren't dealing with a group of people who somehow 
graduated from the London school of convoluted economics. They 
talk about tax incorporations, and taxing profits. They really don't 
seem to understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that only people pay 
taxes. Corporations and profits — you tax corporations, you're 
taxing the shareholders; when you're taxing the province, you're 
taxing the shareholders as well. 
 
Only people pay taxes. This government inherited decades of an 
administration that advocated taxes, lots of taxes — lots of 
government and lots of taxes; that's the philosophy both federally 
and provincially. Canadians are now burdened with a legacy of 
debt and taxation. And then we have the hypocrisy of the party 
that was instrumental in creating that economic climate here in this 
province to put forward a motion like this today advocating a 
reduction in taxes and fair taxes. Well I must say that I think that 
the people of Saskatchewan do agree that we need fair taxes. They 
agreed in 1982, and that's why they changed the government, and I 
believe they'll agree again this year and return a Conservative 
government for the same reason. They want fair taxes, but  

more, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they want less taxes. That is not 
accomplished by the kind of economics we've heard here today in 
the House from the members' opposite. 
 
We believe, and I believe, that the way this province can salvage it 
economic future is to broaden the tax base and encourage 
investment. That's not done by raising allegations and a smear 
campaign against potential investors for an example, such as 
Weyerhaeuser, Peter Pocklington and his group, Gainers. I was 
present in the House and witnessed the performance of the 
members opposite when they were guests of our legislature. That's 
not the way that you encourage investment, and that's not the way 
that you create jobs. 
 
The member for Athabasca speaks of welfare and food banks and 
things that concern him a great deal and his constituency, and they 
should, and they concern me and have for a number of years. 
Where we really differ is how do we deal with them. We talk 
about them, look negative, tax away a bunch of more money from 
the productive segment of the economy to deal with it, or do we 
encourage investment and jobs and growth. And essentially that, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the difference. 
 
They make reference as well to PC promises. And I'm reminded of 
a story my dad told years ago about the old CCF government 
trying to get re-elected in the '50s. They promised to get rid of the 
3 per cent sales tax. By gosh! they did. As soon as they were 
elected they raised it to 5 per cent. So technically they got rid of 
the 3 per cent sales tax, but it's the kind of political deceit that the 
people of Canada are fed up with. 
 
Never have the public had a low regard, in fact, for politicians than 
they do today in Canada — all across this country — and it's for 
the very reason that's so clearly enunciated by the members today 
and in this motion. 
 
The public want honesty in government. And they don't want 
more government; they want less. They believe that their futures 
are best secured by a tax system that is not only simply and clear 
to understand, but if fair and not so burdensome on those that 
work. 
 
How the members opposite and their party intends to accomplish 
that, if they pursue the policies that they practised when 
government, escapes me. While government, in good times in this 
province, when the revenues were pouring in from high-priced 
natural resources that were being marketed all over the world, 
what was the legacy? Where was the money? What did they save 
up? How much was in the Heritage fund? 
 
Debt is what our legacy was under the NDP, and lots of it. Sleight 
of hand at bookkeeping that the member for Regina Elphinstone 
accused the Weyerhaeuser group of being able to do; I think he 
speaks from a great deal of authority on that subject, having been 
premier here for a number of years and burying a great deal of 
government waste and expenditure in the Crown corporations, as 
they did. 
 
Well the public can't be fooled quite so easily any more. They 
can't believe that, on the one hand, the NDP are going to bring 
forward promises that, on the face of it, are  
  



 
May 20, 1986 

1391 
 
 

over a billion dollars, reduce taxes, and reduce the deficit. Now it's 
the kind of miracle working that the public aren't prepared to 
accept. They want some honesty, and they want government to be 
honest with them. 
 
And that raises the second question. And the second part of this 
motion that so concerns me is the allegations that are so readily 
made by members of the party opposite against business men, and 
against other members of the legislature, and against people who 
they see as being in conflict with government. And in a way it's 
the beauty of the system that they've so cleverly crafted over the 
past couple of decades that government is so huge now, like an 
octopus, in so many affairs of the public that you can't hardly be in 
business without being in conflict with respect to dealing with the 
government, because the government is everywhere. 
 
So they win both ways. And ultimately, if their philosophy 
prevails, we will have nothing in our legislatures and parliaments 
but elected bureaucrats of a socialist bent who don't believe in 
business or business men. And their slate of candidates for this 
upcoming election clearly reflects that. They aren't interested in 
business people, and they're not interested in business. They're 
interested in taxing them and smearing them, raising allegations. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that if the public want fair taxes and less 
taxes, they have to accept some economic realities, and they are 
accepting it out there, that the business community generates the 
real wealth in this country. 
 
Business community must be encouraged to come into this 
province and develop the resources we have. And the biggest 
recourse, of course, is the people, who are now staying in this 
province for that very reason, as opposed to moving to Alberta or 
British Columbia and other places as they did in the decades of the 
NDP. 
 
(1545) 
 
We have to set a climate here that not only encourages investment 
in this province but makes them feel welcome in this province. 
Business is not going to come here when they hear comments such 
as have been levelled in the past several weeks against the 
Weyerhaeuser group. That doesn't encourage them to invest in a 
hostile climate. They don't need to do that. There's other places in 
the world where business is welcome, and business will go where 
they are welcome. 
 
We believe in this party, and I believe that the questions raised of 
fair taxes and essentially the question of patronage are both 
addressed in the same manner. You can have less risk of patronage 
and less risk of conflict when you have less government. There 
really is no other approach to that problem. There's very little 
conflict, of course, in the Soviet Union and other places where 
everybody works for the government. But in a free society where 
people are operating in the business world and dealing with 
government, the less and the clearer are the guide-lines, and the 
less government we have in the business sector, of course the less 
opportunity for conflict. 

But the party opposite, when in government, invested in all sorts 
of business, weren't concerned about lowering taxes at all. They 
took a billion dollars and threw it into businesses that were already 
existing and already employing people — potash mines, uranium 
mines and others. Those dollars, those hundreds of millions of 
dollars would have been very helpful in tougher times to do the 
things that government — legitimate things that government 
should be doing, such as building highways and hospitals and 
senior citizens' homes and things of that nature. But no, that 
money is invested now in the business community, so that 
government could be that much more persuasive and that much 
more powerful in this province. 
 
Well that's not what the people of Saskatchewan want; it's not 
what they're going to vote for. They're going to understand that the 
true economic miracle can be only created by the people 
themselves through their own enterprise and by business, and not 
by government, and that this party, the PC Party, is the opportunity 
that they are looking for and that they will go for this year. 
 
And for that reason I do not support the motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I know there's not much time 
left in the debate, but I do want to put on the record the opposition 
to the amendment that has been moved here in support of the 
motion as written on the blues. What we have here is a motion that 
would have dealt clearly with massive tax increases that have 
taken place in this province since the election of the Devine 
government in 1982. What we have seen here in the province, Mr. 
Speaker, since the election, is a number of broken promises, the 
most important one, the promise to remove the sales tax in the 
province of Saskatchewan, that 5 per cent sales tax that the now 
government members promised to eliminate in their first term of 
office. 
 
And the people of the province know full well that you can't 
believe these people when they promise at election time. They 
know full well that a promise to remove the sales tax was broken, 
and not only broken, but it was extended. It was extended to used 
automobiles in the last budget, Mr. Speaker. And as a result of that 
tax being extended to used automobiles, some of them grain trucks 
or . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It is my duty to inform the 
member that the time has elapsed. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 1 : — Assistance to Farmers through Oil 
Royalty Refunds 

 
Mr. Swenson: — It's my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to move, 
seconded by my colleague, the member from Shellbrook-Torch 
River: 
 

That this Assembly commends the Minister of Agriculture and 
the Government of Saskatchewan for the initiative taken to 
lower input costs on the family farm through the farmers' oil 
royalty refund  

  



 
May 20, 1986 

 

1392 
 
 

program. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, on referring to this particular motion, it gives 
me a great deal of excitement and commitment by this 
government because it really marries two of the great industries in 
Saskatchewan: that of agriculture and that of energy. As everyone 
is aware, the farm oil royalty refund is a 21-cent-a-gallon refund to 
farmers in this province, and it's made possible because of the 
expansion which has taken place in the energy sector in the last 
few years under our government. 
 
Sixty-five thousand farmers in this province will receive 
approximately $650 each, a year, through this royalty refund. And 
of course, this wouldn't have been possible if the energy sector had 
not moved forward like it has in the last three years. As everyone 
knows, until our government came to power in 1982, the energy 
sector in this province amounted to virtually nothing. The number 
of gas wells drilled in this province prior to 1982 were 
insignificant. The number of oil wells drilled in this province prior 
to 1982 were basically insignificant, and this sector was not here 
to provide assistance, to provide jobs and provide benefits to the 
people of Saskatchewan. It's obvious by the amount of money that 
has been generated, Mr. Speaker, over the last three years by this 
particular sector, that those benefits can now start flowing back to 
the people of Saskatchewan, especially to the agricultural sector. 
 
And I think when we talk about input in the farm community, 
many of them have to do, either directly or indirectly, with energy. 
And we talk about fuel, and we talk about fertilizer, farm 
chemicals, of course, and these are all significant farm inputs. And 
because of the things that we have been doing with the energy 
sector in this province, many of these things can now start 
accruing back to reduce inputs on the farm level. I think the 
natural gas distribution program, though it isn't the same as oil, is 
directly related. Because of the increased drilling that has occurred 
in this province, we now suddenly have enough natural gas 
available to start supplying rural Saskatchewan with significantly 
lower energy costs. To think that nearly 20,000 rural and urban 
hook-ups have occurred since 1982, that's got to have a large 
impact out there in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, we talk about things like irrigation and the potential 
that's there in our province. We talk about livestock and the 
expansions that are happening in the livestock sector, processing, 
and the value-added sector; all of those things are enhanced by 
having those cheaper costs available, those lower input costs, 
because of the natural gas program. And of course, as I've said 
before, this is directly related to the energy sector and the 
increased drilling that has occurred in this province in the oil 
fields. I think that it shows a continuation of our government's 
commitment to decreasing taxes and passing on the benefits of our 
resources to our people. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, in 1982 this government did away 
with all taxes on gasoline in this province, and I know that some 
say that that had no direct benefit to the agricultural sector. But I 
can tell you, Mr. Speaker, from my own experience anyway, the 
fact that my wife and my mother do a tremendous amount of the 
business of our  

farm — and that means driving to Moose Jaw for parts or driving 
in to settle up the bill with the fertilizer dealer — that was all done 
on fuel which had provincial tax on it. And the fact that it was 
removed meant a significant portion of money, input costs, were 
saved by my particular farming operation and every farming 
operation in this province. So, Mr. Speaker, even though the 
motion only deals with the oil royalty refund, as you can see, it has 
a fairly wide-ranging aspect to it because it is a marriage of these 
two great industries — agriculture and energy. 
 
And I think of the things which have accrued from it, things like 
an upgrader for Regina, which once again will be using 
Saskatchewan oil, Saskatchewan heavy oil, processing it here into 
usable diesel fuel, usable gasoline, which are then available to the 
producers in this province at lower input costs. And every time 
you can lower any one of the input costs in farming, it means that 
your profit margin goes up, and that is what we are faced with 
today, is keeping our profit margin put and keeping our farmers 
profitable. And I think of this upgrader as a result of the expanded 
interests in the energy sector, and then I think of the fertilizer plant 
that's going along with it. 
 
And it's always made me wonder, Mr. Speaker, why a province 
that has 40 per cent of the arable land in Canada doesn't have one 
fertilizer plant in it. And you think that all our fertilizer is trucked 
in or brought in by rail from the province of Alberta, or brought in 
from Pocatella, Idaho, or brought in from somewhere else in the 
States, and I think the current costs for trucking, evidently, right 
now are about $2.50 a loaded mile, the fact that we might have a 
fertilizer plant here, using the energy from Saskatchewan's oil 
fields, using the energy from Saskatchewan's gas fields — and you 
could draw a circle around the city of Regina 150 miles wide, and 
anything inside of that circle is saving costs because that trucking 
cost will not be there. And you think that the average farmer 
probably uses 10, 20 tonnes of fertilizer per year, maybe more, and 
he's got $2.50 a loaded mile per tonne there, and you start adding 
those figures up, because they would have a fertilizer facility here 
in Saskatchewan, where the farm land is, and you realize a 
significant cost decrease to the agricultural sector in this province. 
 
It makes me wonder why this didn't occur before. Why didn't this 
realization that we could take two of our great resources in this 
province, agriculture and energy, and meld the two of them 
together so that they benefit one another? And I guess I can only 
say, Mr. Speaker, I'm certainly glad that a Conservative 
government finally came along in 1982 to start making some of 
these things happen, because we have to reduce the input costs for 
our agricultural sector. Many of these things that I've named off 
here have been reducing them, piece by piece. 
 
I also would like to commend the Premier in this motion, Mr. 
Speaker, for the co-operation which has occurred between the 
provincial and federal governments recently. We asked for, as a 
large agricultural province, that the federal government remove 
the federal taxes on farm fuel. And that has happened, Mr. 
Speaker. There's $165 million over the next two years going to 
accrue to Saskatchewan farmers. And I think that's another 
significant cost in the reduction of inputs that goes right  
  



 
May 20, 1986 

1393 
 
 

along with what we've been doing provincially. It's going right 
along with what we've been trying to do as far as fostering 
development and growth in this province. And even though 
agriculture has been facing some tough times, and the energy 
sector is momentarily down a little bit, I'm sure you'll see that over 
the next number of years, by combining these two powerful forces 
together, that Saskatchewan has got nowhere to go but grow and 
grow and grow and prosper. 
 
I'd like to go back for a minute to the processing side of things. For 
years, we've been accused in this province of being drawers of 
water and hewers of wood. And I don't know if that's a reflection 
on some of the past governments that we've had in this province or 
not. And I know that some of the members opposite speak with 
great derision on Mr. Pocklington for trying to add a processing 
plant in this province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What's that got to do with this resolution? 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well it has a great deal to do with this 
resolution, Mr. Speaker, because the hogs that are going to be 
grown in this province to be in Mr. Pocklington's plant are going 
to be raised in hog barns which are going to be heated with 
Saskatchewan natural gas; they're going to be heated with 
Saskatchewan fuel. And our government, through its oil royalty 
refund, with its natural gas distribution program, all of these things 
has been making the production of those hogs cheaper, and 
therefore adding to the profit margin of the farmer growing them, 
meaning that we can then grow more hogs and we can have 
processing plants; we can get into the value-added sector; we can 
get into the markets which have never been available to us before. 
 
(1600) 
 
And if those markets are there, and the statistics provide to us that 
they are, that we've got a $300-billion grocery market in the 
United States of America which the Canadian farmer has been not 
tapping into because he's only had raw product, and if the market 
is there for Canadian bacon, then I say we go for it. 
 
And it goes for the same for the processing of rape-seed, for the 
cubing of alfalfa. All of these things are directly related to energy. 
All of these things are directly related to the programs which 
we've been trying to foster in Saskatchewan, both through 
agriculture and energy, of reducing costs. 
 
And I think of the jobs. When I think of the expansion and the 
growth that's possible by fostering this value-added sector and this 
processing, then, Mr. Speaker, anyone who speaks against such 
development obviously doesn't want Saskatchewan to grow and 
prosper. 
 
And I gather from the quiet in there that my argument has been 
making some sense because we've maybe finally got through to 
some of the members opposite that yes, we are on the right track 
with this type of program, and it is making some sense. 
 
And obviously the great benefactor in this province is  

going to be our agricultural producer. Because of all of these 
programs and all of the inputs which are now costing him less 
money, he's going to become a more profitable farmer. And that 
has been the number one goal of this government, is to enhance 
agriculture and make our producers, if not already number one in 
the world, to keep them being number one in the world. 
 
There are many other items here, Mr. Speaker, which I could 
touch on, that are directly related to the energy sector and related 
to farmers. I'd like to finish off with one. I think it's high time that 
Saskatchewan took the lead in getting a major chemical plant in 
this province. 
 
I know that negotiations have gone on, and I think that with the 
combination of cheap natural gas and cheaper fuel costs, that if we 
could get some chemical manufacturing in this province that 
would use our resources and perhaps get in on the generic side, 
that we could finally have the whole gamut — the fuel, the 
fertilizer, the chemical — and we would have the whole gamut in 
our hands to control, if you will, Mr. Speaker, some of the input 
costs that govern the destinies of our farmers. 
 
And I would like to just say that this government has obviously 
been on the right track in this particular area. Our farm royalty 
refund is only one piece of a much greater plan and a much greater 
thrust. 
 
And I would like to finish off, Mr. Speaker, by saying that I 
wholeheartedly support the marriage of these two great industries 
— agriculture and energy — and the benefits which can accrue 
back and forth between them and to the people of this province in 
the jobs and the growth and the dynamism which the province of 
Saskatchewan will result from these particular things. 
 
I guess, Mr. Speaker, I forgot to move my motion. I so move, 
seconded by the member from Shellbrook-Torch River: 
 

That this Assembly commends the Minister of Agriculture and 
the Government of Saskatchewan for the initiatives taken to 
lower input costs on the family farm through the farmers' oil 
royalty refund program. 

 
Mr. Muller: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Not coming from an 
energy-producing part of the province of Saskatchewan, I don't 
know a great deal about energy production in Saskatchewan other 
than it does certainly reflect greatly on agriculture and the cost of 
producing food and agricultural products in this province. 
 
Agriculture depends on energy in so many different ways. It has a 
reflection on all the input costs that go into agriculture, such as 
fertilizer and chemical and all related industries — trucking and 
the trucking of fertilizers and chemicals all across Saskatchewan. 
Of course, to broaden the debate a bit, it also has a lot to do with 
the interest rates and everything charged to farmers, and that's a 
definite input cost in the agriculture sector. 
 
This last winter and fall we had a cabinet committee on farm input 
costs that travelled across Saskatchewan. Two  
  



 
May 20, 1986 

 

1394 
 
 

or three of the main input costs that came up at every meeting — 
and I only attended the one in my own area — but the most 
prevalent things to arise at these meetings was the cost of energy 
and the taxes charged by governments on energy. Of course, 
everyone there knew that this provincial Government of 
Saskatchewan had no tax on energy as, i.e., the former 
governments had in this province. 
 
The NDP government had costs on gas tax. There was gas tax, and 
that related back to the farm, because I hauled fertilizer that was 
trucked by commercial truckers, and I hauled chemicals that were 
trucked by commercial truckers, and grain was hauled by 
commercial truckers, and that all related back to agriculture, and I 
paid the gas tax on that. It wasn't only my wife and mother going 
to town for parts or to do the books, travelling the 20 miles, 40 
miles round trip. Everything in the gas tax relates to agriculture, 
and certainly we removed the gas tax in 1982 and we've certainly 
reduced farmers' input costs through that. 
 
The former government once gave a fuel rebate, 3 cents a gallon in 
1977, I think it was. They removed it in 1978 right after the 
election. I think I got in on it once. I got $350, which was the 
maximum. And the farmers' oil royalty refund now that's in place 
is . . We are going to lower the farm input costs by taking 4.6 cents 
a litre or 21 cents a gallon off; and certainly lobbying the federal 
government to remove the federal tax on farm fuels is going to 
remove another 5-point-some cents a litre off of farm fuels. And 
with the reductions in farm fuels as, i.e., the world price of oil has 
dropped, certainly the farm input costs are going to be a lot lower 
this spring in the fuel area. 
 
It certainly has also stabilized and lowered in some cases the cost 
of fertilizers. And coming from the northern part of the province 
where we depend very heavily on fertilizers for our inputs in 
agriculture . . . I come from an area that does a lot of continuous 
cropping, and certainly we rely very heavily on nitrogen fertilizers 
and phosphorus and potash. We even started to use potash this 
year. 
 
This committee found that the costs of fertilizer are really closely 
related to the energy costs. This has been a major step forward in 
the cost of agriculture — the lowering of the price of fertilizer 
especially in the northern part of the province . . . northern farming 
area, I should say; it's the central part of the province. 
 
But everything like this that drops the price to agriculture a little 
bit on each sector, certainly makes a major difference when you 
come to the end of the year. 
 
There's many other things that came up at the cabinet committee 
hearings. The one other major issue that came up on farm input 
costs was the interest rates and the cost of interest for agriculture. 
The one thing that they were quite happy about was the lowering 
of the interest rate to 6 per cent on the production loan program, 
and it was far better than the 24 per cent they were paying in 1981, 
down to 6 per cent in 1985-86. 
 
In 1981 the NDP said that was a federal issue; that the  

provincial government could not attack or do anything with 
interest rates; interest rates were a federal issue. They refused to 
look at them through the agricultural sector or any other sector. 
They just let them run rampant. They never tried to slow them 
down in any way and certainly got a lot of the agricultural people 
into problems in 1980 and '81. It took them four or five years to 
work themselves out of those notes that they had signed, those 
loans that they had made in '80 and '81, in '79, '80-81. Those 
interest rates carried on a floating rate, and thank goodness that we 
took the initiative and chased the interest rates down. And I think 
that probably Saskatchewan can stand proudly in saying that we 
have chased the interest rates down somewhat, because other 
provinces and the federal government have certainly followed. 
 
As we've done with the oil royalty refund, we've forced the federal 
government — and I want to compliment them — we forced them 
into removing the tax off farm fuels by us taking the first step, 
making a step in the right direction, and they seen the light and 
followed us. And I'll say that I have to compliment the Prime 
Minister and his colleagues in Ottawa for following the lead of our 
Premier here in Saskatchewan, because he is a leader, and one 
that's really going to certainly show up in the next few months. 
 
This fertilizer plant that is certainly going to be built in Regina . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What is? 
 
Mr. Muller: — The fertilizer plant that's going to be built in 
Regina is certainly going to be a plus for Saskatchewan. We're 
going to be able to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, we'll have 
the oil upgrader. The problem is with the opposition; they never 
had any long-term planning. They never planned into the future 
for an upgrader or a fertilizer plant or anything that would reflect 
on the agricultural sector in the input costs. They wanted to buy all 
their oil from Alberta and their natural gas . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — And they wanted to buy all the land. 
 
Mr. Muller: — Well their land, that was in Saskatchewan; they 
couldn't move it to Alberta. But they wanted to buy all the farm 
input costs from Alberta. They never built a fertilizer plant or an 
upgrader or anything in Saskatchewan. They refused to look over 
the long term. They thought, well maybe some day we'll own all 
the land, and we may not have to fertilize it; we'll just buy the 
grain. 
 
But in any respect, the long-term planning of this government 
looking forward to an upgrader, an upgrader is going to do a 
tremendous amount of good to Saskatchewan. We'll be able to use 
our own heavy oil and produce the proper products we need in our 
agricultural sector. 
 
But the important thing of that too is the fertilizer plant that will be 
built there. The first one in Saskatchewan is going to be built in 
conjunction, in conjunction with co-op Refinery; Co-op  
and provincial government and federal government building the 
upgrader; Co-op  
  



 
May 20, 1986 

1395 
 
 

Refinery working in conjunction with the provincial Government 
of Saskatchewan to build an upgrader and a fertilizer plant that is 
certainly going to have a major impact on the costs of farming in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1615) 
 
The amount of money we pay into Alberta and into their 
provincial coffers by buying our energy from them . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Building their heritage fund. 
 
Mr. Muller: — And we built their heritage fund, that's right. And 
it's our farmers that are doing it, and they're skimming our profits. 
And the former government, the NDP Government of 
Saskatchewan, never recognized this, and weren't able to look into 
the future and see what we really need in Saskatchewan. 
 
The member from Pelly earlier this afternoon was on his feet, and 
he was talking about the extra cost to farmers that we have 
incurred since we became government. We have reduced the cost 
to farmers — interest free on livestock, 6 per cent production 
loans, and the 8 per cent interest for the farm purchase program. I 
could go through this book and take quite some time — the hog 
incentive program, the agricultural credit corporation. We've 
reduced the interest rates to farmers. Zero per cent on money 
borrowed on livestock — zero per cent. In 1981 interest rates were 
24 per cent. How can they sit there and say that we have increased 
the costs to farmers. We've decreased the cost to farmers. 
 
Agriculture has finally been recognized by this government, and 
agriculture being recognized certainly has an impact on the rest of 
the economy in Saskatchewan. And certainly the whole world has 
been in a downturn, and I'm sure that that will turn around. I've 
been in the agricultural business all my life, and it's been cyclical. 
It's up and down, and it certainly has been over the last 30 years 
that I have been involved with it. But it will turn around. And the 
next time it turns around with a Tory government, it will certainly 
be better. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I will be voting in favour of 
the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, want to speak in 
favour of the motion as suggested by the member from Thunder 
Creek. And I want to begin by saying that there are certain things 
that have value in the process of society in Saskatchewan. And 
those things, we generally call them traditions. Those are the 
things that we call . . . things that have gone through our history. 
 
Saskatchewan today has to build on this traditional kind of society, 
and in order to do that we have to take a look at just exactly how 
do we do it. I've lived in this province all my life, and as I've 
looked and worked in the agricultural sector, there are a lot of 
things that have indicated to me that the opposition and the 
government that they represented were not, in all fairness to them, 
they were not doing the things that would promote agriculture and 
do it in a proper way. 
 
So when the member from Thunder Creek suggested that  

he would like to have someone speak on this, it was a pleasure for 
me to do that, because we have taken an integrated, as he 
suggested — integrated the oil sector into the farming sector. We 
have taken and put the two together. If you take a look at the 
history of it, this is something that we have to work on and we 
have to expand it. 
 
The point has to be that we working a complementary kind of way 
with the other sectors of our society; agriculture with the energy; 
energy with the pulp business; energy with the potash; agriculture 
with the potash. All of us have to work together to make this 
province grow. 
 
In order to do that, we have to in some instances begin to say, this 
sector of our society needs a specific advantage. And that's why 
the Minister of Agriculture at the time, the member from 
Weyburn, introduced the oil royalty refund program in order to 
give an opportunity for agriculture to benefit directly from the 
royalty that was received by the provincial government. 
 
What does this do, Mr. Speaker? It does a number of things. First 
of all, it protects the agriculture sector in its area of development. 
Agriculture is not always able to determine its profit and loss 
margin within itself, because we are affected basically by a lot of 
outside influences. And in order to do that, our government has set 
up a basic safety net in a lot of areas. We've dealt with a number of 
them today, and I'm planning on discussing some of them in view 
of relating it to the royalty holiday, or the royalty rebate program. 
 
We need another thing to happen in this agriculture community, 
and that is that we need to have an opportunity for growth. And 
the only way that we have an opportunity for growth is to provide 
some stability, number one; economic viability, number two; and 
that we have to work at to get the agriculture sector moving. 
 
In order for this to happen, you also have to have people in the 
agriculture community. You have to have people who are willing 
to take on that kind of a vocation, and if you don't have any profits 
in it, Mr. Speaker, you're not going to get any of the people 
wanting to be a part of that. 
 
How does this all transpire into what a government should do and 
how it should lead its society in that specific sector? I think that 
our government has shown an awful lot of leadership in this area. 
We have shown leadership as it relates to trade; we have shown 
leadership as it relates to energy; we have shown leadership as it 
relates to agriculture; we have shown leadership in a lot of 
different ways. And the oil royalty refund is just one example of 
the way we have shown leadership in this province. We've shown 
leadership in providing these kinds of Bills for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the things that the oil royalty holiday will do, it will 
provide for Saskatchewan producers a reduction in the costs of 
fuel. And when we were travelling around in the cabinet 
committee on farm input costs, this was one of those main items 
that was addressed in just about every place that we went. There 
were emphases in other areas, in certain places, but each one dealt 
with the fuel costs. 
  



 
May 20, 1986 

 

1396 
 
 

And as we went around listening to the people, we began to assess 
it from their perspective, not understand this thing for a fact, that 
we understood it before because we're one of them. They told us 
again exactly what they thought we should be doing. And in this 
oil royalty refund they said, yes, that's the great thing to do. 
 
When we told them, for example, Mr. Speaker, that we weren't 
using any gas at all, or crude oil in Saskatchewan, that was drilled 
in Saskatchewan, they found that a little surprising. Well, why 
don't you use your crude oil? It's because the refinery here in 
Regina was never able to use the crude oil in Saskatchewan 
because of the NDP. 
 
And what happened was, we were buying our crude oil from 
Alberta, and in that process we could never reduce the costs. They 
found that probably just as difficult when they were in government 
— they couldn't pay a royalty they weren't getting on the fuel that 
was consumed in Saskatchewan because it wasn't Saskatchewan 
fuel. And we put a billion dollars into the Alberta Heritage Fund in 
that process, and that's why the upgrader here in Regina is 
extremely important. And the energy sector, in relation to 
agriculture in Saskatchewan, is extremely important. That's why I 
think it's very important that we discuss this in the legislature here 
today. 
 
The importance of the energy sector is often minimized by the 
opposition. And we heard that just earlier in rule 16 debate how 
the budget in 1982 was $700 million, and in 1986 it was $500 
million. Well, Mr. Speaker, there's a lot you have to learn about 
the NDP arithmetic. The NDP arithmetic only uses the gross 
figures; they never use the net figures when they're talking about 
it. They only use the gross figures over there. And that's the kind 
of thing that they have always done. 
 
And the fact is that we had to pay back to many of the energy 
producers in this province, an agreement that was made by them. 
And that cost the taxpayers of this province $300 million. That's 
what it cost them. Now they don't even understand it. That's just 
the type of mental arithmetic that they do. 
 
Since 1982 the oil and the gas industry has undergone a lot of 
dramatic changes. And in order to provide the position that this 
government can have in 1986 of providing a farm fuel rebate for 
producers in Saskatchewan, it had to undergo a major renovation. 
The whole energy sector was down and going away on us. Down 
in the south-east, what did they have? They had everything shut 
down. The south-west was almost shut down. Up at Lloydminster 
it was almost shut down. 
 
In gas alone they drilled nine wells in 1982; nine wells in 
'81.That's the kind of energy policy they had. And they're bragging 
about their 700 or $600 million. I wouldn't, because they never 
took off the cost that it was to get that, because they had to put it 
in. And that's the part that they never consider. They never 
consider the net. 
 
When we took in '82 and assessed it, there were three things that 
we had to come up with — three objectives. The first was to get 
the oil and gas business going; the second was increase provincial 
revenues; and the third  

was to get jobs for the people of Saskatchewan. And those three 
things were identified; they were addressed in the energy policy 
that we put in in '82. 
 
And what happened? The energy sector took off. And it started to 
do things in Saskatchewan that they put moratoriums on. It started 
to be the catalyst for having money to put into nursing homes and 
all that kind of stuff on the social side of the society of 
Saskatchewan. That's the kind of things that the energy sector did, 
and also it tied in in giving an opportunity for agriculture to get a 
benefit, and that's extremely important. 
 
In 1985, for example, Mr. Speaker, there were over 3,800 wells 
drilled in this province. Thirty-eight hundred. And in revenue as it 
relates to the land sales, almost $150 million in 1985. And what 
does that do? It gives an opportunity for the energy sector to 
provide, through its royalty structure, a payment to the agriculture 
community. It's what you call a direct benefit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our net revenue from the province has increased by about $270 
million over 1981-82 to '85-86, and that's one of the things that the 
NDP never ever talk about. They talk about their gross sales and 
their volume but, Mr. Speaker, when the production in 
Saskatchewan was going down, down, down, how did they ever 
expect to get the revenue out of those barrels of oil? They never 
did. And 1985 was the first year where we broke the record for a 
production in energy in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I was just reading in the Leader-Post today an 
article as it relates to the energy sector. Doom and gloom over 
there often portrays that oil is going out, and I just read today, "Oil 
price above $17." And they were scoffing and spoofing about it 
for the last three, four months, that this was not going to happen. 
But anyway, they are the people that talk about the negatives. And 
the oil industry is going to pay, Mr. Speaker, for agriculture 
production in this province. And in time, Mr. Speaker, it's 
agriculture that provides an opportunity for that fuel to be used. 
 
(1630) 
 
Another thing that the NDP did is, when they were with their 
energy program, they were dealing mainly with the multinational 
corporations. And I can't understand how they could even do that 
sort of thing. They drove every little business man out of this 
province. And what they did is they said, okay, we will give a 
payment to get your work done; we'll give you a payment to get 
your wells restructured. And what they did is they set the people in 
this province . . . they taxed them and gave that to the oil 
companies. What did the little oil companies have to do? When 
they saw the squeeze coming, they couldn't afford to have their 
banker foreclose on them. so what they did is they sold their share 
of that refund to the big, major oil companies. And then Mobil, 
and all of those big, multinational corporations, who they always 
talk against, they had them. And really in fact, Mr. Speaker, the 
taxes that we paid in Saskatchewan went to the big, multinational 
corporations who they are always against. And I don't think that 
that's the kind of thing that we in this province want to have. 
  



 
May 20, 1986 

1397 
 
 

We have established many little companies in this province, and 
some of the members of the opposition are parts of those 
companies, and they have provided an opportunity for oil rebates 
to flow into the agriculture sector. And that is why, Mr. Speaker, 
we have to work together with them. 
 
The other area that the mover spoke about was the natural gas 
side, and I want to take a little time to discuss that with the 
Assembly here today, and just point out a couple of things that 
were in the program as it related up till 1982. Up till 1982, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP had made an agreement with the Alberta 
government and transcend pipeline that they would buy all the gas 
from Alberta. Why use up our gas in Saskatchewan to deal with 
the energy sector? The opportunity was never given to the people 
of Saskatchewan to develop the energy sector. They made an 
agreement with Alberta, and they made an agreement with the 
Liberal government in Ottawa that they would run it their way. 
And what happened was that the people of Saskatchewan were left 
out. They were left out by that kind of leadership, Mr. Speaker, 
and that's the kind of leadership that the people voted against in 
1982. And I think that the opportunity, when it is presented, will 
provide them that opportunity to do it again. And I think that that's 
the kind of thing that we in Saskatchewan really believe is the way 
it should be. 
 
Placing agriculture on the Canadian agenda was brought about by 
people in agriculture in this province working together to provide 
an opportunity for that to happen, and that was provided by 
leadership. The same kind of leadership that put in the oil royalty 
refund to the agriculture sector is the same leadership that 
provided an opportunity to have agriculture discussed in a broader 
sense in a national and international way. And I believe that it is 
an attitude that has caused this to happen. And I just want to read a 
paragraph out of a letter addressed by the Premier of the province 
to the first ministers' conference. And it says here: 
 

I'm impressed that there is a growing consensus on the nature 
and magnitude of the problems in the agriculture environment 
that farmers and governments jointly face. We agree that the 
situation is serious, but there is also an emerging willingness to 
examine and try new solutions. 

 
And we, Mr. Speaker, have done that — try new solutions to the 
problem. 
 
When did they ever think of a zero per cent interest rate? When 
did they ever think of a 6 per cent interest rate? When did they 
ever think of an 8 per cent interest rate? When did they think of 
$42 million going back into farmers' pockets through the oil 
royalty holiday? Never! 
 
And the member from Shellbrook-Torch River mentioned the 
rebate on fuel that they had. And, Mr. Speaker, a lot of the farmers 
thought it was a joke. A lot of the farmers didn't even apply, 
because they had a limit. They had a $300 limit on their thing. 
And they'd put it in for an election and took it out as soon as the 
election was over; and they put it in for an election and took it out 
as soon as the election was over. And that's the kind of planning 
that  

they had over there. That's the kind of agriculture that they thought 
that they could have. 
 
Going on, we have to try new solutions. Natural disasters require 
more effective policy responses. And what does that take, Mr. 
Speaker? It takes the kind of planning and leadership that we have 
demonstrated in this province under the work of our Premier. 
 
It deals, Mr. Speaker, going on with farm finance, trade, resource 
management, like we're talking about today — regulation and 
technology — all require that, the attention and modification 
necessary to sustain our family farms in an increasingly 
competitive world environment. Canadian farmers are leaders in 
world agriculture. National policy at home and abroad must 
aggressively support and develop that role. 
 
When agriculture in this province realized that it was important for 
us to deal with various aspects of the costs of production in 
agriculture, we started to attack it almost immediately, and the first 
attack we had was on interest rates. Then we went to the oil 
royalty refund. And that, Mr. Speaker, will provide 4.6 cents a litre 
or 21 cents a gallon: a far, far cry from what was going on when 
the previous administration was giving direction for agriculture in 
this province. I think that that's extremely important, that we 
recognize it. 
 
The Premier in the new year decided that there was reason to 
believe that we should go out and travel through the province and 
listen to what the farmers had to say. And that gave us an 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to talk to a lot of farmers in this 
province. We had briefs from about 2,000 people and through that 
there were some very, very important, striking things that came 
about because of that. I want to point out the fuel rebate, because it 
was almost the number one item, and every one of those is an 
extremely important feature. 
 
I think it's done a number of things. I would say, Mr. Speaker, that 
the focus on fuels in this province is one of the reasons why we 
went out to bring the attention to that. But also, Mr. Speaker, what 
I think has happened is that a lot of the pressure brought to bear on 
companies supplying fuel to this province have had to reduce their 
prices in order to save face in a lot of places. And I think that that's 
an extremely important function in dealing with this. 
 
It takes leadership to provide the road for these people to follow. 
And if leadership isn't there, then it'll go on its own way. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I read in the Leader-Post just recently that Federated 
Co-op had purchased a whole lot of their bulk fuel for delivery this 
summer, last fall at the high price, and they're expected to lose $10 
million on that purchase. 
 
One of the things that I think is extremely important in this 
discussion is to think about their role. They need to have an 
opportunity to earn a dollar. But we also must consider that the 
farmers in this province have to earn a dollar, too, in order that 
they can buy the fuel that that refinery is going to manufacture. 
And not only the co-op upgrader — the Imperial Oil, or Shell, or 
Pert-Canada, or whatever. 
  



 
May 20, 1986 

 

1398 
 
 

These opportunities that we had for fuel discussions with the 
farmers on fuel costs have always been an integral part of the other 
costs that accrue to farmers. Interest costs are going to be reduced 
by the very fact that fuel costs are reduced. 
 
Each one of these is a layer that is of positive benefit to the next 
one. If you reduce the costs of chemicals, you reduce the cost of 
interest. If you reduce the cost of fuels, you reduce the cost of 
interest. If you reduce the cost of any one of the things that 
farmers have to buy, it reduces the cost of interest. And I think that 
that's an extremely important feature. 
 
What is this new upgrader in the province going to provide for us? 
Is it going to provide for us an opportunity to deal with the 
fertilizer prices? I believe it will. The costs of manufacturing are 
going to be reduced because the costs here are going to be 
reduced. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, we bought a load of fertilizer from 
Calgary, and it came in on a semi-trailer and we went and spread 
it. And that, Mr. Speaker, was from Calgary. Federated Co-op, 
their refinery in Medicine Hat isn't working. And I recall when 
that refinery was built, Mr. Speaker. There was an opportunity for 
a government that believed in the co-op movement to put a 
refinery in Saskatchewan, and they never even offered it into 
Saskatchewan. Why did they go to Alberta? Why did they go to 
Alberta? 
 
I'll tell you why. Because it was cheaper there to manufacture the 
product. It was cheaper, because they could buy the gas cheaper. 
Here in Saskatchewan, because of the way we have operated our 
programs, Federated can now begin to buy that gas cheaper in 
Saskatchewan than they could from Alberta. And it's cheaper in 
Saskatchewan now than it is in Alberta. And they have continued 
to do that all the time. That's what their answer is: buy it from 
somebody else; close your own businesses down. And that's the 
way they've continued to operate. 
 
There were a number of positions provided to us in the discussion 
that we had with farmers as we travelled around, getting their 
views on input costs. Interest costs were one — interest costs on 
the farmers' fuels, their mortgages, their land costs, and the 
machinery costs. This interest in 1981, 1980, 1979, 1978 — it was 
just going up and up and up. And when we came into power in 
1982, what did we have to provide? We had to provide a safety net 
for that agriculture sector because it was being eroded. Because 
farmers today are in trouble because they're paying interest on the 
capitalization of their interest. And that's, I think, a very important 
feature of what the people of Saskatchewan have done. 
 
I want to outline some broader things as it relates to energy and a 
number of other things. Interest rate on farm credit. The rates were 
too high, they told us. Okay, what do you do to fix it? Farmers told 
us from all over the place: they're too high, they're unstable, and 
you need a ceiling on the rates. 
 
And what did we have in 1982 when we took over? We  

had rates going up; we had escalating prices in fuel, machinery, 
land, and all those things. What we did, and what we're doing with 
the oil royalty refund, is lowering that cost so that they can 
continue to farm. 
 
What else did the farmers say? Well maybe it would be a good 
idea to have an Agribond. That might be a good idea. One of the 
key things that I believe, Mr. Speaker, is that there are two things 
that relate to financing that are extremely important to agriculture. 
One is the term, the length of time for repayment; and the second 
thing is the rate of interest. 
 
And what we had happen in the '70s, in the late '70s, was an 
increased rate of interest, and the farmers just couldn't support 
themselves or their families or pay their bills. And in 1982 they 
were refinancing a lot of that stuff. And that's the kind of thing that 
these people continue to do. 
 
(1645) 
 
There are other aspects that obviously need to be addressed. And 
the fuel costs, as it relates to farming and the need for rebates, was 
evident by the fact that we would not take any more tax off of the 
fuel in Saskatchewan. We didn't have any tax on the fuel 
consumed by the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
And that's extremely important for the people of the province to 
realize; 95 per cent of the fuel that we use comes from Alberta. 
And it's extremely important for people to realize that, that the 
energy that is consumed in Saskatchewan is from Alberta, and we 
in Saskatchewan could not reduce the tax. So what we did is we 
said, okay, we will provide a benefit from the royalties that our 
energy provides, to the people of Saskatchewan. That lowers the 
prices of a lot of the different commodities that people have in the 
province. 
 
In fuel costs, the people told us that we needed to lower the price 
of fuels, but also that we needed to encourage the federal 
government to lower the price of fuels. And I'm really happy that 
our Premier, together with the Prime Minister of Canada, put 
together a policy that would not only reduce our energy by the 4.6 
cents a litre, but also another 5.5 cents a litre by the federal 
government. 
 
I think that that's extremely important. That's over 11 cents a litre, 
Mr. Speaker. And if you multiply that out, that's a fair chunk of 
money when it comes . . . That's about 50 cents a gallon. That's a 
fair rebate in today's energy costs. 
 
Because agriculture is extremely dependent on farm fuels, I 
believe that it is important that we take a look at it. I think we must 
understand that the average consumption in the province is about 
15 per cent of the total cost in agriculture in Saskatchewan — 15 
per cent. And that 15 per cent, if we can reduce that 1 per cent, 2 
per cent, 3 per cent, that has a major economic benefit to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
What does it do? It provides an opportunity for that farmer to put 
some fertilizer in where he maybe wasn't going to before. it 
provides an opportunity for maybe where he can put some 
chemicals on that he wasn't going to before.  
  



 
May 20, 1986 

1399 
 
 

And that is extremely important in today's society, and especially 
our agriculture community. 
 
There's another area, Mr. Speaker, that I want to deal with, and 
that relates to who else benefits besides agriculture from this kind 
of a function? 
 
And I opened up a natural gas distribution in Bateman, 
Saskatchewan. It's just a little bit outside of my constituency, but I 
went down there and I opened this natural gas distribution area. 
And what did the gentlemen there who were visiting with me — 
they said this to me: there are two churches in this community; 
there are two halls in this community; there's a skating rink; there's 
a school; and all of these different community functions are paid 
for by 60 families. And those 60 families had a reduction of 50 per 
cent of their cost that they had to donate to those organizations. 
And what it did is it reduced the cost and it gave them an 
opportunity, instead of having their rink facility, for example 
running two and a half months, they had it running three and a half 
months because they could afford to do it. 
 
And they were telling me that the school cost on an average of 
$1.700 a month to run the fuel through there. What did the gas 
distribution do in that community? It reduced that to 800. And 
that, Mr. Speaker, has direct impact on the kinds of things that we 
do and the things that we recognize. And I know, Mr. Speaker, 
that when the opportunity comes for people to select who they 
want to have govern this province again, they will look and say: 
who's going to supply the natural gas to this province? It's not 
going to be the NDP. They're against it; they're right against it, and 
they've always been against it because they don't believe in that 
kind of thing. And they have said they're against it. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the natural gas distribution in this 
province is equivalent to the time in the early '50s and the late '40s 
when electrical power came to this province. And I believe that 
people will recognize that it's the future that they're going to deal 
with, and it's very important that they take a look at that. 
 
The fertilizer business in this province has to be addressed for 
lowering prices, and we're doing that through the relationship of 
the gas industry to the upgrader, and I mentioned that before. 
 
There's other places that need to be addressed. For example, how 
much does it cost to move the products that we need for land, for 
machinery, for example? What does it take to bring those products 
into my community? And when I was getting some grain hauled 
by a liner out of one of my granaries, I said to the fellow that was 
hauling it, I said, how much saving did you have when you had 
the gas tax taken off in this province? He said, every time I fill up I 
save $100. And every time he fills up and he hauls my grain and 
he uses a tank of fuel, it's a $100 less than it costs him. And that 
benefit, Mr. Speaker, is passed on to us as rural people. 
 
And that's a thing these people across the way could never 
understand. They never understood it. I recall very vividly the 
former minister of Agriculture and the minister of Rural 
Development speaking in Swift Current. He said,  

my 1946 two-ton Mercury still does the job. I think, Mr. Speaker, 
that's exactly where their agriculture community was getting their 
ideas from — 1946 and earlier. 
 
And I think that that's the kind of thing that we have on this side of 
the House, from the leadership of our Premier, that gives us a 
dimension of dealing with the problems, addressing them in a very 
positive and a concrete way. 
 
One of the things that often is neglected are the small items, or 
what people perceive to be small items. And as we were going 
around on our input costs, one of the things that was mentioned to 
us by a gentleman who did a lot of income tax for people and their 
business accounting, he said one of the things that people don't put 
together properly is what their depreciation on their machinery 
really costs them. That's the kind of thing that we went around and 
saw. For example, Mr. Speaker, he said there was — roughly 25 
per cent of the cost of agriculture was on the farm machinery, as it 
relates to 15 per cent on oil and fuel consumption. 
 
Those are the kinds of things that need to be addressed, and we 
have been addressing them. We have addressed them as it relates 
to energy costs by putting on a 4.6 cents a litre reduction. That's 
going to give us an opportunity at the end of every quarter to apply 
for a rebate on the fuel that we have consumed. And I believe that 
that is also an important thing to mention. 
 
The people have said consistently that we need to have more and 
more of the government listening to people; the government needs 
to listen to people. We have done that time after time after time, 
and we will continue to do that. 
 
Another aspect of dealing with energy and its relationship to the 
agriculture community is, I think we have to address it from the 
point of view of utilities. In this province we have energy that is 
put through the power lines and it is generated by hydro dams; it's 
generated by coal burning furnaces; it’s generated by natural gas 
turbines. Each of these has a very important function. But I want 
to get to the part that deals with the energy part in utilities. And in 
every part that we can use fuel from Saskatchewan — we can use 
energy that is produced in Saskatchewan — it gives us an 
opportunity to have jobs; it gives us an opportunity to have more 
wells drilled; it gives us an opportunity to get people going in this 
province. And I think that that's an extremely important feature. 
 
The people in various other parts of the province may not 
recognize the importance that the opportunity to use natural gas in 
this province has. And I think it is extremely important for me and 
for the people in my constituency. From my constituency west to 
the border, there are a lot of gas wells drilled, and that is supplying 
energy for Sask Power Corporation. And I think that that's an 
extremely important item in reducing the costs to farmers. We 
need to have that. 
 
The opportunity that there is to have various kinds of energy 
production in this province, gives us an opportunity for diversity 
whether we have hydro, whether we have coal burning, or whether 
we have the natural gas. And I believe that the gas that we use on 
the west side  
  



 
May 20, 1986 

 

1400 
 
 

of the province is extremely important. 
 
What else have we done to respond to the input cost side? One of 
the things . . As we went around in the province, one of the things 
that was mentioned time after time after time was the lack of a 
research facility in this province. I was very pleased that the 
Premier of this province took it upon himself to develop that 
research facility in Saskatoon, and that's going to be the new 
college of agriculture. That, Mr. Speaker, is going to have an 
extremely important impact on us in this province. 
 
There are a lot of other issues that we could deal with in this 
discussion, but I want to conclude by saying this, Mr. Speaker. 
There are features of the things that have happened that give an 
opportunity for agriculture to plan. We have had a lot of different 
hit-and-miss kinds of policies demonstrated by the opposition. But 
when you put all of our policies together, what does it do? It 
provides protection; it provides an opportunity for agriculture to 
develop. If you have adequate leadership, I think, it's extremely 
important. And that's what we have demonstrated by our Premier. 
He has leadership in agriculture. We need to take a very serious 
look at that because that gives us an opportunity. 
 
Because of the opportunity . . . and I see the time is getting late, 
Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn debate. Thank you very much. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 
  



 
May 20, 1986 

1401 
 
 

 CORRIGENDUM ET ADDENDUM 
 
In the Hansard No. 43A FRIDAY, MAY 16, 1986, 10:00 a.m. on 
page 1360 under INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS, the full text of 
the introduction by Mr. Maxwell should have read. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: M. le Président, c'est mon plaisir de vous 
présenter pour ma collègue le ministre d'Energie, le membre pour 
Weyburn, des étudiants de la belle province, Québec. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: Merci. J'espère que vous allez enjouir de votre 
visite ici á la Saskatchewan, et que vous allez trouver la session á 
la législature très intéressante. Les professeurs qui sont avec les 
élèves sont Richard Wanner, de Weyburn, et Messieurs Arsène 
Savoie, Alain Gauthier, et Walter Sonier de Jonquière, Québec. 
Vienvenue! 
 
Note: — The online Hansard has been corrected. 
 
 


