




















































March 26, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 March 26, 1986 
 

199 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on Tuesday next move: 
 
First reading of a Bill to amend The Education and Health Tax 
Act for the purpose of repealing provisions imposing a sales tax 
on used vehicles. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on Tuesday 
next I shall move: 
 
First reading of a Bill to amend The Income Tax Act to repeal 
the flat tax. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on Tuesday 
next I shall move: 
 
First reading of a Bill respecting property improvement grants to 
restore property tax relief. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as you know, yesterday there 
was a small celebration in the city of Prince Albert. Canada 
Weyerhaeuser . . . Weyerhaeuser of Canada has agreed in 
principle to spend approximately $500 million in Prince Albert 
to build a brand-new paper mill. 
 
It’s my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, today to introduce three 
executives from Weyerhaeuser Canada. They’re seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery. Mr. C. William Gaynor, who is vice-president 
of timberlands and planning, Weyerhaeuser Canada; Mr. D.R. 
Andrews, vice-president legal affairs and corporate secretary; 
and Mr. Barney Lucas, director of public affairs for 
Weyerhaeuser Canada. Mr. Speaker, I would like this Assembly 
to give them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with the 
Premier in extending a welcome to Weyerhaeuser Canada for the 
job and opportunity he’s created in Prince Albert and for the 
confidence they’re showing in our province, and I ask all 
members to join with me. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce 
to you and to the members of the Assembly today a group of 25 
students who are . . . Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, I’ll wait till the 
members opposite are quiet. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. It’s very difficult to be heard when 
you’re introducing guests, with all the commotion. I would ask 
members to maintain silence. 

An Hon. Member: Particularly members of the opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, as I was beginning to say, it’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you and to all members of the 
Assembly today a group of 25 grade 12 law class students from 
Martin Collegiate here in the city of Regina. The collegiate is 
situated in my constituency. 
 
They have with them their teacher and two chaperons, and it will 
be my pleasure to be meeting with them for pictures and a 
discussion later this afternoon. They are seated in the west 
gallery. 
 
I trust that your visit with us today will be profitable. It’s an 
honour for us to have you visiting, and I would ask all members 
to join with me in welcoming them this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, it is pleasurable to introduce to 
you and to the members of this Assembly 21 students, grade 10, 
11, and 12, from Imperial High School, for the great constituency 
of Arm River. They are accompanied by their teacher, Robert 
Payton; chaperon, Mary and Judy — I’m sorry I can’t read the 
second names. I apologize. It’s just not printed on here very 
clearly — bus driver, Larry Cruise, and I ask the members of this 
Assembly to join with me in wishing them a very enjoyable day 
and a good trip home, and I’ll be meeting with them for 
refreshments and questions later on. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Currie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure at this 
time to introduce to you and through you to the members of this 
House a group of 12 Girl Guides who are presently sitting in the 
Speaker’s gallery. They are accompanied here by their 
Guider-in-charge, Nancy Holder. I would suggest to these young 
people that during question period they just sit back, relax, and 
enjoy themselves, because I’m sure that’s what will be taking 
place down here, and I will be pleased to meet with you after 
question period for photographs and for drinks. I would ask all 
the members of the Assembly to join with me in extending a real 
welcome to them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve had another 
note handed to me. In the Imperial group there is an exchange 
student by the name of Gabriella Monroy from — I’m sorry. I 
won’t be pronouncing this name right, but it’s from Tapachula, 
Mexico. I may not have this name right, but I would ask all the 
people from this Assembly to please welcome our exchange 
student from Mexico. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

200 
 

Tax Proposals in Budget 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct a 
question to the Premier, and it has to do with this evening’s 
provincial budget. A year ago your government hit the ordinary 
people of the province with the biggest, single tax increase in the 
history of this province. The people want to know whether you 
have noted their concern, and can you give the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan your guarantee that this evening’s budget will roll 
back the record unfair tax increases introduced in your last 
budget. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure this Assembly 
that the taxes in Saskatchewan, under a Progressive Conservative 
administration, have been lower than they were under the NDP 
and will continue to be lower than they were under the NDP 
because we are concerned about families in Saskatchewan. And 
we have taken the tax off for families; we have protected families 
against high interest rates; we have protected farmers; we have 
done all kinds of things to help families, Mr. Speaker. That bunch 
of seven sisters there with their seven promises for seven people 
all at the same time are going to appreciate the fact that families 
are well protected in the province of Saskatchewan. And we’ll 
look forward to this evening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I noted 
that the general question did not elicit a response. I will ask you 
a specific question: will you agree that the flat tax on net income, 
as structured by your government, which takes close to $400 a 
year from the average Saskatchewan family, is an unfair tax and 
should be repealed, and will you agree that it will be repealed in 
tonight’s budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member and I have 
had several discussions, and he agrees, as I do, that there are 
many people in Saskatchewan who were not paying any tax at 
all, and tax reform is necessary to get those people to pay some 
tax. 
 
We now have 97 per cent of those, that didn’t pay tax at all, now 
paying, and I’ve said it at a time before: I’ve asked the federal 
government to reform their tax forms so that we could make sure 
that all those people do pay tax. In the province of Saskatchewan 
under the previous administration, these people didn’t pay any 
tax at all. We have changed that, and the hon. member agrees that 
we should, in fact, have some of these wealthy people — all of 
them — contribute something to the taxes here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, in the province of Saskatchewan, they do, and I believe that 
he agrees it’s a good idea. He said he’d like to see the tax form 
rebuilt and I agree with him. We have led the nation in terms of 
tax reform, and more wealthy people are paying tax in this 
province than they do any place else in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. As the 
Premier is well aware, some of the people who he says are now 
paying tax and did not previously, were people who took 
advantage of the investment tax credit for farmers, which he took 
away — which he took away — for the calculation of the flat tax. 
 
I ask you sir: when you took away the investment tax credit for 
farmers, which you did when you put on the flat tax, do you 
believe that this led to the federal government taking away the 
investment tax credit for farmers which they have just done in 
their budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, if we want to talk about 
farmers and taxes in his legislature, I can remember . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: You didn’t answer the question, Grant. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I’ll answer it right now. I can remember 
the former attorney general standing here, and in 1972 he 
introduced taxes on farmers. He introduced succession duties on 
Saskatchewan farmers. Widows and orphans in this province had 
to pay tax to the NDP government. 
 
You can watch and you can talk to people all over rural 
Saskatchewan, those farm families that had to pay succession 
duties to the NDP. Widows and orphans had to pay, and if they 
didn’t have enough money, the NDP administration charged 
them interest on succession duties. They charged them that tax 
for five years — succession duties on farms and families and 
businesses all over. And after it was . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, after people cried out all over 
this province because they didn’t like the fairness . . . the 
unfairness of succession duties, the previous administration 
decided to take it off, and they didn’t give 1 cent back to families 
— not 1 cent. They took $28 million out of the pockets of farm 
wives and widows and orphans and small business all across this 
province, and they never gave 1 cent back. 
 
And they’re standing over here talking about farmers. This 
administration has done more for farm families than all the NDP 
administrations in the country or in the past. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 
Premier apparently wishes to talk about 1972 and not 1985. I 
want to talk about the property tax relief which you took away in 
your budget of last year. My question is very simple: will you 
guarantee the people of Saskatchewan that tonight’s budget will 
contain a form of direct property tax relief from home owners 
and small-business people and renters and farmers? Last year you 
put it on. Will you agree that you were wrong in taking away that 
relief, and will you put back some relief in tonight’s budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the opposition is 
going to have to wait until 7 o’clock to hear 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

201 
 

the budget. But when we’re talking about relief for farmers and 
families, I’ll take the things that we have done to protect farm 
families and urban families all over this province —protected 
them from interest rates, protect them in terms of taxes; we’ve 
cut taxes for low-income people. And the opposition has one 
thing on their mind. They always have one thing on their mind. 
They’d say, well, we’ll tax small business and we’ll tax farmers; 
we’ll have succession duties; we’ll have land bank. Then do you 
know what they say, Mr. Speaker? They say, we’ll give you a 
grant; we’ll give you a grant. The NDP, that’s all they know — 
we’ll tax this, and we’ll tax that, and we’ll give you a grant. Well 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, this province is an awful lot bigger and 
an awful lot more proud to be bought with a couple of grants by 
the NDP. The NDP don’t know how to build; they don’t know 
how to expand; they don’t know how to create; they don’t know 
how to encourage Saskatchewan people to invest. All they can 
say is tax, tax, tax, and give them a grant. Well I’ll tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, in the next election in this province people are going to 
remember what they did in 1982, and they’re going to say, the 
NDP and the road of the grants have gone the same way — down 
the road. 
 

Tax Paid on Used Vehicles 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the 
Minister of Revenue and Financial Services. I wonder whether 
he can assure the taxpayers of the province that the budget 
tonight will deal with the unfair used tax on used vehicles, and 
whether or not it will be repealed, and whether or not the $5 
million collected on used automobiles will be sent back to those 
people who paid it over the last year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the question. And I can assure the member opposite 
one thing about the budget tonight. There will be no succession 
duties in it tonight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the minister 
again . . . I can understand why . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister 
dealt with used vehicles and an unfair tax that was placed on used 
half-tons, used grain trucks, used cars that were bought by 
families in Saskatchewan, and the question was whether we can 
expect tonight that the $5 million you collected, unfairly, will be 
sent back to the families of Saskatchewan, the 60,000 families 
that it was paid by? 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, to begin with the people 
of Saskatchewan thought the succession duties and taxing 
widows and orphans at a time of bereavement was unfair. And 
when the former government, the people opposite, finally bowed 
to the pressure of those people, and the people of Saskatchewan, 
and removed that tax, of the $28 million they collected they did 
not refund a penny. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, suddenly they’ve changed their tune; 

they’re singing to different music. Mr. Speaker, we have tried to 
be fair and reasonable in whatever we have done with taxation in 
this province. We have rolled back taxes on the average citizens 
in this province, and I believe we will continue to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Final supplementary to the minister. I have 
here a news clipping coming out of the nominating meeting last 
night where the Premier states that . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — . . . And of course we know that this is the 
meeting where the member for Regina North escaped to Regina 
South to avoid defeat. But the Premier stated, and I quote: 
 

Devine said the sales tax on used cars was a mistake, 
and that’s why he rescinded it. 

 
I wonder whether now, because the Premier is admitting it was 
an unfair tax, whether you will have the courage and the courtesy 
to do two things; one, issue an apology for collecting it unfairly; 
and secondly, send a cheque back to those 60,000 families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t recall in all the years 
that the members opposite were government that they ever 
apologized for increasing the tax in this province from 32 per 
cent to 52 per cent; that they ever apologized for imposing a 20 
per cent tax on gasoline; that they ever apologized for collecting 
a tax on power bills, for children’s clothing, for any of the other 
things. I don’t believe they ever apologized for that. I don’t 
believe they’re apologetic today or that they’ve changed their 
attitude one bit, and that all we see from them is tax, tax, and 
more tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prince Albert Pulp Company Purchase by Weyerhaeuser 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Speaker, I direct my question to the 
Premier. And my question is to the Premier and it deals with 
yesterday’s announcement in Prince Albert. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Can the Premier assure Saskatchewan 
taxpayers that later today he will table copies of all agreements 
or memorandums of understanding his government has signed 
with Weyerhaeuser Company of Tacoma with respect to the sale 
of the Prince Albert pulp mill and other related assets? When will 
the taxpayers get to see the detailed commitments you have made 
to Weyerhaeuser in this sale? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have an agreement and an 
understanding to have a major investment in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: When? 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

202 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — We already announced it. It was yesterday. 
That close to $500 million that’s going to go into the province of 
Saskatchewan and going to go into Prince Albert — that’s $500 
million of new money, somebody else’s money, that ‘s gong to 
go right into Prince Albert. That’s a $500 million net gain to the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s opposed to, and that’s the very opposite 
to, the NDP approach where they took $600 million of your 
money and mine — $600 million — and they sent it to Wall 
Street. They took $600 million and they sent it down to Wall 
Street for the multinationals to keep. And what did we get, Mr. 
Speaker? We got a debt of $600 million. Well yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker, we got 500 million back and we put it in Prince Albert, 
Saskatchewan, as opposed to giving it to the people in Wall 
Street. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, if the 
members opposite want one single election issue, if they’re 
interested at all, they can go back and look at history and say: 
how good was the investment of borrowing $600 million of 
Saskatchewan’s money and giving it to multinationals in New 
York versus taking $500 million of Canadian money, new 
money, and putting it right into Prince Albert? And I’ll tell you 
what the people will say. They’ll say they’ll take the 500 million 
new money in Prince Albert any day of the week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Supplement, Mr. Speaker. The question that 
I asked the Premier, if he was going to table the documents, he 
never answered that. But he indicated about the new money. And 
I suggest to you, Mr. Premier, that there’s not 1 cent of new 
money, if it’s guaranteed by the taxpayers of this province. 
 
My supplementary, Mr. Speaker: Mr. Premier, you will know 
that the Weyerhaeuser Company is a major international 
corporation with assets in the billions of dollars. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Last year’s net sales by this corporation were 
more than $5 billion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — If this company is so large and is doing so 
well, and if this kind of modernization and expansion is such a 
great deal, why did Saskatchewan taxpayers have to lend money 
to Weyerhaeuser to help them finance it in the order of a 
government guarantee of $248 million of taxpayers’ money? 
Why couldn’t Weyerhaeuser finance this deal on his own, Mr. 
Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, there’s obviously . . . We’re 
getting right to the nub of the difference between 

that bunch over here and this group here. Right to the nub. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — And they’re even getting a little bit worried 
about it. Right to the nub. 
 
Under the previous administration that pulp company was 
purchased and going to be turned into a Crown corporation, and 
it lost money, and it lost money, and it lost money. They said that 
they don’t like multinationals. So what did they do? You know 
what they do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. When you ask questions 
you should be considerate enough to give the government an 
opportunity to at least answer you. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, we’re getting to a 
fundamental difference between the NDP and the people of 
Saskatchewan. Okay? And I just want to elaborate on it. 
 
The fundamental difference is: they would take over 
corporations; they would nationalize the corporations; they 
would borrow money; they’d take the taxpayers’ money; and 
they lost, and they lost, and they lost. They don’t like 
multinationals, so they decided they’d take $600 million of your 
money and mine, and they’d give it to multinationals so they 
could go home to New York and put it in the bank on Wall Street. 
And it’s gone, and what have we got to show for it. We’ve got a 
debt — $600 million. 
 
What we have done, Mr. Speaker: we took new money, new 
money coming into Saskatchewan, new money from a very large, 
powerful corporation which is going to make a profit, and we’re 
going to have . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please! Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We are going to have a completely 
integrated forestry, pulp, and paper business — one of the finest 
companies, one of the finest mills you will see any place in North 
America, right here in this province, right here in this particular 
part of the forestry business — the largest in western Canada. 
And it is going to be integrated all over the world. It’s going to 
have sales offices connected to Japan, to San Francisco, to New 
York — all over. And we have asked a profitable company to put 
$500 million here . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I’m gong to ask the members to 
contain themselves a bit. It’s impossible to hear. Order! 
 
An Hon. Member: He’s got a platform here. It’s part of the 
election campaign. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the member is right. This is 
very much at the nub of the difference between our 
administration and the former administration that lost so badly. 
They nationalized companies and they lost the money. They risk 
the taxpayers’ dollars. They used $600 million of ours, and sent 
it in to New York, and we never 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

203 
 

did get it back. This company is a profitable company and it’s 
coming into Prince Albert and it’s going to spend $500 million. 
People there appreciate the new jobs and the profit and the 
excitement and the future. You can go into Prince Albert . . . And 
I know the NDP are against this paper mill. I know they’re 
against it. They’re against the crop insurance moving to Melville. 
They’re against Rafferty. They’re against the bacon plant in 
North Battleford. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 
Premier, and it has to do with the Weyerhaeuser deal. I take it 
you are refusing to table any documents. I take that because you 
have avoided the question by my colleague, the member for 
Athabasca. May I ask you a couple of simple questions that you 
can perhaps answer? With respect to the existing mill, is it not 
correct that the purchase of the Price Albert Pulp Company and 
related assets by Weyerhaeuser will be done by a $248 million 
loan from Saskatchewan taxpayers, and no money from 
Weyerhaeuser, and the company will only have to pay back the 
$248 million out of profits; no profits, no payback? Is that the 
deal with respect to the existing mill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have invited a profitable 
firm, Weyerhaeuser Canada, to purchase the pulp mill and to 
build a fine new paper mill in the province of Saskatchewan. As 
they just pointed out by the members opposite they made 
something like $5 billion last year in terms of sales. That was 
their sales, and it’s a profitable company. The are taking a losing 
operation that the taxpayers have put millions and millions and 
millions of dollars into, and they are turning that into a very large 
profitable organization with a fine new paper mill that can sell all 
over the world. And yes, they are going to pay for it because 
they’re going to be making profits in the province of 
Saskatchewan as opposed to debts in a Crown corporation. And 
I like to see companies come in here and spend $500 million and 
make profit and turn things around and provide the job security 
to people all over this province, and particularly to Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is nothing wrong with the word profit. Profit’s 
a good word. Mr. Speaker, if you can make profits you can pay 
for pulp and paper and you can pay for jobs, and in fact that’s 
what makes the economy go. The previous administration didn’t 
understand that. They nationalized companies, sent the money 
away, because they didn’t like them to make profits. We believe 
in making profits. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder 
if the Premier would desist from these little lectures and answer 
the question — and it’s a financial question. And the question is 
this, sir: is it true that with respect to the sale of the Prince Albert 
pulp mill it is being sold to Weyerhaeuser for $248 million, all of 
which is being provided by the people of Saskatchewan with no 
stated rate of interest — at least public — and that it does 

not have to be paid back unless profits are made? Is that your deal 
with Weyerhaeuser? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, our arrangement is for this 
company to spend all this money here to build a profitable 
arrangement, to build a profitable company and a brand-new 
paper mill that will allow the pulp company now, which is losing 
millions and millions of dollars, to be profitable. And the 
members opposite don’t seem to like profit. Well I know they 
don’t like that word. They don’t like the name free enterprise, 
they don’t like small business. They don’t like the word profit. 
I’ll tell you, profit’s a good word. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We are asking companies to pay profits. In 
Saskatchewan, they pay tax on profits, they buy buildings with 
profits, they create economic activity with profits, they pay 
employees with profits. How else do you make the economy 
work unless it’s with profits? I mean, what would we do, tie it to 
a loss? We wouldn’t sell this thing` and say it’s a loss. We are 
building a profitable operation for the first time in years and yes, 
it’s based on profit and yes, that’s the way the country runs, is on 
profit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I take it then 
you’re acknowledging that Weyerhaeuser has no obligation to 
pay back the $248 million unless they make a profit, and that this 
mill will be part of a world-wide operation and that if they have 
any skills in accounting they can cite the profit in any portion of 
any organization they like. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — My question to you, very simply, Mr. 
Premier, is this: with respect to this proposition, is it not true that 
the Government of Saskatchewan is committed to transfer the 
mill, that the Government of Saskatchewan is committed to 
transfer forest rights, and that as of now Weyerhaeuser is 
committed to nothing — nothing except to recommend 
something to their head office? Have you any commitment from 
Weyerhaeuser, which is any way legally binding, and are you not 
committed to transfer the mill and to transfer the forest rights? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The hon. member raised two points. The 
first one is that companies like Weyerhaeuser Canada are going 
to cook the books. That’s just what he said. And that, Mr. 
Speaker, is the nub of the indifference between the NDP and 
this . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It’s impossible to carry on 
business with the amount of noise and I’m going to ask for order.  
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, do you know why the 
province of Saskatchewan under the NDP had such a bad 
reputation? Because that was their attitude. All over the world 
that was their attitude. They would either say that . . . 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

204 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. It’s your time that’s running, if 
you want to keep talking. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 11 — An Act respecting the consequential 
amendments resulting from the enactment of The 
Environmental Management and Protection Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Embury: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting the consequential amendments resulting from the 
enactment of The Environmental Management and Protection 
Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill referred 
to the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might have 
leave of the Assembly to move directly to government motions 
and then revert back to special order. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting and House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, this motion is simply to 
accommodate evening sitting tonight so that we may hear the 
exciting and new budget delivery from the Minister of Finance. 
So I move, seconded by the Minister of Justice: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3 of the Rule and Procedures 
of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, this 
Assembly shall on Thursday, March 27th, 1986, meet at 
10 o’clock a.m. until 1 o’clock p.m., and that when this 
Assembly adjourns on Thursday, March 27th, 1986, it do 
stand adjourned until Tuesday, April 1, 1986. 

 
The motion that I just described earlier, before I moved the 
motion, was the one that we moved the other day to 
accommodate the sitting tonight. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

QUESTIONS PUT BY MEMBERS 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, 281 through 317 inclusive, 
be moved to motions for return debatable. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Questions 281 to 317, motions for returns 
debatable. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the 

address in reply which was moved by Mr. Klein, seconded by 
Mr. Domotor. 
 
Mr. Young: — Mr. Speaker, I left off last night. I had a few 
remarks I would still like to put onto the record with respect to 
what’s happening today. I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s very 
interesting to have watched the NDP today and to watch their 
reaction to what took place the other day in Prince Albert. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that everything that I said yesterday in the 
House was confirmed by what took place this morning. The NDP 
are against every project that is on stream in this province. I 
mentioned 24 items yesterday, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon, and I 
know the NDP have been fighting them all. With particular 
vigour, they’ve been fighting the arena, and now I see that they’re 
going to be fighting the paper mill in Prince Albert. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that their accusations that they made 
today about Weyerhaeuser . . . Those people wrote the book on 
cooking the book. And now they’re suggesting that another very 
reputable firm, a Canadian firm, would attempt such a thing. I 
think it’s outright scandalous, Mr. Speaker, that they would make 
the comments that they made under the privilege of the House 
today and abuse their protection in this Assembly to make 
accusations such as that. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Prince Albert will 
pay them their respects when the election comes for the type of 
interference that they’re attempting on the very positive and 
employment-generating program that’s going to be under way in 
Prince Albert very shortly. 
 
I do want to commend our government, certainly, Mr. Speaker, 
and also the people from Weyerhaeuser for what they’ve put 
together and the benefit that it’s gong to bring to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I certainly must, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people of my 
constituency — and I’m sure most of the people in the North — 
condemn the NDP for their very negative attitude that they have 
taken towards this and so many other major projects, Mr. 
Speaker, in the province. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that that is so 
very, very evident from what we saw this morning. I am appalled, 
Mr. Speaker, that they would take the position that they’ve 
obviously taken. 
 
Just, Mr. Speaker, in bringing to a close some of my remarks, I 
would like to take this opportunity to thank the people in the 
Clerk’s office who’ve been of such assistance to all of us 
members, particularly Mr. Barnhart and his crew. I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that the services that they have provided to us as 
members are sometimes overlooked and taken for granted. But 
the impartiality and the professionalism by which they conduct 
their affairs in the position of the Clerk’s office is something that 
we as members should not take for granted, Mr. Speaker, and I 
certainly do not take those people for granted. And I want to from 
the bottom of my heart thank all of them for the assistance that 
I’ve received. And I know other members feel the same way as I 
do about the help from Mr. Barnhart and his office. They have 
been of great assistance to us and have made our jobs much 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

205 
 

easier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Young: — Certainly, Mr. Speaker, in closing, there’s a 
couple of members in this House who won’t be running, who 
haven’t been mentioned to any great extent. I know, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s such that we can’t refer to the members by their names, but 
only by their seats. There’s one member here who has the 
nickname of the “Birk,” Mr. Speaker, and I think I know 
everybody knows I’m talking about the member from 
Moosomin. And I just want to go on record of thanking him. He’s 
a little sick right now, Mr. Speaker, but I’m sure he’ll be back in 
gear. He’s had the flu. 
 
I hope, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this House recognize the 
contribution he has made to people such as myself who were 
first-term MLAs from 1982. We were very much in need of 
assistance in figuring out how to conduct ourselves in this House, 
and how to do some of our constituency matters that came upon 
us upon our election. And certainly he was the one, together with 
the member from Rosthern, who were very beneficial in helping 
us rookie MLAs out in first term. 
 
(1445) 
 
And again, I’d like to thank the “Birk” and the member from 
Rosthern from the bottom of my heart for the contributions they 
made in helping me better serve my constituents in Eastview, Mr. 
Speaker. And with those remarks, I would only point out as I did 
in the beginning of my speech, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting 
the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure 
once again to take part in the throne speech debate in this 
Assembly. The speech delivered by the Lieutenant Governor on 
March 17th, reflects the initiative, the leadership, and the concern 
of people that have characterized the past four years of 
Progressive Conservative government under the premiership of 
Grant Devine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government believes in working with people to 
help them achieve their own goals. We don’t believe in telling 
people what’s good for them or how they have to do things. On 
the contrary, we believe in giving them the tools to do the thing 
they would like to do themselves, in the way they want to do 
them, and the means for providing those opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think opportunities is a very, very important word 
as we look forward in the direction that our province should be 
taking. Opportunities, Mr. Speaker, for people to get the training 
and the education that they need for meaningful jobs so that they 
can find their niche here in the fabric of Saskatchewan. 
Opportunities for rural people to continue the tradition of the 
family farm which so many of our members know is very 
important to the make-up of our province. Opportunities for 
people to establish their own business, both in our cities and also, 
Mr. Speaker, in our smaller communities. Opportunities for 
people to participate directly in our resource industries as we 
heard the very 

good announcement yesterday in Prince Albert. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, all around the province people are benefiting 
from our government’s policies in many different ways. As I 
travel around this province and around my own constituency of 
Indian Head-Wolseley, the evidence is there for anyone to see. 
Evidence, Mr. Speaker, of diversification of industry into small-
town Saskatchewan. Evidence, Mr. Speaker, of expanded 
facilities in the basic fabric of the safety net of this province. 
Better schools, new schools, hospitals, nursing homes, and of 
course, more and more young people owning their farm from day 
one because of the policies brought in by the Devine government, 
and also more and more people being able to meet their 
commitments because of low-interest money and the security 
that is provided by some of the initiatives that have been 
announced by my colleagues within this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve mentioned several areas in which our 
Progressive Conservative government has taken major initiatives 
in co-operation with the people of this province. 
 
I want to turn in more detail now to the area that is one of the 
corner-stones of our partnership for progress, and that, Mr. 
Speaker, is the whole area that is very important to the population 
of Saskatchewan, that is of health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure most people remember what the members 
opposite used to say to the people of Saskatchewan about health 
care. I remember it so well in 1978 when their battle-cry was, 
don’t let them take it away That’s what they said to the people. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, all I can say is there’s a heck of a lot more 
that they could be taking away now than there was in 1982 when 
we took office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And of course when we announce all of 
our health care plans and programs, the members opposite claim 
they were empty promises. Unfortunately they were making the 
mistake of assuming that a PC promise is no more real than the 
empty NDP promises that they were so used to. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the facts speak for themselves. We now have 
a provincial chiropody program. Legislation has been passed to 
prohibit extra billing in this province. We have a new Wascana 
rehabilitation centre growing up just across the park here. We 
have a new cancer clinic and research building going up in 
Saskatoon, as well as a new 238-bed, level 4, long-term facility 
in Saskatoon. The third phase of the regeneration of the Pasqua 
Hospital is finished and opened, and the third phase of the Regina 
General Hospital is well under way. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, those are just a few of the many projects in 
our steady expansion improvement of the health care system. 
 
Whatever the members opposite may like to think, our five-year 
programs are re-establishing the foundations of health care in 
Saskatchewan and repairing the damage done by years of neglect 
by the NDP. 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

206 
 

The $300 million health capital fund is providing for new and 
expanding hospitals in many centres throughout this province, 
and it is providing 1,600 new replacement special care beds in 60 
communities around the province. And I can tell you that when I 
attend sod turnings and official openings at these facilities, along 
with many of my colleagues who are sitting here today, the local 
residents appreciate the fact that they now have a government 
that listens to them and, more importantly, responds to their 
needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a logical follow-up to our construction program, 
we have now announced a five-year, $100 million, enriched, 
patient care program. This program will provide for substantial 
numbers of new patient care staff in our health care facilities, as 
well as for new programs and equipment. And it will provide 
some long-term solutions to the problems of waiting lists in the 
Saskatoon hospitals. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite don’t want to 
believe that the program is real either. But all they are proving is 
that they haven’t learned a thing since 1982. They were blind to 
reality then, and they still can’t see what’s going on around the 
world or in the world around them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite still think that the 
Progressive Conservatives under Premier Devine are going to 
take away health care, they are the only people in the province 
that think that. But, Mr. Speaker, our government is not about to 
relax in the health care just because all those major programs are 
in place. 
 
We will continue to work with the people of Saskatchewan to 
ensure that our health care system remains the best in Canada. 
We will continue, Mr. Speaker, to expand and improve long-term 
care services for seniors and the younger disabled. In particular, 
we will be working to help seniors live in their own homes 
longer, among their family and friends, as long as possible, 
where, Mr. Speaker, they tell me and my colleagues they want to 
be. 
 
We will work to expand rehabilitation services, and we will 
continue working to expand health care in the North in 
co-operation with northern residents. We will work with rural 
hospitals and communities on implementing strategies to 
enhance rural medical services. And this includes providing an 
effective role in the community for our small, rural hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are just some of the areas that will continue 
to receive our close attention in the months ahead. They are a 
reflection of our government’s commitment to ensuring a 
first-class health care system in Saskatchewan, a system that 
gives people appropriate access to the services they need 
regardless of where they live. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, during our first four years in office our 
Progressive Conservative government has worked with 
Saskatchewan people of all ages, in all walks of life, and from all 
parts of this province. Together we have accomplished many 
things to help Saskatchewan 

residents overcome their difficulties, meet their challenges, and 
achieve their goals. 
 
The throne speech charts out an effective course to build on our 
achievements and to realize our province’s great potential. The 
members opposite will undoubtedly continue to take a negative 
approach, preaching doom and gloom. But they will be left 
behind, Mr. Speaker, as the rest of the province moves ahead and 
leaves them in the wake. 
 
Leadership, Mr. Speaker, means looking ahead. It means 
accepting responsibilities and challenges and being willing to 
meet them head-on. That’s the kind of leadership, Mr. Speaker, 
that we have experienced under Premier Grant Devine. And 
that’s the kind of leadership it’s going to enjoy in this province 
for many, many more years to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I look back in four years, in the portfolio that 
I’ve had the pleasure of looking after for the last four years, when 
I came in I saw certain inadequacies. Certainly there had been 
virtually no construction in special care homes. There was a 
moratorium placed on the construction of special care homes by 
the Blakeney government. Mr. Speaker, that was our first 
five-year plan: to construct over 1,600 special care homes across 
the province of Saskatchewan. That plan is well under way and, 
I can say, being very, very well received by many communities 
throughout the province. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, as I looked at the health care needs of our 
province, it was evident that the acute care hospitals were in need 
of upgrading, and construction, and improvements, and 
expansion in space and also in equipment. And that is why last 
year in the budget, Mr. Speaker, we came forward with a $300 
million capital project for construction in acute care hospitals and 
special care homes in this province. I’m proud to say that many 
of those projects are well under way today, Mr. Speaker, and 
more will be coming in the years ahead. That was our second 
five-year plan. 
 
It only seemed logical then to look at the needs of the staffing 
components for the facilities that we were building. And, Mr. 
Speaker, as you know, in February of this year we came forward 
with a third five-year plan for health care, and that was to put in 
place another $100 million for staffing enrichment and 
equipment to meet the needs of Saskatchewan health care over 
the next five years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you, the members of this Assembly, and 
my colleagues, who have given me good support for these 
initiatives, that we in the Progressive Conservative Party will 
make Saskatchewan the leader in health care in the country of 
Canada and, I believe, in North America and perhaps the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, that’s a record we’re all 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

207 
 

proud of, and that’s the record that we will continue. 
 
With those brief words, Mr. Speaker, I must say that I am proud 
to be a member of this party, and I join with my colleagues in 
voting my whole-hearted support for the throne speech that we 
heard approximately one week ago. And I look forward, Mr. 
Speaker, along with a lot of other folks out there in 
Saskatchewan, for the good news coming tonight in the budget. 
 
Thank you very, very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate this 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to speak in this throne speech debate, 
not because of the nature of the throne speech itself, but because 
I am able to do it on behalf of the people of the Regina North 
East constituency. It’s an honour to do that. I must say that for 
almost four years the people of that constituency did not have 
anyone speaking for them. And I am prepared to do as best as I 
can to speak on their behalf and to represent their interests. 
 
I listened with some interest to the member from Eastview who 
spoke first in this debate this afternoon, and I must say, Mr. 
Speaker, that maybe he should take a look carefully at what he 
said in light of what the Premier was doing today during question 
period. 
 
I think what the member from Eastview needs to keep in mind, 
Mr. Speaker, and ask himself, because all of the constituents who 
live in his constituency will be asking the following: why is the 
Premier not prepared to table in this House and let Saskatchewan 
people know what the nature of the deal with Weyerhaeuser is? 
Is it because there is something that the Premier knows that 
nobody else knows? Is it because, as we have suggested, the deal 
could cost Saskatchewan taxpayers $248 million because they 
are paying for somebody else to buy something that they own? Is 
that why the Premier refused to answer the questions today, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
And before the member from Eastview repeats what he has been 
saying in too many places, I would suggest he should consider 
how he will answer that question when the candidate who is 
taking his place in his constituency has to respond with some 
answers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Minister of Health had some things to say about the field of 
health. The point about what the Minister of Health has got to say 
about health these days is that nobody but he believes it. Nobody 
but he believes it. And let me give you an example why. 
 
The people of this province do not get fooled easily. The reason 
why nobody believes it is the example of his five-year plan which 
he announced in the last budget, that most intelligent budget. And 
in that five-year plan the Minister of Health outlines several 
projects which were going to be completed in 1986. They were 
part of this brand-new, five-year plan. But lo and behold! Guess 
what? Every one of those projects that were listed for 1986 had 
been in the budget for 1984-1985. Smoke and mirrors. Smoke 
and mirrors, Mr. Speaker. The 

Saskatchewan taxpayer and the Saskatchewan people know it. 
They’ve had enough of it. 
 
The credibility of this government is no more. They might as well 
call an election and get their agony over with so they don’t have 
to wait for so long for the inevitable. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, speaking near the end of a debate such as this 
gives a speaker some advantages. And the main advantage is that 
I have had an opportunity to talk to a lot of people, not only in 
the city of Regina but people who live in other places of 
Saskatchewan. And I’ve been able to hear from them how they 
feel about what this government is saying in this throne speech. 
 
(1500) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that my listening to what they 
have to say in places like Prince Albert, and Saskatoon, and 
Watrous, and Moose Jaw, and Canora, and Regina, there is a very 
straightforward and solid message that’s coming through. 
Although these people were from many different parts of our 
province, and in some ways indeed have different interests 
because of their home locations and their work locations, one 
common and unanimous response came from every one of them, 
and it was this. 
 
It was that the throne speech was that of a government which 
sounds like a tired government which has given up — the most 
backward-looking document that has ever been presented in this 
legislature as long as I can remember it, in my experience here. 
 
Now I want to say that it’s not a government that’s given up 
trying to preserve itself in power at any cost — I wouldn’t want 
to say that — but given up trying to deal with the issues that 
Saskatchewan people are saying are important to them. And as I 
listen to these comments and look at the dismal record of this 
Devine PC government, I have concluded that not only has this 
government given up, I will go further and to say that it never 
even got started, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Oh yes, and the minister responsible for SGI, he shakes his head. 
Well I’ll have a few things to say about what he’s done with SGI 
insurance, in his term since he came in there, later on. I hope he 
hangs around; it’ll be worth hearing. 
 
And oh yes, Mr. Speaker, they were quick to act in giving 
millions to Peter Pocklington. He came running along with a big 
suitcase to the Premier’s office, and the Premier said, open it up 
and shovel it in. They were quick to act to tell Peter Pocklington, 
a form Tory leadership candidate for the national Progressive 
Conservative Party — oh, if everybody could only run for the 
leadership of the Conservative Party, how well off they’d be 
today! 
 
And they were quick to act, Mr. Speaker, in promising $28 
million to Will Klein, who’s now somewhere in the United 
States, and Pioneer Trust, because he and his friends financed the 
Conservative Party prior to 1982. That’s why they were quick to 
act. 
 
And oh yes, they were quick to act in giving away $900 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

208 
 

million of the people’s money to the oil companies while they 
were prosperous and there was a boom on. Now what kind of 
economic logic is this? The oil industry is doing well. They even 
show you statistics about how well the oil industry was doing, 
and guess what they do? They say, we’re going to give you some 
incentives; we’re gong to give you $900 million which could 
have gone a long way to stop the kind of deficit which 
Saskatchewan people are mortgaged for now for generations to 
come. 
 
Oh yes, for their friends they were quick to act, Mr. Speaker, but 
when oil prices began to drop real fast, when the oil prices 
dropped by 60 per cent, the Premier and his government 
remained silent about the lack of a similar drop of the prices of 
gasoline at the pump which my constituents had to get their gas 
from. Not a single word. 
 
And when I ask a question in this House about why the price at 
the pump had only dropped 5 per cent while the price in the barrel 
had dropped 60 per cent, all the Premier could do is say 
something about the rebate that the people were going to get and 
therefore the price was even lower. Well I’ve really tried hard to 
find somebody who fills up his tank at the pumps with his car 
who’s able to qualify for that rebate. 
 
Now I don’t know who pushed the button for that particular 
programmed answer, Mr. Speaker, but obviously they pushed the 
wrong button because the Premier was not exactly on line on that 
one. He and his government refused to address the fact that the 
prices of gasoline ranged by as much as 20 cents a gallon from 
one part of a province to another because some oil companies are 
ripping off the consumer. 
 
And oh yes, you know, we’ve got a Minister of Consumer Affairs 
in this province. Now I have some interest in that department 
because I was the first minister who established that department, 
and it was meant to look after the interests of the Saskatchewan 
consumer. That’s why it was established. But I regret to say, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that the minister is now only a minister in name 
because that department does not represent the interest of 
Saskatchewan consumers any more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — A Minister of Consumer Affairs who 
would not say one single word when Saskatchewan taxpayers 
and consumers were being ripped off by the oil companies during 
these months and weeks, I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, 
represents a government that is really tired and has given up 
trying. 
 
And so I ask this question, because I think the question has to be 
asked: why this silence? Why this silence from the Premier and 
the Minister of Consumer Affairs and all of those people over 
there? 
 
I’ll tell you why, and I know you’re interested. Because they 
don’t dare speak out against those who pay the piper. The large 
oil corporations fund the campaigns of the Conservative Party 
and the Devine Conservative government has and will continue 
to reward them at the 

expense of ordinary Saskatchewan taxpayers every time — 
taxpayers who must pay more taxes every year while the services 
that they receive are deteriorating every year under this 
government and have deteriorated for the last four years. 
 
Oh yes. Oh yes, Mr. Speaker, this callous and this heartless 
government is quick to act when their friends who they appoint 
to government positions ask for expensive perks. You will recall, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, because you were in this House — I was 
not here then — the debate that took place in here about a certain 
president of the Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation. The 
member from Prince Albert will know that very well. This man, 
a friend of this Conservative government, was paid a salary of 
$120,000 a year. And I won’t argue about the salary, but he was 
also paid monthly living expenses, including his rent, he was paid 
for his groceries, he was paid for his cable television charges, he 
was paid for his laundry bills, and he was paid for his telephone 
bills. 
 
Now that’s one — that’s one. Then there is a more recent 
example of a certain president of a Regina firm almost wholly 
owned by Sedco. Now this gentleman gets paid a more modest 
salary. He’s getting paid something like $8,000 a month, and I 
won’t even bother to argue about that. But I ask: is it necessary, 
simply because he’s a friend of somebody else’s friend who sits 
over there, to also pay trips to his home in Toronto as often as he 
wants? The rent for a plush apartment? I have no doubt, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that these gentlemen also receive free cars at 
their disposal and maybe credit cards. 
 
Well, I simply want to say this, Mr. Speaker. While friends and 
appointments of this government get paid for the rent of their 
apartments, get paid for their groceries, get paid for all of those 
things that are essentials to the life of any family in 
Saskatchewan, do you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what the 
Minister of Social Services gives a family on welfare for rent? 
I’ll tell you. This minister, this generous Minister of Social 
Services, gives those families who are forced to go on welfare 
because of the lack of jobs created by this government, get $200 
a month. 
 
Now you tell, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how anyone with any kind of 
compassion in his heart can say that someone making $120,000 
a year should get rent for an apartment paid for, but a family who 
happens to be on welfare can only get $200 a month for renting 
of a suite. 
 
Now I’ve done a little study, and I went around looking in 
down-town Regina — some of the poorer parts — for an 
apartment that would accommodate a family of four, a single 
parent, a mother and four children. And you know, Mr. Speaker, 
unless it was really an extremely slum kind of building, there was 
not one place in which you could find an apartment for that 
family for $200 a month. 
 
And so do you know what those people are doing? They’re taking 
money out of their food allowance to be able to pay for the rent. 
And the Minister of Social Services stands up in this House and 
he boasts about welfare reform. That’s an example of his welfare 
reform, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

209 
 

Now listen, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They are quick to act when it 
comes to the wealthy and the privileged and the powerful and 
their friends. A former president of the Progressive Conservative 
Party, one by the name of George Hill . . . Well, you know, he is 
appointed now as the chief executive officer of the Souris Basin 
Development Authority. 
 
Now, we don’t know how much he’s going to get paid. We don’t 
know how much he’s going to get paid because I’m sure if we 
ask the members they will deal with that question in the same 
way as they deal with all questions and they will refuse to answer 
it. But I know that this gentleman’s pay as a judge was something 
in excess of $100,000 a year because that’s what they’re paid, 
and the Minister of Justice, I’m sure, will be able to verify that. I 
kind of doubt it that the Premier would appoint his friend and a 
former president of the Progressive Conservative Party to a 
position at the taxpayers’ expense for less than that. I kind of 
doubt that. But you know, that’s a small price to pay. That’s a 
small price to pay for maybe possibly guaranteeing the 
re-election of the Premier in his constituency. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the throne speech states the following: 
“Government should be close to the people it serves.” And 
indeed, indeed, this government is. It’s close to the board of 
directors of the oil corporations. It’s close to the people who 
control Canpotex, and who have failed to sell Saskatchewan 
potash as well as it should have been sold. This government is 
close to the patronage appointments that the Premier and his 
cabinet have made. But this government has failed to deal with 
the problems of the vast majority of Saskatchewan citizens, and 
it’s not close to them. It’s not close to them. 
 
And let me give you a real life example, because you are a 
compassionate man, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Let me give you a 
good example. I spoke to a young lady the other day who phoned 
me because she was unable to get a satisfactory answer about a 
problem she was having. And let me tell this House and the 
members opposite that it was not a very small problem. Let me, 
by using her example, illustrate how close this government has 
been to her. 
 
She recently returned from the city of Montreal because she had 
been there for a very serious brain operation, not the kind of thing 
that most people would take very lightly — an operation that 
could not be performed here in Saskatchewan, and that’s 
understandable. We can’t do it all here and they can’t do it all 
there, and we have to do some of this. 
 
(1515) 
 
Now this woman is unable to work, so she has to be receiving 
assistance from welfare. She’s not exactly an abuser of the 
system who the minister now, the Minister of Social Services, the 
member from Rosetown, is going to make come to his office’s 
door to pick up her cheque — the member from Rosemont. She’s 
not exactly what you would call an abuser of the system. 
 
Well you know what happened? The doctors in Montreal have 
sent her an additional bill for $300, and both Social 

Services and the Medical Care Insurance Commission have done 
nothing to help her, either in payment of the bill or assistance in 
having those who sent the bill reconsider it. It has been suggested 
to her that she deduct $5 a month from her welfare cheque and 
pay off the $300 that that bill is all about, the extra-billing bill. 
 
And not only can she not afford the $5, but at that rate it would 
take her 80 weeks with the interest considered, to pay it back. 
And that’s what she is being told by this compassionate 
government and by the officials of that compassionate Minister 
of Social Services. Due to the nature of her operation, this woman 
is under extreme stress. She is worried, and all that this 
government can do is pass the buck. 
 
This, I say to the House and to the people of Saskatchewan, is 
what the Minister of Social Services calls welfare reform. he sits 
in a cabinet that squandered millions on cabinet ministers’ 
expenses and perks for his political appointees, so that they can 
live the high life in the fast lane. But he has brought on welfare 
reform which will not provide $300 to an individual to pay a 
medical bill sent to her after a serious operation out of this 
province. 
 
Let me say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that Saskatchewan people are 
deeply concerned about who this government is close to, because 
they know it’s not them; that they have paid a big price during 
the last four years because of this Devine government’s concern 
for the rich and the powerful and disregard for the ordinary 
citizens struggling to make a living. 
 
And the one real example of how one individual is being ignored, 
I regret to say, is only too typical of how this government 
responds to people and the issues that people are saying are 
important to them. It can be multiplied thousands of times across 
this province. And instead of a government which shows 
compassion, we have ministers day after day in this House who 
try to cover up their government’s failures by rhetoric and the 
most expensive and the most massive government advertising 
that this province has ever seen —all at the expense of the 
taxpayer. 
 
Well we have a Minister of Social Services who tries to cover up 
his government’s failures by beating up on the poor. This tough 
minister publicly takes on all the people on welfare who he 
alleges are abusers. He doesn’t provide enough allowances so 
children can eat well or take part in sports of be part of Girl 
Guides or Boy Scouts. He plays cruel numbers, puts people for 
22 weeks on a job on some work program only long enough to 
qualify for unemployment insurance, so that they can go on 
unemployment insurance. And then they can say, oh, we have put 
people to work. But it’s only a numbers game. 
 
And how does the fugitive member from Regina North . . . Oh, 
I’m sorry, he’s now Regina South, the fugitive member who has 
run to Regina South. How does he respond? Well he responds, 
and I quote from his throne speech debate, “We are a most 
compassionate government.” How ironic. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Franklin D. Roosevelt 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

210 
 

once said: 
 

The test of our progress is not whether we add more to the 
abundance of those who have much, it is whether we 
provide enough for those that have too little. 

 
Well I suggest to you and to this House that on this test, this 
government has failed. The Pocklingtons and the Imperial Essos 
and the banks and the rich who can hide their money in tax 
loopholes of all kinds, they have fared well under this 
government. But the poor and the low- and middle-income 
people have not fared so well. 
 
They boast over there of something they call the welfare reform, 
the training programs. And I say, yes, the training programs are 
laudable. I will agree with them on that, if only they would 
implement them seriously. Instead, they are used as smoke and 
mirrors to hide what they really are doing. 
 
During the 1982 election campaign the Premier, who was then 
only the Leader of the Conservative Party, made a promise, and 
his promise was widespread prosperity and jobs for all. Well that 
promise, I suggest to you, looks dismal today. It looks like a 
dismal failure. It was a hollow promise and it really is even more 
vivid when one looks at a recent report released by the National 
Council of Welfare, which I have here, which was in a Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix very recently, March 15, 1986. 
 
And do you what this national council says? I can make copies 
and pass it to those members opposite because I know they are 
interested. It said: “PC government contributes to rising 
Saskatchewan poverty rates.” It’s right there. Let me say further 
what it says: “The ranks of the poor were growing faster in 
Saskatchewan than almost anywhere else in Canada.” That’s the 
legacy of this government, Mr. Speaker. That’s how insensitive 
it has been to the issues that Saskatchewan people have said are 
their issues. That’s how it went about making a lot of promises 
and delivered on almost none of them, and this is the price that 
we have to pay. 
 
Now the Minister of Health spoke a while ago, and I listened 
carefully to what he had to say. He tries to cover up his 
government’s failures by spending thousands of dollars on public 
relations effort and using smoke and mirrors trying to pretend 
that all is okay in our system. Volumes of documentation and 
evidence have shown that our health delivery system is under 
such stress that in fact dangerous conditions exist in some cases, 
and the Minister of Health goes around boasting about what a 
good job his government has done. 
 
On the eve of an election, lo and behold! — we should have an 
election every year — on the even of an election he announces 
more staffing for hospitals. But let’s think about it for a while. 
No one knows yet how much additional staff will be provided, or 
if most of the money will simply go to previously underfunded 
and already announced positions. 
 
When I talk about staffing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I mean all 
staffing, because I know we’ve tended to concentrate on the 
nurses because there is more information around, but 

it’s all staffing in our hospitals. 
 
Yesterday I had the honour of being on a panel with the Minister 
of Health in Regina. I thought that it went very well. It was a 
good panel. But the minister said something of interest. He said 
at this nurses’ forum in Regina that he has increased staff in the 
last four years. The problem is, nobody can find them. When he 
is asked where they are, he can’t tell you. 
 
Mr. Minister, the announcements that you make don’t increase 
staff. And I say to you, that’s all that you have done is make 
announcements. Just like the long list of promises that you and 
your Premier made in 1982 — lots of promises and no results. 
 
If you have provided or if he has provided all these staff 
increases, I would like him to take note and explain the 
following. Why then in the Regina General Hospital — and I 
know the member from North West will be interested in this — 
why then in the Regina General Hospital was there in October of 
1982, 929 support staff, but on March 1st of 1986 there are only 
901 support staff? 
 
What happened to this great increase in staff that the minister 
speaks of? And those are the figures that he used, both part-time 
and full-time. But if you consider only the full-time staff, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, since 1982 until March 1st of 1986, the staff of 
full-time people at the Regina General Hospital in the support 
staff has decreased by 77 people. 
 
The point is that no one really knows if any of this promised 
funding will ever see the light of day if this Conservative 
government should happen to be re-elected after the next 
election. 
 
We have the Minister of Health on the one hand talking about 
more health funding. That’s part of his job, I suppose. But we 
have other government members like the member from Prince 
Albert talking a different line. This is the member who now has 
been given a new status in this caucus. He has now been 
appointed, I believe, to the campaign committee by the Premier. 
Pretty important job, so he must have some influence. 
 
Well let me quote out of a newspaper article in the Prince Albert 
Herald of January 7 of 1985 — or ’86 — in which the following 
is written. This is the member for Prince Albert commenting on 
what he would like to see in the budget: 
 

Prince Albert Conservative MLA Paul Meagher says the 
provincial budget will follow with tougher measures, 
hoping for enormous cuts in government spending, 
especially medicare. 

 
Especially medicare. Prince Albert Herald. That’s the article, 
Mr. Speaker. I will table that. Can I have a page? My colleague 
will pass it over. 
 
The question simply has to be asked: which will it be, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? The question simply has to be: which will it be? Will 
the Minister of Health deliver on his promise, this minister who 
skips meetings that he himself hasn’t staged, and refuses to meet 
with people who see 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

211 
 

the problems every day — the nurses — or will the firmly held 
belief of the member from Prince Albert and many others like 
him in the Tory caucus win the day? Which one? 
 
Now I know they get sensitive if we get into a debate on whether 
the Devine government is firmly committed to medicare and 
health care or not, so I won’t get into that debate. I will assure the 
members I won’t get into that debate. I’m prepared to let the 
people of Saskatchewan judge them on their record. And that 
record, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say is a record of failure. 
 
The throne speech, as I said earlier, is the most backward-looking 
document that any government has presented in this legislature 
in my memory. It is nothing more than an attempt by the 
government to pat itself on the back. 
 
But for what? I ask — for what? There are children’s wards in 
hospitals with 25 to 30 children at a time, and one nurse is 
provided to look after them. There are rural hospitals wit two 
floors and only one nurse on duty at night. There are cases of 
people coming to an emergency ward with an appendicitis attack 
and waiting six hours for an operation. There are over 6,000 
people on the waiting list at the hospitals in Saskatoon. And 
there’s a recent report in the Star-Phoenix where the St. Paul’s 
Hospital is closing 77 beds because it has to deal with a deficit. 
 
And this government boasts about their commitment to health 
care. And guess what the minister has done recently — this great 
improvement to our health care system. Government announced 
the other day that routine eye examinations after April 1st will be 
covered by medicare every two years, instead of once a year as 
they presently are. 
 
Members opposite probably didn’t know that, but that’s a fact. 
This is the new improvement in health care in our province. 
People could get their eyes checked once a year covered by 
medicare; now they’re going to have to wait every two years . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right. My colleague from 
Athabasca has it right. If you’re rich, you’re okay; if you’re not 
so rich, or if you’re poor, you’re in trouble, with this government. 
 
The record of this government has been one of failure, Mr. 
Speaker, and Saskatchewan people have concluded that they 
can’t afford four more years of this kind of Devine failure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And by every measure that one can apply, 
the government has failed. This government has failed to provide 
health to those who need it. Instead of creating jobs, the policies 
of this government have led to a doubling of our unemployed. 
Over 40,000 people are out of work and the numbers keep 
growing. 
 
In 1982 the Premier promised, and I quote, “widespread 
prosperity and jobs for all.” And what has he delivered? 

He has delivered 40,000 unemployed. He’s delivered a record 
number of people on the welfare rolls, more that we even had 
during the depression, and more businesses announcing closures 
every day. 
 
They talk about jobs created in the past four years. The 
unemployed go out to look for a job and they ask: where are they? 
Where are those jobs? They never talk about the closing of 
Stelco, the closing of Dominion Bridge — old established firms 
— the closing of Native Metal Industries, the shutting down of 
Dad’s Cookies, the closing of Eaton’s and Zeller’s and 
MacLeod’s in Moose Jaw. 
 
Oh yes, they announce an upgrader, and that was fine. But the 
people said, get rid of Devine. They announced the upgrader 
here, and yet there has to be a shovelful of dirt turned to begin 
construction on it. There was a bit of a by-election coming at that 
time and they needed a little hoop-la, and we’re still waiting. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the other day the member from Lakeview 
stood up in this House and he spoke about schools that have been 
built in Saskatchewan, and in Regina in particular, and there have 
been . . . But he forgot to say that every one of those schools has 
been built in Regina — and the Minister of Education should pay 
attention — was built by a contractor that was not from the 
province of Saskatchewan. Every one of those schools in Regina 
was built by an Alberta contractor, and I ask, why? Aren’t 
Saskatchewan business people and Saskatchewan contractors 
good enough? 
 
An Hon. Member: The kickbacks are too small. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I don’t want to get into that, but 
maybe you have something there, member from Regina North 
West. 
 
For four years, this government talked about creating jobs, yet 
unemployment has doubled. People dependent on welfare has 
reached record numbers, even higher than during the depression, 
as I’ve said before. And more people moved out of Saskatchewan 
in 1985 than moved here from other provinces. 
 
And I have here an article that came out of the Leader-Post, 
March 18th, and it says: “Province net loser.” I quote from the 
article: 
 

More people moved out of Saskatchewan in 1985 than 
moved here from other provinces, according to statistics 
compiled by the Canadian Association of Movers. 

 
Now you know, I remember a certain premier before the 1971 
election. His name was Ross Thatcher, and Mr. Thatcher had a 
good measure. He said the acid test of growth is population 
growth. If that’s the acid test of growth, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
government has failed miserably, even by that test. And the 
headline is correct. 
 
Under the administration of this government this province has 
been a loser. And why has that happened? Because this 
government has failed to govern in the best 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

212 
 

interest of Saskatchewan people. This open-for-business 
boondoggle has worked the other way. For who? Certainly not 
for the small-business man in Saskatchewan; it hasn’t worked for 
him. 
 
This government has gone out of its way to discourage 
Saskatchewan business people from having a role to play in the 
business that’s here. It’s failed to recognize the ability of 
Saskatchewan people to do things for themselves. They seem to 
think that all you have to do is look somewhere else, and out of 
the corporate world from all over else in the world the saviour is 
going to come, and we’ll do well. 
 
Well I want to suggest — and I’m about to close my remarks, 
Mr. Speaker — that while this government spends its time with 
open-for-business rhetoric and tens of millions of dollars trying 
to convince voters with its advertising that it is actually doing 
something for them, the New Democratic Party and our caucus 
has listened to people from one end of this province to another. 
 
And those people have said to us that jobs should be the highest 
priority of government today, and we agree. And the people have 
said housing and affordable mortgages are needed, and we agree. 
And they have said that Saskatchewan businesses need to be 
involved to meet these needs, and we agree. We listened and we 
heard and we have responded. And on Tuesday, our Leader, 
Allan Blakeney, announced a new housing policy which would 
meet all three of these needs. 
 
It’s always been the Saskatchewan dream, Mr. Speaker, that if 
you work hard you can make a better life for yourself and your 
family. In the past four years the Saskatchewan dream has been 
tarnished. And no matter how hard our families have struggled, 
the job, the security, the new opportunities just haven’t been 
there. 
 
And that is why, in the upcoming provincial election campaign, 
our number one priority is to get Saskatchewan working again. 
A Saskatchewan in which everyone who wants to work has the 
opportunity to work is the ideal, and it is an ideal to which a New 
Democratic Party government will be dedicated. 
 
And so yesterday, on Tuesday, our leader unveiled another major 
plank in a New Democratic government economic strategy, a 
strategy to rekindle the Saskatchewan dream, a strategy to get 
Saskatchewan working again. 
 
This policy, Mr. Speaker, will be a direct benefit to 
Saskatchewan’s families, working people, and small businesses. 
And the number one, job-creation sector, even the members 
opposite will agree, in a provincial economy is housing. And 
each time a new home is built, economic activity on many 
different levels is generated. And even the most cautious 
estimates agree that at least one new job is created in 
Saskatchewan for every new housing unit that’s constructed, plus 
the spin-offs. 
 
And in the past two years housing construction in our province 
has been far below average. Nineteen eighty-four saw the fewest 
housing starts in Saskatchewan since 1970, I want to tell the 
former minister of Urban 

Affairs. And last year was only marginally better with 5,300. We 
say that just isn’t good enough. We say that the Saskatchewan 
economy can generate a minimum of 8,000 new housing units a 
year. 
 
After four years of listening to the ideas and the concerns of 
Saskatchewan families and Saskatchewan small businesses, New 
Democrats are ready to act. And for the young family just starting 
out and trying to pay for their first home, our New Democratic 
government will provide down payment assistance of $7,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — This program will be in effect for a 
minimum of three years to provide some stability to the housing 
market and to avoid the boom and the bust mentality which 
previous programs of this type have generated. And to provide 
interest stability for both new and existing home owners and 
encourage them to make long-term economic commitments, a 
New Democratic government will provide a family home 
protection plan guaranteeing 7 per cent home mortgages for 7 
years on the first 70,000 of the mortgage. 
 
And there’s more, Mr. Speaker. For those living in older homes 
in need of major repairs or renovations, a New Democratic 
government will provide home rehabilitation assistance of up to 
$7,000. And this would include assistance for renovations to 
improve energy conservation. 
 
And the fourth part of this policy, Mr. Speaker, is that for 
low-income families and individuals, as well as senior citizens, a 
New Democratic government would have a renewed 
commitment to the construction of social housing, both rental and 
home ownership units. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the members of this House 
and the people of Saskatchewan: the time has come to make 
decent, affordable housing a right for Saskatchewan people and 
not just a privilege. 
 
I say, let’s build for tomorrow. Stop the rhetoric about open for 
business, because that’s all it is, is rhetoric. And let’s do it the 
Saskatchewan way with Saskatchewan people doing the things 
for themselves like they know how to do. Stop the waste of 
taxpayers’ money on expensive government advertising — tens 
of millions of dollars wasted on expensive government 
advertising just before an election — and put it into jobs for 
people. Put it into jobs so families can get a decent living. 
 
I say that this government has burdened Saskatchewan taxpayers 
with the biggest tax increase in the history of Saskatchewan. And 
the most intelligent budget of the former minister of Finance took 
millions of dollars out of consumers’ pockets, dollars that would 
have been spent in Saskatchewan business places. 
 
I say to the people of this province that New Democrats are 
prepared to put their money into housing to help make it possible 
for our families to buy and own a home, also to create thousands 
of jobs and to stimulate business in our business community. The 
Tories have put their money — the taxpayers’ money — into the 
pockets of the 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

213 
 

Peter Pocklingtons at $10 million, and the Manalta Coals from 
Alberta where they sold off the people’s coal mines, Pioneer 
Trust and Will Klein, the oil companies. That’s not where the 
taxpayers’ money should go. It should go to benefit the taxpayer 
who paid it in the first place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Oh, yes, today we, for the second day, 
heard about the new developments in PAPCO. Except once 
again, the Premier and members opposite refused to answer why 
the Saskatchewan people through their taxes, have to put up the 
$248 million with which this company of Weyerhaeuser is going 
to buy the pulp mill. 
 
Tommy Douglas used to say: some people look at things as they 
are and say why?; we look at things as they might be, and we say, 
why not? Young families have said to this government, we want 
to buy a home; we can’t afford a down payment. And this 
government has said, why? Well, we don’t say that, Mr. Speaker. 
We say, why not? We will make it possible. We will help you, 
the families of Saskatchewan, achieve the dream of owning your 
own home. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion let me say this. In 1982 a certain 
political leader won office in our province by promising people, 
there’s so much we can be. And by golly —to quote a word he 
often uses — ‘by golly’ he kept that promise. Four years later we 
have so much more. We have more unemployment, we have 
more government debt, we have more taxation of ordinary 
people, we have more tax breaks for the oil companies and the 
rich, we have more wasteful government spending than ever 
before in our history, we have more mismanagement, and we 
have more scandal, and we have more cut-backs in important 
government services. 
 
He kept his promise. Four years after this Leader of the 
Conservative Party, and now the Premier, told us, there’s so 
much more we can be. I say to this House, Saskatchewan people 
are asking how much more of this can we stand. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And they have concluded, only as long as 
it takes to get an election over with — only that long. In four 
years this government has lost public support and public 
confidence. It has squandered important opportunities to move 
our province forward. It’s turned its back on its so-called populist 
principles and become an uncaring, incompetent bunch of 
desperate politicians with no sense of purpose, no direction, and 
no future. Never has a Saskatchewan government disappointed 
so many in such a period of time. 
 
In this throne speech I see no direction at all. This throne speech 
perpetuates the disappointment of the people of Saskatchewan. 
It’s backward looking. It has no vision. It is 

the speech of a government that has failed, and therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, I cannot support it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I certainly enter this 
debate with a great deal of enthusiasm. I thank the people of 
Regina North West, who I do represent, for continuing to support 
my political endeavours. I also represent those people in this 
province who are still of the free enterprise stripe, and certainly 
those small “c” conservatives who have been left so far in the 
dust by this current government. 
 
The rhetoric that we saw within the throne speech has a very 
weak support base. We have a government that came into power 
in the province of Saskatchewan with a great deal of promise. 
The people believed in them. They were depending on a change. 
They’d just had 11 years of socialism. They were up to here with 
that, Mr. Speaker, and they looked at the change in 1982 as 
something very positive in Saskatchewan. 
 
It started out on a very positive note, I might add. There was a 
reduction of approximately 140 million annually in taxes on 
gasoline. That happened within seconds of this administration’s 
swearing-in ceremony. Good legislation, Mr. Speaker, good 
legislation. 
 
Following that, at a time when the NDP refused to recognize that 
the home owners of this province were losing their homes to high 
interest rates, the Conservative government in 1982 responded 
with a mortgage interest reduction plan. Again, very good 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. Legislation in fact that defeated the 
socialists, defeated them at a time when they could have 
responded as a government to the needs of those home owners 
across this province. They came in with a program that helped no 
one. 
 
I recall at the time the NDP offered the people of Saskatchewan 
— in 1982 as an election promise — a promise that would have 
offered one out of 25 mortgage holders in the province support. 
Rates rose from a 1967 level of 6 per cent to an unbearablelevel 
in 1979, ’80, and ’81, of nearing 22 per cent suffered by home 
owners certainly in my constituency and certainly in many across 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unfortunately that’s where the drama ends; that’s 
where the Conservative promise to the people of Saskatchewan 
slows up. Interest rates began to fall. A program they’d basically 
saved homes with, became redundant. Instead of reacting to the 
needs of those home owners, they extended a program that was 
no longer a program that helped anyone. 
 
Currently interest rates sit at between 10 and 12 per cent, 
depending on the term that the home owner wants to accept. It 
certainly hasn’t enhanced the construction of new homes in the 
province, as can be seen by Sask Housing’s own record; 1984 
and ’85 were the worst two on record in the past 10 years in this 
province with respect to housing starts. 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

214 
 

Their own bureaucrats in the Sask Housing department, under 
their current support system of thirteen and a quarter per cent, 
estimate that by 1987, Mr. Speaker, there will be a reduction, a 
further reduction, in home starts throughout the province. The 
same bureaucrats indicated in the document, Housing Demand, 
that’s available to anybody in the province through the Sask 
Housing Corporation, that the reasons for the reduction in home 
starts in the province are high interest rates and high 
unemployment. 
 
Their own bureaucrats are leading them, as far as the direction 
they could have taken in enhancing a program that would have 
delivered for the people, rather than a program that in fact is 
negative, in that it costs jobs every time a home start is not 
undertaken. The multiplier factor above the number of people 
working on that home is about 2.5. Each housing start in the 
province offers another 1.78 jobs to the people of this province. 
 
We undertook to recognize this as a serious problem within our 
system. Recent direction in the U.S. market indicates that since 
January their 30-year conventional mortgage rate has dropped 
from 13 per cent to 10 per cent. The result of that change in the 
U.S. 30-year conventional mortgage rate is a 15 per cent increase 
in housing starts nationally across the United States of America. 
This means thousands and thousands of jobs to thousands and 
thousands of Americans. 
 
It’s a time when Saskatchewan people are failing to react to the 
change in rates from thirteen and a quarter to 10 to 12 per cent. 
They just don’t feel at thirteen and a quarter that many of them 
can afford to own homes, and they’re absolutely right. At thirteen 
and a quarter per cent the qualification rate for a family to 
purchase a home in Saskatchewan is somewhere between 27 and 
$30,000. 
 
We offered a program several weeks ago that will address many 
of the weaknesses inherent in our system as they relate to interest 
rates. The Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce has recently 
indicated interest rates have still got a most serious effect on our 
economy. 
 
The program we indicated was that the government would pay 
the first $50,000 on all home mortgages up to a maximum of 
$50,000 appraised value on homes across this province. What 
that means to the poor, and the NDP are always certainly 
considering them in the overall picture, it means in many cases 
that they can in fact own a home in this province. On a 20-year 
term on that program, $206 a month will make the monthly 
payment on the principal, requiring less than $15,000 in income 
to become a home owner in Saskatchewan. 
 
It’ll certainly turn the attention to home ownership in the rural 
areas of the province where I think there has been —as the 
minister of housing indicated to me in question period last week 
— there’s been a low and a very slow development of housing 
ownership and housing construction. 
 
A home in the rural area that would be valued at approximately 
$30,000 appraised value, could be financed for in the area of 150 
to $200 a month, and 

owned by some young gentleman out there that’s putting farm 
machinery together or working at odd jobs, jobs that are available 
in our communities. But certainly the jobs out there will not 
support purchase of homes at thirteen and a quarter per cent as 
has been demonstrated and proved with their own statistics on 
home ownership and new construction in the province. 
 
Looking at the record in the American housing industry and also 
looking at the record in Alberta during buoyant economic times, 
there certainly will be an increase in housing starts based on 
interest rate projections. The NDP, a government that could not 
foresee the problems happening to people in 1982 at 20 and 22 
per cent, have suddenly jumped into the ball game with a promise 
of 7 per cent for seven years on $70,000. 
 
It reminds me . . . and I go back to 1973 and a federal government 
program at the time called AHOP, which again was designed for 
the low-income earners. The term was as at that time five years. 
In 1978, ’79, when those terms were expiring, Mr. Speaker, the 
AHOP home owners in most cases were forced out of their 
homes because they could not afford the new interest rates placed 
on those AHOP homes by the banks who were in fact supporting 
those loans. 
 
That’s not a phenomenon that the NDP are suggesting won’t 
happen with their program. In fact I would suggest it would 
happen in many, many cases, because it doesn’t give any 
long-term guarantee on interest rates to home owners anywhere 
in the province. They’re suggesting a seven-year program. 
They’re also indicating, and I think in their area of housing and 
home ownership, their credibility has to be somewhat questioned 
— they’re not only giving 7 per cent to the home owners across 
the province, they’re going to give them back their home owners’ 
grant which is just another gift from the NDP with a program like 
they’re designing. 
 
And if you look at the multitude of promises that have come out 
of the socialist mouths in the last two weeks, going into an 
election campaign, I think the people of Saskatchewan have to 
somewhat question who can credibly govern this province. 
Although the record of the present government may be weak, 
they’ve indicated with the sale of Weyerhaeuser, for instance, in 
recent days, that they are at least willing to turn the corner and 
sell off assets in order to enhance the lives of Saskatchewan 
people who somewhere down the road have to pay off a deficit 
that has to be shared by the NDP. 
 
When this government came into power, certainly there was debt. 
It was hidden in the Crown sector. But the debt was nearing $3 
billion. Four years later we’ve got a debt that’s nearing $7 billion 
when you include the same Crown sector, which is almost 7,000 
for every man, woman, and child in the province. Something has 
got to enhance the orderly economic growth of this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that home ownership, which 
has to be the most important element and the most important 
consideration of any family in the province, can in fact do that 
through a program where the interest is guaranteed and paid for 
by the province; and the principal, every payment on a home, by 
every home 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

215 
 

owner in this province, becomes an investment in their own 
future. This can only be done with the election of some WCC 
members in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — If the people of Saskatchewan will examine 
carefully the program, there is no question — and we have graphs 
that I will make available to the people of Saskatchewan that 
indicate a program of that nature will at least add to the growth 
in home construction in this province by a factor of three-fold, 
which would offer approximately 50,000 Saskatchewan residents 
the opportunity of new, meaningful, employment over a long 
term. 
 
We would also find that under a program of that nature, Mr. 
Speaker, we would have a great influx, a great influx of 
professionals who make a profession of building homes, into this 
province. And it would eat up the unemployment that’s also been 
supported not only by the former government, but hasn’t changed 
a great deal with the election of a Conservative government who 
continues not only to expand their own government offices and 
their own cabinet offices, but also expands the civil service 
within the province, a promise that they entered government and 
they took the oath as government, to reduce. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are not going to take 
that promise lightly. We are committed to a small ‘c’ 
conservative philosophy. The promises undertaken by both the 
government and the official opposition in this campaign are 
going to be examined very critically, and rightly so. 
 
We have a deficit that wasn’t mentioned, wasn’t even suggested 
as a serious problem, in a document that was tabled as a 
document basically looking at the future of this province. We 
have a Minister of Finance who tonight goes to the people across 
this province indicating that there’s no reason at this time to 
address the huge and growing deficit in Saskatchewan. And 
certainly the reason the Government of Saskatchewan fails to 
address the deficit is they are bankrupt of any ideas that will 
enable the economy of this province to progress. 
 
Another omission in the throne speech is the U.S. farm Bill. That 
particular piece of legislation in the U.S. will likely have a more 
dramatic effect on the Saskatchewan economy than any 
legislation ever passed on this continent. At this time the Chicago 
futures for number one red spring, range around $2.50 a bushel, 
compared to the March futures of approximately 25 per cent 
higher, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Members opposite will say, well that’s an investor’s look at the 
grains market. Well the investors do set the price and the 
investors are not happy with what could happen to the Canadian 
grain producer, half of which live in this province. We’ve poured 
a billion dollars into their pockets through government coffers in 
the last several weeks. Certainly the banks are happy because 
those who can’t afford to make their payments, their 50,000 is 
going directly to the eastern banks. 

The other farmers in the province who are in the intermediate 
area when it comes to financing, I’m certain are happy. They can 
put their crops in. They can pay for their fuel and their fertilizers. 
 
There’s another third out there, and many of them don’t want the 
50,000, don’t need the 50,000. And certainly . . . Maybe that 
should have been held over for a rainy day. In the next three 
years, as we’re all aware, the U.S. government is putting 52 
billion into support programs to support the grains prices to U.S. 
farmers. 
 
That is what we’re competing with, Mr. Speaker. We could see 
$2-a-bushel wheat in this province. That means a loss of revenues 
to the Saskatchewan farmers of probably in the area of a billion 
dollars if it’s taken out at great length. Indicated right now, with 
a 25 per cent drop in those prices, the farmers are going to suffer 
in this province a loss of income of at least a half a billion dollars. 
 
That certainly doesn’t bode well for a government that’s deficit 
has grown to 7 billion, with no answers to the people of this 
province as to how that deficit will be addressed. 
 
We offer a program that I wish the Government of Saskatchewan 
would undertake to implement as legislation, which will 
guarantee — guarantee — at least a three-fold increase in the 
number of housing starts, at least 50,000 jobs throughout the 
province of Saskatchewan. It will also address the needs in the 
rural communities, where business people are going to suffer 
astronomically as a result of low grain prices and as a result of 
drought they’ve experienced over the last three or four years. 
 
We need something to address the problem in the rural 
communities. Home construction has traditionally in this country 
been an engine and a fuel of our . . . an engine of our economy. 
And I would suggest that at this time in our history, home 
construction can still be used as an engine to fuel our economy. 
 
A program like the program we’ve outlined will pay for itself — 
will pay for itself. 
 
An Hon. Member: Why are you stealing our program? 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — The member from . . . Mr. Koskie suggests we 
stole his program. He’s speaking from a position . . . He was in 
government in 1982. When the home owners and the young 
families in this province were being forced out of their homes, 
his answer was public housing. And many, many places 
throughout Saskatchewan, and the rural members in this House 
will be aware of this, they are empty today. 
 
(1600) 
 
I was through the community of Avonlea not long ago, during 
the winter, and a public housing unit was standing with its door 
open. The people of Saskatchewan do not want competition with 
the public housing sector. In small towns where people are 
coming and going and home ownership is not that uncommon, 
when they have to 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

216 
 

compete with public ownership in the sale of their homes in those 
small rural areas, it’s almost impossible to get the market value 
for that property. And that certainly affects teachers and other 
professionals who in small towns have been at least in a position 
where they could afford housing. 
 
So it isn’t unfair to be critical of this government’s housing 
record, Mr. Speaker. But I believe that with some direction, and 
if the mandate is renewed, that they will have the political will 
and they could have the political will to address the problem. But 
they have to address it from the position of interest rates. There 
isn’t any other way that you can stimulate housing and stimulate 
job creation as quickly as you can by lowering interest rates. 
 
We also suggest that the home owners who are in the 
market-place for interest rates are affected dramatically by the 
market. If the government supports that interest and pays it and 
borrows the money on behalf of the home owner, we believe that 
the interest rates paid by the taxpayers and the owners of homes 
in this province could be from two to three points lower than 
interest is currently, tied in on housing. 
 
And I’m sure that the Minister of Finance would support that 
position, knowing that governments do have a little more 
leverage in the world financial market in borrowing money that 
they know will be repaid, borrowing money for a program that 
creates jobs. 
 
The other thing it does, and the NDP spoke of that earlier in 
today’s debate, it puts money back into those taxpayers’ pockets, 
who have paid the bills in this country — the middle-income 
earners who are so often called upon again tonight in tonight’s 
budget speech to contribute a little more, to contribute a little 
more because of the lack of interest that the current government 
and the last government had in the welfare of those 
middle-income earners in our province. 
 
It also puts them to work because, Mr. Speaker, these people 
don’t want to be on the welfare rolls. They don’t want to be on 
the unemployment rolls. Their choice in life is to work and to 
contribute in a meaningful way to society. 
 
They ask us how we’re going to pay for such a program. Within 
their own budget speech they have an economic development 
program that in fact cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan $120 
million, Mr. Speaker. That program provides — and I can quote 
from the budget or from the throne speech: 
 

In the past year alone $120 million was provided out of the 
employment development fund, creating or sustaining 
more than 22,000 jobs, principally in co-operation with the 
private sector. 

 
Well, I should say that $120 million will pay the interest annually 
on the construction of 20,000 new housing units in Saskatchewan 
— 20,000 new housing units. Just using a little bit of arithmetic, 
and one housing unit provides 1.78 full-time jobs in our 
community, plus a spin-off factor of a further 2.54 jobs in our 
community. So looking at 20,000 housing units, Mr. Speaker, 
you’re going to 

create at least 40,000 jobs with the same input, jobs that are 
meaningful. Not chipping ice of Regina streets, not gathering up 
weeds in the alleys of Regina and other cities and towns in the 
province, but putting people into a situation where they can not 
only build houses and build on their own future with meaningful 
jobs, but also can afford homes. 
 
And this is a problem not only in Saskatchewan, it’s a problem 
throughout our country, and it certainly relates directly to high 
interest rates. As I indicated earlier in the U.S. example, in 1982 
in the U.S. there were 1.1 million housing starts. In March of this 
year, the projected number of housing starts in the U.S. market 
had risen to 2.1 million. It’s doubled. 
 
Now the performance of this government . . .By their own 
admission the number of housing units has actually fallen since 
they were elected in 1982. The number of new starts has actually 
fallen. There’s got to be a failure somewhere within the system. 
And the problem is they haven’t got possibly the personnel to 
recognize the problem or they probably haven’t got the people 
qualified to find the problem. Their own bureaucrats are 
predicting a downturn in the number of housing starts, and in 
their own documentation they indicate it’s due to unemployment 
and high interest rates. 
 
We have a program that addresses both high unemployment and 
high interest rates. It eliminates the cost of interest on the 
principal residence only, and that’s what families are interested 
in. And it allows them not only to buy and purchase houses 
throughout Saskatchewan, but it gives the unemployed, 
approximately 40,000 who are recognized as unemployed and 
certainly many others who are no longer even considered 
unemployed and are just basically without hope in the market, it 
gives them all hope and it does so on an annual basis. I think a 
very conservative estimate would be 15,000 new starts a year 
within our community. 
 
In 1978 in Alberta we had 47,000 new home starts. That was in 
a buoyant Alberta economy. It was at a time when rates were 
rising. People were getting into the market, and I will admit the 
economy has had a downturn, a severe downturn, and many of 
these home owners have lost their property simply because they 
can no longer afford to make the payments because of high 
interest rates and loss of jobs. But as I outlined earlier, Mr. 
Speaker, with a program like we’ve offered, the less meaningful 
employment, the people who are on the minimum wage, the 
people who are earning less that $15,000 in our communities, 
will have hope of home ownership. In fact I would suggest that a 
family of three, a mother and two children on welfare, under our 
program would certainly be considered for home ownership 
because paying the principal is affordable. 
 
The other benefit our program offers . . . The NDP suggest in 
seven years their program will expire. Well I suggest to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that so will a lot of their home owners expire, because 
when the interest rate rises to the market seven years down the 
road, they will not be able to afford those homes. 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

217 
 

Under our program, on a $50,000 mortgage, if you took a 10-year 
term on the mortgage, Mr. Speaker, your house would be paid 
for. The $50,000 of equity would be yours in 10 years. Under the 
present system, most homes and most young families are tied in 
for 25 years. The cost is more. For 25 years they pay more. The 
first 15 years is interest only. You barely touch the principal. 
Every nickel they pay on their house for the first 15 years, unless 
it’s with a credit union in Saskatchewan, goes to Toronto or 
Montreal, to an eastern banking institution. 
 
There’s no question the government still has to deal with the 
banks, but we do feel it would be a more equitable, and certainly 
a more successful method of turning the Saskatchewan economy 
around, through new jobs, renewed security, and renewed hope 
by those families who want to own homes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would salute this government if they would undertake a 
program like ours, and take it seriously, and offer it to the people 
of Saskatchewan through legislation. They have the time. They 
have the mandate. And I believe we’ll be here for a while longer, 
until in fact this government comes up with an answer for those 
home owners across this province. 
 
The NDP promise and our promise has to be taken seriously by 
your government before you go to the polls, gentlemen, or you 
could be history. And I don’t believe that there’s any question 
that some of the minds in your government may recognize that, 
and may come in with a program that will be legislated, that will 
in fact be on behalf of Saskatchewan home owners and on behalf 
of Saskatchewan people. 
 
The statistics with respect to home ownership under your 
administration have not been good. I will add that the statistics 
— the foreclosure statistics — under the past government, the 
NDP, were not good. That’s why they’ve been reduced to a mere 
nine members in this Assembly. They recognize the problem is 
still there. You as a government, I think you’ve been just a little 
too laid back. 
 
You’ve taken on some of the character of our past government. 
You’ve expanded in the civil service We now have 5 per cent 
people — 5 per cent more employment — in the government 
circles of this province and it’s at the expense of the 
Saskatchewan taxpayer. If numbers are examined, those 5 per 
cent, that 5 per cent increase has cost the taxpayer approximately 
$300 million a year. If it was trimmed, and if we eliminate other 
support programs in employment which approach $200 million, 
I say to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we can afford 
a program that we have been talking about. 
 
And I suggest to you, and I challenge you, to offer them at least 
as much — at least as much — with respect to that area. 
 
It also takes the question of the politics of interest rate stability 
out of the market-place. We will no longer trade off interest rate 
reduction for votes, but we will enhance the small-business sector 
because everybody’s equity, over the period of this program, will 
increase. And that’s certainly new in the history of small 
business, and also families in this province whose experience has 
certainly 

been less than that. 
 
I could go on, Mr. Speaker, at length. I’ve given the Minister of 
Environment a commitment that I’ll allow him 10 minutes in the 
debate. But I would like to close, with certainly some 
apprehension, and the apprehension is as a result of promises that 
I’ve heard from both sides of this House in this election 
campaign. The people of this province cannot afford them. You 
have offered nothing which will replenish the revenues required 
to pay off our deficit. The news tonight is not going to be good 
news to the people of Saskatchewan. It’s not going to be good 
news for the Conservatives. It may be good news for the 
opposition because we may be here for a while longer before an 
election is going to be an issue for the people of Saskatchewan, 
to debate whose programs in fact offer them the most security. 
 
(1615) 
 
But take it seriously, gentlemen — deficit reduction before we 
are ordered by the banks, nationally and internationally, to trim 
our own ship. There’s still some hope, Mr. Speaker, a glimmer. 
And I would expect the government who does come back with 
the mandate after the next election to address some areas that the 
people of this province expect them to address. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a 
pleasure to enter the throne speech debate as a representative of 
the Kelsey-Tisdale constituency. It’s an honour and a privilege 
to have served Kelsey-Tisdale for the last six years. And certainly 
the people of Kelsey-Tisdale, the north-eastern part of 
Saskatchewan, are a very proud lot of people. They’re proud of 
their community, they’re proud of the great province we live in, 
they’re proud to be Canadian, and certainly I’m proud to 
represent them as a member of the legislature from 
Kelsey-Tisdale. 
 
Before I go into some of the things I want to say about 
Kelsey-Tisdale . . . And talking of being proud as a member of 
the legislature, this afternoon in question period I was not proud 
to be a member of this Legislative Assembly when I saw people 
— very, very honest and important people —being introduced in 
this legislature, and I saw members of the opposition, NDP 
opposition, acting like children, hollering and yelling. I heard one 
member, the member from Quill Lakes say, when Mr. Gaynor 
was introduced, “Gainer the Gopher.” I can’t believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that this Assembly can condone that type of decorum. 
That is absolutely, in my belief, not the type of decorum that 
should be, or ever should be . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — . . . represented by any member of this 
legislature in this Assembly at any time. I do not believe that, Mr. 
Speaker, and I do not partake in any part of that. 
 
When you look at people like Weyerhaeuser — the most honest, 
probably the most people-oriented company that’s known in this 
North American continent — when 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

218 
 

you hear members of the opposition, the Leader of the 
Opposition, actually insinuate that they may have had a criminal 
offence and maybe scam money off . . . 
 
I can’t believe, Mr. Speaker, that anybody, anybody at all, who 
would invite people of the calibre of Weyerhaeuser into our 
province — who are going to spend $500 million in here, who 
are going to employ 700 man-years of employment, who are 
going to have 215 permanent jobs — would talk about people 
like that. That is not, in my belief, being representative of the 
people of Saskatchewan or not fairly representing this 
Legislative Assembly . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . And I just heard somebody over there say, are 
they going to fill your pockets? Mr. Speaker, I do not believe that 
any member of this legislature should even talk in that tone of 
voice, because each and every one of us represent the 
constituency they come from and the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. And if you do not believe that you represent all 
of Saskatchewan as members of this legislature, then I believe 
that you should not sit in this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Speaker, I heard the member from 
Regina North East speaking today. He talked about the housing 
program they had introduced — 7 per cent, or whatever it was. I 
heard on the radio; I heard it being announced. And I would just 
like to ask . . . I would just first of all question the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It’s impossible to hear what the 
member is saying. I’d like to hear it, and I trust most of you 
would. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
just question the credibility of such a program. I would like to 
just put into its perspective how they would recover the cost. I 
heard the Leader of the Opposition say on TV last night that it 
would be recovered through the tax structure, that it would be 
returned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we in 1983 had build-a-home program, we 
did a complete analysis of what would be the return to the 
province of Saskatchewan. That was based on a 60 to $70,000 
home. It came out in the neighbourhood $3,000 per unit. That 
included education and health tax; it included corporate tax, 
individual tax, and all the other spin-off types of taxes that would 
come in. We estimated, if we brought that program in, it would 
be a break-even type of program. 
 
Since that time, Mr. Speaker, housing has not increased in value. 
It is about the same, as I heard Mr. McKinlay say on CKRM this 
morning. So what does that tell you, Mr. Speaker? If they are 
going to give you $7,000 for every new home in this province, 
they are going to take it out of the tax base that they will have in 
place. That tells me that they’re either going to double the 
education and health tax, they’re going to substantially increase 
the individual or corporate tax, or they’re going to bring on some 
other taxes we don’t know about. Mr. Speaker, either it’s not true 
or they’re going to increase the taxes. There’s no other alternative 
to it, whatever it would be. 

Also, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the number of houses that 
they’re saying will be built in the province, they’re saying 8,000 
new homes in 1986 if their program . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Speaker, but that’s not credible. If you 
listen to the Saskatchewan housing association, they say the 
number of units that’s needed to be built in this province is about 
6,500 on an annual basis — 6,500, not 8,000. And also they say, 
Mr. Speaker, that without the program, there will be 5,500 units 
built. If you take the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Speaker, if you take 5,500 units that 
would normally be built, you take the 6,500 that would be built 
regardless of what program was in or what’s needed out there 
over the next three years, you multiply that out, Mr. Speaker, and 
it’s going to cost in the neighbourhood of $45 million a year to 
bring on 1,000 extra units — $45 million a year to give us 1,000 
extra units in this province. Does that seem to make sense and is 
that credible, Mr. Speaker? And that does not take into 
consideration the 7 per cent interest, the write-down. 
 
So I just ask: is it credible? It comes back to me, is it credible and 
is it fair? Who would pay? The taxpayer would have to pay. The 
taxpayer would have to pay about $45,000 per unit extra to get 
the extra 1,000 units — 45,000. If you break that down to per 
family, in this province, of four, that’s over 220 to $250 per 
family for each unit that’s built. Just stop and think of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure there’s many things I could talk about 
about the opposition, but I really came here today to talk a little 
bit about Kelsey-Tisdale. I came here to talk about 
Kelsey-Tisdale and how I feel very proud and important to 
represent it. And I’d just like to go back over some of the things 
that’s happened over the last four years in my constituency in 
Kelsey-Tisdale. 
 
And I look at the Tisdale area, and I could just list off a large 
number of things that have happened, but I’ll just touch on a few 
of the very major important things: a new shopping mall in 
Tisdale, 20 new businesses; three new implement dealerships, 
and they’re brand-new, Mr. Speaker; two brand-new car 
dealerships. We’ve had about 45 new homes built in there, and 
we’ve had a manufacturing plant that’s doubled its number of 
employees from 40 to 90. We have Fibre Form, that was closed 
down when we took over, Mr. Speaker, is now back in full 
production, in fact expanding and employs another 15 people. 
 
We have 13 new businesses in down-town Tisdale. And on top 
of that, Mr. Speaker, we’re gong to have a 40-bed nursing home, 
something that’s been asked for in that area for years. It’s going 
to be built, a brand-new one. We put up a brand-new senior 
citizens’ complex, 36 units. The primary No. 3 Highway from 
Tisdale west which was needed to be primary status, is now 
primary status, a cost saving to the truckers in the area, and 
certainly 35 south has been renovated. 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

219 
 

We’ve got a new seed cleaning plant in the Tisdale area, a 
brand-new seed cleaning plant. We’ve got natural gas to the 
farmers in the area under our natural gas program, and they’re 
also looking at a health care unit centre, with a hospital 
incorporated with the nursing home. We’re looking at a bulk 
seeding plant in the area and certainly spin-off industries. 
 
And I could go on, Mr. Speaker, but that just gives you some of 
the ideas of one town in my constituency as what has went on 
there in the last four years only. In little towns like Prairie River, 
a new museum and a new library. And Bjorkdale, Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, we have new low-income homes. We have certainly 
a new curling rink. We have four new businesses and a 
brand-new gym on the school. 
 
Porcupine Plain, Mr. Speaker — I was proud of Porcupine Plain 
to open a handicapped centre which will allow 35 less fortunate 
than ourselves to be able to be employed, at the same time 
employ 15 staff. And I certainly could go on. 
 
Talk about our highways. In Kelsey-Tisdale nearly every road 
has been upgraded or improved or rebuilt to a total of almost $24 
million in Kelsey-Tisdale in the last four years. 
 
And I could go on to a little town called Archerwill, 
Saskatchewan. If you look there . . . When I went there . . . I 
remember going back there in 1978 in a campaign, went into 
there, and there wasn’t much more than a welding shop and a 
hotel and a post office. Today they have a new credit union. 
They’ve got a large co-op complex there, with a hardware store, 
a retail. They also have a brand-new activity centre. They have a 
new curling rink. They’ve got a new accounting office. They’ve 
the R.M. office there. And they’ve got four other new businesses, 
plus a major welding and repair shop in there. 
 
Now I’d like to move on to Hudson Bay and talk a little bit about 
how Weyerhaeuser fits into it and how the forest management, 
which . . . Those people over opposite do not understand forest 
management. I see the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
smile when I talk about forest management. I know that. He 
doesn’t understand. Certainly the member from Athabasca does, 
but the other ones don’t understand how important forest 
management and the utilization of our forest is to this province 
and to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Just in the Hudson Bay area, just to give you an example in the 
Hudson Bay area, over the last 10 or 12 years we’ve been trying 
to find a place to sell our chips to, from SaskPly and from 
Simpson Timber. They’ve been shipping up to The Pas, Manfor 
at The Pas. They’re just about in the procedure of being closed 
under an NDP government. Now we’ll have a secure market for 
our chips. We’ll have a secure market for our small wood. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, it will allow the operators in the 
area to log and take out the wood that’s normally been left and 
wasted. 
 
I’d just like to talk about MacMillan Bloedel in Hudson Bay. It 
has been a very large expansion done 

there. It went, Mr. Speaker, from 80 employees in 1982 to 160 
employees right now with a possible further expansion. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s opportunities and jobs for a lot of people in my 
area and in Saskatchewan. 
 
Certainly the signing yesterday with Weyerhaeuser was a very, 
very important feature that all of us here in Saskatchewan should 
be proud of. It will be the first time that we’ll incorporate an 
integrated pulp and paper mill together where the usage of all our 
forests — and certainly the member from Athabasca will 
appreciate it — the usage of all our forests will be used, not 
wasted. The small timber, the aspen that’s in the area that has 
been wasted for many, many years will now be utilized in a very 
high quality paper mill, at the same time, Mr. Speaker, creating 
a lot of jobs. 
 
And even more important than that, the forest management, the 
reforestation that is needed, the proper forest management of all 
our forests — these people are known to be number one in that 
industry. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, it’s about time. You know, for about 
three decades now that I can remember, we have really had very 
little forest management or reforestation. In the last four years, 
Mr. Speaker, we have planted 40 million trees in Saskatchewan, 
but that’s just not enough. We need more and we need a 
long-term plan if we’re going to have forests here for future 
generations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s getting towards 4:30. I’ve got just a couple more 
things I’d like to . . . (inaudible) . . . here. I’d just like to go on, 
Mr. Speaker, to say that the signing of the long-term forest 
management agreement with the west and the central part of 
Saskatchewan, which will allow individual and small contractors 
a secure wood supply, the inner exchange of wood, the saw logs 
from PAPCO — as it’s known now — to Big River, which hasn’t 
been done before, the utilization to its best return value to the 
province will happen. Also, as I mentioned earlier, the use of the 
aspen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that’s what I call using to the best of our 
ability the resources we have. That’s good, sound business 
people working with a good government here in Saskatchewan 
— and working together for the betterment of all the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1630) 
 
I would say, Mr. Speaker, that what it does: it gives opportunities 
for the province; it gives opportunity for young people; it gives 
opportunities for our families; much more so, it gives 
opportunities for tomorrow, planning for the future. And I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that’s success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re a proud people, and we’re living in a great 
province with many ups and downs. But as pioneers of today and 
pioneers of the future we all know that. Led by certainly a young 
and dynamic, young Premier like Premier Grant Devine, and the 
grass-roots people that we represent, the people of 
Saskatchewan, we will lead the nation in growth, and in jobs, and 
in every other field. Because we believe in our province and our 
future, and we’ll only be satisfied when the highest degree of 
success 
  



 
March 26, 1986 

 

220 
 

for the people of Saskatchewan has been achieved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I support the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 42 
 

Tusa Muirhead 
McLeod McLaren 
Taylor Rousseau 
Schoenhals Bacon 
Duncan Johnson 
Katzman Parker 
Pickering Young 
Hardy Hopfner 
Folk Rybchuk 
Smith (Swift Current) Caswell 
Myers Domotor 
Dutchak Meagher 
Embury Boutin 
Sandberg Muller 
Klein Baker 
Currie Glauser 
Martens Sauder 
Maxwell Zazelenchuk 
Smith (Moose Jaw South) Gerich 
Hodgins Petersen 
Morin Swenson 

 
Nays — 10 

 
Blakeney Koskie 
Tchorzewski Lusney 
Thompson Shillington 
Engel Sveinson 
Lingenfelter Hampton 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the hon. 
member from The Battlefords: 
 
That the said address be engrossed and presented to His Honour 
the Lieutenant Governor by such members of the Assembly as 
are of the Executive Council. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I moved, seconded by the hon. member 
from The Battlefords: 
 
That this Assembly, pursuant to rule 84, hereby appoints the 
committee of finance to consider the supply to be granted to Her 
Majesty and to consider the ways and means of raising the 
supply. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


