


















































May 1, 1986 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 1, 1986 
 
 

1019 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Urban Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 24 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me whether 
your department has paid for any polling or any similar kind of 
research in the fiscal year last? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — No. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. Do you have provisions in 
the budget we’re now considering to pay for any polling? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We don’t plan to do any. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, I don’t know 
whether you have it with you. If you do, just pass it over and 
it’ll save time. And if you don’t, if you would give me an 
undertaking that you will provide it for me later. But does your 
department hire any consultants or architects to do work on 
behalf of the department? And if it does, can you provide me 
with a list of those that did some work for you in the last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — There was some consulting work done 
with regards to conducting investigations in, I believe, two or 
three municipalities. I will provide that information to you as 
soon as I can, but that was all that was done. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — You don’t have it with you at the present 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I have some information here, but I want to 
check it before I pass . . . It’s the first time I’ve seen it. So that I 
will pass it to you. It may not come tonight, but it will come to 
you as quickly as I can get it to you. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I find that . . . That’s quite adequate. Can 
you at the same time provide, when you provide that 
information, the amount that was paid for the contract that these 
people did for you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Whatever information is appropriate to 
pass, I will certainly provide that to you. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I don’t think there would be anything 
inappropriate in giving us information on how much a 
consultant would have been paid. It’ll certainly be public 
knowledge in the public accounts, so basically what I’m asking 
for: give me the name of the consultants or architects; the work 
that was done; and the amount that they were paid. Those are 
the three items and if you can give me a commitment to do that 
within the next few days, I will be satisfied. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I thought I had already given you a 
commitment to provide you with whatever information I  

can that is deemed appropriate. This is the first time that I have 
seen this particular information. I want to review it myself. I 
have a couple of questions that I want to ask about it and I will 
provide you whatever I can as soon as I can. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Okay. I will take you at your word, Mr. 
Minister, and I will await it. I wanted to ask another question, 
and that is: can you tell me what advertising your department 
has done in the last fiscal year and the amount that was 
expended for advertising purposes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — What year were you asking about? I 
already read to the member, one of your colleagues, the ’86-87 
information. Now were you asking for that again? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I will get that from him. What I’m 
wondering is: can you provide me, and if you don’t have it 
handy here right now, at least give me an undertaking that 
you’ll provide it for me some time next week, a list of all the 
advertising that your department paid for in the last year, and 
who the agencies were that got paid, and the amount that they 
were paid in the last fiscal year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I will provide the member opposite with 
whatever information is appropriate. I don’t have anything in 
typed-up form here. This is the first time that I’ve seen some of 
last year’s figures. I wasn’t minister last year, as you know, so I 
will review this information and I will provide it to you, and 
give you the indication that I will do that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I let you go on the first 
one, but I can’t let you go on this one. 
 
What do you mean, what’s appropriate? You either spent some 
taxpayers’ money on purposes of advertising by your 
department or you didn’t. There’s nothing that’s inappropriate. 
If you spend $2 of the taxpayers’ money, the taxpayer has a 
right to know. 
 
Now I’m asking you to give me a list, now, of all of the 
advertising that your department paid for. There obviously is 
nothing to hide. If you thought it was worth doing, you 
shouldn’t want to hide it. So will you give me now the 
advertising your department paid for, who did the advertising, 
and what were they paid? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — As I indicated to the member opposite, I 
will certainly provide him with whatever is appropriate to be 
provided. And I haven’t had an opportunity to review any of the 
data pertaining to advertising. Certainly that which would 
naturally be made public, I am more than willing to make 
public, and I will provide that to the member opposite. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, two minutes ago you said 
you had that information on your desk. It’s on the record. Now 
you’re telling me you don’t want to provide it because you 
think that some of it might not be appropriate. Well I want to 
tell you that if you think that something in your advertising 
budget that you spent last year is not appropriate, you shouldn’t 
have done it. It would be highly irresponsible of your 
government to spend money on advertising that you now are 
holding  
  



 
May 1, 1986 

1020 
 

from the public. I’m asking you: I want, and this House wants 
you to give us the list of advertising that you did in the last 
fiscal year, who did it for you, and how much did you spend. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, I indicated to the member 
opposite that the information that was just provided to me was 
in written form. I have some questions that I want to ask of my 
staff about that particular information. Whatever is money that 
has been spent on advertising will naturally be provided to the 
member opposite. And I certainly would give him that 
commitment. Whatever information will naturally be provided 
in a public fashion later on in public accounts, there’s no reason 
why that information shouldn’t be made public to the member 
opposite, and I would give him that commitment that I would 
do that for him. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, on the first day of the 
consideration of your estimates one week ago, I gave you notice 
of a number of questions which I and my colleagues were going 
to ask you. We did it out of courtesy, and we did it so that you 
and your officials could be prepared to provide those answers. 
The second question that I said I would be asking you, when I 
gave you that list of nine questions, was the one dealing with 
advertising. Are you telling this House that even though we 
gave you notice a week ago, this is the first time you see those 
figures and you did not take the time to prepare yourself to 
provide us with those answers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, the member opposite doesn’t need to 
get excited. I indicated to him that the information which would 
naturally be made public later in public accounts, that I would 
provide that to him. We’ve covered a lot of ground during the 
last few days here in the Assembly, and if he wants to be very 
critical of the fact that there is not typed information available 
for him this particular moment, I suppose he can choose to be 
critical if he wants to do that. I’ve indicated to him that I will be 
providing the information at the earliest possible moment, and 
if he wants to continue being critical, he certainly is free to do 
that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, that’s not co-operating; 
that’s stonewalling and that’s hiding the facts. That is a 
government that is hiding information and in its big majority, 
arrogant way is not prepared to tell the public where it’s 
spending its money. 
 
Let me tell you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chairman, in question 
period this afternoon a question was asked of the Minister of 
Supply and Services about a patronage appointment of an 
ex-Tory organizer who worked for Dick Collver and worked for 
the Conservative Party so that he is going to be paid $85,000 of 
taxpayers’ money to distribute literature to stores and malls and 
everywhere else across the province. I think that is enough 
evidence to indicate that this government has an obligation to 
answer straight and simple and rudimentary questions such as 
the ones dealing with advertising, particularly when we gave 
you notice a week ago. If you’re saying you don’t want to 
answer the question, then you are saying your government 
refuses to provide the answers. You refuse to tell the public 
where you spend their money, because you know, Mr. Minister, 
that the money you  

spent in your department on advertising has been spent on 
straight political patronage to your friends — on straight 
political patronage. If it hasn’t been, you show me the 
advertising. You show me where you spent it. Mr. Minister, you 
say you will give it to us when you find what you think is 
appropriate. I want you to tell me and this House what you 
think will be appropriate information when you provide the 
information that we ask for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, the member opposite is making an 
accusation about purely political advertising. I wonder what the 
senior citizens of this province would say when they hear about 
a seniors’ heritage grant program, which provides our 
lower-income seniors with the most generous benefits that I 
know of anywhere, and that advertising provides them with 
information about that particular kind of program, how they can 
access it and so on. I wonder what they have to say about that 
particular accusation. And I will have more to say later on about 
the seniors’ heritage grant program. 
 
But I find it most unfortunate that you would make that 
particular kind of an accusation. Certainly, the seniors in our 
province deserve better attention from the NDP opposition than 
you seem to be suggesting. 
 
As I indicated, I will be providing the member opposite with 
information on advertising as soon as I am able to do that. I 
have given him that commitment. If he wants to continue to be 
very critical, he can choose to do that. Certainly I’ve given him 
that commitment. And I think that’s a very appropriate thing for 
a minister to do. And I’m pleased that I am able to give him that 
commitment. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, even your Minister of 
Health, and he is the master of not providing information, 
provided that information to us when we asked him in his 
estimates. And we never even as much as gave him notice that 
we would be asking him that question. We gave you notice a 
week ago, even though I know that in the preparation of such a 
briefing book for the minister, your officials have it in front of 
them in their briefing books and they’ve given it to you. I ask 
you: what is it that you think might not be appropriate, that you 
would want to delete so that you cannot give us that information 
now? 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well any moneys that were spent on 
advertising would be made public during public accounts and I 
indicated that that information I will make public to the member 
opposite, and I will do that as soon as I can. The information 
that I have before me is not in the appropriate form to present. It 
many not have the sufficient detail that I think it should have 
for your purposes. So I will be providing that for you as soon as 
I can. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, you’ve had a week to 
prepare the detail. I’m quite prepared to sit here and take notes 
while you read to the House whatever it is you want to give us. 
So if you’re quite prepared to do that, I will sit down. I will 
have my pad here and my pencil and you can read to us who the 
advertising firms were, what it is you paid advertising for, and 
how much you spent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I indicated to the member opposite I  



 
May 1, 1986 

1021 
 

will provide him with that information as soon as I can, and if 
wants to continue to make the same statements hour after hour 
in the House here tonight I suppose he’s free to use the House 
time that way. I have given him the commitment that I will 
provide him with that information and it will be forthcoming to 
him. Just as the Minister of Health made the commitment, I will 
be providing the information to the member opposite. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, the Minister of 
Health didn’t give a commitment; he gave us the information 
right on the spot. We appreciated that. Can you tell us when you 
will provide it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We may very well be able to provide it to 
the minister — or the member — tomorrow. If it’s not available 
tomorrow, likely first part of next week. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I will accept that, Mr. Minister, 
because obviously you refuse to provide it tonight. We will be 
able to raise it again, Mr. Minister. I will go to another question 
and then I may come back to this. 
 
I want to ask you to give me a list of the travelling that was 
done and paid for by the minister, whether it was you or the 
previous minister, paid for by the Department of Urban Affairs, 
the destination of the trips made by the minister, the purpose of 
those trips, the cost that was involved, and the passengers that 
went along with the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I’ll certainly provide the member opposite 
at the earliest possible time with the information concerning 
travel as it relates to destination and number of trips and 
number of passengers and total cost. I believe that’s the same 
information that the Minister of Health was going to provide. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, did you include in that the 
passengers that went along with you on those trips, or the 
previous minister? I missed that. Did you, in your response, 
include the passengers who went along on your ministerial 
trips, and the names of the passengers who went on those trips? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I indicated I would provide the member 
with the destinations, and the number of trips, and the number 
of passengers, and the total costs involved, which I believe is 
the tradition of the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Why would you not provide the names of 
the passengers involved in that? That is included in the manifest 
and your department will have the information. I know it does. 
Every department does. Why would you not include the names 
of the passengers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — As I indicated, we will be following the 
traditions of the House, which your particular administration 
followed. And we will follow the same traditions and provide 
that similar information. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think it’s clear to 
everybody in this House, and the public, in the concluding 
hours of, or maybe hours of your estimates — particularly in 
the last few minutes — how inept you have been. I mean, I have 
asked you now this evening in the  

last 20 minutes several questions which I asked you and served 
you notice of a week ago. You knew the questions that were 
going to be asked. There is no conceivable reason why you 
could not answer them here today unless you deliberately, on 
behalf of your government, have something to hide. 
 
It is clear to the taxpayers of this province that you have shown 
here today that in your department, as was the case in the 
Department of Health, and as will be the case in other 
departments, your government is covering up in every case 
some things that you don’t want the public to know. Because if 
you are not covering up, Mr. Minister, you would have been 
providing the straightforward answers to the straightforward 
questions of which you were served notice a week ago. 
 
We have examples, Mr. Minister, of orders in council that were 
ordered three years ago by this Assembly, not by the 
opposition. They were asked by the opposition but ordered by 
this Assembly, which means your members voted for it, which 
your ministers have not yet provided answers to. And you’re 
continuing that same kind of patterns in these estimates. 
 
I asked you about the advertising your department did in 
1985-86, the amount you paid for the advertising. You refused 
to answer. Now I know you said you’ll provide it later, but 
you’ve refused to answer today even though you know you’ve 
got the answer because you were asked a week ago. We’re 
asking you about minister’s travel. You’re only going to give a 
partial answer. I gave you notice a week ago and I had asked 
you about the list of consultants who were hired by your 
department. That was a week ago. Today the best you can do is 
come in here and say that you will give it to us in due course 
because you don’t have it. 
 
All that we can conclude, and all that the taxpayers of this 
province can conclude, is that you’re covering something up. 
You don’t want to discuss it in the House under your estimates. 
You want to provide it; if you do provide it — I’m not longer 
convinced you will, even though you say so, because your word 
is as good as mud — but if you do provide it, you want to 
provide it on an occasion where we can’t debate it in your 
estimates again. 
 
Now why would you want to do that? What is it that your 
government, on the eve of an election, is trying to hide so 
desperately? Is it trying to hide so desperately because we’re 
finding day after day out of the Department of Supply and 
Services, blatant political patronage being handed out to 
relatives of officials in some departments; being handed out to 
former Tory organizers — thousands of dollars and hundreds of 
thousands of dollars of taxpayers’ money to pay off your 
friends. And I say to you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, 
the member from Regina North, now the candidate in Regina 
South, says, “millions.” Well he knows better than I, and it 
probably is millions. It probably is millions. 
 
There are people who are getting fat at the public trough at the 
expense of the taxpayers simply because they are friends of the 
member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake. That’s the member 
who is speaking from his seat, yelling and hollering so that we 
can’t even carry on a debate in  
  



 
May 1, 1986 

1022 
 

here and ask normal questions. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I will not pursue this any more because you 
have clearly said you will not provide the answers in this 
House. Now that’s okay; it’s not okay with men, but I don’t 
have any choice. If you refuse to provide the answers, I’m sure 
that the chairman would rule that is your right. But I’m telling 
you now that someone will make a judgement on that, and 
that’s going to be the voter. And whether that comes in the next 
month or within the next couple of weeks, or within the next 
year as you continue to run and try to hide, I can’t predict that. 
 
But there will be a day of reckoning, not only in the province — 
all around the province — but in your constituency as well, 
because your constituents are going to know that you were part 
of this stonewalling and you were part of this refusal to provide 
the information to this House. 
 
I regret that, because until now, although we’ve had some fairly 
hectic debates on your estimates, I have considered that you 
were going to be an honourable minister and provide these 
kinds of answers. I regret that you have not been, and that’s the 
conclusion I have to draw. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, unless one of my colleagues has further 
questions, I will not pursue that any more, simply to say that we 
can proceed with this subvote by subvote, and we’ll ask 
questions as we go along, on an itemized basis. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well as I indicated to the member 
opposite, I certainly would be providing him with information 
on the number of trips, and the destination, and the number of 
passengers, and the total cost. I would simply remind the 
member to consider the April 24th Hansard, 1986, page 847, at 
which point in time the present Minister of Health . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What page? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Page 847. The present Minister of Health 
quoted the comments of your former cabinet minister, at that 
time the Hon. Mr. Robbins, when he was asked questions 
concerning the names of individuals that accompanied him on a 
flight. The response by the Hon. Mr. Robbins at that time was, 
“No, that’s not government policy. It’s just the number recorded 
on the flight.” 
 
So in keeping with the tradition of this House, I will certainly 
provide the member opposite with the same information that 
was provided by the former members, which is the appropriate 
information in keeping with the Assembly. 
 
I do want to draw to the attention of members here tonight the 
fact that there is a very significant program in the Department 
of Urban Affairs, and I believe members here will be interested 
in this. Perhaps the opposition members ignored this particular 
program, and maybe they did want to bring some questions up 
later, I don’t know. 
 
But I do think it’s important for members to realize before they 
vote on these particular estimates, that this year we have 
included in our estimates a very significant program  

for the senior citizens of the province of Saskatchewan. And 
I’m referring of course to the new senior citizens’ heritage grant 
program, introduced for the first time this year in the province 
of Saskatchewan to assist our seniors who have provided so 
much in the way of a heritage that is near and dear to all of us in 
the province, those who have worked hard to pass on to us that 
heritage, those individuals who deserve to be provided with 
appropriate income in the province of Saskatchewan. And as a 
consequence, the Progressive Conservative government under 
the leadership of Grant Devine is providing approximately 
65,000 seniors in the province of Saskatchewan this year with 
the seniors’ heritage grant. 
 
(1930) 
 
Now it may be that there are one or two seniors watching 
tonight who are not familiar with this particular program, and I 
certainly would want them, along with all members of the 
Assembly, to be aware of the details of this particular heritage 
grant program. 
 
If you are a senior couple and your income is less than $25,000 
a year — and we know that there are many, many seniors who 
have less than that income in the province of Saskatchewan — 
they would be eligible for a grant of $700. And I do believe that 
many seniors have already filled out an application form and 
have sent it into us. 
 
If we do have a seniors couple, and their income is between 
$25,000 and $30,000, then they would be eligible for half of 
that amount. If we have a single senior whose income was less 
than $25,000, then they would be eligible for a $500 grant, and 
a single senior between the income of $25,000 and $30,000 
would be eligible for half of that. 
 
As I indicated, applications have been sent out to all senior 
citizens in the province, and we have already received back 
literally thousands of those applications. And I understand that 
well over 20,000 applications have been responded to, and 
cheques have been sent out to those seniors. 
 
I think as members consider the estimates today as to whether 
or not these are appropriate estimates to vote in favour of, that 
they will want to know some of the comments that I have 
received back from senior citizens here across the province. 
And I would only relate to the members tonight just a few of 
those particular comments. We don’t have time to read all of 
them, but I’m sure that members would want to know what the 
seniors in Saskatchewan are saying. 
 
Here is a letter that comes to us from Quinton, Saskatchewan. A 
couple happily married for 45 years, and they say as follows: 
 

Dear Sir: Just to thank you for the cheque we received 
from you yesterday. I wish there was a better word than 
thank you, but this is the best we can do. It’s better than 
not hearing from us at all. 
 
Once again, thank you so very, very much. May God bless 
you. 

 
  



 
May 1, 1986 

1023 
 

Here’s a letter from a senior in Regina. 
 

I received my cheque for $200 today and I just want to say 
thank you. I’ve been in Regina since 1912 and I feel that 
we as senior citizens are very well treated. I thank the 
government very much for helping to make our declining 
years just a little bit happier. 

 
Then we have a letter sent that says the following: 
 

Thank you to you and your government for the $700 grant 
received from you yesterday. I have always been proud to 
be from Saskatchewan and I am proud to think that our 
government has honoured all of our senior citizens. Thank 
you again. 

 
Here is a letter coming from seniors in Saskatoon: 
 

Dear Sir: I just received your cheque for the senior 
citizens’ heritage program in the mail and I am so grateful 
for it. As it has come on a son’s birthday, I shall talk with 
him long distance as a special pleasure today, on my son’s 
birthday. Again thank you so very much. 

 
Just a few more for the members’ edification. This one coming 
from Saskatoon: 
 

I would like to thank the Saskatchewan government for the 
$200 cheque I received from the heritage program. I am 75 
years of age without a family of any sort and it came just 
in time for me to get my new spectacles. 

 
So there’s a senior certainly appreciative of the assistance being 
received. Here’s another one from a town in Saskatchewan: 
 

Please accept my thanks for the $500 cheque. You have no 
idea how this has helped me. You are the only ones that 
ever did anything for me. I will remember. Thank you 
again. 

 
I’m certain that the members will want to consider that. Here’s 
a final letter: 
 

Dear Sir: I just had to write a word or two to thank you for 
the money you sent to my wife and I. (They say the 
following.) To receive a cheque of $700 is overwhelming. 
We thank you very much. Now we can buy a little bit 
extra for ourselves. (And they say) P.S. there’s a lot of 
citizens who will certainly know how to vote next time as 
seniors because they appreciate a government that is 
concerned about the needs of seniors. 

 
And I’m sure all members opposite will want to consider those 
fine comments, representative I’m sure of the feelings of many 
senior citizens here in the province of Saskatchewan. With 
those words, I think we will want to move on and begin to vote 
on the particular subvotes here in these estimates before us this 
evening. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I’m sure that you’re  

overjoyed to know that there will be six senior citizens who will 
be voting for you in the next election. But under this program I 
want to ask you some questions, because I asked them of the 
minister, your predecessor, who had the Bill in here, at which 
time we debated this, and he gave me some undertaking which I 
wonder whether you can now keep up, or uphold. 
 
And the main one is this. I asked the then minister, when the 
legislation was here, whether this grant would be taxable. Mr. 
Minister, the former minister then undertook to provide that 
information to us when we got into the consideration of the 
estimates. Can you tell us now whether this grant that senior 
citizens are going to get is going to be income taxable? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We have received confirmation from 
federal officials that it will not be taxable. Those discussions are 
matters between Finance departments, obviously, and you may 
want to address your question to the Minister of Finance during 
his estimates. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, in what form did you 
receive that confirmation — telephone call, letter, exchange of 
letters between ministers? What form was that confirmation 
provided? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well we have received that information 
from Department of Finance officials. Just exactly how they 
received that communication from Ottawa, I’m not sure. So you 
can provide that . . . you can ask that question to the Minister of 
Finance. They undoubtedly received verbal assurance. Whether 
or not they have received their written assurance, which I 
understand was to be forthcoming, you’d have to ask that to the 
Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Here we go, Mr. Minister — the most 
unprepared minister. The former minister made an undertaking, 
gave us an undertaking, that he was going to send . . . write to 
the federal government when the legislation was passed. The 
legislation was passed on December 13, 1985. I assume that the 
former minister carried out his promise to this legislature and 
that there was a reply. 
 
The least you could have done is listen to what your officials 
told you and be prepared to have that information here. Maybe 
the response came to the Minister of Finance, but you’re the 
minister in charge of this program. And it’s fine for you to stand 
up and make a speech about it, and I’m sure that the senior 
citizens are appreciative of the money they’re getting — 
nobody will question that. But you have the responsibility to 
provide the answers under the program which you administer. 
 
Now can you tell me, Mr. Minister, what kind of confirmation 
was provided by the federal government? Verbal isn’t good 
enough because you and I know, and the Minister of Finance 
certainly knows, that a verbal confirmation is not adequate. In 
order for the appropriate taxation changes to be made at the 
federal level, you have to do some formal communication. I’m 
asking you what kind of formal communication has taken place 
which will assure the senior citizens that this program will not 
be income taxable for this year? 
  



 
May 1, 1986 

1024 
 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I don’t know what else I can tell the 
member except to repeat what I just said: that Department of 
Finance officials here in Saskatchewan have informed 
Department of Urban Affairs officials here in Saskatchewan 
that Department of Finance officials in Ottawa have said that it 
will not be taxable. Now, that’s about as plain as you can get it. 
And if you want to ask the Minister of Finance in his estimates 
exactly what the form of communication took and when the 
communication took place, you’re certainly free to do that of 
course. But I indicated to you that we have received a 
commitment that it will not be taxable. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, it may be plain but 
it’s not reliable. Unless we get firm evidence from your 
government, we will know that anything you say is not reliable. 
 
And I submit to you, and if you refuse to give the answers, I’m 
not going to take all night here trying to ask the same question 
over and over simply to have you say no, which is what you’ve 
been doing. I submit to you that the reason you’re not providing 
it is because in case you happen to get up the courage, or your 
Premier does, to call an election, you want to make sure that the 
Minister of Finance is one of the last estimates that we do so 
that he will never have to answer these questions, because you 
know that there has not been — and I’m telling you . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . well, the member from Meadow 
Lake is interrupting here. I’m sure the minister can’t hear me. 
 
I’m telling you, Mr. Minister, that you know as well as I know, 
that you do not have that assurance from the federal 
government. This program will be taxable, and the senior 
citizens of Saskatchewan need to know that, and many of them 
know that. They used to get a property improvement grant; they 
used to get a grant for the rebate of school taxes — that was not 
taxable. This rebate that you’re now giving to senior citizens is 
going to be taxable. And unless you’re prepared to stand up 
here — because you know we’ll never hear from the Minister of 
Finance because he’s never going to show up in his estimates 
before an election — unless you’re prepared to stand up here 
and provide proof that you’ve got this confirmation from the 
federal government, we can only conclude that it is going to be 
taxable; and the senior citizens who are getting these grants, 
when they fill out their income tax next year, are going to have 
to shell out some money to pay a tax which they owe. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, a straightforward question — it’s got 
nothing to do with the Minister of Finance — will any senior 
citizen who turns 65 years of age in 1985 be eligible for this 
grant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite would 
attempt to scare senior citizens. I have given him the 
commitment that we have received from the federal Department 
of Finance officials . . . it could not be clearer. And when the 
federal officials and the Prime Minister say, we are going to do 
this for Saskatchewan, then they do it. They have delivered in 
spades for agriculture here in this province. They committed 
themselves and they delivered. 
 

We committed ourselves to provide seniors with assistance, and 
some questioned and said, well I’m not so sure they’re going to 
do it. Well it seems to me that the six letters I quoted tonight are 
ample evidence of the commitment of this government to 
follow through on the kinds of promises that it makes. So we 
promised to get rid of the gas tax, and we did. We promised to 
take the tax of clothing, and we have done so. We promised to 
provide seniors with assistance, and we have. 
 
You would attempt to throw a scare tactic in front of the senior. 
I remember once when your party attempted to scare the seniors 
that somehow medicare was threatened and was going to be 
taken away. And a lot of seniors, I think, during the last three or 
four years, have come to understand that they have a 
government today that they can trust, that is interested in 
seniors, that cares for seniors. 
 
And if the member is interested in having me recite the kinds of 
things that we have done for senior citizens to show how much 
we care about them, then I certainly would be more than willing 
to take the time to do that — more than willing. Whether it’s 
nursing homes for seniors, whether it’s the senior citizens’ 
home repair program, whether it’s establishing a seniors’ 
bureau for seniors — never ever done before — whether it was 
holding a seniors’ forum here in the province of Saskatchewan 
and inviting seniors from across the province to meet with 
senior cabinet ministers and government officials to talk about 
the needs of seniors — never ever done before under your 
administration — whether it’s providing a chiropody program 
for seniors, something they were asking for for years but never 
were able to receive — this government is certainly doing a lot 
for seniors. 
 
(1945) 
 
And I think the seniors’ heritage grant program under the 
Department of Urban Affairs is a primary example of our 
commitment to help seniors, rather than to threaten them or 
scare them as the members opposite did. Certainly, as I 
indicated, the federal Finance department has communicated 
with our Finance officials that this grant will not be taxable. 
Now that’s as black and white as you can get it. Those are the 
facts. 
 
The 20,000 seniors who have already received their assistance, 
I’m sure are pleased that they have it today. The 45,000 others 
who have sent in their applications or have yet to do so can be 
assured that their particular assistance will be coming to them 
within the next month. Certainly this government follows 
through on its commitments to seniors, and I think the letters 
that I read tonight from seniors are ample evidence that seniors 
know that they have a government today that truly cares about 
seniors and listens to their concerns. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now that you have your speech out of 
the way, Mr. Minister, will you answer the question? Will 
anyone who turned 65 years of age in 1985 be eligible for the 
heritage grant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes. 
  



 
May 1, 1986 

1025 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — If that’s the case, why are some senior 
citizens being informed by your department when they phone 
that because they turned 65 in 1985 they will not be eligible? 
And I don’t know whether there’s a misunderstanding or not. If 
there is, I would like to be able to correct them, and will you 
please assist us in doing that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Any senior who meets the income 
requirements and who turns 65 would be eligible. 
 
An Hon. Member: — In 1985. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Exactly. Would be eligible. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I’ll accept that because the reason I asked 
that is because a number of seniors have indeed been confused 
because they’re getting conflicting information. 
 
And I would just ask you to please check with the people who 
are administering the program and make sure that everybody is 
giving the same information. I’m not saying that in the critical 
sense. It could be that some of the people who are making the 
calls are misunderstanding what the message is. 
 
So I appreciate your clarifying it because it will assist me, and I 
will now be bale to say to them . . . In fact, I can sent them a 
copy of the Hansard because then they’ll understand that if they 
turn, if they had a birthday in 1985 and turned 65 they are 
eligible for the grant — of course, within the income 
restrictions — and that’s quite all right. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes, I’m pleased that we were able to 
clarify that particular issue, if the member did have some 
concerns. I’m sure that because it is a new program that there 
may have been some seniors who did not understand entirely 
that they were eligible for the senior citizens’ heritage grant 
program. 
 
And to all seniors who may be watching tonight or who may 
hear about the debate, certainly if they turned 65 in 1985, they 
would be eligible for the program. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — One other question. Mr. Minister, can 
you tell us and the House how much money your department 
will be paying to InfoCentre Network for the distribution of 
certain literature about the department’s programs in this fiscal 
year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I’m informed that this department is not 
involved with that particular organization. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Okay, Mr. Minister. We’ll be pursuing 
that later in another forum, but I just wanted to have your 
response to it. I have it now. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — If I just might add as well for any senior 
who may be watching tonight, the question was: if they turn 65 
in 1985, are they eligible? And yes, they are. 
 
They’re also eligible if they turn 65 in 1986. And there were 
some that had asked me questions about that. They may have 
asked some other MLAs about that, and I simply  

wanted that information to be clarified as well. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, is this an ongoing program? 
Is this a commitment which this government has made to senior 
citizens for an indefinite period of time, or is it a program for 
this year only? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — This government is committed to this 
particular program as long as we are government. 
 
And I’m sure that the senior citizens of this province will 
certainly remember that it was this government that provided 
this particular program to the seniors, that showed the kind of 
interest and concern for seniors that is deserving of the 
commitment that they have shown to Saskatchewan over the 
years. 
 
So certainly there is an ongoing commitment on the part of 
government. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the question I want to ask is 
with respect to the senior citizens’ supplement. Have there been 
discussions with Health and Welfare Canada to determine 
whether or not this $700 is included in income for the purposes 
of the supplement? And has the Minister of Urban Affairs had 
discussions with the Minister of Social Services with respect to 
whether or not this $700 is taken into account for purposes of 
determining the senior citizens’ provincial pension income? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes, I have had those discussions with 
myself. And the income under the seniors’ heritage program 
will have no negative impact whatsoever on supplement 
payments. They would be excluded from the definition of 
income under the Old Age Security Act. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want just a question on the follow-up to 
what was asked by my learned friend a moment ago. The 
memorandum from Otto Cutts . . . My colleague. The 
memorandum from Otto Cutts referred to by the member from 
Shaunavon today in question period, in which he . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes? Massive cuts, says the member from 
Prince Albert. In the letter from the Deputy Minister’s office, 
Otto Cutts, to a number of people, of which the Urban Affairs is 
stated to be one, this particular public servant introduces the 
concept of info centre and states that he’s going to be serving a 
number of departments, of which Urban Affairs are one. And I 
ask you again, did you receive the memorandum from Otto 
Cutts dated April 29th ’86, and did you respond? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I haven’t received any such memo. My 
department officials are not aware at this particular point in time 
of having received such a memo. It may have come. It may be 
in the mail. I don’t know. It may be a very worthwhile program 
to use. I have no idea. But at this particular point in time, as I 
indicated, I’m not aware of any utilization of that particular 
service, although I certainly do support the concept of providing 
information to individuals where they can access it most 
readily. 
 
Certainly we have provided information, for example, to seniors 
in many of the senior citizens’ activity centres around the 
province. I think that’s a very worthwhile principle to follow, to 
try and assist people wherever they  
  



 
May 1, 1986 

1026 
 

are in order that they can access that information most readily. 
But as I indicated, at this particular point in time, I’m not aware 
of our utilization of that service. Nor am I aware of any 
communication with that particular program that you’ve talked 
about. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the memorandum reads: 
“The attached appendix “B” is a list of 31 departments and 
crown corporations that will be utilizing the distribution service 
. . . “ of which Urban Affairs is stated to be one; Social Services 
is stated to be another. 
 
I wonder if you might consult with the Minister of Social 
Services to find out if he has any knowledge of any such 
service. 
 
The memorandum from the Deputy Minister of Supply and 
Services is crystal clear. They’re acting on behalf of Urban 
Affairs. You stated categorically that you had no association 
with them. I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, are you saying that 
this memorandum was written without proper authorization or 
as I suspect, have you simply not been informed on this issue as 
you have not been on so many others that have come before this 
Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I certainly don’t 
authorize the memos that deputy ministers may write for 
departments that I have no responsibility. So I’m not acquainted 
with the circumstances surrounding the penning of that 
particular memo. As I indicated, I have not received any 
communication directly from that particular deputy minister 
concerning this program. It may be in the mail; it may be 
coming yet. I don’t know what the date of that particular memo 
is. 
 
As I indicate, the principle of providing the public with ready 
access to information on government programs right out there 
in the market-place, so to speak, is a sound principle. And I 
think the public would be appreciative of having information at 
hand rather than having to constantly travel down town, for 
example, to a particular government office to get information. 
 
Whether or not this particular program will be utilized by Urban 
Affairs or by Social Services or by any other department for 
that matter, I certainly don’t know the answer to that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, this sounds remarkably like a 
serious error made by the federal Liberals when they set up 
Information Canada, called Prop Canada, I think, by many 
federal members. This looks remarkably like that, an attempt to 
have the public service do the political work of the government 
in office. So in my experience that doesn’t work very well. 
Public servants don’t see that as their job, nor is it. And in my 
experience it’s often been counter-productive. 
 
Mr. Minister, unless this memorandum was written wholly 
without authority and is a work of fiction, you are setting up in 
this province a provincial version of Information Canada, 
PropCan. I think, Mr. Minister, that this is going to be just 
about as successful as the federal Liberal program was. I think 
it’s going to cause you all the same problems. 
 

I cannot imagine as you walk up to a check-out counter, seeing 
the National Enquirer, the Reader’s Digest, the pamphlets from 
Department of Urban Affairs, Mechanics Illustrated — I just 
can’t see that line-up. And if it is, Mr. Minister, I can’t see your 
pamphlets being taken. 
 
One of the problems with putting this in Safeway at the 
check-out counter, is there is a very large number of pamphlets 
printed by any government. For good purposes, for the best of 
reasons, governments often print pamphlets which explain a 
program. There are, I would estimate, thousands of pamphlets 
in circulation by this provincial government at any time. There 
were before too. To attempt to put such a number of pamphlets 
in a shelf in Safeway, to state the proposition is to refute it. It’s 
just simply impossible to do. Either you are going to be putting 
in the Safeway selected pamphlets which do more to tout the 
Conservative Party than it does the government, or you’re going 
to make complete asses out of yourself attempting to market 
commercially pamphlets which have a very limited interest and 
which are often esoteric in their nature and esoteric in their 
appeal. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What does that mean? I don’t know 
what that means, even. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well the members don’t know what that 
means. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s a big word. Tell us what it means. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The . . . Well I see the members think my 
use of the word “ass,” which is a donkey, is unparliamentary. 
Well I can tell by the braying of the donkeys opposite that they 
might have trouble with some of the language that’s used in a 
parliament. So I will . . . 
 
Mr. Minister, if I could get on to another program which is 
administered by your department but which is not included 
within the estimates of Urban Affairs strictly — it is the capital 
side of your department. There are three subvotes — 19, 20, 21 
— included within the employment development agency which 
are . . . Well now the asses are really braying, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I think the member from Regina 
Centre is playing on words and using language which is not 
becoming parliamentary speakers, and I would ask you to 
refrain. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s a biblical word. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s a silly ruling — silly. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Challenge the Chair. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’m not going to challenge the Chair. 
Suffice it to say, the word is used in the Bible. If it’s good 
enough for the Holy Scriptures, I ought have thought it might 
be good enough for this Assembly. But I’ll take your superior 
view on that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to get to the area of capital grants.  
  



 
May 1, 1986 

1027 
 

One of the areas that I want to deal with is subvote 21 of the 
employment development agency, its grant to the city of Regina 
for rail relocation assistance. I note, Mr. Minister, that this 
subvote has been decreased from 1.5 million to 500,000, by 
one-third. I also note comments by the city of Regina which 
suggest that this project — with a Conservative government in 
Ottawa and a Conservative government in Regina — I note 
comments by officials of the city of Regina that with that mix 
of stars in the heavens this project has gotten permanently, 
seemingly, mired in the mud. 
 
I’d like to know, Mr. Minister, where you think the rail 
relocation is going, because I suspect by the fact that the 
subvote has dropped to one-third of what it was last year that 
you don’t have any more hope that the officials from the city of 
Regina do that this project is going to go ahead. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We are budgeting this particular year the 
same amount of money that was actually spent last year. 
There’s no sense including in your budget an estimate for more 
money than you expect you will spend. So we have used last 
year’s actual expenditure which was in the magnitude of around 
500,000, I believe, and we are estimating a similar expenditure 
this year. 
 
As for which particular track rail relocation is running down 
these days, I suspect that’s something which will be decided by 
the people down East, whenever they decide to hold their 
particular hearings. 
 
Having said that, I wonder if the member opposite would be so 
kind as to clarify for me if he was quoting from the King James 
version of the Bible, or the new international version? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It was the socialist international, or is my 
learned friend not familiar with that version? 
 
Mr. Minister, may I ask you where you think rail relocation is 
going? I recall when this government first assumed office, and 
the now Minister of the Environment was minister of Urban 
Affairs, we had some very serious questions to put to him at 
that time with respect to rail relocation and the multimodal 
station. We had a signed agreement in 1982 to foresee. It was at 
that point in time this government, operating under the general 
theory of paralysis by analysis, that everything must be 
re-examined and the wheel must be reinvented — all four of 
them — on every vehicle. You people stalled the program. In 
effect you broke the agreement, and now I gather the federal 
government is stalling on the project. 
 
I want to know, Mr. Minister, where you think the rail 
relocation project is going, and how soon do you think that you 
might be able to get this project on the rails again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The issue of course is going to be decided 
ultimately in the CTC hearings, so it’s very difficult to predict 
exactly where the project is going because I understand the 
railways are committed to fighting the particular issue at the 
hearings. And this may be a very long, drawn out process, but 
certainly you see our commitment in the estimates of this 
particular year. However it is, as I indicated, difficult to 
determine where  

it is going, and certainly in the final analysis the whole issue is 
going to come down to dollars and the cost that’s going to be 
involved I suppose, and whether or not the railways will be 
successful in changing the entire picture as it relates to rail 
relocation. We won’t know the answers to those questions. It 
will likely be some time before we find out what the answers to 
those questions are. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — In this province the intervening in the court 
challenge to the project, if I may phrase it that loosely. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, we’re sharing in the legal costs, of 
course. There’s no need for us, as far as we’re concerned, to 
directly intervene. The city people have sufficient legal counsel 
to certainly present their particular side of this issue. Our 
support for the project has been obvious from the budget 
commitments in the past, and this year again. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, it is my understanding that the 
province would have the jurisdiction to intervene in the decision 
before the federal court. I am wondering, Mr. Minister, why the 
province doesn’t do that if you support the project. Surely the 
province has an interest in the project proceeding, and the 
province has a particular point of view with respect to the 
constitutionality of the decision that was being challenged. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, why the province doesn’t seek leave 
to intervene in the decision before the federal court. If you 
support it, why don’t you bring your point of view and the 
prestige and authority of the province to bear on the court when 
they’re making the decision. The court has the right to know, it 
seems to me, the wishes of the province. The court has the right 
to hear this government describe what is in the best interests of 
the province. So I think, Mr. Minister, the court is in . . . If the 
decision is to be made properly and intelligibly, the court has 
the right — and should have — the position of this province 
before it when it makes a decision. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, there is nothing to intervene for in 
terms of a constitutional question. That whole issue has been 
put to rest some time back, and it’s now simply a matter of CTC 
finding out whether or not the province is supporting the 
application, and the application is being supported, and is 
proceeding as one would expect it would. So our support for the 
project has been manifest and we really don’t know where it’s 
going to end up of course, once the hearings commence later 
this year. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — When did the federal court hand down 
it’s decision, if you’ve got that decision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I understand it was fairly recent. I don’t 
know the exact date or month, but my officials indicate to me 
that it was fairly recent. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And what was the decision then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The railroads lost their case. The hearing is 
proceeding. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — So the matter now comes again before the 
CRTC. When do you expect the CRTC to hear the  
  



 
May 1, 1986 

1028 
 

matter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I don’t expect the CRTC will ever hear this 
matter. This is not the Canadian radio and television 
commission we’re talking about. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’m sorry for the slip of the tongue. When 
do you expect the Canadian Transport Commission . . . Ah, 
that’s very clever. When do you expect the Canadian Transport 
Commission will hear it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I believe September of this year. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And will the province be making the 
presentation to the CTC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — No. There’s no need for us to. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well I think the same argument applies, 
Mr. Minister. The Canadian Transport Commission has a right 
and should have the views of the province, Mr. Minister. If the 
province feels, as I hope you do, that the project is in the best 
interests of the people of Saskatchewan, then the Canadian 
Transport Commission, whose responsibility extends into 
transport policy as well as merely technical matters — the 
Canadian Transport Commission it seems to me should have the 
views of the province. And if you’re in favour of it, for the life 
of me I don’t understand why you’re not intervening and why 
you’re not placing the position of the province before the 
Canadian Transport Commission. 
 
I suspect, Mr. Minister, that there’s a bit of truth in what the 
former leader of the Liberal party, Mr. Steuart, used to say. He 
used to say that in this country there were two railways, the 
government owned . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Senator 
Steuart . . . in this country there are two railways — the 
government owns one and the other one owns the government. 
It seems to me, Mr. Minister, that that is coming back into play 
again., 
 
If you are in favour of the project, why aren’t you before the 
Canadian Transport Commission making that point of view, 
opposing the railways in what is, I suggest, a self-centred 
approach for the railways which is in their best interest and no 
one else’s. Why aren’t you there adding your authority and your 
weight to the cities, both? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We have already provided our written 
support and approval as part of Regina’s application. This is 
required by CTC as part of this whole process. So in fact we 
have intervened on behalf of the city in this particular project, 
and there is no need for any further intervention to take place. It 
is now before CTC this fall, and the process will proceed as it 
normally does in these particular cases. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — To put it mildly, Mr. Minister, your 
support is a little less than vigorous. 
 
Mr. Minister, the grants under the provincial capital fund 
program have gone from 17 million down to 16 million. Mr. 
Minister, why have you decreased the funding under this 
program? 
 
The member from Moosomin is giving us so much  

assistance on this issue, as he has on so many others, that I have 
no wonder you didn’t hear the question. The question relates to 
subvote 19, under the Employment Development Agency grants 
and the provincial capital fund program — 17 million last year, 
16 million this year. I wonder, Mr. Minister, why that figure has 
gone down. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — In the last fiscal year, last fiscal year 
’85-86, the take-up for this particular program was lower than 
originally anticipated, with expenditures totalling about 12.8 
million. This year we are budgeting about 16 million; and so 
it’s anticipated that the ’86-87 claims submitted to the 
department will be higher than last year’s actuals, which is why 
our estimate is higher than the actual spent last year. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, it seems to me that this is a 
matter that the municipalities have complained about. I refer 
you again to the resolutions at the SUMA convention — 
resolution number 12, grants. While the resolution is long and is 
not as clear as perhaps I might have liked it . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Read it into the record. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, since by popular demand, I will read 
it into the record then: 
 

Whereas municipalities are under increasing pressure from 
the public to provide new additional capital services, 
maintain . . . existing infrastructure, and replace outdated 
infrastructures; and 
 
Whereas senior government capital grants provide in 
excess of 26 per cent of all funding from municipalities 
and over half of this funding is from (the) conditional 
grants which reduce the flexibility of municipalities to 
respond to its citizens’ demands; and 
 
Whereas unconditional capital grants give more autonomy 
to municipal governments and provide more effective and 
efficient use of capital funding resource that can be used 
on the highest local priority items; and 
 
Whereas unconditional capital grants maximize 
employment opportunities in municipalities because 
existing conditional grant eligibility criteria do not always 
allow municipalities to undertake labour intensive capital 
work, if they so desire; and 
 
Whereas minimal provincial resources are required to 
administer unconditional grants versus the bureaucracy 
required to administer, issue, follow up, and process 
claims for conditional grants; and 
 
Whereas the Province has started to increase the level of 
unconditional . . . grants but has reduced total capital grant 
funding to many municipalities. 
 
Therefore be it resolved that the Province make capital 
grants unconditional and that these grants be continued at 
the level of capital grant funding  

  



 
May 1, 1986 

1029 
 

provided in 1984 after being adjusted for inflation and 
population. 

 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Minister, again I ask you: why you don’t respond to this, 
which I think directs itself to the PCC (provincial community 
capital) fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I’m not so sure if I want to thank the 
member for reading that into the record. I’m well aware of the 
resolution. I have a copy of the resolutions here. 
 
I would simply remind the member that we have increased the 
provincial capital funding from $20 to $25 unconditional 
money. That’s a fairly healthy 25 per cent increase to 
municipalities on the capital side of things. As I indicated the 
funds actually taken up under this program in ’85-86 were 
lower than originally anticipated, something in the order of 12.8 
million. Even though we had budgeted 17 million, only 12.8 
million was taken up, and of course the municipalities can 
chose to access the program if they want to. 
 
This year we are budgeting 16 million which is well in excess 
of the take-up from last year. So as I’ve indicated many times 
during these estimates, I’m sure that municipalities would like 
to have more money. I have yet to come across an individual or 
an organization that did not wish they had more funds. 
Unfortunately, there never are enough funds to adequately meet 
all of the needs that people perceive to be out there; however, I 
think the response level that we have given to municipalities in 
terms of capital funding and revenue sharing and so on is 
certainly adequate, given the times in which we live. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, this is a case once 
again where the funding is lower now than it was when you 
took office. The first year you were in office, you provided 17 
million; this year you’re providing 16 million. Once again, Mr. 
Minister, you are solving your financial mess by trying to pass 
it on . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I’m sure you will. 
 
The minister says he will respond. I’m sure he’ll respond to me 
with the usual speech. But, Mr. Minister, what it seems to me 
this government has not done is to respond to the need of the 
municipalities. And of course capital grants and operating 
grants, to some extent, are part of the same problem. If you 
starve the municipalities in their revenue sharing, then, Mr. 
Minister, they’re not going to have the money to take this up. If 
they are hard pressed, and they are, I think largely because of 
the lack of funding that they get from you, then, Mr. Minister, 
they’re going to have difficulty taking up these programs as 
well. 
 
A suggestion, Mr. Minister: if you’re having trouble with 
municipalities picking these funds up, then the reason for that I 
suggest lies in the fact that the municipalities are cash starved 
because of this government’s parsimonious funding. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I certainly have difficulty accept 
indeed. I could not accept the premise from the member 
opposite that somehow the municipalities are  

being starved. They received under the last year of your 
administration 65 million, and this year we expect 89.9 almost 
$90 million. If that’s starvation, I’m not so sure how you really 
define the word. So, there’s been a substantial increase in the 
amount of money provided to municipalities. 
 
And I guess the member can choose to disagree with that if he 
wishes to, but as I indicated the amount of money that we are 
spending, giving to municipalities, I think is indicative of our 
serious and solid commitment to provide urban government 
with adequate dollars here to help them provide people of 
Saskatchewan with the kinds of services that are very necessary 
in this province. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — But you are, Mr. Minister, providing them 
with less money now than you were when you took office. 
That’s true, both with respect to operating grants, and we see 
it’s now true with respect to capital grants. 
 
You’re spending less. You are giving them less money to hire 
policemen, and you’re giving them less money to build sewage 
and water works. And one problem impacts on the other. 
 
I’m sure that municipalities are having difficulty proceeding 
with capital projects. If, as we saw earlier, their grants have not 
kept pace with inflation, and indeed, have been static during a 
period of . . . during a period in which inflation has been 27 per 
cent, then naturally they’re going to run short of money, and 
one can understand why the difficulty taking up these grants. So 
I suggest, Mr. Minister, that if they’re having difficulty they can 
get the grants, then that is because they’re short of money. The 
primary reason they’re short of money is because the funding 
from this government hasn’t kept pace. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, how you can have the cheek to put this 
— to put these moneys in the Employment Development 
Agency when the amount spent is going down. Seems to me if 
you’re spending less on municipal infrastructure rather than 
more, then, Mr. Minister, you’re not creating employment, 
you’re creating unemployment. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t want to belabour the point unduly, but I 
say that with respect to capital grants you’re doing the same as 
you are with respect to operating grants — you’re spending less 
now than you were when you come into office. And I say what 
I said when we began six days ago, that the services provided 
with municipalities are starting to show. 
 
We can visibly see the streets and their deterioration under even 
more severe pressure from the Department of Highways, but, 
Mr. Minister, we can also see it here. If they’re not taking it up 
then, Mr. Minister, I think the reason for that is because they 
simply are not able to do it; not able to do it because you’re not 
providing them with the funds. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, we see here in capital what we’ve seen in 
operating — municipalities are short of money, and the primary 
blame for that lays at your door. 
  



 
May 1, 1986 

1030 
 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess we’ll simply 
have to agree to disagree in this case. 
 
I certainly have presented statistics which would indicate that 
there is a very substantial commitment on the part of this 
government to urban Saskatchewan, and I certainly would stand 
by those comments. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I notice 
here that there is an increase in allocation of expenditure money 
but there is a decrease in staff. Can you tell me first of all, what 
is the decrease in staff and what is the increase in money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — There was a deletion of one vacancy and 
there were some costs pertaining to down-town feasibility 
studies and computer services costs. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — What was the nature of the vacancy? 
What was the position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — A vacant admin officer position. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, we’ll ask a general question 
here with respect to staff. Permanent staff has been decreased 
by 13 positions. I want to ask with respect to those 13 positions: 
were they all vacancies? If not, what arrangements were made 
with respect to anyone who might have been laid off? 
 
I’m looking at page 102, Urban Affairs, summary of 
person-years. Permanent appears to have gone from 116 to 103. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — There were no lay-offs. There were some 
vacancies that obviously will have been deleted and there were 
some transfers to Rural Development, and Environment, as I 
understand it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I noted the transfer to the Environment, at 
least, of the EMO (Emergency Measures Organization) but that 
was only three positions. Mr. Minister, the number of 
non-permanent has increased by 10 positions. Thus, while the 
permanent positions went down . . . I want to go through the 
mathematics here because it suggests that you are converting 
permanent to non-permanent. 
 
Your permanent positions went down 13, but three of those 
presumably went with EMO to Environment. Your 
non-permanents have gone up, so that leaves a net of 10. Your 
non-permanent has gone up by 10. One is left with the 
impression, Mr. Minister, that you are converting permanent to 
non-permanent. And that is not in the best interests of the 
employees, to put it mildly, nor is it in the best interest of the 
government. The public of Saskatchewan are best served by a 
permanent public service with stable employment. And if 
there’s some explanation for this, I would be interested in 
hearing it. If you are converting permanent to non-permanent so 
you can play games with the numbers in the so-called blue 
book, then we are opposed to it, Mr. Minister. 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Is the member listening? Yes . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I’m glad to hear that. You’ll be 
happy to know that your particular analysis and your fears are 
not borne out; that in fact there were six permanent positions 
which were transferred, three of them to the EMO and three of 
them to one of the other departments. Then there were vacancy 
deletions, an increase in temporary as a consequence of 
personnel required for the senior citizens’ heritage grant 
program. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, you told me that was a permanent 
program, Mr. Minister, and that as long as the sun should rise in 
the east and set in the . . . that program would be here. Well, all 
right then. What you’re doing is converting permanent staff to 
non-permanent staff, and that is a very poor way to run a 
government. You may indeed, Mr. Minister, be solving a 
cosmetic problem with the blue book, but the public are best 
served by permanent employees. 
 
What you’ve just said, Mr. Minister, I think confirms what I 
suspected, and that is that you got rid of six permanent 
employees, you hired six temporary employees or seven 
temporary employees to administer a program that you told us 
earlier in the day was permanent. I say, Mr. Minister, you’ve 
confirmed my worst suspicion, and that is that you are 
converting permanent to non-permanent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I say to you that you have confirmed 
my worst suspicions about why your government was so lax in 
its administration of the civil service here in the province. For 
your information, the senior citizens’ heritage grant program 
takes about four months of time to administer. Now what you 
have just told me is that you want to see permanent positions 
for 12 months of the year to administer work that is only 
required for four months of the year. 
 
Now that may be your approach to running government. I 
wouldn’t be surprised if it was. That is not the approach of this 
government. We believe in the efficient administration of 
programs, the wise use of taxpayers’ dollars, and if it is not 
necessary to employ a large number of people for an entire year 
to administer programs, then we certainly won’t do that. We 
will employ them for the necessary period of time, and that is 
what we are doing. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the applications continue to 
come in throughout the entire year. While they do . . . while 
they may bunch up in spring, there are applications coming in 
through the entire year. And I suspect that you have people 
there throughout the entire year dealing with these applications. 
Mr. Minister, do you not expect to have anyone around 
full-time to deal with this? Are you going to have . . . How long 
do you intend to keep these temporary people on staff to deal 
with this seasonal program of yours? 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — There are six permanent people that deal 
with this particular program. Then there are temporaries who 
deal with the peaks, in terms of applications that need to be 
processed and information that needs to be clarified with 
seniors, and telephone calls  
  



 
May 1, 1986 

1031 
 

that may have to be made, and so on. So I think that would 
amply answer the concerns of the member opposite. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Item 3 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I see here 
again there is a reduction in staff of roughly five positions. Can 
you tell me what positions they are? What was their function? 
Or have they been transferred to some other branch? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Two deletions of vacant positions and 
three transfers to Rural Development. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — What positions were they? The two that 
were deleted, what positions were they? What was their 
function? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Clerk typist 2 and 3. 
 
Item 3 agreed to. 
 
Item 4 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. Mr. Minister, the 
staff employed remains at one. But personal services has 
increased by some 23 per cent, roughly, from 45,000 to 55,000. 
I wonder what the explanation for that is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — An increase in honorarium costs due to an 
increase in the number of members serving on the board. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Was the honorarium itself increased? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — No. 
 
Item 4 agreed to. 
 
Item 5 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, earlier we had some 
discussion about the proposed new independent assessment 
agency. Can you tell me what will happen to this assessment 
appeal board when that new concept is introduced? The reason I 
ask is I notice there is an increase in position here, of one. I 
expect the load has become heavier because of the concerns out 
there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — It will remain and perform the same 
functions as it does. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — In other words, there will be an 
independent appeal agency, but if there is concern about some 
of the judgements or rulings it makes, you will have a 
mechanism to which a citizen will be able to appeal. Is that 
what you will do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes. There will be the independent 
assessment agency and then there will be an appeal mechanism 
as well. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Am I to understand that the increase of 
one position is because there is an increase in the  

number of appeals that have been coming forward in the last 
year or two? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — What kind of a backlog is there, and 
what are some of the longest waiting ones? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I don’t have that information with me. It 
may very well depend on the complexity of the particular cases. 
I have information here on the number of sittings and the 
communities, the number of appeals received, how many were 
sustained and dismissed and withdrawn, and so on. If the 
member is interested in that, I can give that to them. I don’t 
know what the backlog is or what the time frame is. It may take 
a while to find that out. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Okay. Then I can assume that you will 
provide that to me in writing or some other form some time 
next week. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Okay. The minister has said yes. 
 
Item 5 agreed to. 
 
Item 6 agreed to. 
 
Item 7 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, to what do you attribute the 
reduction in this subvote in such a significant manner? It seems 
to me that northern municipal services should be a pretty high 
priority. There are new municipalities there up in the North 
being created all the time. They have unique kinds of problems 
up there that we in the South do not experience. I really think 
it’s unusual to see such a substantial cut in northern municipal 
services in your budget for this fiscal year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — There were some vacancies that were 
deleted and there evidently will be some changes in travel 
arrangements as well. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, this is a 15 per cent cut in 
services for northern municipal services. That’s a very, very 
significant cut. Well you can figure it out. I’m sure it would be 
close to 15, or somewhere in there. . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well, do a little calculation then . . . (inaudible) . . . Well 
you had $893,150 in 1985-86. In 1986-87 you’re going to spend 
$763,330. Are you telling me that’s not a cut? That is a cut. 
That is a cut in services. 
 
Now I can understand where your government wants to cut in 
some services in some areas. You keep talking about that. But 
surely this is not an area — an area of the province that 
probably faces greater problems economically and otherwise 
than any other part of Saskatchewan — this is not an area that 
should receive less priority from your government in this 
particular year. 
 
And I know you may have decided that the North has no 
priority for you, electorally or otherwise, but out of fairness to 
the people who live up there, one would think that you would 
consider at least doing as much as used to 



 
May 1, 1986 

1032 
 

be done before. Now wouldn’t you agree that this kind of a cut 
will reduce services in the North for municipal services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — These are vacant positions, for the member 
opposite. These are vacant positions. And if you have a vacant 
position, that means that there is no one in that particular 
position, and it’s been that way for some time. So if there’s no 
one in that particular position, obviously there’s no particular 
service there. 
 
Now you’re talking about you want to see an increase in 
services. Then perhaps you should mount a different argument. 
But if in fact you have the same number of people today who 
are delivering the service in the North as were delivering it a 
month ago, as well deliver it a month hence, then to talk about a 
reduction in services is of course erroneous. And I think the 
member is intelligent enough to realize that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I’m quite intelligent 
enough to figure out what is happening here. The reason the 
positions are vacant is because you didn’t fill them. And 
because you didn’t fill them, the services provided in the North 
have been reduced. Northern people are saying that; northern 
municipalities are saying that; northern municipal councils are 
saying that. They’re saying it, not only verbally, but they’re 
saying it in letter and other communication. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you have reduced the municipal services in 
northern Saskatchewan. I say to you, as has both of my 
colleagues from the North, that there is concern up there. You 
have reduced the services. Simply to say that just because the 
positions were vacant because you didn’t both to fill them, does 
not mean that somehow you’re not reducing services. You 
reduced the services already; you didn’t fill the position; now 
you’re cutting out the money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Just for the member’s interest, in the North 
there are 36 communities which are served by five municipal 
advisers. In the South there are 500 communities served by four 
municipal advisers. So we have five municipal advisers in the 
North serving 36 communities; we have four municipal advisers 
in the South adequately serving the 500 communities here in the 
South. Now I think we are quite responsibly providing 
municipal services to the people in the North. 
 
Now if you want to see more, then that’s fine. You can stand up 
of course and say that you want to see more. But I think that the 
level of service that we are providing is reasonable, and we will 
continue to ensure that that kind of necessary and appropriate 
service is provided to the people of northern Saskatchewan and 
also to the people of the South. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Simply one point, Mr. Minister. Surely 
you cannot compare the municipalities in the North, many of 
which are new developing municipalities to the well-established 
municipalities in the South. I mean, that’s not a fair comparison. 
That’s like apples and oranges, and you know it. 
 
You may want to make that point. I have not suggested  

because I have no way of knowing — and my two colleagues 
from the North will know better than I — that there be an 
increase. I’m just simply saying, you should have at least 
maintained the same kind of services that you allotted for in the 
budget of 1985 and 1986, and we can leave it at that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I’ll be very happy to leave that in a 
minute. But if the member knows anything about ratios — and I 
don’t know what grade level of math he taught — but if you’ve 
got 36 communities in the North, which we all agree do require 
a rather intensive quality of service, and we provide five 
municipal advisers for those 36 communities in the North, then 
certainly when you compare that to four municipal advisers to 
500 communities in the South, then I think that we are very 
adequately responding to the needs that are peculiar and 
distinctive to the people of the North. And the member 
opposite, I think he understands that now. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I just want to add my voice of complaint to 
what . . . to my colleague from Regina North East with respect 
to what you are doing in northern Saskatchewan. I note with 
respect to grants the only two subvotes which are down are the 
grants for northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the minister can make an argument for reducing the grant 
to the town of Uranium City. It may be the population is less. 
But I don’t know what the argument is for reducing the grant to 
the northern capital grants. You’ll no doubt have some song and 
dance. But I say, Mr. Minister, when we come to an item for 
northern Saskatchewan, you can almost bet that this 
government is going to be making a poorer effort than it did last 
year. 
 
Each year you have cut the services to northern Saskatchewan. 
And I know that it’s a waste land for you, and I know that you 
crassly take a look at this thing and say, there’s no way it’s in 
our political interest so we’re going to write them off, and you 
do. You forget there are a large number of human beings live up 
there who need intensive assistance in a way that the South 
doesn’t. 
 
I just want to add my voice, Mr. Minister, to my colleague, my 
seat mate from Cumberland, my colleagues from Athabasca and 
North East who complain of the shoddy treatment that you 
people have meted out to the people of northern Saskatchewan. 
They really have been very poorly treated by this government. 
And we see it here as we see it throughout the entire length and 
breadth of this government’s spending and this government’s 
programs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — For the member opposite, we write no seat 
off. None. And had the election lasted one week longer in 1982, 
I suspect we would have taken all 64 seats in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — And I understand that some of the northern 
candidates are running a little scared these days over on your 
side of the House. 
  



 
May 1, 1986 

1033 
 

I wish the member opposite would show a little courtesy — a 
little courtesy. The member opposite was talking about the 
grants, northern municipal services. For his information and 
perhaps the watching public did not adequately hear, the 
population of Uranium City has been reduced from 2,700 to 150 
to date. And that is what accounts for the reduction in the 
money going to northern Saskatchewan. There is no other 
reason. That very simple, rational, logical reason. 
 
And I would remind the member opposite that capital grants 
provided to northern Saskatchewan under this administration 
are double per capita for the North to what they are for the 
South. 
 
Item 7 agreed to. 
 
Item 8 agreed to. 
 
Item 9 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me whether 
any more than 25,000 was spent last year? I know that under 
this subvote traditionally there’s a token amount of money put 
in. And in case . . . in the event that there may be the need for 
money to be spent in the year, was there any more spent besides 
the $25,000. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Just a touch over $25,000 was spent. Just a 
mite over, $25,436. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Where was the money spent? Was it any 
particular community? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — A grant to the town of Coronach. And 
there’s some kind of an agreement on a declining amount of 
revenue going to the town over time. 
 
Item 9 agreed to. 
 
Item 10 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 18 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, did you . . . what did you 
actually spend on northern capital grants last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Four hundred and fifty thousand. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Have you reduced the formula? Why is it 
that you budgeted less this year? How do you plan on making 
that fit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Do you recall our discussion about 
Uranium City just a few minutes ago? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Uranium City is a separate grant. Do I take 
it that Uranium City also shares in northern capital grants in 
addition to getting the operating grant under 21? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — That’s right. 
 
Item 18 agreed to. 
 
Item 19 agreed to. 

Item 20 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I note that 
you indicate that urban revenue sharing, there was an increase 
of 3 per cent. But in northern revenue sharing, there’s only an 
increase of 1.8 per cent. Can you explain that, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — It’s 3 per cent for everybody in the North. 
Once again, it’s the Uranium City dropping population 
phenomena that impacts the amount of money that is actually 
seen in the overall budget. But the individual municipalities in 
the North are each getting the 3 per cent increase. 
 
Item 20 agreed to. 
 
Item 21 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’ll do the work if the member from 
Meadow Lake, since he’s too timid to raise the issue. Mr. 
Minister, I note this program went from 700,000 in ’84-85, to 
500,000. I take it this project has run itself out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes, the people of Meadow Lake are very 
appreciative of the service that they have been able to receive 
under this particular grant for infrastructure development. I 
think it’s a manifestation of this government’s commitment to 
the community of Meadow Lake. 
 
Item 21 agreed to. 
 
Item 22 agreed to. 
 
Vote 24 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Urban Affairs 

Vote 162 
 

Item 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Just one question. Can you tell me, or if 
you don’t have it here just so that I can have it for myself, can 
you provide me, in the next day or so, a list of municipalities or 
the municipality that this may have applied to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — It just applies to Prince Albert. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 162 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Urban Affairs 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 24 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, this over expenditure was 
fairly sizeable. I wonder if you’d give us an  
  



 
May 1, 1986 

1034 
 

explanation for it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — This sum covers pay increases. It covers 
moneys required for the administration of the senior citizens’ 
heritage rebate program and the senior citizens’ heritage grant 
program that previously were not budgeted. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Items 3 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 7 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 24 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Employment Development Agency — Urban Affairs 

Employment Development Fund — Vote 65 
 

Items 19 to 21 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to say 
that it has been a privilege for me to participate in the estimates 
for Urban Affairs. It certainly has been a privilege to serve as 
minister in this particular portfolio for some period of months 
now. I’ve been very impressed with the professionalism and 
competence of the senior officials who work in the Department 
of Urban Affairs. And I certainly want to take this opportunity 
to publicly thank the individuals who have very competently 
assisted me during the estimates that we have been engaged in 
here during the past week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to also, in 
my concluding remarks, first of all express our appreciation to 
the Chair for once again allowing us, as has become the pattern, 
to ask pretty well all of our questions in subvote 1. A few years 
ago that wasn’t the tradition of the House — that’s quite a few 
years ago — but I think it’s a good practice, and it gives us an 
opportunity to do the debate and cover all of the items and then 
get through with the subvotes. 
 
I want to also join with the minister in thanking his officials for 
the assistance that they provided to him and in turn provided to 
us. I know some of the people — some I don’t know, because I 
have not had an opportunity to meet them — and I certainly 
know that they are capable individuals, and the minister is 
fortunate to have such people working with him. And for the 
assistance they’ve been to us, thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — A special word of recognition to all of 
those folks who happen to be watching on TV tonight. I know 
there were some special individuals watching and I would just 
like to say hi to them. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Tourism and Small Business 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 45 

Item 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
introduce to you and the committee the officials from the 
Department of Tourism and Small Business. On my immediate 
right is Dale Folstad, the deputy minister. Directly behind Dale 
is Ken McNabb, the assistant deputy minister, and on the 
extreme right is Harvey Murchinson, special adviser to the 
deputy. And on my left is the executive director of tourism, Mr. 
Karl Crosby. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would like to take a few moments at the 
beginning and try to focus the discussion by reviewing very 
quickly some of the things that have been happening in the 
Department of Tourism and Small Business, particularly things 
that apply to the budget that was brought down recently by my 
colleague, the Minister of Finance. 
 
The Department of Tourism and Small Business, as most 
members of the committee will know, has been in existence for 
three years now and has in fact accomplished a great deal in that 
time. This department has introduced programs based on 
consultation with the members of our small-business 
community and these are programs which are answering the 
needs that the members of the business community identified. 
 
Simply stated, those needs were for a positive and a stable 
business climate; for less interference from government in 
day-to-day business operations; and for better information on 
which to make sound investment decisions. 
 
By meeting these needs we’ve helped unleash a new and 
vigorous entrepreneurial spirit in the province — a spirit that’s 
encouraged the creation, Mr. Chairman, the creation of nearly 
4,000 small businesses since 1982, and of course along with 
that the creation of tens of thousands of new jobs. And like the 
Finance minister, I believe that the entrepreneurial spirit will be 
further encouraged, and in fact encouraged greatly, thanks to 
the initiatives that were contained in the recent budget. 
 
In reviewing our programs, I’d like to start with our business 
resource centres. This new method of delivering much-needed 
operational and management information has proved 
immensely popular with members of Saskatchewan’s 
small-business community. 
 
As members of the committee are well aware, our business 
resource centres are information storehouses for our 
small-business community. Located for the most part in high 
traffic areas, our resource centres contain a wealth of up-to-date 
business information. Departmental staff are also on hand to 
help business people locate and interpret the information. 
 
Business resource centers are now open in North Battleford, 
Prince Albert, Saskatoon, Estevan, Yorkton, and Swift Current. 
And our regional office in Regina has been functioning as a de 
facto business resource centre, but we plan to open a street-front 
centre in this city in the very near future. 
  



 
May 1, 1986 

1035 
 

Introduction of the centres has resulted in a more than 300 per 
cent increase in activity levels over previous years. In the past 
12 months, Mr. Chairman, we’ve responded to over 22,000 
serious business inquiries. 
 
A key reference source in our centres and, I dare say, the offices 
of many business people, is our publication, Starting a Business 
in Saskatchewan. Nearly 30,000 copies of that book have been 
distributed since September 1984, and the reaction to the book 
from our small-business community has been overwhelmingly 
enthusiastic. I might indicate as well, Mr. Chairman, that that 
publication is now being used in a couple, at least, that I’m 
aware of, post-high-school institutions in their business courses. 
 
In this fiscal year we plan to further improve upon our network 
of business resource centres with the transfer of positions from 
our northern business development branch to our regional 
services branch. We’ll be able to bring the resource centre 
concept in that way to La Ronge, Buffalo Narrows, and 
Creighton. And we’re also outfitting specially equipped vans to 
bring those same services to outlying communities across the 
province. And I believe that those two steps will be met with a 
considerable amount of enthusiasm by the people. 
 
And Mr. Chairman, possibly just for the enlightenment of our 
critic, I would send this copy of Starting a Business in 
Saskatchewan over to the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. He may find some interesting 
information, and it may lead to some questions that he’d like to 
. . . later in the process. 
 
Business resource centres are the responsibility of my 
department’s regional services branch. We’re further enhancing 
the capacity of this branch to help Saskatchewan businesses by 
establishing special business development officer positions in 
Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, and La Ronge. 
 
Business development officers will have a somewhat different 
role than their business consultant colleagues who staff the 
resource centres. Rather than deal with the broad gamut of 
business concerns and problems, these new employees will do 
as their title implies, work exclusively to encourage new 
businesses and provide all the consultative assistance they can 
on various special projects. 
 
Another initiative we’re bringing in this year was first 
mentioned again by my colleague, the Minister of Finance, in 
his recent budget address — the entrepreneur training program. 
And once this program is developed it will be a useful addition 
to the other business programs that I’ve talked about. 
 
The entrepreneur training program is designed to respond to the 
individual needs of people planning to start their own 
businesses. It’s structured format will expose would-be 
entrepreneurs to the type of training that they require. And 
despite the fact that that has been only referred to once or twice, 
we are getting any number of calls — I know I’ve had several 
personally — from people who are interested in the details of 
this program. 

The training that they will receive will include such activities as 
group workshops, pre-business workshops on business 
planning, co-ordination of small business training available 
from various agencies, one-on-one business consulting, 
assistance in preparing business plans, help in securing private 
sources of assistance, and the holding of special entrepreneurial 
conferences. I’ll have more to say about this program once it’s 
developed and is in place. 
 
And I’d like to say a word or two on a topical item. This week 
we announced details of the 1986 women and business 
conference. Last year my department undertook a major new 
initiative relating to women in business. The 1985 conference, 
which was the first in the province, attracted about 330 women, 
and was extremely well received by everyone in attendance. 
Many of the women attending were planning to start a business 
and received very valuable information and encouragement to 
proceed, to say nothing of the contacts that they made that 
would be useful later on. 
 
In 1986 a second conference is being planned with the theme, 
“Taking the next step.” This theme builds on the start made last 
year, and it is our objective to provide more “how to” assistance 
for starting and operating a small business. We’re anticipating 
in excess of 350 people. 
 
And of course, as was announced this week, that conference, 
which my department puts on in conjunction with the Women’s 
Secretariat and the Federal Business Development Bank, will 
take place on May 26, 27, here at the Hotel Saskatchewan. 
 
A couple of words about a program of ours that continues to be 
popular with the small-business community, is our management 
assistance program, or more commonly known as MAP. The 
program gives business people an opportunity to use private 
sector consulting firms to upgrade their management skills. 
They get management advice and information that helps them 
to see their complete operational picture, to go after new 
markets, and to run their companies more effectively. 
 
As my esteemed friend and colleague, the member from Regina 
North, soon to be the member from Regina South, noted last 
year in these estimates, the program has a twofold purpose. 
While assisting business to upgrade management skills the 
department is also developing competent management 
consulting firms which may not have had the opportunity to 
explore this market area — in fact, in the past, were not very 
common in the province. With each community added to the 
program, new teams of consultants are being developed. Since 
the program was introduced in the fall of 1983, more than 1,100 
businesses have been assisted in 52 different communities. 
 
A special management assistance program has also been 
delivered to members of the Northern Saskatchewan Outfitters 
Association. And, Mr. Chairman, in my travels around the 
province in the first six weeks that I was the minister, when we 
stopped and visited in 30 different communities, whenever the 
management assistance program was mentioned the most 
commonly asked  
  



 
May 1, 1986 

1036 
 

question was: when can we get it back again? And it appears to 
have been a very widely accepted program, and I know the 
member from Assiniboia will know that the merchants in 
Assiniboia were very pleased with that program and are, in fact, 
looking to have another session this summer. 
 
The fiscal year 1986-87 will be another year of consolidation 
for the community economic development program which was 
introduced several years ago to enable Saskatchewan’s smaller 
communities to share in this province’s economic growth. The 
program provides development training to volunteers in 
communities of between 700 and 5,000 population and helps 
them form economic development committees to attract new 
businesses and new industry. So far, Mr. Chairman, as a direct 
result of these committees, 53 communities have taken the 
program and their efforts have led to 116 new businesses 
locating in these communities already. And we anticipate 
obviously a great many more. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’ve had very positive news to pass on on our 
venture capital program. As the members know, the program 
was introduced two years ago to redress the problem of an 
insufficient supply of formal investment capital in the province. 
Our venture capital program was a little slow to develop 
primarily because of that inactive and undeveloped 
infrastructure for investment. The program gained a lot of 
momentum in the last fiscal year, however, as the venture 
capital idea began to take hold. To date, and I’m referring to the 
end of calendar ’85, 52 venture capital corporations have been 
registered with the province with a total capitalization of more 
than $33 million. Of that amount, over 15 million has already 
been invested in 24 eligible small-business opportunities, and a 
further 16 projects and considerable amount of money are in the 
process of being approved at this time. 
 
My officials anticipate a capitalization of 35 to $50 million in 
fiscal ’86-87. they also predict that the total amount of grants 
and tax credits, tax credits of course being the carrot that is held 
out to investors, will be between $10 and $15 million. We 
predict that interest in venture capital financing will be further 
heightened this year by some of the initiatives mentioned in the 
budget address. 
 
(2115) 
 
Retail and service industries in communities having populations 
of up to 20,000 are now eligible for VCC (venture capital 
corporation) investment, and of course, as most members of the 
committee will know, the previous limit was 5,000. Investments 
in agricultural facilities and equipment will be more actively 
encouraged, and the provision for labour-sponsored venture 
capital corporations, a new concept in the province, will give 
union members a whole new way to participate in 
Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
Mr. Chairman, members of this House are all vitally concerned 
with northern development, with expanding the range of 
business opportunities that are available to Northerners, and 
with reducing unemployment levels that are traditionally much 
higher than those in southern Saskatchewan. I’m happy to 
report that we have a very  

effective instrument for encouraging new businesses in northern 
Saskatchewan, and that vehicle is the northern Saskatchewan 
economic development revolving fund. The fund has been in 
existence since 1974. For a number of years, though, it suffered 
from poor management. Loans were made which shouldn’t 
have been made. The record of collections was poor, and there 
was an abnormally high level of write-offs. By instituting better 
management and tightening loan approval and collection 
policies, we’ve turned the performance of that fund around. I 
want to repeat that, Mr. Chairman: by tightening the loan 
approval and collection policies and improving the 
management, it’s been turned around. 
 
In 1985-86 there was a record number of loans out of the fund 
— a record number despite the fact that things had tightened up 
a little. Ninety-three loans were made for a total of $4.2 million. 
Those loans created 520 person-years of employment in 
northern Saskatchewan. Accumulative collection figures for 
1985-86 are also very positive. We collected $2.8 million last 
fiscal year — nearly double the figure for ’84-85 and nearly 
four times the figure for ’83-84. A total of 105 loans were 
repaid in full in 1985-86. Obviously, Mr. Chairman, those 
figures speak for themselves and indicate that the projects that 
had been undertaken by the revolving fund, lately, have been 
very successful. 
 
Mr. Chairman, in the throne speech and budget address that 
were delivered earlier this year there was a theme of 
opportunity and protection. The small business interest 
reduction program which was introduced a year ago was a good 
example of how we’re protecting small-business men and 
women and giving them a climate in which to pursue new 
opportunities. As we all know interest costs on loans can be a 
real threat to a business’s security, not only because of the level 
of those rates, but because of uncertainty over what the level 
will be one, two, or even three years down the road. We 
accordingly brought in a program to provide a measure of relief 
from that problem and to write down interest rates on loans to 
small businesses to as low as nine and five-eighths per cent. 
 
Over 6,000 businesses have registered for the program since it 
became effective on May 1st of last year, and nearly $1.5 
million in benefits have been paid out to over 5,500 applicants. 
We expect even more take up on the program this year because 
of the improvements that we have announced in it. The base 
rate for the calculation of interest reduction benefits will no 
longer be nine and five-eighths per cent, Mr. Chairman, but 8 
per cent. 
 
The limit on the loan amounts to be covered increase to 
$100,000 from $50,000, and the aggregate loan ceiling of 
$250,000 has been waived for car and farm equipment 
dealerships, and of course prior to the changes, car and farm 
equipment dealerships did not gain any advantage from this 
program. So the changes that I’ve introduced, I believe 
everyone will agree, have been very positive. To make the 
expanded increase in applicants as a result of these changes, our 
department has budgeted $15.8 million for the small business 
interest reduction program in 1986-87. 
 
I’d like to turn to another area now for just a moment or two 
where we’ve increased our budget, and of course that  
  



 
May 1, 1986 

1037 
 

is in tourism promotion. We’ve added an extra $500,000 for 
out-of-province advertising and $347,000 for promotional 
support to the Saskatchewan presence at Expo ’86. And, Mr. 
Chairman, while I’m on the topic of Expo ’86, I’d just like to 
make a couple of references. Of course last weekend, as most 
members are aware, we had the Saskatchewan reunion at the 
Expo site. In all, somewhere around 13,000 people attended the 
reunion — a record for organized reunions that will appear in 
the book of records. 
 
While in Vancouver the people that have come back indicated 
that the Saskatchewan pavilion is a major topic of conversation 
all around Vancouver. It is accepted to be one of the top three 
pavilions on the site. The location is excellent. The core cast 
that I had the pleasure of seeing off at the Saskatoon airport a 
couple of weeks ago have made their presence felt. They are 
extremely enthusiastic, extremely competent. They are making 
a very real presence felt at the Expo site, and with Expo 
opening tomorrow, the Saskatchewan pavilion will become one 
of the real highlights during this summer. And I believe that by 
the end of the summer North America’s best kept secret will no 
longer be a secret, and many, many people, possibly as high as 
2 and 3 million people, will view our pavilion, take it in, and 
I’m sure it will leave them something to remember. 
 
I’m sure that all members of this House appreciate what a 
significant industry Saskatchewan has in tourism. It’s a billion 
dollar-a-year industry. It is, in fact, our fifth largest industry. 
It’s also highly labour intensive, employing directly and 
indirectly in excess of 31,000 of our residents. 
 
Our programming over the last four years has been directed at 
making a strong industry even stronger and in raising the 
awareness across the country and in the United States of our 
province’s tourism attractions. We’ve developed publications 
and advertisements which paint a bright, colourful picture of 
Saskatchewan. We’ve attended more sport shows and travel 
market-places and undertaken more sales blitzes than ever 
before. And we’ve encouraged development of new tourism 
destinations by the private sector here in the province. 
 
One of our objectives has been to help the private sector take 
the lead role in directing Saskatchewan’s tourism future. I’m 
very pleased to note that the private sector has given every 
indication that it’s prepared to assume that role. Representatives 
of the industry are organizing the Tourism Industry Association 
of Saskatchewan which will represent all tourism operators 
across the province. TISASK has just hired an executive 
director and will be undertaking programming such as 
hospitality training for the industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Our new advertising moneys for 1986-87 will allow us to do 
more television advertising in the very important Minnesota 
market. We will expand a list of customer magazines used for 
advertising, and we will run business reply cards adjacent to our 
magazine ads. And throughout the course of these estimates we 
would be very pleased to show the members of the opposition, 
the members of the committee some of the examples of the ads 
that we are running. 

The Expo moneys that I mentioned earlier will be used to staff 
the information centre at our Saskatchewan pavilion, to produce 
special support material for use at the world’s fair, and to allow 
for additional quantities of our existing travel literature in 
anticipation of the traffic we’re going to get, both at the 
pavilion, and in the increased numbers of vacationers driving 
through the province. 
 
I should note that this May we’ll be opening three new visitor 
reception centres. They’ll be strategically located at Fleming 
and Langenburg near the Manitoba border, and at Maple Creek 
near the Alberta border. These modern buildings will do much 
to enhance the image of Saskatchewan as a place which is 
serious about tourism and the hospitality that we’re prepared to 
afford our visitors. 
 
In closing, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to comment on our total 
budget and our staff complement for 1986-87. First of all with 
the total budget, or excuse me with our staff complement, the 
complement has decreased from 159 to 146. The lost positions, 
however, were vacancies, and no one in the department is out of 
a job as a result of our elimination of those vacant positions. 
 
Members will also note that we have done away with our 
northern business development branch, but this is a result of an 
internal reorganization. Again, no one has lost his or her job, 
nor is our program delivery in northern Saskatchewan 
compromised in any way. In fact, Mr. Chairman, I think it will 
be greatly enhanced. Some of those employees were transferred 
to administrative positions with the northern revolving fund, 
which I’ve already discussed. the majority are now members of 
the regional services branch. And we thought it made more 
sense from a management standpoint to include our program 
delivery services for northern Saskatchewan in a branch which 
handles those services for the rest of the province, rather than 
continuing to administratively hive off the North. 
 
Looking at our budget for ’86-87, members may say that we’ve 
dropped $100,000 from the year before. Our budget for this 
fiscal year under vote 45 is $13.8 million as opposed to $13.9 
million last year, but one must examine the total picture. We’re 
getting $15.8 million from the employment development fund 
for the small business interest reduction program. That figure 
compares to $9 million last year. Add a million dollars from the 
Tourism subagreement, and we have an effective Tourism and 
Small Business budget of $30.6 million, compared with $23.9 
million for 1985-86. 
 
Members should also consider some of the other government 
initiatives which don’t fall under my department; initiatives 
such as the two-year corporate tax holiday for new small 
businesses, the corporate tax holiday on manufacturing and 
processing and the introduction of community development 
corporations. 
 
I think it’s clear from these initiatives, and those which I’ve 
outlined today, that this government is doing more for small 
business than has ever been done before, and we’ll continue to 
meet our commitments to small business in the future. We’ll 
continue to meet our commitments to a  
  



 
May 1, 1986 

1038 
 

sector that is one of the corner-stones of Saskatchewan’s 
economy. Indeed, it’s a corner-stone to our entire way of life. 
 
And I have heard it estimated that in the next decade, small 
business in Canada will provide at least 80 per cent of the new 
jobs that are created. Consequently, I think the initiatives we’ve 
taken to strengthen that sector in this province are certainly 
important. 
 
And I’ll apologize slightly for the length of that, but I thought it 
was important that we cover some of the things that we are 
doing and attempt as much as possible to focus the discussion. 
 
And if there should be any questions at all, I would be prepared 
to attempt to answer them. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I appreciate 
your remarks. Thank you for admitting they were rather boring. 
The minister was a little bit obvious . . . I don’t know if we have 
a chairman in the House or not, but I like it when there’s only 
one person speaking at a time. 
 
One thing I want to compliment . . . I don’t know if my 
colleague’s drunk or what, but if he can’t keep quiet, Mr. 
Chairman, somebody should . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I would hope, first of all, that 
you would refrain from making certain comments about 
members in this House, and at the same time I would ask you to 
retract and apologize to the member for that statement. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, the way the member from 
whatever party he’s representing now . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. That is not what the Chair 
requested. Please be seated. Please be seated. While the 
chairman is on his feet, please be seated. I’ve already indicate 
that I will not tolerate that type of verbiage in this House. I 
would ask you to retract that statement and apologize. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I retract that statement, Mr. Chairman. I will 
continue by remarks. Mr. Minister, it’s obvious from the 
beginning of your remarks . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I ask the other point. It’s not to be 
debated at all in this House, and you know that very well. I ask 
you to retract the statement and apologize to the member. 
 
Mr. Engel: — What statement are you asking me to retract 
now? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I am not here to play verbal or mental 
gymnastics. I asked you to retract the statement that you made 
and apologize to the member. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Your statement that your colleague from 
Regina North was drunk. 
 
Mr. Engel: — He isn’t my colleague. I apologize for saying 
that the member is drunk. He sounded like it, but it  

maybe isn’t . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. One last time. I will ask you 
to apologize and retract, and do not make further statements that 
he sounded inebriated; and then continue on with your 
questions . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, the member that is making all the 
noise beside me will have a full apology from me. I apologized 
for saying he sounds drunk. And that’s what I said; and I will 
apologize and retract that statement. But if the member can be 
quiet and listen, we could carry on with the business of this 
House. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I started saying about your statement, I 
appreciate your remarks and I think that . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order! I think we’ve gotten control 
of the House. The member has apologized and retracted the 
statement. I only think in all fairness that the member from 
Regina North West now maintain his silence so that the 
member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg can ask his questions . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . There is no point of order. If you 
wish to challenge what I’ve just said, you may call back the 
Speaker. I’ve already indicated that the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is asking his question and he may go 
ahead with it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Order! Now this is becoming . . . now this is becoming a game 
of silliness. Now the member . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Order! Now the member from Regina North West will not only 
apologize to the member, he will apologize to the whole House 
for putting aspirations on to the House, that the House is full of 
drunks. And you will apologize and retract that statement. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I certainly apologize for the statement. I will 
indicate that this member, on no grounds at all, suggested that I 
had been drinking — and I don’t drink . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order! You will not challenge the ruling of 
the Chair. The Chair has already obtained a full apology to you 
as the member of North West. The member has already offered 
you a full retraction. the argument over who is or is not in total 
sobriety in this House is over. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, if you can obtain some order, we 
could get on to some very important discussions tonight. I 
appreciated that the member began — and I think we’re going 
to have a session if we could get some order in the House — 
that we could discuss one of the most important industries, next 
to agriculture, in Saskatchewan. 
 
The business of trying to compete with the member that I 
wrongly accused, but who sounds as though he wants to get 
involved in the debate . . . some time he might. He will have his 
chance. We never stood in the way of anybody  
  



 
May 1, 1986 

1039 
 

asking questions in this House. And I wish you would accord 
me the same courtesy that I could ask my questions tonight, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
But as I was saying before I started, Mr. Minister, the former 
minister that just took his seat took this opportunity to prove 
that he was grandstanding. He said, hello mom and all the 
friends back home and you could tell that the whole game was 
around a TV act and a performance. 
 
Tonight I want to assure you that I’m interested in getting down 
to what your department is all about, and I suppose as a first 
question, Mr. Minister, I would ask: what do you consider your 
major qualifications to holding down a serious portfolio like 
this, like Tourism and Small Business. 
 
I enjoyed the debate I used to have with the minister from 
Regina North or South as you described him. That member met 
a payroll; he knew what red tape was all about in filling 
government forms; he was in business and he sounded like a 
business man and had the respect of a lot of business people 
across Saskatchewan. Now I was wondering on what basis — 
and I think it’s a fair question to say that you assume this 
portfolio: what are your strengths in that area; what is your 
experience and background; and what do you think is your 
major point that would give the business community some 
confidence in your ability? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I think . . . I don’t 
think that’s at all an unreasonable question. I think if I had to 
identify one strength only that would cause the business 
community to have confidence in me, it would be the gentlemen 
who surround me here that I introduced recently and the other 
fine people who work in the Department of Tourism and Small 
Business. 
 
And I think the previous minister, who you mentioned, 
obviously had a great deal more small-business experience than 
I do. I bring very little. I have taken . . . spent a good deal of 
time in the first two months of the portfolio meeting with the 
business community around the province. We went on an 
extended tour, talked in over 30 communities. I would hope that 
those people are satisfied that I, in fact, learned a considerable 
amount about the problems that they face. 
 
I would suggest to you that the budget that was brought down 
would suggest that, in the time that I’ve had the portfolio, we 
have managed to make small business a priority — and not to 
indicate in any way that it wasn’t before. I think the budget has 
been referred to by neutral observers, certainly in the press, as a 
small-business budget. 
 
And so, in answer to your question, though, what is the greatest 
strength I have, I think it’s the people that help me. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well, we’re getting off to a real good start. And 
I appreciate your sincerity and your honesty in this, Mr. 
Minister, because I feel that. I feel very strongly that, to get the 
confidence of the business community, a business man has that 
ability because they trust a fellow  

business man and know that he understands their problems. 
And I have confidence in the people in your department. And I 
think just that degree of sensitivity is the kind of answer that’s 
going to make this a nice, short session, and one we can deal 
with. 
 
Now, as far the other area that you didn’t talk about, and I was 
wondering about, and I was worried. And I thought maybe that 
you were going to say that you represent a party that stands up 
and speaks for business men and is business-oriented, like the 
PC party sometimes pretends to be. And I’m glad you didn’t 
refer to that as one of the strengths, because I feel that is the 
greatest weakness that is hitting Saskatchewan today — that the 
business community across the province is very quickly, very 
quickly losing confidence in your party. And so when you talk 
about your officials and the people around you, I like that 
because they’re going to be there after the next election to pick 
up the tab, and whoever gets the job is going to be able to 
handle that. 
 
But as far as confidence is concerned, I think the story about 
business in Saskatchewan — and I have a great deal of 
confidence in what Saskatchewan businesses can do — the 
dynamics, the creativeness, the innovativeness of business 
people in Saskatchewan is second to none in the world. It 
provides the goods and services for our people in all our 
communities, particularly small and rural communities in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, and I’m convinced, that if all of the 
30,000 business men in Saskatchewan, the small businesses in 
Saskatchewan, would create just one job each, it would take 
care of the unemployment situation in Saskatchewan. It would 
take care of that problem where the Department of Social 
Services is supporting people that should be working, and 
would rather be working, and would love to work. I have 
confidence in the work-force of our province, but I have more 
confidence in the business community. And those people will 
hire, will hire and will go to work if the climate is there — if 
the climate is there. 
 
But when you take a look at what’s happened in Saskatchewan 
— and let me just take a minute to inform the loud member 
from Moosomin — let me just take a minute to inform him 
what’s happened in my riding during your term, your four years 
in government. 
 
You can remember what it was like over the 11 years prior to 
you getting elected and what was happening in Saskatchewan. 
But, Mr. Minister, during the last four years in my home town 
do you know, do you know, Mr. Minister, that I’ve only one 
co-op lumberyard left in my whole constituency. Do you know 
that that happened during the last four years, that we lost four 
co-op lumberyards and two private lumberyards in the last four 
years in my riding. What’s that an indication of? Why would 
lumberyards be closing down? And I can tell you the answer is 
straightforward. And it’s getting awful noisy in here, and I’m 
going to lose my voice trying to compete with all the noise. I 
can’t see why you can’t keep order and attention in this House, 
Mr. Chairman. I very much doubt your ability to keep order and 
attention in this House, Mr. Chairman. I very much doubt your 
ability to keep order. I can doubt your ability . . . 
  



 
May 1, 1986 

1040 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Would the member please be seated? 
As long as I’m sitting in this Chair as chairman, that is my 
responsibility to keep order, and not yours. Continue on with 
your questions. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Member, I was trying to remind you of your 
responsibility. I’ve got my responsibility; you’ve got yours. 
Let’s both do our job and get this thing rolling. I don’t want to 
compete with all those noisy yahoos across the way. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. We don’t want to get into this. I’m 
convinced that you would rather be asking questions of the 
minister than asking questions of the chairman. 
 
An Hon. Member: — In some degree of silence. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — We have it right now. Okay, continue. 
 
Mr. Engel: — That’s what I was trying for, Mr. Minister, and I 
succeeded at least in getting those guys to shut up for a while 
and listen. They don’t like to hear that, in the four years they’ve 
been in office, they’ve succeeded in shutting down 
lumberyards. That’s why our party came up with a housing 
program that’s going to work — because we know that you 
have lost your innovative ideas, your creativeness. You started 
with a bang; you started with a loud clatter and a lot of noise of 
hammers and saws, and it was going great. And I would like to 
compliment the minister of small business that got things going, 
but he lost touch so quickly. You lost touch so quickly. And the 
lumberyards shut down and moved out of rural Saskatchewan. 
The carpenters hung up their hammers. 
 
I was in Moose Jaw to pick up a saw that was sharpened and I 
saw the word “Bud Smith” on a saw — and hung up a saw on 
the wall. And I wonder if that’s the same one. It’s a very 
common name, Mr. Chairman. And I asked the saw sharpener 
down there on Caribou Street, who does that saw belong to? 
And he says, I think you know. And I says, you know, are you 
busy? And he had lots of time. He sharpened my saw the day I 
needed it when I wanted it because he wasn’t busy. and you 
know, people right across the piece are telling me that wherever 
I go. How come there’s nothing happening? How come there’s 
no enthusiasm? And, Mr. Minister, you as one who said they’re 
willing to learn, you’ll likely have another year before your 
Premier gets up his nerve to call an election. You’ll likely have 
a whole year. 
 
And so, during that year I would plead with you and challenge 
you to implement and introduce some programs that will 
stimulate the economy. Let’s get things rolling again. You have 
all the clichés. You have the right words and you’re saying the 
right lingo. But, Mr. Minister, the actual fact is . . . the actual 
fact is, nothing’s happening. Nothing’s happening. 
 
And I’d like to know from you, and I listened for a half an hour, 
35 minutes, to you reading that speech of yours. And I can’t 
believe that there was no new ideas or no innovative ideas there 
to get the economy rolling, to give the business men some 
enthusiasm and some hope for the future. And saying that on 
this strength we’ll hire some  

people, on the strength of these programs we’ll go ahead. What 
have you got that is going to stimulate the economy and get 
things rolling? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, several comments, I 
suppose. We can do this one of two ways. We can do the usual 
lengthy and irrelevant preamble and I will respond to the 
preamble and the question, or we can get on to the questions — 
whichever he wishes to do. 
 
He started by some disparaging remarks about our party and its 
relationship to business. A couple of comments. As he may or 
may not know, their party has nominated 64 candidates for the 
next election. Four of those 64, in fact, haven’t had any type of 
business background. And I think that’s an important number 
for people in small businesses to remember. 
 
(2145) 
 
As I indicated in my previous answer, one of the first things I 
did when I became minister was to tour the province. And we 
got two very distinctive messages. One was that since this 
government took office — and again I compliment my 
colleague, the member for Regina North — small business 
people had become rather used to having the small business 
minister come around and visit. In fact, many people told us 
that when I met the 30 communities it was probably more 
meetings with small-business people than the NDP had had in 
the 11 years that they were in government. 
 
Mr. Chairman, one other interesting thing; a story that I was 
told by a business man. I don’t believe it was in your seat, but it 
was in the south-west part of the province. He indicated that 
business people as a group are very concerned about even the 
remote possibility that the NDP might return to govern this 
province. He indicated that, to use my sports background and to 
make an analogy, it was very difficult to do business when you 
not only had to worry about the opposition — as you do in a 
football game — but you had to worry about the possibility of 
being gang-tackled by the referees. And I think that’s the 
attitude that business people in this province have toward the 
party opposite. And I think the concept of suggesting that your 
party may somehow have better contact with the business 
community than ours does really doesn’t make a lot of sense. 
 
The member indicated that a saw-mill had closed in his . . . or a 
lumberyard had closed in his seat. A couple of things that he 
should know, and I notice he has chosen not to pay attention 
any more, but on one day in November, last November, on one 
day in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg the previous minister of 
Tourism and Small Business opened six new businesses. And as 
the member may also be aware, on the day that he and his 
colleague from Shaunavon were in Swift Current agitating the 
farmers, that the minister of small business was opening another 
four or five businesses in his constituency. So to suggest that 
his constituency has somehow been neglected and has not been 
successful is really not accurate. 
 
On a provincial basis in the last four years there have been over 
4,000 new businesses start, which is a growth increase of about 
13 per cent. 
  



 
May 1, 1986 

1041 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — I think, Mr. Chairman, to suggest 
that there’s no excitement, that there’s no growth, is simply 
very misleading. I’m not sure that it’s intentional. I’ll give the 
member the benefit of the doubt but 4,000 new businesses, a 13 
per cent growth rate, I think is an excellent record and, I think, 
indicates the type of growth and excitement that we’re 
experiencing, that we’re seeing across this province in the 
small-business sector. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I think an article, a political commentary that 
you’ve likely seen on the back page of a recent publication, is 
quite contrary to what you’re trying to tell the people tonight. 
And let me just read a few excerpts from this. “Election Fever 
Blakeney Tonic: is the heading on this article on politics and 
commentary for the May 1986 edition. And it says here: 
 

“(It’s) amazing the number of people who want to see me 
again,” the New Democratic Party leader reflected to some 
advisers following yet another meeting with (the) business 
men. Blakeney knows the oil company executives and 
others who have popped into his second floor (legislative) 
office . . . they came to hear from him personally . . . 
When the polls showed the NDP ahead last fall and the 
government floundering with no clear direction, it was like 
a green light for some private, rather large business 
interests . . . He (listens) . . . 

 
It says. And I could go on to read the entire article to the 
member, but I want to tell you — I want to tell you — in the 
last couple of years things have changed immensely. Things 
have changed immensely. 
 
And I like what I read in the papers nowadays, and I don’t like 
headlines like “Bankruptcies jump 13 per cent.” “Saskatchewan 
has a seven per cent rise to 81 failures . . .” And let me list the 
rest of Canada. Alberta had a worse record, with the number of 
failures climbing to 314 from 218. Manitoba’s failure rate went 
to 78, but Saskatchewan’s are 81 with a smaller population. 
Ontario’s rose by 22 per cent to 687, and Quebec had 749 
failures compared to 709 a year ago. Saskatchewan’s increase 
was one of the highest in bankruptcies. 
 
That’s a measure of where people think you’re at. And 
small-business communities across . . . We could go through 
headlines after headlines, Mr. Minister, and see what the press 
is saying about the recognition your party has in the business 
community. 
 
And, like I started my comment, your party talks loudly like it’s 
reported in this article here. The Tories scream — the Tories 
will scream at you until they are blue in the face that they 
haven’t changed at all. 
 
Well, you can do all the screaming you want, Mr. Minister, but 
nobody’s listening to you any more. They have given up on 
you. And those people that you talk about that are coming — 
that are coming in this mass of support to you — I don’t see 
that, Mr. Minister. I don’t see that, Mr. Minister. 

You have a few friends. You have a few friends. You’re open 
for big business. And just in the last little while, let me mention 
a few. 
 
Manalta Coal thinks you’re great. Manalta Coal, and you give 
away the coal mine in my constituency. That’s great for 
business, but that’s not small business, Mr. Minister. That’s not 
small business. 
 
Weyerhaeuser thinks you’re the best guys in the world. They 
got a mill for a song. And they don’t have to pay for it if they 
don’t make any profit. They think you’re great. They think 
you’re great. 
 
George Hill thinks you’re the greatest thing since home-made 
bread. He thinks you’re great. And so does Peter Pocklington. 
They think you’re great. There’s a lot of people around. The big 
oil companies love you. 
 
I listened to an oil executive on the radio. I listened to an oil 
executive on the radio this morning, Mr. Minister. I listened to 
him this morning, and he’s arguing — and he’s arguing that the 
recent announcement . . . New announcements of your big 
give-aways to the oil companies that affects the big oil 
companies, not the small ones. You’re not holding up your end 
of the stick. 
 
Now as the former member of the cabinet and involved in 
energy, you should know the small oil companies. You should 
be interested and concerned with all the lay-offs that have 
happened in the oil industry. 
 
And the oil people — you know what they’re telling us, Mr. 
Minister? Those oil people that are lining up — those oil people 
that are lining up on the second floor, across from the library, 
Mr. Minister — you know what those guys are telling us? You 
know when they come, Mr. Minister, you know what they tell 
us? The way you heated up the oil industry was to their 
detriment. You spend a half a million bucks on a well that we 
then have to shut down and not pump. That costs us money. 
Saskatchewan Business Report, that reported on you people, is 
indicating loud and clear — this is where this back page story 
came from that’s about election fever and a commentary on 
politics. You guys should read stuff like that. You guys should 
keep yourself informed, and you wouldn’t be in the kind of 
trouble you are in today. 
 
But I want to tell you that the mismanagement that your party’s 
been involved in, the deficit you’ve created, the fiascos that 
have arisen since your friends have been in government, Mr. 
Chairman, is a disgrace. To call yourself a party of business 
men — it’s a disgrace to think of creating losses in Crown 
corporations like you have. The Pioneer Trust fiasco, deficits 
like you’ve piled up. Is that business management? Is that good 
business management? Is that the kind of climate we want for 
our small-business men? 
 
When every one of those 30,000 business men thinks about 
their role and the amount that their share of the $2 billion 
deficit, they just shudder in their bones. They just shudder and 
say: what have these guys got us into? 
 
You talk about the four or five business men that Mr.  
  



 
May 1, 1986 

1042 
 

Member from Regina North or South visited down home. You 
know, they laughed about it. They said that we were given a 
road show to contend with, or else. But how much money did 
we get? What kind of grants? What kind of help did we get? 
What happened to Main Street? What happened to the main 
street improvement program? What happened to the program 
that put money . . . How come it’s a blank? You draw a blank. 
No explanation — nothing — just a blank. Main street 
improvement program, three dots — nothing. Main street 
improvement was very, very attractive. The people across my 
constituency in Willow Bunch love to remodel. Somebody 
doesn’t like what I’m saying, Mr. Chairman, because they’re 
getting awful noisy here. I guess I have to do your job and quiet 
this place down myself. 
 
The main street improvement program in Willow Bunch was a 
major success. Main Street in Will Bunch looks great. They 
have gone overboard in fixing up their main street. It looks 
great. Gravelbourg improved their store-fronts right down the 
whole street. They loved it. How come you got a big goose egg 
in there for main street improvement? Why quit on a program 
that was working so good when there’s some other communities 
that would love to get involved? 
 
And I think this government shows that they have a few friends 
they’re going to cater to. There’s a few friends that you’re going 
to cater to like I mentioned earlier, like Weyerhaeuser, Peter 
Pocklington, and George Hill. There’s a few of those guys that 
are going to do very well, thank you. But the rest of the 
businesses, the 30,000 representing the business men that count 
— the guys that can make Saskatchewan tick, the guys that can 
make Saskatchewan prosper — those are the people you have 
forgotten about. And all across Saskatchewan, small-business 
men are experiencing difficulties exactly like they did in 1971. 
 
I could go into a story and the former attorney general, the 
Minister of Finance knows . . . he served on a committee that I 
was chairman of back in 1971. Him and Don MacDonald isn’t 
around any more. Henry Baker isn’t around any more. He was 
on the committee. We had different members on the committee, 
and we toured across Saskatchewan. 
 
And do you want to know something, Mr. Minister? One of the 
programs that came out of that was the regional business reps 
around Saskatchewan. We implemented that program because 
there was business men who were telling us. They said that the 
farmer has ag reps, and the farmer has access to ag reps. We put 
business reps out there, and what have you done with the 
business reps? You look at your budget. What have you done? 
You’ve moved them into some major centres and have beefed 
them up, but you haven’t done anything for the guy serving 
rural Saskatchewan, Small Town, Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m concerned with the moneys that should be in industrial 
technical assistance, for example. Let’s look at that one. 
Farmers that are going into business to manufacture something 
used to be able to get some technical service. I have here the 
Public Accounts for 1984-85, and if you look at the budget for 
industrial technical assistance, amount budgeted: $175,000  

according to public accounts. 
 
How much did you spend? $70,000. $100,000 less. Not even 50 
per cent. 
 
You know, if you’d be back teaching school you know what 
you do with that department, and I guess that’s why the little 
minister flunked. Maybe that’s why he’s from North or South, 
and we don’t know where he’s going. Because that program 
totally failed. The technical service that you had budgeted and 
were planning on giving was a total flop. $100,000 you didn’t 
spend. And you’re talking about providing a service. 
 
The only one — the only one in the whole estimates from this 
year’s public accounts, Mr. Minister, the only section in the 
entire estimates that you spent was on your communications. 
The only one you spent was on your communications. 
 
And I think the minister has a lot of explaining to do as we get 
into the details of this. 
 
And these are some of the things I want you to do, to look up 
overnight. As you go about your evening assignments, I have a 
page here that I’d like you to bring along tomorrow: the salaries 
for your personal staff and the amount of increase they got over 
last year; advertising by your department through an agency or 
through the department itself; and did you conduct any surveys? 
What was the agency who conducted them? and so on. 
 
We’re interested in yours and your executive — your own and 
your executive travel, the destination, the purpose of the trip, 
the cost, and who went with you, and so on. 
 
I think one of the reasons why we want to know who went 
along is because of the news story that the little minister from 
Regina North or South when he went down to Hollywood and 
took that whole crowd with him, and then they really had a big 
time. 
 
We’re interested if you’re gone on those kind of expeditions as 
well with a good . . . (inaudible) . . . And, then, I think the other 
area of concern I’d like you to think about overnight and get 
some numbers for us for tomorrow, is: list the consultants that 
have been hired on a contractual arrangement that your 
department entered into, what plans they’ve drawn up and so 
and so; how much have you spent on consultants? If we can get 
those five areas in some specifics, I’d be very happy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, I have all that 
information with me. I could give it tonight; since he asked for 
it tomorrow. I’ll deliver it first thing. When we get started 
tomorrow, I’ll send it across. 
 
I have to make a few comments after that tremendous amount 
of diatribe, and I’m not really sure where to start. I think he 
started first of all quoting something that indicated that a whole 
lot of people were somehow coming to them for a lot of 
information. I suppose it was an attempt to indicate that they are 
in fact an open, responsive party. 
 
I happen to have in my hand an advertisement that  
  



 
May 1, 1986 

1043 
 

appeared in The Potashville Miner-Journal, which is the 
Esterhazy paper, this week, and it advertises a meeting that in 
fact is taking place this evening in Esterhazy, and it says — and 
there are two very interesting lines, Mr. Chairman — its says, 
“New Democrats, meet Allan Blakeney.” The indication is 
clearly that if you’re not a New Democrat, Allan Blakeney’s not 
real interested in talking to you. And I can understand that. 
 
And the second thing that it says is: “Members and invited 
guests welcome.” In other words, you’re not going to get a 
chance to meet Allan Blakeney unless you’ve already taken the 
course. 
 
A couple of brief comments and I’ll try, Mr. Chairman, to keep 
this relatively short. As is the wont of the party opposite, he 
reeled off a lot of statistics on bankruptcy, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:03 p.m. 
 
 


