


















































May 8, 1986 Hansard Evening


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 8, 1986 
 

1165 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Culture and Recreation 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 7 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I’m glad that the member 
for Prince Albert-Duck Lake is here again yapping from his seat 
as usual. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I would ask the member from 
Shaunavon to keep his remarks to the estimates on Culture and 
Recreation and not make references to other people in the House. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, it’s interesting that all of a 
sudden we’re worried about members talking or not talking about 
other members in the House. When the Premier or any of the 
government members are on their feet, they’re continually 
talking about other members in the Assembly. 
 
But I would like to ask the minister some questions about funding 
of recreational centres in some rural communities. And you will 
know very well that in many of the centres in my constituency, 
as in the other rural members’, that the centre of activity is often 
the curling rink or the skating rink, during the winter months at 
any rate, and the ball diamond and other recreation facilities 
during the summer. 
 
But my question to you, Mr. Minister: at the present time, I 
wonder if you could outline your program for assistance of 
funding construction of new facilities in the area of recreation. 
Have you got a grant structure of a community . . . Let’s say the 
community of Shaunavon was wanting to build a new skating 
rink. What would you have available in terms of a grant structure 
at the present time for a community like that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, we have in place, through the 
Department of Culture and Recreation, a program called the 
culture and recreational facility grant program. And the basis of 
it, to the member, is that there is a base grant available to every 
urban municipality of $5,000, plus a per capita along with that of 
$25 based on the 1981 census. 
 
So in other words, for simplicity’s sake, if you had a town of 
1,000 people, that would give them a base grant of $5,000 plus 
$25 times 1,000 which would be another 25,000. So their total 
allocation over a five-year period would be $30,000. 
 
And as well with the program, there’s a bonus grant of $5 per 
capita if two urban municipalities join together and jointly fund 
a facility. 
 
And as well as that, moneys are made available to rural 
municipalities who can contribute their funds towards a project 
in an urban centre.

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, on the issue of the $5,000 
basic grant, does that apply to all communities regardless of size 
or is there a cut-off for certain size towns? Can you outline for 
the different size of communities what that baseline is, and is this 
the same for the urban centres. Or what size communities would 
this apply to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — The base grant would be applicable to all 
urban municipalities, rural, and Indian reserves as well — base 
grant. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The $25 per capita, Mr. Minister, for a 
town of 1,000 — they end up with $25,000. You will well know 
how far that will go in building a rink complex. Well, with the 
$5,000 extra grant it would amount to 30,000. 
 
But when you’re talking about building one of these centres now, 
a combination curling rink and skating rink, I don’t think you can 
build one for less than a million, and the amount that you are 
putting forward here in grants simply doesn’t do anything. I 
might add doesn’t do anything to help these communities. 
 
And I would . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member 
from Weyburn, if he would quit shouting from his seat we might 
be able to get on. And maybe, Mr. Chairman, you could get him 
under control. Sits there and smokes cigars in the Assembly and 
shouts from his seat. 
 
But I would just say to the minister that in the 1978, for example, 
or ’79, there was a grant structure in place that allowed $100 per 
capita at that time for construction of rinks. And that is at a time 
when . . . Well they could use the community capital fund as well 
if they were wanting to use it. And it was a good boost to the 
community. And that’s when you could build a rink for half of 
what you can now. 
 
I just say to you that this grant structure you have in place at the 
present time is meaningless. And many of the rural communities 
who elected you people, based on the fact that you had promised 
them that you would have lower power rates, for example . . . 
And the member from Kindersley will well remember making 
speeches from this side of the House about the high power rates 
and how, if they were elected, they would have a different rate 
for community facilities. And that’s what they promised prior to 
1982, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And I know you’re looking at me like you don’t believe that 
statement, but you could ask the member from Kindersley. He 
promised that and he said it many times in the Assembly, that 
they would have a lower power rate for community facilities like 
skating and curling rinks. 
 
And what has happened? Well the power rates have continually 
gone up. And many of these rinks, structures . . . And the member 
from Weyburn will well know that the communities are having a 
hard time keeping the doors open, let alone build anything new. 
 
And in that area, I just say that your program has been a 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1166 
 

dismal failure for the rural communities. And I just want to put 
that on the record because I get a number of letters every year 
when the rink boards go to open the rinks and put in their artificial 
ice that they are terribly disappointed — terribly disappointed — 
in what this government has done in terms of helping those local 
rinks and communities. Because what we are talking about is a 
commitment that was made, Mr. Chairman, by a government in 
its early days, to do something for these rural communities — 
and they have gone in the opposite direction. They’ve taken away 
the grants that were in place. Power rates have gone up; they 
haven’t gone down. 
 
And I just wonder, Mr. Minister, whether you can outline any 
plans that you have at the present time to help out these 
communities in terms of keeping their rinks open. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to make a few 
comments in response to the comments made by the member for 
Shaunavon. The program we have got is a five-year program that 
is budgeted to be $32 million, and I would compare that with the 
last program under the NDP which was a similar type program, 
a five-year program that in total was estimated to be about $26 
million. So if the member makes a statement that they’re 
disappointed with the amount that’s available here, they must 
have been terribly disappointed with the one that was in place 
under the NDP. And where he gets the $100 per capita one, we’re 
not aware of that in 1978 or ’79. And also for the information of 
the members also, that the total number of projects that have been 
received to date since April 1, 1983, are 1,144. That’s throughout 
our whole province. So indeed the program has a good take-up 
and is being taken advantage of by the communities. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — But the number of 1,100 . . . I wonder if 
you could outline what . . . You’re certainly not saying that we’ve 
had 1,100 new rinks built in the province. I think you’re away off 
base if that’s the story you’re trying to tell the committee. There 
certainly have not been 1,100 new rinks built. And I suppose if 
you’re including every door that has been changed or every new 
light that has been put in. But it’s inaccurate, Mr. Chairman, for 
the minister to stand and say that we’ve built or constructed 1,100 
new facilities. 
 
And what I’m saying is that many of these community rinks are 
having a hard time keeping their doors open. And the member 
from Rosthern will know very well, coming from a rural area, 
that he will have been lobbied as well by rink boards who are 
saying they are having tough times. And I’m just making the case 
that, when you promise to do something about that when you’re 
in opposition, when you get into government I think you have a 
moral obligation to deal with the problem. 
 
And what I was asking you: that in terms of the support for the 
operating of rinks, do you have any plan in place? Do you have 
any plan at all that would assist these rinks in keeping the door 
open? Because I’ll just tell you that there are a number of rink 
boards around the province that are pulling their hair out every 
time they get the power bill from the Tory government. They 
don’t know how they’re going to keep their kids skating in the 
rinks because you

birds are charging them so much for the power and natural gas 
and they simply can’t keep functioning. 
 
And you will know very well, as the minister, that rink boards 
must have approached you, unless you’ve become so arrogant 
and isolated that they’ve totally quit talking to you. And that may 
be the problem. That may be the problem — that they’ve quit. 
They’ve just given up after four years. In fact, we’re now into the 
fifth year of this government’s term. After five years of arguing 
with you people to keep your election promises of having a lower 
power rate for rinks, which was promised in 1982, they may 
realize this government has become so arrogant — so arrogant 
with their massive mandate that they were given in 1982 to do 
things — that they have simply quit listening to the people of the 
province, and in return the rink boards may have quit writing to 
you. But I know that earlier on they were getting in touch with 
the office of the Minister of Culture and Recreation many times. 
 
I know the recreation board in Frontier, for example — I’ll use 
that one as the example. They have written me a number of times 
saying the power bills they’re getting for that centre — that’s the 
recreation centre in Frontier that . . . That was when Olaf 
Friggstad had Friggstad Manufacturing going in that town, 
before it went bankrupt after this government took over in 1982. 
They had a beautiful recreation centre that was built in part by 
Friggstad Manufacturing, a small-business person who had set 
up in that town in the ’70s under Allan Blakeney, and had a 
flourishing business building cultivators and rock pickers. And 
within 18 months, Mr. Chairman, after this government took 
over, they were bankrupt. They were bankrupt because they got 
no support from this government. 
 
And I’ll tell you that the recreation centre that he built or helped 
build at that time is having a difficult time not only keeping 
things rolling, but keeping the door open because of the fact that 
the power bill is so high. And I have letters and I can go back to 
the office and get them and read them into the record. Because, 
I’ll tell you that that community, under you birds, has practically 
ceased to exist, in terms of trying to keep the recreation centre 
open. 
 
And I’ll tell you that if you don’t have a plan in place, that’s 
something that’s going to come back to haunt you in the next 
election. Because when you talk about making a promise to lower 
the power bills, you simply haven’t done it. And I’m just 
wondering now, when you’re in the dying days of this 
government, sort of a deathbed repentance, have you got any plan 
at all that would help those rinks out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, the member has touched on a 
number of items in his remarks there. I think one of the ones was, 
you have a breakdown of the types of projects that have been 
undertaken in that figure I gave you, and I can go through the list 
here, and I believe I should. 
 
Since April 1, 1983 there have been 227 complexes begun. And 
I should indicate here that this grant can be used not only for new 
complexes, but renovations. There’s been 227 complexes . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . .  
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1167 
 

Mr. Chairman, if the members of the NDP would care to listen to 
the question, rather than shouting from their seat. 
 
(1915) 
 
The skating rinks, indoor, 174; skating rinks, outdoor, 19; curling 
rinks, 136; swimming pools, 35; tennis courts, 12; halls, 221; 
libraries, 31; museums, 13; arts centres, 7; playgrounds, 33; golf 
courses, 17; race tracks, 4; rodeo grounds, 7; gymnasiums, 4; 
playing fields, 109; theatre, 7; RV parks, 12; senior citizens’ 
recreation centres, 9; bowling alleys, 8; and other, 27. So that 
would add up pretty close to the 1,144 that I mentioned in my 
previous response. 
 
So indeed, the communities are taking up the program and the 
program was meant to facilitate a community building their 
project. It’s not meant that the provincial government pays for 
the whole ball of wax; rather assist the community. Because as 
members will know, such as the member for Rosthern, contrary 
to your early statement, there can be rinks built for well under $1 
million. 
 
And it’s up to the community to do the planning. And one thing 
that’s very important through this program is that it is the 
community that decides where this money should be allocated. 
For example, if they want to put X number of dollars towards the 
skating rink and the same towards the curling rink, it’s up to the 
community to identify those needs, rather than the provincial 
government identifying it for them. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I think I should just reiterate once again the 
number of dollars in this program as opposed to the five-year 
program under the NDP. And also, he alludes to the high cost of 
operation. And indeed I think one of the major reasons that the 
operational expenditures are quite high is because of the demand 
meters for power. And I believe the case is that demand meters 
were introduced in Saskatchewan by the former administration, 
the NDP administration, and I recollect very clearly that at the 
recent SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 
conference the minister in charge of Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation stated that SPC is looking at that, and we’re hoping 
to get a new system, which shows that our government is willing 
to address that situation. 
 
And I also should remind all the members that we have 
eliminated the E&H tax on all the power bills, so there’s a 5 per 
cent decrease right there. I don’t have the figures in front of me, 
but over the four years of a Tory administration, I would compare 
the power rate increases with the last four of the NDP, and I 
would be pleased to go over that, and I’m sure the minister in 
charge of Sask Power would do that as well. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister says very 
clearly and now agrees with us that there was a promise made to 
replace the demand meters on rinks four years ago, and he’s 
correct in that, that statements were made and promises were 
made to the rink boards to change the power rate structure for 
rinks. That’s what was promised, and the minister has now 
agreed with that, and

he says that in their fifth year, they’re now looking at it, the 
possibility of changing that. That’s what he’s saying. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, a New Democratic government wouldn’t only 
study it, they would do something about it. Well I’ll tell you, in 
the 1970s there was money in the rural communities. There was 
a good deal of money, and Mr. Chairman will know that farmers 
at that time actually paid income tax because we had some 
income. That’s what happened. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They didn’t vote for the NDP either. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, in the ’70s they did vote for the NDP. 
Yes, they did . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I believe the debate is straying from 
the topic. We’re getting into irrelevant topics, and I would ask 
the member to come back to the debate, which is estimates on 
Culture and Recreation. It’s not the income of farmers in the ’70s 
or anything of that nature. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I think the salary of farmers in terms of 
what they can afford for their children in terms of recreation has 
everything to do with the estimates of Recreation. Of course it 
does. If farmers don’t have an income so they can afford to take 
their children to the rink, that has something to do with 
recreation. And, Mr. Chairman, if you’d follow the arguments, 
we will . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Is the member from Shaunavon 
challenging my ruling? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — What I’m talking about is the income of 
farmers as it relates to the ability of people to buy tickets to go 
skating. Obviously in the 1970s farmers had good income; they 
could afford to buy memberships to the local rink, and it wasn’t 
a big problem. 
 
But I’ll tell you, today everything is falling apart. Farm income 
is at the lowest level since the 1930s, since the last time that we 
had a Conservative government in this province, Mr. Chairman. 
I don’t know whether you realize that. But the last time farmers 
had this much trouble with recreation and getting their children 
to the rink was in the 1930s. They haven’t had an income so low 
since back in 1931 when the Anderson government was in — the 
Conservative Anderson government. That’s how long ago it is 
since we had farm incomes that low. And I’ll tell you they’re 
having a great deal of difficulty paying the ever increasing 
amounts that they have to for their families to go to these skating 
rinks. And many of the families simply can’t have their children 
in the curling clubs because the curling clubs have to charge so 
much because the power rates have gone so high. 
 
And I say to you that farm income has everything to do with the 
recreation facilities in our local communities, and when farm 
income goes down there’s not as much money that can be raised 
by going around canvassing to build the local rink. And I just 
think that that is so obvious, Mr. Chairman. The farm income has 
a lot to do with why we should have more input from the 
provincial government instead of less, which is what we’re 
seeing at the present time. 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1168 
 

Now I know as a rural member you will be well aware of that. 
And I’m sure that you can now agree with me that farm income 
is an important issue when it comes to whether or not your 
children and family members can go to the rink and skate, if in 
fact the rates are going up year after year. 
 
And the provincial government has reneged on a very important 
election promise. That is that demand meters, as the minister has 
apologized for, has admitted that they promised to remove, 
haven’t been removed, and what he is saying that in their fifth 
year they’re now looking at it. Well I don’t think that’s a policy. 
I think that’s a cop-out, Mr. Minister, that you’re going to have 
to live with in the next election. 
 
Because obviously the rural communities were promised that if 
Premier Devine got to be premier, which he did, that he would 
do something about it. And he’s reneged on that. He’s broken his 
word to the people of the province and the farm community. And 
I say that’s unfortunate. And I’m just wondering that in the year 
that we’re coming to, and in these estimates, there’s any relief for 
the power bills for those rinks. Is there any relief for the skating 
rinks and for the curling rinks in the year that we’re coming into 
and the estimates we’re dealing with? 
 
Now you say you’re studying it. Have you got a committee set 
up? Or what does the study involve? What kind of a study are 
you doing at the present time to look at the power rates as they 
affect rinks and local community centres? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Well, Mr. Chairman, once again the member 
from Shaunavon has touched on many issues. And I would 
certainly appreciate it if he would go through Hansard and just 
look at my remarks and see what kind of commitment I made on 
that. Rather, I think it was very succinct: that it was under the 
NDP that demand meters came into effect, and it is under us that 
we are looking at alleviating that problem. So let’s be clear on 
that, that it was the NDP, not this government, that brought those 
in. 
 
And as far as the NDP feeling for what’s going on in recreational 
facilities across this province, Mr. Chairman, I just can’t believe 
it. You know, the member alludes that he goes into a curling rink 
and everybody comes up running to him and says, I can’t curl 
because the power rates are so high. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’ve spent a little bit of time in my lifetime around 
curling rinks; and not once — not once — has anybody ever 
come up to me and said, Rick, I can’t curl because the power rates 
are so high. Mr. Chairman, and I’m sure as we go around here, 
people are not saying that. Rather, the strength in communities, 
the strength in curling rinks and hockey rinks, of recreation 
boards across this province, is the ability of the community to run 
their operations. They take pride in that. 
 
Have you ever gone into the rinks around, and have you seen 
volunteer help in there helping out on the concessions? Have you 
seen volunteer help out there cleaning the ice? Have you seen 
volunteer help out there really pitching in to make their 
community proud of what they have?

The NDP say they are going to have a solution to this; as usual, 
there’s no details. But maybe, if I can let my mind wander a little 
bit the way they brought in land bank, maybe their solution is 
rink bank, curling rink bank, skating rink bank, under the NDP. 
Vote for us, we’ll nationalize your curling rinks — that’s the 
NDP way of doing it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister is so off track that he doesn’t 
realize that the rinks are already owned by the communities — 
that the rinks are already owned by the communities — and that’s 
how out of touch he is with reality. And I suppose, Mr. Chairman, 
if you travelled in the circles that the rich people do, as the 
minister does on his curling tours, you wouldn’t hear the stories 
that I hear. 
 
And I say to you that people from the small communities . . . and 
I’ll use an example. Let’s take the Al Lind rink from Admiral 
who come from a different background than the minister, but I’ll 
say, but don’t have much trouble cleaning his clock from time to 
time on the ice at play-offs. 
 
I’ll say to you that the people will be able to tell you, if you cared 
to listen, that the power rates are too high. Well, the power rates 
are too high, that’s what they’re saying. And the minister will 
stand here and say that he has not hear it from anyone — that he 
hasn’t heard that. Well I’ll tell you, that is a government that is 
out of touch. If he hasn’t heard the problem of high power rates 
in rinks then he’s out of touch. 
 
A Member: — He’s curling in the wrong rinks. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And he’s curling in the wrong rinks with 
the wrong people. And I think maybe he’s going to too many cash 
bonspiels in Vancouver and around Canada, and flying and 
taking the high flying operation, and should be going out to the 
Admirals and Eastends and Frontiers and Lafleche, and listening 
to what the people are really saying. Because if you were 
listening, this is what you would hear, is that the power rates are 
too high; that families are having to pay too much for their passes 
to the rinks because your government has failed on a major 
commitment, and that was to lower the power rates for those 
rinks. That was the promise that you made. And I wonder if you 
can tell me, Mr. Minister, whether or not before the next election 
you intend to fulfil that commitment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Well, Mr. Chairman, maybe I’d like to 
address a few comments in response to the member from 
Shaunavon. 
 
Certainly I guess that in the travels that I’ve made through 
curling, that I’ve touched in many rinks in Saskatchewan and 
across western Canada and I’m sure that some of the people that 
I have curled with and against would be very interested in the 
comments you have made, that we’re going around the elite. But 
I will tell you that not many of the people that I’ve played with 
or against have oil rigs in their backyard and have that as a . . . 
(inaudible) . . . 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1169 
 

And as far as the remark about getting my clock cleaned in 
play-offs and that, well, what can you say to that, Mr. Chairman, 
except that maybe under the NDP they would like to get rid of 
the competitive spirit. And I go out there to win every game, and 
certainly we don’t win every game. We tend to lose. 
 
I guess what the NDP would like to see is a real roaring game of 
curling, and tie the game so that nobody gets beat and nobody 
gets their clock cleaned or anywhere else. That seems to be the 
socialist mentality. Any time they see someone who has a little 
bit of a competitive spirit or any community that shows some 
drive to get out there, they dump on it. 
 
So you might be able to find a couple of communities across the 
province that are in dire straits, but I’m sure you’ll find many, 
many more that really take a lot of pride in the operation of their 
facility. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Is that the ones that own them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — They own their own facilities — you’re very 
correct. We realize that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 
please do. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the members are yelling from their seats of 
course, once again. It’s quite simply — okay — I do have the 
MLA for Shaunavon and his constituency, which I don’t know if 
he’s aware of, but under this program we’ve had two projects in 
Admiral, one in Cadillac, two in Consul, one in Eastend, one in 
Glentworth, one in Mankota, one in Pinto Creek, and two in 
Ponteix, that have gone on with total actual costs so far of 
$456,361.62. So there is activity there. Rinks are being 
renovated. They are being built. 
 
(1930) 
 
And I think if the member for Shaunavon will really look, it’s the 
people of the community that pitch in and help make the 
community complex, the skating rinks go, the curling rinks go. 
That’s the name of the game. People in Saskatchewan have the 
highest rate of volunteerism. They know how to pitch in and help, 
and have pride in their communities. 
 
So no matter what you say, people in Saskatchewan have a lot of 
pride, and they will have a lot of pride in the future. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister has outlined some of the 
projects that have happened in the Shaunavon constituency in the 
last four years. And I say, quite honestly, that we have been able 
to fight for and get some very important projects. 
 
And the Shaunavon constituency, in getting projects, that’s not 
the one I was worried about. But the problem is that not all the 
constituencies have NDP MLAs who will fight for their 
communities.

And I say to you that it’s been a struggle to get those projects 
going. And the minister may try to take credit for everything that 
has happened down there. But I’ll tell you the communities have 
fought hard for them. They have fought hard for them, Mr. 
Chairman, and as a result they did get some projects going. But 
the minister will know that the problems that are facing the 
communities are paying the power bills and keeping the door 
open — keeping the doors open. 
 
And you will know that you have had many people come to you 
and written to your office . . . And if the Minister of Health would 
quit his chattering from his seat; he’s just going on and on. I don’t 
know where he had supper tonight but I’ll tell you, he’s pretty 
excited. 
 
But I want to tell the minister that when you say that some of the 
rinks aren’t proud of their facilities . . . I hear you say that, that 
some of the communities aren’t proud of their facilities. The ones 
that are writing to you are saying that the power bills are too high; 
that those communities aren’t proud of their facilities. I’m going 
to be sending that comment. I’m taking it out of Hansard 
tomorrow. and each one of the communities who has written in 
and complained about the power rates that you are referring to as 
not being proud of their facilities, I’m going to send that out to 
them. Because the people in Frontier will be interested in 
knowing that you as minister feel they are not proud of their 
facilities, because that’s what you said. 
 
But the question I asked you was whether or not you had any 
intention of fulfilling your commitment, the 1982 commitment, 
before the next election. That is to reduce the power rates for 
those facilities as you promised in the election campaign in 1982. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member said that 
he’s going to be pleased to take my comments out of Hansard. I 
hope he does. And maybe I can add something else for him to 
send to his constituents. As I went through the list of projects in 
his constituency . . . And he distinctly got up and said they had 
an MLA that’s been fighting for their projects in his constituency. 
Since I’ve been Minister of Culture and Recreation, since the 
summer of 1983, not once, not once ever has the MLA for 
Shaunavon written to me, phoned me, asked about anything to 
do in his constituency, about any of the facilities. 
 
So the battle in the constituency of Shaunavon to improve their 
facilities has gone on in the absence, I might add, of the member 
for Shaunavon. As far as the Sask Power, as I indicated earlier, 
the minister distinctly said at the SUMA conference that Sask 
Power is looking at the demand meter situation, and they’re 
hoping to come up with a solution very soon. And I’ll reiterate 
once again, demand meters were introduced in the province of 
Saskatchewan by the NDP. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I wonder if the minister can tell me 
what studies are being done in that area. Have you got a 
committee set up or is there a joint committee between Sask 
Power and your department? Can you just outline what studies 
are going in to make those changes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to indicate that 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1170 
 

officials from Sask Power and officials from our department of 
Culture and Recreation are working together on this to bring this 
to a head and try to get the best possible result possible. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I just received some figures that might be 
interesting on power rate increases in the province of 
Saskatchewan. In 1975, there was a 27 per cent increase; in 1976, 
there was 12.8 per cent increase; in 1977, it was 17.3; in 1978, it 
was 3.3 — I think there was an election that year; in 1979, there 
was an 8.3 per cent; 1980, 7.9 per cent; 1981, 15.8 per cent; and 
in 1982, another election year, 7.5 per cent. That’s the NDP 
record; an average power rate increase under the NDP in those 
years of 12.5 per cent. 
 
Under the administration of the Progressive Conservatives: 1983, 
12.6 per cent; ’84, 9.2 per cent; 1985, zero per cent — and you 
might recollect there was no election in 1985; in 1986, it’s 
estimated at 7.5 per cent. The average under the PC government 
is 4.8 per cent a year. So once again to capsulize that, just for the 
member’s sake: the NDP average for those years, 12.5 per cent 
per year; under the Progressive Conservatives, 4.8 per cent per 
year. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well the minister will well know that the 
income of the farmers . . . And I, being one, will well remember 
that the income increases that we had during that time period 
were well in excess of 12 per cent. But I’ll tell you that the rate 
increases now when my income isn’t going up by 4 per cent, but 
in fact going down by 20 and 30 per cent a year, that we could 
afford to pay 12 per cent more very easily in the 1970s. But I’ll 
tell you, we can’t afford to pay 4 per cent more now when our 
income is going down by 20 per cent under the Progressive 
Conservatives. It’s impossible. It’s impossible. 
 
I remember very clearly in ’77 that our income on the farm was 
going up by 20 or 30 per cent a year — 20 or 30 per cent a year. 
And 12 per cent increases were about the rate of inflation, and 
we could afford to handle. it. And you could follow the price of 
wheat going up under the NDP government. But I’ll tell you, our 
price of grain has gone from 6 bucks a bushel back in ’76 to $3 a 
bushel under the Mulroney government. And 4 per cent increases 
of power for the rinks is no solution to the problem because they 
can’t afford to pay it. They simply can’t afford to pay it. And the 
minister can down play the issue and pretend it isn’t there, and 
that’s what he’s doing tonight, pretending there’s no problem, 
saying we’re making up this story and the rinks who are writing 
in aren’t proud of their facilities. That’s what he’s saying, and 
ignoring the problem. Well that’s fine. If that’s the arrogant 
attitude the minister wants to carry on with, that’s fine. 
 
And if you can convince the people of Saskatchewan, the rural 
communities, that it was bad times in the 1970s, that they were 
having a difficult time in the 1970s, that they were having a 
difficult time in the 1970s, go ahead. But I lived out there and I 
started farming at that time and I remember how exciting and 
vibrant the rural communities were in the 1970s, and what our 
income increases were each year during the 1970s. That was an 
exciting time to be a farmer in Saskatchewan. I’ll tell you now 
there are more farmers wondering how they can get

off of the land under a Conservative government at the federal 
and provincial level than I have ever seen since I’ve started 
farming. 
 
If they could get a job, and the reason that many of them are 
simply staying there is because there are no jobs . . . But they’re 
up against the wall. And yes, it has a lot to do with recreation 
because it’s directly related to the incomes and what farmers can 
afford to pay at the rinks. And if the minister is saying that we 
had a tough time in the 1970s, I don’t know where you were at. I 
don’t know where you were at, because I’ll tell you, out in my 
constituency things were booming in the 1970s. Things were 
booming. And if you’re saying that it’s better times today in rural 
areas in 1986 under a Conservative government than it was back 
in ’76, I don’t know where the rose coloured glasses that you 
people are wearing are coming from. 
 
So I would just say to you that you can carry on in your arrogant 
manner saying there is no problem, that there is no problem at 
all, and the rinks are wrong. The ones who are complaining 
simply aren’t proud of their facilities — and that’s your opinion. 
I’ll leave it at that. Because I think you are impossible to talk to 
and I suppose coming from a big city, in terms of what my 
constituency knows, maybe you don’t understand what it’s like 
to keep a small rink open. But I’ll tell you, I’ll tell you that they’re 
having a difficult time. and you can choose to ignore it if you 
want but I just wanted to put that on the record. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Well, Mr. Chairman, once again the member 
has put a lot on the record here, you know, being against kids 
from the cities or whatever, as opposed to his own area. Indeed, 
people in Saskatoon are eligible for the program just the very 
same as they are in your community — $5,000 base grant plus 
$25 per capita. And indeed there’s a lot of facilities in the city of 
Saskatoon. And believe me, there’s a lot of people very proud of 
the facilities, that they have pitched in together. 
 
I’ve had some further information given to me. Certainly the last 
increases I gave to you were electric. But now we get into the gas 
side of it through Sask Power and we’ll start in good old 1975 
again, under the NDP. 
 
Under the gas there was a 66 per cent increase in 1975; a 27 per 
cent increase in 1976; in 1977, it was 19 per cent; 1978, 10 per 
cent; 1979, there were two increases, one of 3 per cent, one of 
3;5 per cent; in 1980, they outdid themselves here, they had three 
increases of 4.2, 9.8, and 14.9 per cent. In 1981 they settled down 
a bit, they only had two increases of 6.5 per cent, and 6.1 per 
cent; and in February of 1982 they slipped in a quick 18.5 per 
cent increase. So that averages out, under those years of the NDP, 
to 24 per cent per year increase in the gas rates under Sask Power, 
under the NDP. And just for comparison’s sake, under the 
Progressive Conservative government, in 1983, it was 13 per 
cent; in 1983 in September, there was an increase of 0.2 per cent; 
and in January of 1975 there was a decrease of 1.1 per cent — an 
average per year under the Progressive Conservatives of 2.5 per 
cent per year. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And no sales tax. 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1171 
 

Hon. Mr. Folk: — And on top of that I’m reminded that there is 
no sales tax any more on the power bills in the province of 
Saskatchewan, which is indeed a 5 per cent reduction. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, you know, he states that farm incomes were 
very good and vibrant, etc., in the late years, in the 1970s, and 
indeed that might have been the case. But I guess not having a 
real agricultural background, I would ask one question. If the 
agriculture incomes were going up and things were going so good 
out there on the farm, why did the NDP institute land bank and 
start buying the farmers’ land? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
your cultural facilities grant programs, as you describe it, has a 
base grant of $5,000 and has a per capita grant of $25. If you take 
of community of 500 people, that will give the community 
$17,500 over five years. If you take a community of 1,000 
people, that would give them, I believe, $30,000 over five years. 
If you take a community of 5,000 people, that will give them 
$130,000 over five years. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you need to build a community hall in a 
community, or a skating rink, the basic cost in a community of 
500, 1,000, or 5,000 will more or less be the same. Now there 
will be some difference maybe in a 5,000 population community. 
Why, Mr. Minister, are you discriminating against smaller 
communities by providing them so little as $17,500 and so much 
more for bigger communities, because it’s probably not enough 
in today’s age. When you think of the cost of a skating rink, an 
enclosed skating rink, $130,000 is not a great deal of money. 
Why would you not consider, Mr. Minister, as used to be the case 
under . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What would you do about it? You were 
Finance minister. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I’ll tell you what I will do. The member 
from Lloydminster speaks from his seat and asks what we would 
do. Well, I’ll tell you what we would do, because we did it. You 
may have not remembered that, and you weren’t here, and you 
may be forgiven for your ignorance of what went on. But I’ll tell 
you. 
 
In the previous recreation and cultural facilities grant program, 
there was a base grant; there was a per capita grant; and in smaller 
communities under a certain specified population there was an 
additional amount of money provided because there were not as 
many people in a population sense in those communities, and yet 
they still needed the facilities. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, why could not your program have included 
such a provision in it, where a community of 500 people could 
have had not only the $25 but maybe another 15 or $20 to assist 
them in providing the same kind of facility as a community that 
is larger, which they obviously need? Why wouldn’t you have 
considered that? 
 
(1945)

Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, in response, I’ve checked with 
my officials and they’re not aware of that clause that was there 
under the culture and rec facility grant program under the NDP. 
 
But I will reiterate some of my remarks earlier: that our five-year 
program is budgeted at $32 million over that period, and theirs 
was budgeted at $26 million over that period. So whether or not 
they had that clause in there, I can’t comment for sure. But if they 
did, they must have been taking it off the top end, because in fact 
their total allocation is less than what is under our program. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Chairman, when we’re looking at this 
program, I’ve talked to numerous communities that are interested 
in renovating or building new facilities. And when we talk about 
what is the fairest way possible of allocating money towards 
communities to help them build facilities or renovate it, the 
fairest way that we have found is through a per capita grant. So 
that indeed with the larger centres, whether they be very large 
centres or smaller ones, as we go down, the more people you 
have, the more people are in need of recreational facilities. I think 
that makes sense. 
 
So there cannot be a formula, to our knowledge, that is any more 
fair than the size of the community on a per capita basis, then, 
right across the province. And certainly, if the members of the 
opposition have any solutions; we’d be very pleased to hear about 
them. But I think it’s a fair program. And in talking to 
communities, they believe it is fair too, that everybody gets a fair 
shot at it. 
 
And I will also reiterate that under our program there’s a $5 per 
capita incentive grant if two municipalities, two urban 
municipalities, get together to joint-fund a project. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I’m not going to argue with 
your officials. I’m not here to discuss with them; I’m here to 
discuss with you this grant program. And I will say to you that 
either you’re not telling us what your officials are telling you or 
your officials do not have the former program close at hand. 
 
The former program, which I happened to be the minister at the 
time when it was announced, had a $25 per capita provision, plus 
another amount of money — and I can’t remember exactly what 
it was — in addition to that for communities under a certain size, 
plus another provision of $5 per capita where more than one 
community joined together and jointly built a facility. I think that 
that’s commendable, Mr. Minister. I think that that’s a good idea. 
 
But what I’m telling you is, that when you say you have some 
$36 million in your budget, or $32 million in your budget, and in 
previous years there was $26 million, my only comment on that 
is — and it applies in lots of other departments, as well — too 
often what you budget in your government and what you actually 
spend doesn’t quite jibe. And I suspect that may very well be the 
case again. I hope it’s not, because I really think that some of 
these improved services are necessary. And I hope it doesn’t 
happen. But I just want to make that point. 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1172 
 

Mr. Minister, how can you say to a community of 500 people 
who needs a community hall that they can only have $17,500, 
and a community of 1,000 which probably needs a hall of about 
the same size — I don’t think you can build much difference in 
size halls — that they will get $30,000? Can you explain how 
you see that to be fair? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, as I mentioned in my earlier 
remarks, we have gone across the province. We have developed 
this program in consultation with the communities. My officials 
have come up with this program. It was designed in 1983, and 
we are not starting year four of the program. 
 
And as I indicated earlier, as you talk to people in the 
communities, and whether they’re happy with the program or not 
happy with it, when you ask them, what is the fair way of doing 
it other than per capita basis? In other words, if you ask them, 
like, would you say that your community should maybe get twice 
as much? Well that means another community gets zero. Is that 
the kind of program you would like a provincial government to 
do? 
 
If you got a basic amount of money that is there, are you going 
to go around as a provincial government and say, you need a new 
rink, here’s a whole bunch of money; you guys need one, but no 
money for you. Or is it more fair to say to every community, you 
have the opportunity to use $25 per capita as well as the base 
grant of $5,000. I believe that is the fairest way possible, but like 
I said in my earlier response, if you have a better idea, then 
certainly we’re willing to entertain it because in two year’s time, 
under this government, we’re going to be instituting a new 
program, and all suggestions are welcome, even from the 
opposition. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I’m afraid, Mr. Minister, that even though 
your Premier doesn’t want to call an election, in less than a year’s 
time, it’ll automatically be called. So you don’t have two years. 
Keep that in mind. 
 
Mr. Minister, you made a comment which I would like to explore 
further because I’m not sure that I understood what you said. Can 
you clarify to the committee how, under your formula, or the 
formula which I have proposed, some community would get 
zero. You said some communities would get zero. Would you 
mind elaborating on that and explaining how some communities 
would get zero. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Well, maybe I wasn’t clear on that, Mr. 
Chairman, but what I said was, in consultation with the 
communities when they meet — and I’ve met with numerous 
communities that have projects in mind — that when we give 
them the details of the program, such as what we’ve gone through 
here before of $5,000 base grant plus $25 per capita and the 
possible $5 per head bonus, that indeed works out to a certain 
amount. And they said, is there no more available? 
 
And you know, it’s simply a discussion comes along to what is 
the fairest for every community in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And when it comes down, why we got a project that we deserve 
more money for, I said, okay, for example, if we gave you twice 
as much money, that

means other communities would have zero. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — If we were working with the same number of 
dollars. Under any other kind of program, if you don’t do it per 
capita, which I think is very fair, then I guess one of the other 
solutions is that the provincial government with their money 
comes along and says, that community will get some, that gets 
none. Community X gets zero. What kind of program can there 
be? I just bring up that example. 
 
If you’re talking about fairness, I believe the per capita grant 
program that we have is the fairest possible. And in consultation 
with the communities when this conversation comes up, we have 
not heard of any other possible formulas or any other context that 
we could disburse the funds on. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I suppose if we were 
describing your procedure and your policies in giving out tenders 
to contractors under your government — it may be for recreation 
purposes, Mr. Chairman, or other purposes — or if we were 
talking about how advertising is allocated to advertising agencies 
which your government chooses, then, yes indeed, there would 
be some. A lot who would get zero, and a few who would get 
everything. 
 
Mr. Chairman, that’s what the minister’s talking about. In line 
with that kind of Conservative logic, this government would rob 
from Peter to pay Paul. They would take from one community 
and give to another. 
 
That’s not what the proposal I’m talking about is all about, Mr. 
Minister. All I’m saying is . . . Let me ask you this question 
before I say it. This community of 500 which needs a community 
hall will get 17,500. Another one of 1,000 will have a similar hall 
that they need to build, will get $30,000. Don’t you agree that the 
community of 500, Mr. Minister, would have to raise more 
money locally than the community of 1,000 — similar hall? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, on the examples the member 
brings up, on communities of approximately 500 or 1,000, if you 
take a community of 500 and compare it to a community of 
1,000, obviously the one community under this program is going 
to get more money than the other. But on the same token they’re 
going to have to provide more services because there’s going to 
more people taking advantage of those facilities that are in need, 
either proposed to be built or renovated; and as I made reference 
before, that it is the intent of our program that the community 
understands exactly how much is going to be available to them 
over that five-year period, so that it can help in their planning. 
 
And we under this program, we let the community come back to 
us and recommend where the money be spent. In other words, 
they can allocate a part of it to the hall projects, such as the 
member indicates, and perhaps another chunk of it towards the 
curling rink project; whatever it might be that is deemed in the 
best interest of that community. 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1173 
 

It helps out in their planning function, and, you know, the 
example you bring up of 500 people versus 1,000, and certainly 
logic would indicate that there are more services needed in a 
community of a 1,000 than there would be in a community of 
500. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, you avoided my 
question. Let us assume that these two communities needed a hall 
— a community hall, each one. The services . . . As soon as the 
member from Saskatoon quits interrupting, I will continue. I 
won’t want you to miss my question. Thank you. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you’re right. And I think that’s laudable too. 
If two communities choose each in their case to build a 
community hall, that’s a choice they should make. We won’t 
disagree with that. So let’s take these two communities; each one 
decided to build a community hall. Do you not agree that the one 
with the 500 population would have to raise more money locally, 
under your program, than the community with 1,000? Simply 
question: yes or no? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — I guess if you’re looking for a very simple 
answer, I guess the answer would be no, because in fact, as I 
pointed out earlier, the base grant is the same for the city of 
Climax, or the two of Climax, as opposed to the city of 
Saskatoon. The base grant is $5,000. So it seems like there’s a 
distinct advantage there to the smaller centre. 
 
And also, if two communities are planning a community hall, one 
to service 500 people, the other one to service 1,000 people, 
presumably the community that serves the 1,000 would need a 
bigger community hall, so therefore it should be a larger facility. 
The member laughs. I guess he thinks it’s funny. 
 
You know, does that not sound logical that if you’re building a 
facility to on one hand accommodate 500 people in your 
community, that you would have a smaller community hall than 
one to service 1,000 people? So like I say, the obvious quick 
answer is no. Because we are servicing just like a city of 
Saskatoon if they were building a community hall, it has to serve 
a lot more people than it would, say, in Moose Jaw for example. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think this proves 
your lack of contact with the communities and your lack of 
making yourself available to communities and organizations. 
 
For you to stand up and make that fallacious argument that 
somehow you can scale down a standard community hall 
between a community of 500 and 1,000 people, Mr. Minister, 
really is . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I’m afraid I must ask the 
member from Regina North East to go on to a new question. I 
have been following the line of questioning in the House, and 
since 7 o’clock, essentially two questions have been asked, one 
by the former speaker, and one by you. And the business of the 
House cannot proceed if we have this constant repetition. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I think . . . I don’t

mean to argue with you, Mr. Chairman, but I think you lost sight 
of the total purpose of the committee of finance. In the committee 
of finance, Mr. Chairman, if I may make this point, there is a 
great deal of room to ask questions, as many questions as one 
wants, by as many members taking as many opportunities as they 
desire, until the minister either answers the question or refuses to 
answer the question. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I believe that members have great 
latitude to ask questions — and often similar — but I do not agree 
that essentially the same question can be asked over and over. 
And I ask the member to go to a new question. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I have only asked this 
question once, and the record will show. I asked the question of 
the minister and he avoided answering it. The question was 
simply this: if you take two communities, one of 500 and one of 
1,000, would the minister not agree, if each of those communities 
decided to build a community hall that the one of 500, because it 
only gets half of the grant, would have to raise more money 
locally? This, Mr. Chairman, is the second time I’ve asked that 
question, and I would like the minister to answer it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, if I can possibly clarify it for 
him. On those two exact examples that he uses, in a community 
with a population of 500, they would get, for a community hall 
project or whatever project, they would get 500 times $25, which 
is $12,500, plus the base grant of $5,000, which equals 17,500. 
When you divide . . . Mr. Chairman, I don’t know if the members 
opposite are interested in the answer. When you divide the total 
amount there that’s available, as I just outlined, $17,500 divided 
by 500, which is the population, that works out to $35 per capita. 
 
You take the example of a population of 1,000. You get 1,000 
people times $25 is $25,000, plus the $5,000 base grant is 
$30,000. You divide $30,000 by 1,000 is $30 per capita. So in 
effect, using the member’s argument, the members of a 
community in a population of 500 get more per capita than a 
population of 1,000 . . . 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, that is a weird argument, and 
I just want to respond to that comment. Are you suggesting, Mr. 
Minister, that the community of 1,000 people wouldn’t also have 
a municipality, an R.M., joined with them as well? I mean, what 
kind of logic is that? 
 
Okay. Maybe I misunderstood. Tell me how the community of 
500 would get a $30 per capita grant but a community of 1,000 
would only get $25? Will you explain that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, I think obviously the member 
did not hear it. It’s very simple. We’re operating under the 
concept that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Perhaps the members 
beside him there don’t want to hear the answer but I know this 
member does. Okay. Very equal situation, no R.M.s getting 
involved, nothing else, pure and simple. Population 500, they get 
a grant of 500 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1174 
 

 times $25, which equals $12,500. Right? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Thank you. Plus a base grant of $5,000; that 
equals $17,500. Correct? If you take $17,500 and divide it by 
$500, you arrive at $35 per capita. Right . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Try you one more time. Well just to continue 
here because we’re comparing it to a population of 1,000. 
 
In a population of 1,000, you get 1,000 times $25, which equals 
$25,000, plus $5,000 base grant, which equals $30,000; you 
divide $30,000 which is the total, divide that by 1,000 people, 
and you arrive at $30 per capita. 
 
So therefore in conclusion, for the community of a population of 
500, it works out to $35 per capita; for the community of a 
population of 1,000, it works out to $30 per capita. Is that clear? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — It’s clear, Mr. Minister, but it’s nonsense. 
Now either you have a base grant or you don’t have a base grant. 
Now a little while ago you said you had a $5,000 base grant 
which every community was eligible for. Now you’re saying, oh, 
no, we’re going to add it all up and then we’re going to divide it 
by the population and we’re not going to call it a base grant, 
we’re saying this is what you’re getting per capita. Now you can’t 
have it both ways, Mr. Minister. Either you have a base grant and 
a per capita grant or you have a straight per capita grant. 
 
So don’t turn your argument around when you find yourself in 
some difficulty, and even though . . . And don’t listen to the 
advice from the member from Eastview because he just gave you 
some advice a little while ago and you know that it was wrong. 
 
The point, Mr. Member, and I don’t want to pursue it any more, 
because we don’t want to exhaust . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well, if the members opposite want me to, I will. I’m quite 
prepared to do that. The point, Mr. Minister . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman, I can’t hear because the members on the 
government side are so noisy. Can you get them to come to 
order? Well, it’s the member form Moosomin’s pipe that kind of 
confuses things here. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me give you the proposal that I think is a more 
reasonable proposal, and this is the New Democratic Party 
proposal. And the proposal is that a comment . . . a program 
which would work well would be one in which there was a base 
grant, and yours is $5,000, and I know that should change from 
time to time as costs of construction go up and so on. You have 
a base grant. You should have a per capita grant. You should have 
an additional incentive grant for more then one community to 
jointly participate in the program. 
 
And finally, Mr. Minister, there should be some provision for 
communities of smaller size to assist them. And let me explain to 
you why I believe that’s important, because under your program 
what you’re doing is you’re saying to smaller communities, you 
know, you’re pretty good people out there — and I agree they are 
— because . . .

Well if the member from Lloydminster keeps yelling from his 
seat, Mr. Chairman, I don’t know how we can proceed in this 
House. Now either you should call him to order, or we can’t 
really get much done. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the reason I think that my proposal is a more 
adequate proposal is this: because under your proposal you’re 
saying to the community of 500 — or you pick your size, 700, 
800 — that you people are more able to raise money voluntarily. 
I’m not sure I agree with you, but that’s what you’re saying. And 
because these people will go out, and they will sell raffle tickets, 
and they will have hockey pools, and they will sell hamburgers 
at the concession counter, and they will do all of these things, 
they will raise more money locally because they have to. And 
you’re saying to them: because you’ve got this spirit, you’re 
going to go out to do it, we’re going to punish you. We’re going 
to punish you by not providing some additional money because 
of your smaller size. 
 
I feel strongly about this because from 1969 when I first got 
involved in politics and there was a cabinet minister of the former 
federal government going around, small communities have to die 
and two-thirds of the farmers have to get off the land. I said at 
that time we have to have government programs which really 
provide some kind of a balance, so that small communities do not 
get punished for being small communities, because they are very 
wonderful places in which for people to live, and they should be 
encouraged in every way possible. 
 
The problem with your program is it doesn’t do that; it goes the 
other way around. And when I got up to ask you these questions 
I wasn’t prepared . . . wasn’t going to get into a debate. I simply 
wanted to make the point. I wanted to ask you, why would you 
not have considered providing the additional 5, $10 grant to 
smaller communities? Because, as the member from Rosthern 
would agree, that would have been, I think, a very logical 
program. 
 
I’m not suggesting the member from Rosthern said anything. I 
think he’s a reasonable man and he would agree with my 
proposition . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well maybe the 
member from Indian Head wouldn’t, but the member from 
Rosthern, I’m quite sure, would. I know him very well. 
 
That’s simply the point I’m trying to make with you, Mr. 
Minister. That’s the program I think would be a more adequate 
program. And if there was a New Democratic Party government 
in place, that’s in general terms the kind of program we would 
have in place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, I have just a brief response. I 
think, you know, what you have outlined there as a proposal is 
almost exactly what is in place right now, with the exception of 
your small community numbers. I’ll say we’ll look at that. And 
I’m sure that our officials, when they developed this program, 
did look at that. 
 
But I would maybe caution on one thing there, that when you 
have two communities — and seeing that you used the member 
for Rosthern, I’ll use him as an example also 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1175 
 

— depending where you put that border of who’s eligible for this 
extra money because they’re a small community. 
 
Pick a figure of 500 or 1,000 — say, pick 1,000 people. Anybody 
under 1,000 people would get an extra grant. What about the 
community of 1,200? They would look at the community down 
the line of 900 and say, they get an extra amount of money; 
they’re smaller; they don’t have to provide the services we do; 
why should they get more money than we do and we have more 
people to serve? That’s one that comes to mind. 
 
Certainly we’ll look at it because, like I mentioned earlier, after 
the next election we’ll be sitting here deriving a new program 
when this program runs out in two years. 
 
Mr. Katzman: — Mr. Chairman, it seems that I’m in this debate 
this evening even if I wasn’t in it. Mr. Minister, I have two or 
three questions for you, and I guess more to put something on the 
record than to get into the questioning. 
 
In my constituency, which is probably one of the fastest growing 
constituencies in the area because of the population growth 
surrounding Saskatoon and the bedroom community aspects, 
when we, in Martensville, were building a new rink we were 
given the privilege of, instead of taking census figures of 
Canadian government and qualifying that on the $25 and the $5, 
you came out with a new policy that allowed us to take a census 
of our own of the community by counting people, and therefore, 
the grant for that community was about 30 to 40 per cent higher 
because of that. Is that basically correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, in response, that is indeed the 
case. As I outlined the program earlier, the population figures 
were based on the 1981 census. And if indeed we have a 
community that is growing at that kind of rate, we get a resolution 
from their town council saying, that according to their latest 
census or whatever way they might come up with a new 
population figure, as long as they have a resolution of the town 
council stating that that is their population, we will address that 
in our program. 
 
Mr. Katzman: — Mr. Minister, you asked for any members who 
had suggestions. Obviously, in 1988 when the next possible grant 
will come out, and I assume the Tories will be the government 
— I won’t be here because I’m retiring of my own volition — 
and I would hope that you will continue that policy which is so 
effective in my constituency because of the growing 
communities. 
 
The other comment I would like to make is that the grant in the 
small community of Neuhorst, which is less than 200 people, was 
able to give them an outdoor rink which they are super glad to 
have, but they would not have it hadn’t been for the program. 
 
So I would hope that the formula of allowing small communities 
with a base grant and the $25 per person, and they choose — and 
I report that is important — they choose if they want to put 
artificial ice in their plant or build an outdoor rink, be continued 
as well. and those are the feelings of my town councils and so 
forth that I am

repeating. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, certainly I’d like to thank the 
member from Rosthern for the question that, indeed, he reflects 
a knowledge of the program and certainly reflects the attitude of 
communities within his constituency that understand the program 
and the major points of it, and certainly I congratulate him for 
that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I want to return in part to the 
theme that I was enunciating before 5 o’clock. 
 
I dealt with the Arts Board, the funding for professional artists, 
and pointed out that over the four years that this government has 
been in office, the funding has increased by only 7 per cent 
during a time of 27 per cent inflation, during a time when the 
government’s expenditures have increased by 33 per cent, and 
during a time when your revenues have increased by 32 per cent. 
You’ve obviously decided for some reason or other, not to make 
cultural affairs a priority. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to refer you to the general spending in your 
department. If you take out the $6 million that you’ve . . . for the 
provincial cultural and recreational facilities program, take out 
subvotes 15, 16 and 17, take out the provincial cultural and 
recreational facilities program, take out the grant for the Young 
Canada Games Society, Saskatoon, take out the grant to the 
Western Canada Summer Games — none of which had any 
equivalent in 1982-83 when you first assumed office, you’re left 
with expenditures of somewhat over 12 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, the funds provided for your department this year 
are 85 per cent of what they were in 1982-83. In absolute dollars 
the funding is only 85 per cent of what it was in ’82-83. I ask 
you, Mr. Minister: why is it that your government has decided to 
spend less on culture and recreation and sport rather than more? 
Why is it that you determine that this isn’t important? I really 
wish you would address the issue that your government has 
obviously done that, because you’ve decreased spending. I wish, 
Mr. Minister, that you would share the reason with us. 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, if the members of the 
opposition would like to listen to the answer. The member for 
Regina Centre asked the question that if you take away certain 
subvotes, which I think are legitimate expenditures for the 
Department of Culture and Recreation, and the ones he points to 
are 15, 16, and 17, which is under the culture and rec facility 
grant program, the 1989 Canada Games in Saskatoon, and the 
1987 Western Canada Summer Games, if I understand correctly 
you’re saying if you take those out, the total amount spent does 
not compare favourably with 1981-82. 
 
You know, without going through the figures in great detail, just 
looking at what it was in the year 1981-82, or excuse me, the 
estimated 1982-83 which is your budget, you had an item in there 
youth employment services, which used to be under culture and 
youth, of $1.27 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1176 
 

million. That’s one example of a program that was in that budget 
then that is not in it now; it’s rather transferred to Advanced 
Education and Manpower. 
 
And another one I’m informed, just looking at it quickly, is under 
the subvote there, subvote 6, under this budget of yours, under 
heritage conservation. I believe, and I’m informed that historic 
parks receive money under that subvote — and that of course is 
over to Parks and Renewable Resources. 
 
So without going through in great detail trying to figure out the 
exact parallels between the programs that are offered now in our 
department as opposed to four years ago, it’s hard to give a 
specific example. But I’ll raise those two just for the sake of 
comparison what may have happened throughout. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the three that I mentioned are 
not . . . The three that I mentioned were not a part of the ’82-83 
budget; ’82-83 happened to come between programs, as a matter 
of interest. 
 
The minister will remember that in March of 1982 the then NDP 
government announced a cultural and recreational facilities 
program to begin on April 1, 1982. Your government, I think 
unwisely, chose not to proceed with that program. And it wasn’t 
in your ’82-83 budget. So there was no $6 million figure in your 
’82-83 budget because you people chose to skip a year. The 
program had been in continuous existence for many, many years. 
You chose to skip a year, and you did. So the $6 million figure 
was absent from that budget and virtually none other. 
 
In addition the $2.5 million grant for the Western Canada 
Summer Games and the $5 million grant for the Young Canada 
Games are not ongoing programs. Presumably they’ll be over . . . 
presumably next year will be the last expenditure under one, and 
three years hence will be the last expenditure under the other. 
 
So I’m talking about your programs and your grants. Not your 
one-time extravaganzas — the games. I’m talking about your 
programs and your grants which are designed to assist the 
Saskatchewan people in promoting cultural and recreational 
sporting facilities in their own communities. That’s what this 
department is all about, is promoting those activities in their own 
communities. 
 
So take out these figures and you’re spending 85 per cent of what 
you were spending in 1982-83. I ask you how you justify that? 
How you justify a decrease? Is this something you think that the 
provincial government should be decreasing its role in, is an area 
you feel could be best left to the communities and to individuals 
themselves? What is your philosophy, in a word, Mr. Minister, 
with respect to this department? You appear to be cutting back 
on the funding for regular programs and ongoing grants. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Well specifically, Mr. Chairman, the member 
is correct in the sense that indeed after 1987 the subvote number 
17 for the Western Canada Summer Games will no longer be 
continuing, as well as number 16 for the Canada Summer Games 
in Saskatoon, 1989. That’ll only carry on for a certain amount of 
time. And as

well under the culture and recreational facility grant program, 
that’ll receive a budgetary one next year, which will be the end 
of that five-year program. 
 
I should just shed light that under our first budget, when we 
brought in the culture and rec facility grant program, that was 
made retroactive to the end of whenever your program ended, 
which I believe went to January 1, 1982. I believe that’s correct. 
So that was made retroactive so that, indeed, nobody fell through 
the cracks, or any community, that there was a facility there. 
 
As far as trying to compare exactly what has been spent in each 
area, you know, we do have, as I was mentioning earlier this 
afternoon, we do have a very good working relationship with the 
lotteries, people involved with the lotteries. And indeed, one of 
our things that we’ve been trying to do is not duplicate services 
exactly between funding from the Department of Culture and 
Recreation and those that come through the lotteries, whether 
they be for sport, culture, and recreation. 
 
So as we go through here, as we get into specifics where you 
think there might be a cut-back, I would like to comment on that, 
because indeed in some of the cases some of the programming is 
being picked up by the lottery trust, which is offering basically 
the same program. So, in effect that service is being picked up by 
the lottery, and sometimes enhanced. So if we can get maybe 
more specific, we can go through it in detail. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Is that your philosophy, that it is appropriate 
for the lottery trust to be picking up this department’s 
responsibility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — No, it’s not. The department has a 
responsibility and that, as you know, as a former minister of 
Culture and Recreation, or culture and youth, is to promote and 
enhance the sporting scene in Saskatchewan, the cultural scene, 
the recreational scene. 
 
And certainly even when you were minister, there were lottery 
dollars available, which served the same purpose — sport, 
culture, recreation. You know, using broad headings. 
 
So when you have two organizations, one the Department of 
Culture and Recreation with the Government of Saskatchewan, 
and the other using lottery funds for similar purposes, I think it’s 
incumbent that the two organizations get together, see what their 
programs are hitting, so that, indeed, there’s not duplicate 
funding or indeed that the best bang for the buck, if you wish, is 
achieved, so that, indeed, the lotteries, through some of their 
programs are not doing the exact same thing as the Department 
of Culture and Recreation is. 
 
So we’ve been working together on that to make sure that indeed 
the province of Saskatchewan has served to the fullest extent 
possible in those areas of sport, culture, recreation, heritage, etc. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, co-ordination is a 
laudable goal. It’s always been done, and I’m not aware that 
duplication has ever been a particular problem. The groups have 
always talked. 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1177 
 

Your departmental officials have carried on that responsibility 
for the full 14 . . . 13, 14 years that the lottery’s been in existence. 
So you’re not announcing anything when you tell us that you 
believe co-ordination is desirable. Of course it is. It’s always 
been done. That’s nothing you initiated, and nothing, I think, 
you’ve changed. 
 
What you’ve changed is, you are in effect phasing out your 
department. And the only excuse you offer is to all of these 
things, well, the lottery’s picking it up. I don’t think the lottery is 
picking up the whole load. But let’s leave that aside for the 
moment. 
 
I ask you again: do you think it’s appropriate for your department 
to be spending 85 per cent of what it was in 1982-83, with, as 
you claim, the lotteries picking up the difference? Do you think 
that’s an appropriate program delivery mechanism? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Well, Mr. Chairman, you know in response I 
think it should be made clear that I do not accept his figures that 
there’s only 85 per cent being spent. In my previous example — 
just after a couple of minutes of looking at it — we picked out at 
least two programs that were in the ’82-83 budget that are not 
currently within the department. So it’s like comparing apples 
and oranges, if you wish. 
 
As far as using lottery dollars which are designated for the same 
purpose basically that, you know, the Department of Culture and 
Recreation, I think it only makes good sense that when you have 
an organization with government — Culture and Recreation — 
and an organization through lottery funds, that they work 
together to serve the needs of the communities all across the 
province. 
 
Indeed, just recently in the past year or so, there’s been a new 
program announced called the trust initiative program which gets 
lottery dollars down to the community level, which has been 
sorely missed since lotteries were instituted in the province, like 
you say, about 14 years ago. So this is one area where lotteries 
are indeed getting their money back to the community level and 
that is appreciated by the communities. 
 
Certainly I’d be prepared to go through the individual subvotes 
to clarify the situation on what the funding is and how it is looked 
after on a provincial scope. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — All right. You say there were two programs 
which were with the department in ’82-83 and are not there now. 
What are those programs and what was the funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — The way we look at it right now, just at a 
quick look, under number 12 for 1982-83, you have youth 
employment services, which is not with the Department of 
Culture and Recreation any more in 1986-87. That’s an 
expenditure — just picking it right off the top — of $1.27 million. 
And I’m informed that when we look back at subvote number 6 
in that budget that we have, under heritage conservation, the 
historic parks received funding under that subvote. And that, of 
course,

is with the Department of Parks and Renewable Resources. 
There’s two examples we pick out right away just to show that 
indeed we’re not comparing apples and oranges and, indeed, the 
two budgets are not easily transposed upon each other. That’s 
why I think it only fair that we go through it subvote by subvote 
to compare the services that are provided under the Department 
of Culture and Recreation. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — All right, Mr. Minister. Take those two 
programs out, you’re still about half a million dollars short of 
what you were spending in ’82-83. Please deal with the issue and 
stop trying to complicate it. You’re not spending as much money 
now as you were then. Why? What is your approach to this 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Well, Mr. Chairman, like I say, without going 
through it with a fine-tooth comb to get the exact figures of what 
was in the budget in ’82-83 versus what is in for ’86-87, if you, 
for some reason, take those three subvotes out of our budget for 
this year, you arrive at a figure of approximately, I think — what 
was it? — $12 million. And if you do the same for 1982, just the 
two that we have identified, without going through these with a 
fine-tooth comb, you arrive with approximately the same figure. 
That’s without going through and finding out any other programs 
which are not applicable. So neither . . . Using that logic, they’re 
approximately the same. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — No, they’re not approximately the same. 
You take out, factor out all of those things, by my calculation, 
you’re now spending $400,000 less than you were then. In an era 
of 27 per cent inflation, when you ought to be spending close to 
$15 million in constant dollars, you’re spending almost the same. 
That, Mr. Minister, is a decrease. 
 
(2030) 
 
I ask you again, Mr. Minister: why? What are you doing, phasing 
out your department? Do you believe that this is not a proper role 
of government, that it’s a proper role for the lotteries or the 
communities or someone else? What is the philosophy which lies 
behind this downgrading of this department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there is absolutely no 
downgrading of this department. The member is using a 
hypothetical argument, and I’ve been trying to follow it with him. 
 
If you look at our expenditure for the Department of Culture and 
Recreation, they amount to $21,492,610. That is a department 
that serves the basic premise of sport, culture, recreation, and 
heritage in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So to try and follow this ludicrous argument that he’s putting 
forward is absolutely crazy. 
 
We’re very proud of the Department of Culture and Recreation. 
And when he finds such subvotes as the Saskatoon, 
Saskatchewan’s hosting the 1989 Canada Summer Games, 
shouldn’t be in our budget; he finds such things as the 1987 
Western Canada Summer Games being hosted in Regina, 
Saskatchewan, shouldn’t be in 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1178 
 

the budget — let’s not compare these things — then he’s also 
saying, take out the culture and recreation facility grant program, 
which there’s been in effect for at least eight years right now. 
 
I think it only fair that we talk about this budget here, the budget 
that is in front of us for $21,492,610. That’s what’s in effect for 
this year. 
 
And as we go through the subvotes, I can explain in detail how 
we work with the lotteries, so that in fact the population and the 
sporting, culture, recreational, heritage groups throughout the 
province of Saskatchewan are served both through the 
Department of Culture and Recreation and through the lotteries. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, if you take out those programs 
you wind up with — and assuming the figure to be taken out 
which I think is within a few thousand dollars of being accurate, 
is $400,000 — that’s the program you take out for the heritage 
program. You wind up with a figure for current expenditures, on 
the same programs, of $12,939,170, versus $12,492,000; you’re 
still spending $500,000 less. Now please deal with the issue. 
Adjusted for inflation you’d be spending around $15 million. So 
I ask you, Mr. Minister: what are you doing with this department? 
Why are you spending less now than you were then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, as I’ve tried to indicate, that 
is not the case. I do not accept those figures because indeed, until 
myself and our officials get a chance to go through the budget 
that he’s alluding to, to find out exactly what goods and services 
and programs were offered and the one he is talking about, and 
compare them to exactly what’s being offered in 1986-87, until 
we get a chance to do that, I don’t think it’s a fair comparison. 
You’re comparing apples and oranges. 
 
I think we should be talking about the estimates for the 
Department of Culture and Recreation 1986-87, which is what 
we are here for. If the member believes that there is a subvote 
there, any specific one, any specific program within Culture and 
Recreation that he believes has been cut back, please identify it 
and we’ll explain it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, take the figure for 1982-83; 
take out those two programs; you wind up with $12.4 million. 
Add the 27 per cent inflation and you get a figure of $16.5 
million. In constant dollars that’s what you should be spending, 
is 16.5 million. You aren’t; you’re spending $12.5 million. 
You’re spending considerably less in this department and I want 
to know why, and I think the public are entitled to an explanation. 
 
If you’re going to cut the department down, if you’re going to cut 
it back, you may do so. You are a duly elected government and 
you have the right and responsibility to decide your own 
spending priorities. But you have a responsibility, Mr. Minister, 
to tell this Assembly and to tell the people what you’re doing. 
And that’s what I’m asking you to do. I do not quarrel with your 
right to cut back on the expending in this area if you think it’s not 
appropriate. If the Premier thinks that health and agriculture and 
education, and all those things that you pat on the back endlessly, 
are the priorities and this isn’t,

then, Mr. Minister, that’s your responsibility. But you do owe us 
an explanation, and you’re not giving it to us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m very interested in 
the comments of the NDP and their priority they put on health, 
education, agriculture, and job creation through the Government 
of Saskatchewan. I’m sure there will be many people interested 
in those comments. Like I say, Mr. Chairman, I’m trying to make 
this clear. I do not accept the figures that he’s throwing because 
for one, if we take the 1981-82 budget, and take out, as you do, 
the culture and rec facility grant program that is denoted here at 
$3 million, that brings the total expenditures for that year at 
approximately 11. And then if you take out those other programs, 
the 1.2 plus whatever you’re submitting for heritage parks, that 
takes it under $10 million. So I don’t know why we’re comparing 
apples and oranges here. I’ve made the commitment that if he 
believes there’s a cut-back in one area, be pleased to explain it 
— what services are being provided through that subvote and 
indeed where applicable how the lottery funds through the set-up 
that’s been in the province for a number of years are servicing 
the needs of the Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, your case is a great deal worse 
if you use the ’81-82 figures, as you just finished doing. You said, 
okay, that’s not fair; let’s use the ’81-82 figures. Let’s do that. 
 
The decrease is $400,000 more. Mr. Minister, you have to 
remember that it was a very high rate of inflation. The cost of 
living increase since March of 1981 is not 27 per cent but 43 per 
cent. So your case, Mr. Minister, is a great deal weaker if you 
want to compare your last year in office — and believe me, this 
is going to be your last year in office — if you compare your last 
year in office with our last year in office, your case is a great deal 
weaker and the drop in expenditures in constant dollars is a great 
deal more marked. 
 
So choose that comparison if you like, but tell us why you’re 
spending so much less in this department now than you were four 
years ago. Tell us why you’re doing it. That’s all you owe us. 
You have every right to cut back in this area if you think the 
money is needed somewhere else. But you do owe us an 
explanation and I’m going to insist upon it, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, I think even the member for 
Regina Centre just somewhere might admit that over the course 
of maybe five or six years some things will change. You know, 
in a department such as ours, programs are going to change. 
We’ve got new programs that have been instituted in the last few 
years. They had new programs that they instituted. So to try and 
compare budgetary figures with either 1981 or 1982 with those 
of 1986 serves no purpose at all. I can’t figure out his logic in it. 
 
If you look through, these are the estimates we are going through 
— this year’s. If you have a concern, a special program, if there’s 
a new one we’ve instituted; if you happen to think we’ve cut a 
program: bring it up, we’ll explain it. That’s the purpose of 
estimates — right now. If you believe that the area of sports has 
been cut back in 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1179 
 

five years, say that. We’ll explain it. If you believe the area of 
culture has been cut back, say it and we’ll explain it. Quite 
simply, we’re making the offer to go through these estimates just 
as we should. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Any discussion with you with respect to 
item by item is absolutely pointless. I found that out this 
afternoon. Because if I want to talk about the Arts Board, you 
want to talk about the lottery; I want to talk about funding in arts, 
cultural and multiculturalism, and the heritage, you want to talk 
about another subvote. You won’t talk about the subvote that I 
raise. 
 
So I am raising the whole vote for this department, in the hope 
that you’d confine yourself to that. So that, Mr. Minister, is why 
I do not want to discuss with you each individual subvote because 
you inevitably talk about another one. It is painfully obvious you 
don’t want to deal with the issue, and I do. And I ask you to tell 
us why, in constant dollars, this department has been cut back so 
drastically. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, I have repeated, I don’t know 
how many times, that is simply not the case. You cannot make 
that comparison. You simply cannot. The functions, the 
programs are not the same in 1986 that they were in 1980. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — They are not. How can you possibly say that 
every program is the same in 1980 that they are in 1986? You’re 
talking through your hat, Mr. Member. 
 
I’m saying, let’s talk about these estimates. That’s like 
comparing your age now as opposed to six year ago — saying 
it’s the same thing, you did the same things. That’s like saying a 
six-year-old child wears the same size clothes they do when 
they’re 12. Let’s talk apples and apples, or oranges and oranges 
— not compare oranges and apples. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — We are comparing apples and apples. Mr. 
Minister, this department has changed less than practically any I 
can think of. This department has changed very little. In 1981-82, 
and 1982-83, there were seven subvotes under program services. 
Lo and behold, I’ll be darned if there aren’t still seven. There are 
darn few departments which we can say that. 
 
How many subvotes are there for grants to local authorities and 
third parties? Well we find 17 now, 15 then, and you’re quite 
right. We take out the last three now because they weren’t in there 
then, and you have to take out of the ’82-83 the youth 
employment services because it isn’t now a part of that 
department; it’s now in a different department. But, Mr. Minister, 
this department has not changed. You have basically the same 
people, doing the same job, with less money. And I want to know 
why you have the same people, with the same programs, minus 
the two exceptions which is common ground between us, with 
less money. Why are you doing that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, he is implying that the needs 
of the communities are the very same they are now in 1986 that 
they were in 1980. He’s implying that the

needs of the groups out there that receive funding from Culture 
and Recreation are exactly the same in 1986 that they were in 
1980. He’s implying that the facilities that were needed in 1980 
are the very same as they are in 1986. 
 
He’s implying that indeed we should ignore the fact that the 1989 
Canada Summer Games are coming to our province. He’s 
implying that we should ignore the fact that the 1987 Western 
Canada Summer Games are coming to our province. he’s arguing 
that we should ignore the fact that there is a culture and rec 
facility grant program that’s in effect. 
 
He’s ignoring the fact that indeed the groups have changed out 
there. And he can make his argument as we go along there that 
the subvotes seem relatively the same, but I’ve already pointed 
out that after one minute, we pick out two of them that are no 
longer within our department that were here in 1980 or ’81. 
 
I believe we should be talking about the estimates, the programs, 
the services that are available through Department of Culture and 
Recreation, 1986 year end review. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Erosion, Mr. Minister, in the funding has not 
come about this year. It’s been a gradual thing. I happen to have 
in front of me the estimates for each year, back to and including 
the year 1980-81. and the erosion of this department has been 
gradual. It hasn’t occurred in one year. You didn’t decide — 
when you decided to chase the Western Canada Summer Games, 
that wasn’t the year you decided that this department was no 
longer important to you. The erosion has been gradual over the 
years. It appears to be a conscious decision that this is not a 
proper role for the government, and if it is, I just want you to tell 
me that and tell me why you think that, or it appears to be an 
unconscious decision. 
 
Mr. Minister, you said the needs of the communities change over 
four years. All right, if that’s your explanation for the smaller 
expenditure in constant dollars, then tell me how the needs have 
changed? Expand on that comment a bit, because that’s the 
comment I’m trying to get from you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, for example, as was brought 
out earlier by the member for Rosthern, he has an example of a 
community that indeed has increased dramatically in the size, 
perhaps doubled. There’s one example of a community that may 
have changed. We may have examples of communities in our 
province that have gone down in population. That’s an example 
of how a community has changed. 
 
There could bring out examples where there’s been a 
change-over in people. Some people have moved out; others have 
moved in. Emphasis may be going from one sport to another. 
Whereas six year ago maybe the big sport in town was curling, 
but now it’s hockey; maybe it used to be soccer, but now it’s 
baseball. Those are the kind of examples that the needs of a 
community and the activities that go on there can change. 
 
(2045) 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1180 
 

Mr. Shillington: — But, Mr. Minister, all you’re talking about 
is fine tuning. The population of this province has not changed 
by 1 per cent since you took office. It’s a fact: the population has 
not changed by 1 per cent. So I doubt that it is a shift in the 
demographics that’s caused the smaller expenditure in constant 
dollars. and you can’t deny there is a smaller expenditure in 
constant dollars. I mean, you can’t — the difference in constant 
dollars is 4 to $5 million, depending on which year you’re talking 
about. So, Mr. Minister, what is it about the . . . how have the 
communities changed which justifies you spending less in this 
area? 
 
So I don’t think, Mr. Minister, your priorities are other people’s 
priorities. Your priorities appear to be pumping an endless 
amount of money into the oil industry, and some horrendous 
expenditures on travel, some horrendous expenditures on 
advertising, and what one former member called mind-boggling 
salaries on mindless hacks. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to read for your benefit a resolution in the 
1986 convention of SUMA, when they talk about the need for 
recreational grants. Resolution number 29 reads: 
 

WHEREAS many of the recreational structures in the 
province are ageing physically; and 

 
WHEREAS the mental and physical well-being of the 
province’s residents is a source of economic strength; and 

 
WHEREAS there is the need to protect the existing public 
investment in these recreation facilities and to make 
changes to facilities to meet new community (standards); 
and 

 
WHEREAS the necessary financial resources to conserve 
our existing recreational facilities is becoming more 
difficult to locate. 

 
THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED that SUMA request the 
Province to make provision in its funding programs for both 
the construction of new recreational facilities and the 
renovations and upgrading of existing recreation (facilities). 

 
And admittedly it deals with recreational facilities. It doesn’t 
entirely deal with the spending that we’re talking about. But, Mr. 
Minister, it shows that recreation and culture is still important to 
this province, still important to the communities in this province, 
as voiced by their elected representatives. And you say, Mr. 
Minister, it’s not, because you’re spending less in constant 
dollars. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, to tell us what in Heaven’s name 
you’re doing. If the communities have changed, and that justifies 
the smaller expenditure in constant dollars, then tell me how 
they’ve changed and how you arrived at that conclusion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, to continue to discussion 
there, just to show there have been numerous new programs to 
the Department of Culture and Recreation the last few years, such 
as the Best Ever program that was instituted, the municipal 
incentive

program, the athlete assistance program. These are examples of 
new programs that are in effect right now and show up in this 
budget, that of course would not show up in 1980, ’81, ’82, 
whatever figures that . . . Just some examples of brand-new 
programs. And I’ve got numerous pages here of others that 
probably would not be applicable, you know, six years ago. 
 
As far as the resolution he reads from SUMA, we’re very aware 
of it, and I did send a response to that resolution. In fact, we had 
a lengthy discussion with some of your colleagues on the Culture 
and Recreation facility grant program, just explaining how it 
works and the uses it can be used to. 
 
And indeed SUMA does bring to our attention needs in their 
communities, which exactly they should do. And it is our 
responsibility to respond to their resolutions and work with them 
whenever possible. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I want to take you back to the 
Helicon days of 1982 to ’84. This was the days . . . You’ve no 
doubt forgotten these days. This was the days when ministers of 
this government actually had a vision. There were things they 
wanted to do, and they enunciated them. And people in this 
government opposite . . . I know this seems impossible these 
days, because all you do is defend. You’ve been in a defensive 
posture for 18 months. And you really do have a siege mentality. 
 
But I want to take you back to a time when this government 
actually had some vision and some ideas. I wonder, Mr. Minister, 
the question I’m going to ask you . . . I wonder if the House is 
interested in a small diversion, Mr. Chairman. I wonder if the 
House is interested in a small diversion, with respect to the 
Alberta election. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Member from Regina Centre, 
please be seated. Please be seated. Would you continue on with 
the questions in estimates that are relevant. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — In the province of Alberta, in contrast to this 
province’s spending on recreation and cultural facilities, they 
have had a generous program; and they have. It is much more 
generous than ours. It is much more generous than ours, and has 
been supported by the New Democratic Party enthusiastically. 
Let me tell me what that support has brought the New 
Democratic Party in Alberta. The NDP are leading in 20 seats in 
Alberta. Twenty seats in Alberta. Mr. Minister . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sixteen, Ned. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Even 16 is the upset of the century, it really 
is. Even 16 is the upset of the century. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to take you back to a day when ministers in 
this government had vision, had confidence and had some ideas. 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you can identify the spokesman: 
 

Culture and Recreation Minister (Blank) last Tuesday 
handed the Western Development Museums a cheque for 
$1.2 million as part of the 

  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1181 
 

government’s $7 million, three-year capital funding 
commitment. He then enunciated the “founding principles” 
. . . 

 
The person who said this is of course the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland. I guess it is, the current Minister of Tourism and 
Small Business, but I can’t remember his seat. 
 
The current Minister of Tourism and Small Business, the then 
minister of the then department of culture and youth said the 
following: 
 

He enunciated the “founding principles” of the 
Conservatives’ new cultural policy: the importance of the 
creative individual; universal access to cultural activities; 
community involvement in decision-making; and 
promotion and encouragement of the arts. Most 
significantly, he enunciated the need for government 
involvement. Schoenhals (then) gave recognition to Dr. 
Gordon Vichert’s 1979-80 cultural study and the (limited) 
NDP implementation, but in signalling a PC willingness to 
become involved, he has in effect told Saskatchewan artists 
that they will not be abandoned. 

 
It’s part of an editorial in the Leader-Post dated May 30, 1983, 
and the editorial then goes on to say, those are fine words, Mr. 
Schoenhals. We support what you’ve said, but we gotta see some 
action. 
 
And the last sentence — the last two sentences are: 
 

Come now, Mr. Minister, in the words of another cultural 
figure, (W. Shakespeare): “Suit the action to the words, the 
words to the action.” (Then the editorial says) But at least 
let us have the action. 

 
What, in fact, the intervening years have brought us, is a 
departure of that minister, supposedly to greater things which he 
made an enormous mess of. But he was moved out of the 
department, some lesser figures took his place, and the 
department has been downgraded ever since. No . . . I am sure 
when the cultural, artistic, and sports and recreational community 
in Saskatchewan heard those words they were encouraged by 
them. Because as I said, in those days, members of these treasury 
branches had courage and vision and ideas and they were going 
places. 
 
For 18 months, for the last 18 months, Mr. Minister, you have 
had a siege mentality. You are for ever defending yourself 
against enemies. And when I see the results rolling in from 
Alberta, I can understand some of why you have a siege 
mentality. But, Mr. Minister, your action contrasts so starkly with 
those words. Why, Mr. Minister — if the minister can stop 
yawning — I’ll wait till I can get his attention. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’ll tell you, when the Alberta results 
come in, he won’t be yawning. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well believe it or not he still is. He 
obviously doesn’t care. Mr. Minister, how is it that you came to 
depart from that statement which I and the editorial writers at the 
Leader-Post heartily endorse. How

did you come to depart from that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, in fact there has been very 
little departure from the cultural policy that was enunciated there, 
and as well, under this government. and may I emphasize under 
this government there was a sport policy introduced, there was a 
cultural policy introduced, and recreational position paper that 
have been followed by this government. And the member for 
Regina Centre seems to make light of the performance of one of 
my colleagues, the member for Saskatoon Sutherland, and I’ll 
share with you, Mr. Chairman, just some of the comments that I 
have heard. 
 
As I’ve been visiting with culture groups, recreation groups, 
sport groups throughout the province, believe me there is a big 
smile comes across their face whenever we start to compare the 
performance of that minister, the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland, as opposed to the performance of that member from 
Regina Centre when he was the same minister. And whereas this 
minister, in his words, went on to bigger and better things. In fact, 
after his tenure as minister of culture and youth, he found himself 
as a back-bencher. That’s how good he did with his . . . 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, seeing that we seem to be bringing in some 
westerly comments here, it reminds me that when they bring in 
the number of 20 or 15, whatever the case might be, that seems 
to be in my mathematics to leave about 60 or 70 for the other 
side. And it reminds me of a saying, that they are so far behind 
they think they’re ahead. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I said a moment ago, Mr. Minister, that I 
believe that these were the last time we would do culture and 
youth estimates. When I look at these Alberta results, I’m not 
sure that this is going to be the last time you do culture and youth 
estimates. 
 
Mr. Minister, well let me tell you what the support of the Liberal 
party for the cultural affairs in Alberta has brought them — two 
elected in two and leading in one. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I’ve indicated earlier, and you have 
had your say regarding that event. Would you please get back to 
estimates regarding Culture and Recreation in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I can see why the Chairman would not want 
to discuss this. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m going to leave the area of the role of your 
department with the simple comment that I, for one, regret it. I, 
for one, very much regret the downgrading of this department. 
There’s a saying — I believe it’s biblical — that man cannot live 
by bread alone. While economic development is important, so is 
the quality of life, and that’s what your department addresses 
directly. 
 
And it provides leadership from the only source that it’s ever 
going to have in Saskatchewan. In New York City and in Paris 
and in London, leadership in cultural affairs and patronage for it 
is going to come from a different source, but not in 
Saskatchewan. Leadership must come from this government in 
cultural affairs and, to a lesser 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1182 
 

extent perhaps, in recreation and sport, and you’re not giving it. 
And I, for one, very much regret it, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to make one more comment, and then I want 
to get on to a different subject. When I was out canvassing before 
the session started — I have not been out since — when I was 
out canvassing before the session started, I had a remarkable 
number of people ask me, what is your cultural policy? What’s 
your approach to cultural affairs? And I may say, Mr. Minister, 
that a fair number of artists live in my riding; they live downtown 
for a variety of reasons. 
 
I know now, Mr. Minister, why they are interested in an 
alternative — because the leadership which your government has 
given in cultural affairs is an abomination, an absolute 
abomination. And whether or not your believe it’s a rallying cry 
for people against you, it is going to hurt you, Mr. Minister, in 
the next election. And I, for one, look forward to the day, which 
may be some time distant now, when you people actually have 
the courage to call an election. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to get on to a different subject if I might. 
The executive director of the Saskatchewan Arts Board resigned. 
I want to know, Mr. Minister, what benefits she got in terms of 
sick leave, vacation leave, EDOs, overtime, and severance pay, 
if any. 
 
Mr. Minister, you may want to provide that to me in writing. I 
don’t particularly want to embarrass someone who’s already 
gone and who may have suffered their quota of embarrassment 
already. So, Mr. Minister, if you want to provide that in writing, 
and you undertake to do so at a reasonably early date, I’d be 
prepared to accept that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, in response, I will endeavour 
to get that information to the member. Obviously the resignation 
did occur and now we have a new executive director in place, but 
we’ll endeavour to get that information to you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well I’d like it specifically. Do you 
undertake to give to me sick leave, vacation leave, EDOs, 
payment for overtime, and severance, if any? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, I’m informed that the 
individual that did resign will be receiving benefits similar to the 
situation of anybody else in that particular position that would 
have resigned. So in response to the question, we will endeavour 
to get that information for him. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, is your current executive 
director entitled to overtime pay? Current executive director of 
the Arts Board — is he entitled to overtime pay? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, the simple answer to that is 
no, he’s out-of-scope appointment — order in council 
appointment; and there’s no overtime. He’s under contract.

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, would you give me the amount 
actually expended for ’85-86 on the culture and recreational 
facilities grant program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, the actual amount expended 
under the culture and recreational facilities grant program for 
1985-86 is $4,594,942. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Very close to 5 million, what was estimated. 
Mr. Minister, when the program was initially announced, you 
announced a $32 million program. You spent 3 million, a little 
over 3 million the first year; a little over 5 million the second 
year; the third year you spent about 5 million; at this rate of 
going, you’re never going — unless I’m misunderstanding 
something — you’re never going to spend the 32 million. I 
wonder what’s going on here, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, indeed the member, if he 
wants the exact figures on the draw-down on the program, it’s 
3.1 million in ’83-84; 5.8 million in ’84-85, and this figure I just 
gave him of approximately 4.6 million. That gives us a figure of 
approximately 13.5 million over the three years. In fact, I am 
advised that no application that has come into the department for 
funding under this program that is properly done, if you wish — 
has everything in place — has been rejected. So this accurately 
reflects the number of applications that have come in. 
 
The nature of these kinds of programs is that the larger cities do 
not come in with their big dollar expenditures until later on in the 
program. We can expect that to start happening this year, then of 
course next year in the fifth year. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I grant you that’s probably 
right. Given the formula, the government has virtually no control 
over the amount spent. If it had all come in and got it all the first 
year in some impossible fashion, you could have spent 32 million 
the first year. I grant you, Mr. Minister, this is not a deliberate 
underexpenditure. I grant you that with respect to this program 
you haven’t much control over it, because it’s up to the 
municipalities to take it up. 
 
If I may echo a comment made by the member from Shaunavon 
a moment ago, he said, with respect to operating grants, with 
respect to assistance for operating rinks, the times had changed. 
And what was appropriate for the period up to ’82, which was a 
period of prosperity, not entirely because of the government in 
office — and what has followed since ’82 has been a sharp 
recession, not entirely your fault. 
 
But while you didn’t engineer a drop in grain prices, and the 
grasshoppers, and the drought, the reason why these results are 
coming in from Alberta and other Conservative provinces the 
way they are is that Conservative governments have by and large 
failed to react. You have simply said — you and other 
Conservative governments have simply said, well that’s tough, 
but these cycles come and go. And that’s okay if you’ve a secure 
job, but it isn’t okay if you’re on the receiving end of this. 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1183 
 

And the Alberta results, I say to the House, the Alberta results 
reflect a frustration with Conservative governments which won’t 
change the policies for these changing times. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order, order, order. The 
election in any other province, or what’s going on, has absolutely 
nothing to do with these estimates, and let’s get on with them. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It has everything to do with this government 
and these estimates, but I grant you that it may be out of order. I 
grant you that the rules may not reflect reality. 
 
Mr. Minister, times have changed. As the member from 
Shaunavon said, times are tougher. Municipalities . . . A formula 
which was appropriate during the ’80s . . . I’m sorry. A formula 
which was appropriate during the ’70s is clearly not appropriate 
during the ’80s, because it’s not being taken up. 
 
It seems to be, Mr. Minister, that if this was truly a job creation 
program, as it was billed, then it’s incumbent on this government 
to change the formula and make it more attractive. Clearly what 
was . . . The program in the ’70s were all taken up; almost every 
nickel of it was used. It’s not happening now. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, it’s clear that this government ought to 
change the formula to make it more attractive. Instead of saying 
that they must come up with 50 per cent of the money, one might 
say 30 per cent or some other figure to make this a more attractive 
program. As it is, Mr. Minister, it’s not doing much for job 
creation, which was one of the prime benefits of this program. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister: why haven’t you and other 
Conservative dinosaur governments in this country changed your 
program to the changing times? That, without getting back into 
. . . without irritating Mr. Chairman any longer and getting back 
into the Alberta election, that’s why you’re doing so badly in 
Alberta and across Canada as you are, because you’re not 
changing your programs. This is an obvious one which should 
have been changed. And I ask you, Mr. Minister: why didn’t you 
change it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, in response there, he covered 
a few areas there. Number one, I would like to indicate to the 
House that the value of the total projects that are in effect under 
this program are $70,189,101. So in fact, even though through 
the program there might only be in the neighbourhood of $13.5 
million expended by the Government of Saskatchewan through 
the program, the total value of these projects is approximately 
that $70 million program. And indeed, there is a lot of jobs 
created, I think throughout the facilities, through the 
communities. 
 
In response to the second part of his discussions, diatribe perhaps, 
he suggests that perhaps we should change this program. Well, 
Mr. Chairman, quite simply, when you introduce a five-year 
program that has a formula based on per capita, you cannot 
change it half-way through, because it would not be fair to the 
communities that have

already drawn down by it if you change the criteria. 
 
Quite simply, the reason we will not change it now is because it 
would not be fair if we did so, and I’m surprised the NDP would 
even mention that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I want to give you an update 
on why Conservative . . . I guess I’m not going to be allowed, 
Mr. Chairman? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — No. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Let me ask a question, Mr. Minister. If I 
were to tell the House that the NDP is elected in nine, leading in 
seven, would that be out of order? I guess it would be. So I won’t 
announce it. I’ll leave that. It’s obviously out of order. 
 
Mr. Minister, I grant you that we have . . . that there’s $70 million 
worth. But when it was announced . . . I have the press release 
sitting right in front of me. When it was announced, you claimed 
$100 million worth of projects. And if you had got the take-up 
that you wanted, you would have got the 100 million. But you 
didn’t. 
 
I ask you again, Mr. Minister: would it not have been a good idea, 
when the program wasn’t flying, to enrich it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Well quite frankly, Mr. Chairman, no. I 
already covered that in my previous answer. When you introduce 
a five-year program that is based on per capita, is that fair to the 
communities that have already drawn down, that have already 
built their rink based on their planning that they got this amount 
of money for this program? Say they drew down $30,000 and 
suddenly you’re going to say, well, you got an extra $10,000 
available. They’ve already built their project. That’s not fair to 
those communities, and I think that would be the answer to that. 
If there’s something else there, too. Maybe I could get him to 
repeat the first part of his question for me, please. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The member from Regina North East will 
be in here in a minute. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Martens: — I’d like to ask the minister a question or two 
about the provincial Culture and Recreation facilities program. 
 
First of all, the urban structure. How does that work in the Culture 
and Rec facilities grant? How does that work? Can you describe 
that for me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Right. The basics of the program is that any 
urban municipality, or rural, gets a base grant of $5,000 plus $25 
per capita, and if two urban municipalities wish to get together to 
joint-fund a project, they would be eligible for an incentive grant 
of $5 per capita. 
 
Mr. Martens: — I notice, Mr. Chairman, that under that 
facilities grant there’s an increase of a million dollars, from five 
to six. 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1184 
 

I was particularly impressed at how the communities are allowed 
to give an opportunity to express themselves in the kinds of 
facilities that they want to have. And if I reviewed some of the 
things that happened in my constituency, and they had the 
flexibility, Mr. Chairman, to determine within their community 
what they wanted to have, who they wanted to work with. And I 
think that the people of my constituency have appreciated that 
opportunity. 
 
And it hasn’t only gone to individual towns, it’s gone to rural 
municipalities, and things like that. And I have been very pleased 
to work together with the minister in developing some of these 
programs. 
 
And I just did a swift calculation of some of them. We’ve had 
about four that are over 35,000, and some over 20 that received 
grants, and they were very appreciative of the fact that they had 
that opportunity to work together with the department. 
 
The total is almost $250,000, and I think that that’s important. 
And I think that as I see this increase, I think it’s going to bid 
well for the other communities in my area that have not had an 
opportunity yet to use this. And I know that there are some that 
are going to be actively approaching the minister with some of 
those grant programs that they have. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I want to know . . . I wonder 
if you’d give me the total expenditure of this government on the 
1987 Western Canada Summer Games, and the 1989 — I have 
to use the English — Young Canada Games? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, if he’s looking for the figures 
on the commitment — for the 1987 Western Canada Summer 
Games there’s a commitment by the Government of 
Saskatchewan of up to $4 million in capital and up to $2 million 
in operating expenses to host the 1987 Western Canada Summer 
Games in Regina. The commitment to Saskatoon for the 1989 
Canada Summer Games is $2.5 million in capital. And that is a 
joint capital program; one-third, one-third, one-third, with the 
federal government, the provincial government, and the host city. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That’s total? There’s nothing for operating 
for the Young Canada Games? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — The Canada Summer Games — the operating 
costs are picked up by the federal government. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the staffing for regional 
services is down from 42.5 to 35.3. I’d like to know what 
positions are being deleted and where. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, I’m informed that there were 
7.2 person-years that were in last year’s budget that were used 
under that subvote for Heritage ’85; that, of course, is no longer 
in effect in ’86, so that is why there is that reduction there. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — All right. Mr. Minister, in passing you gave 
me the deficit of the Centre of the Arts, but I didn’t make a note 
of it, Mr. Minister. Would you give me the

deficit of the Centre of the Arts for ’85-86, and what you estimate 
the deficit is going to be for ’86-87. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, as we touched on earlier this 
afternoon, the amount paid for ’85-86 towards the deficit was 
$50,000. That’s in addition to the original allocation of the 
300,000. For 1986-87 the allocation is $300,000; and of course 
it’s our hope that it will not be run at a deficit. So therefore no 
money can be forecast for that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I want to know the amount 
spent by the government on advertising, and what portion of the 
money spent was funnelled through Dome Advertising. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Is that for this year? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Both what you spent in ’85-86, and what 
you propose to spend in ’86-87. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, I have the figures here for 
’85-86 as it relates to department advertising and specifically for 
Dome. For Dome actually: $87,502, which includes 
development, placement and publication, and as well, the Dome 
media buying services of another $9,645 for a total, $97,147. For 
Heritage ’85 which was completed last year, of course, the total 
amount spent through Dome and for Dome media buying 
services: $543,705. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you’d tell me what, 
if any, buildings during the last year were declared to be heritage 
buildings by the government, not by the municipalities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the question, to 
our knowledge there was no provincial designations for 1985, but 
there were a number of municipal designations that we’d be 
pleased to bring together and give to the member for his 
information. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — You’re going to send that to me in writing 
then are you, Mr. Minister — the figure with respect to the 
municipal designations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Yes, what we’ll do, Mr. Chairman, is we’ll 
get them for the last few years. We’ll give you both the municipal 
and the provincial designations that have gone for the last few 
years. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 10 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, the Saskatoon Centennial Auditorium had difficulties 
in the last — I think it was in the ’85 fiscal year — when it was 
closed down due to a labour management dispute. Was it 1985 
or 1984? Was the government of the province in a position to 
assist the auditorium financially, because obviously they had not 
got the kind of revenues they had been able to gain in the past. 
Did the government assist with picking up some of that. 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1185 
 

Hon. Mr. Folk: — Well in fact they received the $300,000 that 
was designated, and that’s according to the formula that’s been 
worked out over the years. 
 
Item 10 agreed to. 
 
Item 11 agreed to. 
 
Item 12 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, there is a significant drop 
here, Mr. Minister. Can you tell me the reason for the decrease in 
the funding provided for ’86-87 as opposed to ’85-86? 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, in fact, under that subvote, it’s 
one of the ones we were alluding to earlier where one of the 
programs that used to be in that subvote, the museum assistance 
program, is now being taken over and funded by the lottery trust. 
So the program is in effect, except rather than being funded by 
Culture and Recreation, it will be funded through lottery 
proceeds. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I could have asked this next 
question under either 4 or this one, because I’m interested in the 
funding for multiculturalism. Can you tell me what the total 
funding in the department is for multiculturalism for this fiscal 
year? And you might as well give me what it was for last year as 
well if you can. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t have that exactly 
broken out, but I’ll endeavour that we will get both last year’s 
and this year’s, for the Department of Culture and Recreation, for 
actual amounts spent on multiculturalism. And would the 
member also like expenditures that are for multiculturalism 
through the trust, through the lotteries? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, I would indeed appreciate that. And 
if you’re prepared to give me that commitment, I will not pursue 
it. I just . . . and I’m sure other members feel the same as I do, 
that one of the greatest strengths in the province of Saskatchewan 
is our multicultural nature, because we have here a population 
composed of people who have come from literally every place in 
the world and every country you can find in the world. We’re the 
richer for it. 
 
I know that in the ’70s there was a lot of emphasis put on that. 
Much activity that’s began, it still continues. And I think that any 
government in this province ought to be interested in that and be 
very supportive. And so I will be interested in the amount that 
you have in the budget for this year and the amount that was there 
last year, so I can make a comparison. 
 
One of the things I know, I suspect, is not in — and I hope that 
. . . certainly the New Democratic party is interested in it, and I 
would hope that the member opposite, the minister, might 
become interested in it, is that one of the things that multicultural 
groups or people of different ethnic backgrounds have provided 
for themselves are centres, cultural centres, halls and so on. 
Sometimes they

find it very difficult when they need to do capital work on it, to 
raise enough money, although they do because of the spirit of the 
people who are involved. I think it’s time that government began 
to look at some way to provide some assistance so that we can 
allow them to better be able to do things for themselves and 
continue to develop the rich heritage which we have here. 
 
So I won’t ask further questions, I will take your word and wait 
for you to send me the information. 
 
Item 12 agreed to. 
 
Items 13 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 7 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Employment Development Agency — Culture and 

Recreation 
Employment Development Fund — Vote 65 

 
Nil vote. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1986 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Culture and Recreation 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 7 

 
Vote 7 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. At the 
completion of our estimates I would like to certainly thank our 
officials that have been here today, Mr. Clarke, Mr. Babiuk and 
Mr. Rogers, for their supplying of information and their patience 
throughout. 
 
And also the members opposite, I believe the people that have 
been asking the questions, the member for Regina Centre, the 
member for Regina North East and, as well, the member for 
Shaunavon, are the ones who have been asking the questions. 
And I thank them for their co-operation. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, this is a sharp break with the 
tradition of this session. Your estimates started at 3:30 and we’re 
finished at 9:30. 
 
I only want to say, Mr. Minister, while I disagree with your . . . 
with many of the comments you made, at least you dealt with the 
issues. Had some of your colleagues in Urban Affairs and Health 
been as forthcoming and been as prepared to engage in debate as 
you were, their estimates would not have taken eight days. So 
while I disagree with the positions you’ve taken, and I think 
you’re going to pay for it when you call an election, at least, Mr. 
Minister in the Assembly you attempted to deal with the issues. 
If your colleagues will do the same, the session might not last for 
ever, the way it’s looking as if it’s going to. 
 
I also want to thank you for your staff. As has been the case . . . 
The arrogant opposition wants to thank the staff, as well. As has 
been the case every year you’ve been in here, you’ve been 
reasonably well organized, had your questions. We get them in 
little tear-offs when we ask a 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1186 
 

question. That’s partially due to the minister, but it’s also 
partially due to the staff. So I want to thank everyone who was 
here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:41 p.m. 


