


















































December 9, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 December 9, 1986 
 

71 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of my 
colleague who is unable to be here, the member from Regina 
Centre, I want to, on behalf of him and through you to the 
legislature, introduce a group from Regina Plains Community 
College here in Regina, an adult upgrading group, 5 to 10. 
They’re accompanied by their teacher, Bob Brown. I want to 
welcome the group here on behalf of he hon. Member form 
Regina Centre, and we’ll meet with you later this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Deficiency Payment for Farmers 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Premier, and it deals with the very disappointing announcement 
from Ottawa to be made in a few minutes, and of which the 
Premier will be aware — and if he isn’t I’m sure he’ll tell us 
he’s not aware — that the billion dollar deficiency payment 
promised during the recent Saskatchewan election campaign in 
fact turns out to be something less than $420 million for 
Saskatchewan farmers. My question will be, in a moment, 
whether the Premier can tell us what went wrong. 
 
He went to the premiers’ conference in Edmonton — he went to 
the premiers’ conference in Edmonton — asking for $5 billion. 
In September, he is quoted as saying that there would be $1 
billion for Saskatchewan farmers. Today the announcement is 
that they’re going to get less than half of that. What went 
wrong, Mr. Premier? Why are we getting less than one half of 
what you said we were going to get in September? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I do have a 
ministerial statement to make if, in fact, the Prime Minister 
makes the announcement today, and I will not make it unless I 
am sure that he has made that statement, but we will have to see 
what’s in it. But if the Prime Minister makes the announcement 
that it is a billion dollars cash, and over 84 per cent of it is 
coming to the prairie provinces, that’s exactly what we asked 
for, and that’s exactly what we said we would do in the election 
campaign. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — So, Mr. Speaker, I won’t comment any 
more until I find out what the Prime Minister has announced, 
and when he makes that announcement I’ll be quite prepared to 
make a ministerial statement outlining the details. But 84 per 
cent of a billion dollar cash payment coming to western 
Canadian farmers here on the prairies, I believe you will find, is 
the largest, single support for western Canadian agriculture in 
the history of 

Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
ask the Premier, who is inordinately well-informed on what the 
announcement is going to be from Ottawa, and I ask you then, 
sir, in view of the fact that a deficiency payment in the $4 
million range was said to be needed by United Grain Growers, 
and in view of the fact that he Saskatchewan Wheat Pool said 
that at least $2 million was needed for Saskatchewan farmers, 
how can you say that a payment of less than $240 million for 
Saskatchewan farmers is going to do the job that needs to be 
done in respect of the crop year we’re now in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as the hon. Member knows, 
the four western premiers met in Swan River, Manitoba, and we 
agreed — and that includes obviously, the Hon. Howard Pawley 
from Manitoba, myself, and the two western premiers, British 
Columbia and Alberta — that a $1 billion deficiency payment 
would be necessary — at least 41 billion. And the four premiers 
agreed. They talked to the wheat pools and they talked to 
people right across western Canada, and they agreed that that 
would be something that we could demand and ask, request, 
from the federal government that would be reasonable for them 
to address as the package that we could provide western 
Canadian farmers, to take on the increase in the export subsidies 
in the United States. 
 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, it was an issue during the last 
campaign in the election in Saskatchewan throughout rural 
Saskatchewan. People were saying, I would like to know that 
the Premier of the province, in discussions with the Prime 
Minister of Canada, can deliver a billion dollars cash to 
farmers. And I expect what you’re going to hear today, if you’re 
right and my expectations are accurate, that the Prime Minister 
will announce a billion dollars cash, new money, allocated to 
farmers, and 84 per cent of that coming to the prairie provinces, 
and approximately 42 per cent of that coming right to the 
province of Saskatchewan, which is the lion’s share exactly 
what we have been asking for, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I will only say to my hon. Colleague across the way, if you 
got 100 million, you can always ask for 200 million; if you got 
a billion, you can always ask for two billion. I will just point to 
you and to the public in Saskatchewan and to the farmers who 
listened carefully in this last election — and they spoke from 
one end of the province to the other — that anybody that would 
bargain sincerely on their behalf to get a billion dollars 
delivered and have it delivered is going to be looked at with 
some degree of respect, whether they’re in Ottawa or whether 
they’re in Regina or whether they’re in kingdom-come, for that 
matter. Because you’ve never, ever, in the history of Canada, 
seen money like that go into the hands of farmers when they 
needed it in this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I ask a question, Mr. Premier, for 
clarification. Are you telling me that the four western  
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

72 
 

premiers said that they were asking for or would be satisfied 
with $1 billion dollars for all Canadian farmers, including the 
farmers of Newfoundland and the corn farmers of Ontario? 
Were they not asking for $1 billion for western farmers, and did 
they get it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, my hon. colleague 
keeps talking about $1 million. It’s a billion dollars — a billion 
dollars, not a million, okay, and it’s not 3 million or 4 million or 
a 100 million, it is a billion dollars — a billion dollars for 
farmers. And 84 per cent of that billion dollars goes to prairie 
farmers. And the Prime Minister, obviously, if he makes this 
announcement, and I suspect that he may in the near future as 
you look at the clock, and so do I, also knows that he has corn 
producers who have been subject to some of the hurt as a result 
of the export subsidies in other places like southern Ontario 
where they grow it, or for that matter in southern Quebec. 
 
But 84 per cent of that billion dollars . . . And as I said during 
the campaign, the lion’s share of the billion dollars — 42 to 43 
per cent of that will come into the province of Saskatchewan. I 
didn’t hear anybody complaining. They said, well that’s 
appropriate, that’s accurate. There’ll be over $400 million right 
here, and if the announcement is as I believe it will be, Mr. 
Speaker, then you’re going to hear exactly that. 
 
Well the opposition, fair enough, can say, well you could have 
done better. You should get more. You should add it up. I 
mean, I’ve heard them complain about $200, let alone a billion. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would just say that 84 per cent of a billion 
dollars, cash, coming to farmers in western Canada, on top of 
$879 million, almost another billion dollars in grain 
stabilization payments in one year, Mr. Speaker, is an 
inordinate amount of cash and assistance to western Canadian 
farmers, and it’s never ever happened before in the history of 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Premier, supplementary. In view 
of the fact that Saskatchewan farmers are not perhaps overly 
concerned about what’s being paid to farmers in the Fraser 
Valley, one of the four western provinces; and in view of the 
fact that you promised them $1 billion for Saskatchewan, or at 
least is quoted as saying you are promising $1 billion for 
Saskatchewan, and are now delivering $420 million; and in 
view of the fact that they lost 80 cents a bushel and are going to 
get back less than 40 cents a bushel, are you saying you are 
satisfied with that payment from the Mulroney government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can only say this, that 
during the campaign — and I’ll say it very clearly — it was an 
issue that I was asking for $1 billion to go to farmers in Canada, 
and I said very clearly in Saskatoon that I expected over 400 
million of that to come into the province of Saskatchewan, 
because based on any reasonable production or based on 
acreage we should have the lion’s share of it. 

Well if the announcement comes down today, as I suspect it 
will, and the member of the opposition knows it’s going to be 
exactly as I said it would be, it’s going to be $1 billion cash. We 
are going to get over $400 million of it, close to 42 per cent — 
84 per cent of the entire figure goes to the western provinces. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what I said it would be, and 
it’s right on the number. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, I remind you 
of your own words in Edmonton last August when you told 
reporters, and I’ll quote you: 
 

It is vital the federal government provide the cash to show 
our competitors we are serious in defending our 
agricultural industry and markets. Only in this way can we 
exert some pressure for a long-term solution and provide 
some leverage in trade negotiations. 

 
Mr. Premier, I ask you: how does a billion dollars, about 
one-fifth of what Canadian farmers are losing today, how does 
this exert pressure on our competitors? Doesn’t it send them 
exactly the opposite message? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, I would just, Mr. Speaker, in all 
respect, ask . . . I will have to make some assumptions about the 
question. If you’re saying that we shouldn’t be helping farmers 
because it would give the wrong message to Americans or 
Europeans, I can’t agree with that. 
 
I mean if . . . I believe that we have to show the U.S. people that 
if they’re going to put their treasury up, we’re going to be 
prepared to do the same. And I believe that we’re going to have 
to, because I will not stand by and see Saskatchewan farmers or, 
if I can help it, Canadian farmers go out of business because of 
unfair subsidies in European markets or the United States 
markets. 
 
Now maybe that’s the NDP policy. And if it is, I would like to 
know that you just let them go. But I’m not. And I’ve said that 
earlier, I mean I can understand perhaps . . . And the reason I 
question your statement, because in the past when interest rates 
were 22 per cent, the NDP didn’t do a thing for anybody . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
And they can holler “order” all they like, Mr. Speaker, but they 
didn’t do one thing . . . not one thin dime for farmers — not one 
penny. And when we deliver a billion dollars to Canadian 
farmers for help, they sit across the way and say, I don’t think 
we should help farmers because of the wrong impressions to 
Americans or Europeans. 
 
Well I’ll say to anybody, on that side of the House or anybody 
any place in this legislature, that doesn’t remember when 
interest rates were 22 per cent and nobody would help them in 
this province — somebody did. We did, Mr. Speaker, and we 
will do it as long as we’re here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

73 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, if that is not letting farmers go, 
it’s the next best thing, especially in light of the fact that 
Canadian farmers receive approximately $34 per ton subsidy; 
their counterparts in the United States and Europe receive about 
$130 per ton. What kind of pressure . . . is this the pressure you 
exert on our competitors. 
 
I ask again: why is Canada continuing to force Canadian 
farmers to fight these international grain price wars — fight 
these wars on their own, while the member opposite says we’re 
helping you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can only briefly reiterate, 
Mr. Speaker, what I’ve said. We have defended farmers against 
drought and against flood, against 20 per cent interest rates, and 
against unfair subsidies to the tune of hundreds of millions and, 
indeed, billions of dollars they’ve never had before. Now if you 
don’t think that’s good, fair enough. If you don’t’ think that we 
should be involved in that, I mean that’s perhaps reflected in the 
results in the last election across rural Saskatchewan. 
 
When interest rates were 20 per cent, you didn’t help. When 
people were hurting in drought years ago, you didn’t give the 
many money. You didn’t stand up for them and defend them. 
When we had an opportunity to help farmers, we were there. 
And today, I believe you are going to hear that one more billion 
dollars — cash, no strings attached, new money — going to 
Canadian farmers, and 84 per cent of all of it coming out here in 
the West. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will just say that, well the record of that defence 
for agriculture as our basic industry is extremely important and 
it will speak for itself. And if the NDP doesn’t believe in it or 
doesn’t argue for it or doesn’t want us to do that, fair enough. 
But let the public, and particularly the farmers, and the towns 
and the villages, and indeed through the cities of this province, 
that receive $400-and-some million . . . where do you think the 
money will be spent? Where do you think it’s going to go? It’s 
going to got o every pocket and every small business and every 
jurisdiction in this province. It will almost match total farm 
income. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I will just say that I will defend that. I 
believe it’s extremely important. And I believe that $400 
million plus will be significant to Saskatchewan people from 
borer to border, north and south and east and west. And yes, I 
will defend it as long as I am here, because its’ the number one 
industry in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Drop in Net Income of Saskatchewan Farmers 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I want to address a 
question to the Premier, the Minister of Agriculture. Recently it 
is announced, Mr. Premier, that Agriculture Canada economists 
reported that farmers will see their take-home pay, net farm 
income, fall by almost 18 per cent. But they go on to say that, 
for example, Saskatchewan realized net farm income is 
expected to fall 27 per cent in 1987. And that is a drop of 27 per 
cent in ‘87, expected drop, on top of a previous 9 per cent  

drop. Over a third in two years of net income of farm income 
has dropped. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Premier, do you really believe, and are you 
saying to the farmers of Saskatchewan that this $420 million 
that you got out of Mulroney is going to address the magnitude 
of the problem confronting the farmers, over two years, with 
over a 33 and one-third per cent drop in income. Are you 
purporting to say that that deficiency payment fulfils the crisis 
that the farmers are in? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I have the numbers before 
me. But I will say to the member for Quill Lakes, and I’ve said 
it before in this legislature, the problem that we have in 
agriculture in Saskatchewan today, in large part, is a result of 
the fact that when interest rates were over 22 per cent, you 
wouldn’t help them, and in 1979 and 1980 and 1981 and 1982 
they went deeper and deeper and deeper and deeper into the 
hole and you wouldn’t help them with one dime 
 
As a result of that . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please! The Premier is 
attempting to answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we can go back and review 
his question — you say, is this enough? All right, I’m telling 
you what’s enough. I’m telling you . . . I’m telling you exactly, 
but you don’t like to listen. I want to whole public to listen to 
you holler and talk again and the children can listen because 
you never will listen in this legislature. 
 
When we talk about agriculture . . . Mr. Speaker, there he goes 
again. It’s the same stuff over and over. Why don’t’ you just 
stand up and apologize to your leader like you did the last time 
you were in the House. I mean it’s time you learned about the 
rules of the legislature and have some respect for your 
colleagues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP has very, very 
little credibility when it comes to defending farmers in this 
province. Our income is down, Mr. Speaker — forecast to be 
down 27 per cent in 1987. Alberta’s is going to be down 64 per 
cent. Manitoba’s going to be down 52 per cent. 
 
All right, Mr. Speaker, I’ll point out one fact; it goes back to the 
deficiency payment. With the income that we will receive — 
over 40 some per cent of this deficiency payment coming into 
the province of Saskatchewan, over $400 million added to the 
$465 we’re going to make in 1987 — our income in the 
province of Saskatchewan will go up 35 per cent in 1987 — 35 
per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — No other province will touch it, no other 
province in the country. Now you talk about bargaining for 
Saskatchewan farmers. First you’d better do your homework; 
second you better go back and look 
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

74 
 

at your record; and third, you had better be prepared, you’d 
better be prepared to defend yourself on the farms and the 
towns and villages across in this province, because you haven’t 
been able to do it in the past. Unless you get your act together, 
you wont’ be able to do it in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I rather thought, Mr. Speaker that you were the 
one that decided the conduct in the House, not the Premier. I 
don’t’ need your lectures, and I’ll tell you, you’re out of order 
doing it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We need answers, not lectures. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That’s right. What we need in this House, Mr. 
Premier, in some answers — straightforward answers — not 
lectures from you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to ask you, Mr. Premier, that in view of 
the fact that if you look at the bankruptcies in western Canada, 
that the largest proportion, or half of them almost, are in 
Saskatchewan. If you look at the Wheat Pool, the Wheat Pool 
survey that they did, they indicated that 9 per cent of the 
farmers were in a non-viable position because their debt was so 
heavy. They said another 10 per cent were in serious economic 
or financial straits. That’s about 20 per cent. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Premier: do you think that the miserable $420 
million that you extracted to win an election — to win an 
election — in dealing with the major agricultural crisis, I ask 
you, do you feel that in fact the $420 million will help those 
farmers that the Wheat Pool have identified, the 20 per cent that 
are in every serious financial straits? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll only say this about that 
comment. The members opposite can call a billion dollar 
payment miserable. And you’re on record — you’re on record 
that its’ miserable . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — And you misrepresented the facts. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, again he will not even have 
the courtesy to listen to the response. He just speaks from hi 
seat. Mr. Speaker, it’s on the record now in this legislature that 
the members opposite, that did so well in rural Saskatchewan, 
call a billion dollar payment miserable. 
 
Well I will say, Mr. Speaker, with the money that the provincial 
government and the money that the federal government have 
put up to defend agriculture in this province, and justifiable so 
. . . I don’t believe that farmers in this province are going to call 
it miserable. I believe they are going to say finally somebody is 
defending us that should have been defending us for years. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite can call it miserable all 
over if he likes, he can call it miserable all over Regina, he can 
call it miserable all over this riding for that matter Mr. Speaker, 
$1 billion cash that has never  

been paid before, no strings attached, is one of the most 
important financial statements ever made in this country in 
agriculture, and it’s the result of a great deal of co-operation and 
hard work, not just calling the federal government, or anybody 
else for that matter, miserable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — On this subject matter tot he Premier, 
Minister of Agriculture as well, I refer the Premier to the press 
statement which is dated August 11, 1986, as a result of the 
premiers’ conference in Edmonton. And on page 1 of this 
statement, the Premier identifies these are his words, quote: 
 

Right now, based on Canadian Wheat Board estimates, it 
would cost Canada $4.7 billion a year to meet current 
international grain subsidies. 

 
And then later on, on page 2 the Premier says the following 
quote: 
 

It is vital the federal government provide the cash to show 
our competitors that we are serious in defending our 
agriculture industry in markets. Only in this way can we exert 
some pressure for a long-term solution and provide some 
leverage in trade negotiations. 

 
Now I agree with both of those statements, and my question to 
the Premier is a simple one which I think can be answered 
simply: does the Premier believe that given today’s 
announcement of which only $400 million approximately will 
end up in Saskatchewan farmers’ pockets, does he believe that 
those objectives which he started out with in Edmonton have 
been met? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, 4.7 . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, you need one in agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the hon. 
Member’s question, the $4.7 billion that I went through is the 
total subsidy that the United States was giving to their farmers, 
and I compared it to on a comparable basis with equivalent 
dollars to the Canadian farmer. And I said that when we add up 
the stabilization money that comes through, the Crow money 
and other things that we have, we’re still a long way short of 
that $4.7 billion. 
 
And after that we agreed that if we could design a deficiency 
payment mechanism and put a billion dollars to handle just the 
export subsidy part of it — just the exports part of it — that that 
would be a very positive move to show the United States, as 
well as show our own farmers that we will not let them go, that 
we will defend them. I would like to have a full $4.7 billion 
every year and I could allocate the money. And the hon. 
Member knows there are deficits in every jurisdiction in 
Canada, including the federal government, and you just don’t 
go walking into any government and ask for 4 billion or let 
alone a billion dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a billion dollars. If the Prime Minister 
makes the announcement today, that will be a  
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

75 
 

commitment to Canadian farmers. Never done before. And the 
opposition says, well, they’d rather have 4.7. 
 
Look, I would like to have more money as well. I believe at 
some point in time the public would even appreciate if you 
would say: that’s a very good payment, thank you. But not one 
word of recognition. The Premier of Manitoba always gets into 
that problem; he will never say thank you for anything. 
 
Well, I think the prairie farmers are going to say it may not be 
perfect, but it certainly isn’t miserable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Tabling of White Paper on Proposed Code of Ethics 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will be tabling a report on 
the White Paper on a proposed code of ethical conducts for 
Saskatchewan public employees, and I am going to be tabling it 
now and I just want to make a couple of comments on it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on tabling the report on the White Paper on a 
proposed code of ethical conduct for Saskatchewan public 
office holders, I point out the obvious fact that the report is a 
result of much research and industry 
 
It would be fitting at this time, particularly since there are many 
new members in this Assembly, to set out some background to 
this matter. 
 
The white paper was tab led in the legislature for two purposes. 
Firstly, it outlined suggested guide-lines which might assist 
public office holders to avoid becoming involved, or appearing 
to become involved, in any conflict-of-interest situation. 
Secondly, it was hoped that making public a white paper on an 
important subject would stimulate public interest. 
 
By proceeding in this way the government hoped to make clear 
its intent to obtain public input and discussion before finalizing 
any policies. In order to obtain views and representation of 
interested individuals and organizations, I requested the On. 
E.M.Culliton, former chief justice of Saskatchewan, to arrange 
public hearings. At the conclusion of such hearings, Mr. 
Culliton was asked to suggest appropriate changes tot he white 
paper in light of the vies expressed and his own research. 
 
It will be evident from studying this report that a thorough and 
complete review was made of all relevant legislation in Canada 
and in Great Britain. It is equally apparent from the interviews 
conducted, the briefs filed by interested parties and individuals, 
and the representations made at public hearings, that the inquiry 
resulted in the desired public input. Indeed, the public input was 
greater than might have been anticipated and, I believe, 
reflected the views of many segments of the province’s 
population. 
 
I remind members that the white paper was not introduced to 
meet any crisis situation. Our history reveals how exemplary 
has been the record of people in public life in the province of 
Saskatchewan. But society  

has become more complex. The NDP government brought in 
conflict-of-interest legislation in 1979; that was not a crisis 
situation. But the increasing complexity of life may lead to a 
certain scepticism in the public’s mind as to the conduct of 
cabinet ministers and legislative secretaries, and I thought it 
fitting and proper to have a review made to ask for a report on 
the white paper. 
 
I do not intend to make comments now on any of the particulars 
of the report. When the white paper was tabled in April of this 
year, it was our intention to carefully consider the report’s 
recommendations with respect to the white paper before 
finalizing our approach to dealing with conflict of interest. This 
is especially important now, as Mr. Culliton has suggested new 
approaches to many of these basic issues. 
 
I am therefore tabling Mr. Culliton’s report at this time, to 
permit full study of and response to its recommendations before 
I make proposal for change. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize to the House 
for not being able to make a reply in the terms that perhaps I 
would like to, because I have not had an opportunity to see the 
statement. 
 
And when we are making comments about courtesies extended 
one to the other, I make that point. It has been customary to 
have a copy of ministerial statements provided to the 
opposition. 
 
I now refer to the statement and note that the Premier indicates 
that there was no crisis. That indicates his view of what a crisis 
is. I don’t think he denies that one of his members, no longer 
here in this House, was receiving contracts without tender with 
respect to travel business of the government, directed to a 
company of which that member was the owner. 
 
Another member of his, indeed a Legislative Secretary, was, I 
think by common knowledge, involved in a development on a 
lake where the department in respect of which he was the 
Legislative Secretary was carrying on environmental 
enhancement projects which would obviously increase the value 
of the resort project in which the member was involved. 
 
Those may not represent crises in the mind of the Premier; I 
think they represent situations which required action, and I 
believe that’s why the Premier set up his study and the public 
hearings with respect to conflict of interest guide-lines for 
public officials. 
 
We welcome them. I have not seen the report. We will study the 
report. But we believe that, in the light of events which have 
happened in the last four years, there should be some changes. 
And we very much look forward to the proposals which the 
government will put forward with respect to changes which will 
stop, or at least reduce, the circumstances under which members 
of this House are seen to be profiting from their position as 
members of this House — a situation which erodes public 
confidence in this House and in our system of government. 
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

76 
 

I hope the government will act. We will be looking forward to 
receiving their proposals, I hope, shortly. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Martineau and the amendment 
thereto moved by the Hon. Mr. Blakeney. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured today to have 
the opportunity to participate in this debate on the throne speech 
debate in this House. And I want to begin by first 
congratulating you, Mr. Speaker, for your election to the office 
of Speaker, a very important office in our government. 
 
And I must say, from my observations of the first few days of 
this session, I believe you’re off to a very good start and want to 
commend you for your role in keeping the good attitude that is 
being displayed within this House. I wish you every success in 
the future. 
 
I’d like to congratulate my colleagues who moved and seconded 
the Speech from the Throne, the new member from the 
constituency of Saskatoon Eastview and also from Pelly. 
 
On that note I would also like to congratulate all members who 
have been elected to this House, and especially welcome new 
members, as I believe that the honour to represent people in the 
province of Saskatchewan is given to only a few. And certainly 
it is an opportunity for you as members, no matter which side of 
the House you would sit on, to develop and put forth some of 
the ideas that you believe will make this province of 
Saskatchewan a better place. 
 
After all, Mr. Speaker, I think that is why the people of 
Saskatchewan have elected us, and I think that’s what they 
expect of us. And I urge all members to remember that and over 
the next four years, four and a half years, to try their utmost to 
bring forth those types of objectives. 
 
I’d like to thank the people of the constituency of Indian 
Head-Wolseley for the confidence they have placed in me by 
returning me to the legislature for my third term. The fact, Mr. 
Speaker, that I was re-elected with an even greater plurality 
than my previous terms underlines not only the trust my 
constituents have placed in me but also their confidence in the 
leadership of Premier Grant Devine and the Progressive 
Conservative government. 
 
On October 20th the constituents of Indian Head-Wolseley 
joined with the people of Saskatchewan and said yes to four 
more years of a government that wants to build and diversify 
and provide opportunities for people. They said yes to a 
government that has the courage to protect people when they 
need protection. They said, Mr. Speaker, we can’t afford to lose 
a premier and a government that understands the importance of 

agriculture and stands behind Saskatchewan’s farmers. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, in the exchange today in question 
period, again that was shown very plainly to everyone in this 
Chamber and to the people of Saskatchewan that may have 
been watching the proceedings, the stance of our Premier 
directly, squarely behind the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to be apart of the government of 
Premier Grant Devine, and I’m proud of he confidence the 
Premier has shown in me by returning me to his cabinet with 
increased responsibilities. As the former minister of Health, Mr. 
Speaker, I am proud of the health care accomplishments of the 
Progressive Conservative government over the last term. And I 
know that my colleague, the hon. Member from meadow Lake, 
will continue this government’s commitment to keeping 
Saskatchewan number one in health care. 
 
My new cabinet duties, Mr. Speaker, charged me with great 
responsibilities, but at the same time provide exciting new 
opportunities to serve the people of Saskatchewan. As set out in 
the throne speech, this government’s goals of economic 
development and diversification, of economy and efficiency and 
protection, will be my guide-lines, Mr. Speaker, in the 
management of the portfolios I’ve been charged with. 
 
In the areas of tourism and small business, for which I’m not 
responsible, this government will introduce measure to increase 
the economic contribution of tourism and small business to the 
Saskatchewan economy. This is an area which holds unlimited 
potential for job creation and for economic diversification. I say 
unlimited, Mr. Speaker, because its only limits are the 
imagination and the initiative of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Through the Department of Tourism and Small Business and 
the Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation this 
government will encourage and assist you and existing 
businesses to provide jobs and opportunities for Saskatchewan 
people. As Minister of Supply and Services, Mr. Speaker, one 
of my priorities will be to expand the Buy Saskatchewan policy 
which the government adopted in 1983. In addition, Mr. 
Speaker, I have the honour of overseeing the establishment of 
the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. I will 
further elaborate on these initiatives a little later in my remarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my capacity as minister responsible for 
Northern Affairs, I see many commitments in the Speech from 
the Throne as being applicable to the northern people of this 
province. Some of these include the stimulation of the tourism 
and hospitality industry to expand tourist opportunities offered 
by our magnificent and world-famous northland. Also, an 
enhancement of the Indian Economic Development program — 
particularly significant when over two-thirds of the northern 
population are of Indian ancestry. And, Mr. Speaker, a tax and 
fiscal regime for the uranium industry with the view of 
protecting jobs, as well as research initiatives to strengthen 
Saskatchewan’s position in this significant world industry. In 
these initiatives, Mr.  
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

77 
 

Speaker, we see the keynote of development, diversification 
and protection. 
 
I would add to these, Mr. Speaker, this government’s 
commitment to fully integrating northern Saskatchewan into the 
economic life of our province. This will be achieved by 
encouraging and assisting Northerners to take up the challenge 
of the economic opportunities in mining, in forestry and in 
tourism, and to explore new frontiers in renewable resources, 
transportation, service industries and manufacturing. The 
services, programs and commitments of this government, Mr. 
Speaker, are for all the people in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to return for a moment now, Mr. Speaker, to the subject 
of tourism and small business — a growth area which was long 
neglected by the previous government. I wish to comment the 
Devine government, Mr. Speaker, on its initiatives in support of 
Saskatchewan’s small business community and its tourism 
industry during its first term in office. 
 
This government’s firs step was to listen to business people and 
they told us what they needed. They said they needed an 
advocate in government, and we responded with the 
establishment of the Department of Tourism and Small 
Business. 
 
They said they needed access to loans at stable interest rates, 
and the Devine government responded, Mr. Speaker, with the 
business interest reduction program. 
 
They said they wanted regulatory reforms and less red tape, and 
we responded, Mr. Speaker, with the elimination of over 1.400 
regulations, many of which inhibited business. And to ensure 
this process continued, the business regulatory reform council 
has been formed. 
 
Business people said they needed better information related to 
government programs and services. They said they needed 
professional advice in skill development. This government 
responded, Mr. Speaker, with a management assistance 
program and the establishment of business resource centres 
across this province. 
 
Entrepreneurs said they needed a source of equality; we 
responded with the introduction of the venture capital tax credit. 
Manufacturers said they wanted support for products 
manufactured in the province, and we responded, Mr. Speaker, 
with the establishment of a Saskatchewan made program. And 
small towns, Mr. Speaker, said they needed support for 
community economic development and this government came 
through once again, Mr. Speaker, with a program that is 
currently helping 53 towns co-ordinate their economic 
development activities and attract new businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these initiatives are not like many of the idle 
programs that were in place when we came to office. These 
programs are much needed and they are heavily used. Let me 
give you some examples, Mr. Speaker. Prior to the 
establishment of this government’s business resource centres, 
tourism regional services received an average of about 5,000 
business inquires annually. This year, staff of my department 
will have handled more than five times that many. 
 
Another example, Mr. Speaker. The owners and managers of 
1300 businesses in communities across the province have 

benefited from this government’s management assistance 
program. Private sector business consultants have helped these 
business people with everything from financial and personal 
management to marketing and advertising. 
 
Perhaps the best example of the government’s commitment to 
small business are the more than 8,000 businesses receiving 
interest rate protection under the business interest reduction 
program. The owners of these businesses are resting easier 
these days, Mr. Speaker. They are resting easier because they 
no longer have to lie with the nightmare of increasing interest 
rates. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Progressive conservative government 
recognizes that small business and tourism are the primary 
engines for the job creation in our economy — it only makes 
sense to keep those engines primed. To do this, Mr. Speaker, 
the Premier has announced that 50 million will be committed 
over the next five years to encourage growth in these areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I have said, tourism is very important to our 
province. Tourism contributes almost $1 billion per year to this 
province’s economy and holds an even greater potential. 
 
In the area of job creation, we see over 7,000 new jobs in the 
hospitality industry over the next five years. To ensure that 
there will be skilled and motivated work-force to fill this 
demand, Mr. Speaker, this government has pledged to create a 
tourism and hospitality institute. This centre of excellence will 
provide training for people to fill new jobs in an expanding 
tourist industry. With leadership from government, Mr. 
Speaker, a new interest in tourism is building in all areas of the 
province. 
 
Reinforced by our great success at Expo, the industry has 
developed a pride and a confidence that it can compete in the 
world market-place. Increased tourism potential, promotional 
activities, expanded travel services, and ongoing development 
initiatives are helping to put Saskatchewan on the continent’s 
tourist map. 
 
Particularly encouraging, Mr. Speaker, is this year’s dramatic 
increase in tourism inquiries. During the first nine months of the 
year, 115,000 inquiries were handled by our central office. That 
represents, Mr. Speaker, an increase of 96 per cent over 1985. 
There have also been significant increases in registrations at 
visitor reception centres. This summer, registrations were up by 
over 70 per cent over the previous season. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, the $30 million Canada-Saskatchewan 
tourist agreement is providing an important vehicle for future 
development. Under the agreement to date, 10.5 million has 
been committed toward 53 projects. Major projects currently on 
the drawing board include a $35 million conference centre here 
in the city of Regina and resort projects near Prince Albert and 
La Ronge worth over $15 million. 
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

78 
 

In the future, Mr. Speaker, this government will be placing an 
even greater priority on supporting tourism at the community 
level. And we will continue to encourage the private sector to 
assume more responsibility for the promotion and development 
of tourism. We look forward to working closely with TISASK, 
the new tourism industry association of Saskatchewan. I am 
pleased with the direction this government is heading in, Mr. 
Speaker, because ongoing support for our tourism industry an 
dour small business will help strengthen and diversify our 
economy overall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Economic Development 
Corporation, for which I am now responsible, is also providing 
valuable support to the business community. Sedco’s activities 
in 1986 have created more than 500 jobs for Saskatchewan 
people. Eighty-five per cent of Sedco’s financing in 1986 was 
to small business. Farm equipment manufacturing in 
Saskatchewan is being encouraged by Sedco’s new Agrilease 
program. Mr. Speaker, Sedco’s involvement in Innovation 
Place in Saskatoon is just an example of how this government’s 
growing commitment to the high technology industry is 
demonstrated. Five construction projects at research park have 
created more than 400 construction jobs, while activities within 
the new facilities will employ more than 600 people in related 
research and technical fields. 
 
Since its inception in 1985, this government’s youth 
entrepreneur program has helped 65 young men and women 
create new business and new employment opportunities for 
others. This successful program will be improved and expanded 
during our second term. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my own constituency of Indian Head-Wolseley 
there lies an excellent example of the diversified manufacturing 
that this province can support, given the right political and 
economic climate. The Canapharm pharmaceutical plant in 
Wolseley, which obtained financing through Sedco, is now 
employing near 50 people. 
 
As a result of a contract with Canapharm, the Melfort-Tisdale 
Union Hospital expects to save a quarter of a million dollars 
over the next five years — manufacturing in Saskatchewan and 
savings for Saskatchewan people because of local 
manufacturing. This is just one example, Mr. Speaker, of how 
local manufacturing can result in jobs and cost savings for our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne noted the efforts of 
this government over the pat there years to encourage 
government departments, Crown corporations and agencies to 
purchase goods and services from Saskatchewan sources. 
During that time we succeeded in increasing awareness in the 
public sector of the many Saskatchewan companies able to 
supply products and services to government. 
 
Conversely, Mr. Speaker, increased awareness of government 
needs by the manufacturing sector has resulted in new products 
being made in our province. The benefits of stimulating 
Saskatchewan business and spending money in the province are 
obvious, Mr.  

Speaker. Consequently, this government intends to expand its 
Buy Saskatchewan policy even further, government 
departments and crown corporations will be working harder to 
increase their level of purchases made within the province. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, we will be asking he consulting 
industry, the construction industry, and other Saskatchewan 
businesses, to help in the effort to use Saskatchewan products 
and Saskatchewan labour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, consistent with this government’s announced 
intent to increase government efficiency and effectiveness, as 
Minister of Supply and Services I’ll be undertaking the full 
establishment of the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation. The role of the SPMC, Mr. Speaker, will be to 
satisfy government accommodation requirements and to 
provide financing to third parties for capital construction 
projects. 
 
The benefits of the corporation, Mr. Speaker, will be an 
increased government accountability in the provision and use of 
government-funded accommodation; also increased 
management efficiency and a reduction in the cost of providing 
public facilities A board of directors has been appointed, Mr. 
Speaker, with myself as the chairman, and we will begin 
immediately staffing the corporation in order to get it up and 
running. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the people of Saskatchewan returned the 
Progressive Conservative government to office on October 20, 
they said two things to us: one was that they recognized the 
accomplishments of this government during four years of 
difficult times, and my own constituents of Indian 
Head-Wolseley looked around an they took stock. 
 
And I want to give you some examples from my own 
constituency — which I’m sure member after member could get 
up and indicate similar ones — that show, even though we were 
in difficult times, we still built. And we sill continue to build for 
this fine province. 
 
In the constituency of Indian Head-Wolseley we have an extra 
50 new jobs created by Agtech Processors in Indian Head. It’s 
being built right now, a world-class seed processing plant that 
has contracts reaching around the world for specialized seeds. 
I’ve mentioned the Canapharm plant, a pharmaceutical 
production, earlier in my remarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the constituency of Indian Head-Wolseley over 
the last four years was blessed with some double-laning of the 
Trans-Canada Highway, something that they had asked for for 
13 years, Mr. Speaker, that had been almost to the point of 
letting contracts by the previous government, but never was 
there one mile built; the upgrading of Highway 48 through the 
constituency which will be extended down to the area of 
Kenosee Lake; new enriched housing units and new nursing 
home beds; extended dialling for the communities of Sedley 
and Vibank, and a much needed help for many farmers in the 
area. Yes, the people of Indian head-Wolseley, as did the people 
of many other rural constituencies in this province, they looked 
around and they said, those are the things we really needed and 
this is the government that  
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

79 
 

delivered. We need to stick with them. 
 
The second message the people of Saskatchewan gave to their 
government, Mr. Speaker, was that they approved of the 
direction in which their province was moving. They shared the 
vision of Premier Grant Devine of a thriving self-sufficient 
province, taking its place in the world economy. The people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are resilient, they’re imaginative, 
and they’re industrious. The Progressive Conservative 
government recognizes the potential of Saskatchewan people 
and pledges to work with them to build an even stronger and 
more secure future for our children. By combining our strengths 
in human and natural resources in new and different ways we 
can build a solid economic and social structure on the 
foundation that is already laid. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I just want to recount a couple of 
things that have happened to me since the election to indicate 
what I believe is out there in Saskatchewan and which we can 
build upon and which we can deliver to help many people find 
their niche in the Saskatchewan economy in years to come. 
 
I was having supper one night with three young lads that I 
happened to teach a few years ago in Wolseley. All these boys 
have been to university. I didn’t know at that time that I’d be 
the Minister of Small Business and Tourism, but our discussion 
hinged around their great hope of going into business. These 
three young fellows were all under 26 years of age. Each of 
them had a splendid idea and I think we, as a government, need 
to develop mechanisms and opportunities to allow these young 
people to develop those dreams and hopes and plans of theirs so 
that they can develop businesses in this province — perhaps go 
on and employ other people. I was very impressed to see that. 
 
The other thing, Mr. Speaker, that I see, as I travel the province 
and talk to a lot of people, is that there is an awful lot of the 
people in the female portion of our country, in our province, 
who want to get into business, want to start small businesses, 
who want to, in some cases, have cottage industries and work 
within their homes. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that the Premier 
has given me the opportunity in put those engines of Small 
Business and tourism to work for the betterment of this 
province. 
 
I pledge to you and all the members of this House that this 
priority of the Devine government will be one that gets its full 
attention from me over the years that I have the responsibility to 
be the Minister in those portfolios. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again I want to congratulate you, and I 
would say in closing that I will be supporting the motion. I will 
be supporting the initiatives of the Devine government, and I’m 
proud to be a part of it a we build four more great years for the 
people of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — By leave, I would like to make a 
ministerial statement with respect to the announcement 

that just came out of Ottawa, with respect to the agriculture 
deficiency payment. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Agriculture Deficiency Payment 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to make a statement 
regarding the details of the deficiency payment announced by 
the Right Honourable Prime Minister Mulroney in Ottawa 
earlier this afternoon. 
 
The Prime Minister announced a $1 billion cash payment to 
Canadian farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — this is the largest cash assistance program 
ever provided by government to the agriculture industry, and it 
will provide $415 million to Saskatchewan farmers. 
Saskatchewan’s share of the total payment is significantly 
larger than any share of any other province. We will receive 
approximately 42 per cent. This is in keeping with the 
leadership position that Saskatchewan agriculture industry has 
within Canada. It also approximates this province’s portion of 
Canada’s total farm acreage. Our farmers will be pleased to 
know that the full pay-out from this deficiency payment will be 
made by the end of the spring seeding in 1987. 
 
This deficiency payment will have two important results. First it 
will assist Canadian grain producers at a time when prices are 
extremely low and financial problems are severe. Secondly, it 
will send a message to other grain-producing and consuming 
nations that Canada will not allow its agricultural sector to be 
devastated by excessive subsidization by other countries. 
 
(1500) 
 
We are pleased the federal government moved as quickly as it 
did in announcing the deficiency payment before year’s end to 
ensure farmers can make their financial plans over this coming 
winter. 
 
This payment, Mr. Speaker, combined with the $859 million 
payment under the Western Grain Stabilization Act for the past 
crop year, will dramatically help farmers battle current cash 
flow problems caused by low world grain prices. 
 
The western grain stabilization payment alone, including the 
recently announced $279 million final payment, brought a 
pay-out of about $16,000 per farmer for those with maximum 
contributions under the plan. 
 
In the case of the deficiency payment, Mr. Speaker, there will 
be a cap of $25,000 placed on payments for a producer. This 
deficiency payment is the result of more than a year’s 
consultation and intense lobbying by the government. I believe 
it goes without saying, the Saskatchewan government is very 
proud of its role in the initiation of a deficiency payment for 
Canadian farmers. 
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

80 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We pushed to have agriculture placed on 
the national agenda more than one year ago to reflect the 
importance of agriculture to all Canadians. Equally important is 
our philosophical belief in the retention of the family farm as 
part of Canada’s heritage. 
 
In October of 1985 our government held the Saskatchewan 
agriculture conference in Saskatoon to receive suggestions from 
farmers, farm groups, and farm businesses on what they 
considered to be the priorities for developing a national 
agricultural strategy. 
 
That’s the input I took to Halifax a month later, Mr. Speaker, in 
November of 1985, for the first ministers’ conference. It was 
the very first time agriculture has been placed on the national 
agenda, and Saskatchewan was successful in securing an 
agreement in principle for the development of a national 
agricultural strategy. Following a year of development, a 
national strategy was officially adopted — just one moth ago. 
 
Establishment of a national strategy recognizes the national and 
international scope of the problems facing the agricultural 
sector. Farmers have been severely hurt by low grain prices 
caused by the short-sighted subsidy policies of the United States 
and, indeed, the European Economic Community. But the 
Saskatchewan government recognizes that the development of a 
long-term agricultural strategy is not sufficient in itself. 
 
At the western premiers’ conference in Swan River, Manitoba, 
earlier this year, Saskatchewan led the call for a deficiency 
payment of $1 billion to help ease the economic burden facing 
producers. Once again the federal government has responded to 
our call for help, announcing today details of a payment which 
Saskatchewan 65,000 fares have been anxious to hear. 
 
The formula, Mr. Speaker, which was established for the 
deficiency payment policy, was the result of extensive 
consultation — a consultative process — which received input 
from all sectors of agriculture. It is representative of the feelings 
expressed by farm groups and individuals alike and is one 
which the government supports. 
 
Payment to farmers is based on a combination of seeded 
acreage multiplied by the regional yield, with a built-in hurt 
factor. That hurt factor represents the repercussions which 
farmers have felt from the international subsidy process. In 
other words, how much did the price fall in the commodities 
that they grew? 
 
The payment distribution mechanism has been developed after 
extensive consultation with the provinces, farmers, and farm 
groups. This consultation process brought substantial agreement 
on the payment mechanism from the more than two dozen farm 
organizations consulted. These organizations include the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the Saskatchewan Pulse Crop 
Development Board, the Canadian Cattlemen’s Association, the 
National Farmers Union, the Canadian Federation of 
Agriculture, the Saskatchewan Canola Growers Association, 
Western Canada Flax Growers  

Association, Western Canadian Wheat Growers Association. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I wish to remind members in this 
Assembly of the co-operative effort which Canadian 
agriculture, and Saskatchewan in particular, has received from 
the federal government. 
 
When assistance was needed to fight drought, high input costs, 
assistance was forthcoming. We have a continuing commitment 
to agriculture in Saskatchewan, a commitment which will 
ultimately see the restoration of agriculture to a sound economic 
base and for the good of all Canada. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I welcome this 
opportunity to reply briefly to the Premier’s remarks, and I 
haven to had long, as you see, to go over his remarks. 
 
For many months now, Saskatchewan farmers have been 
waiting anxiously to hear this response from the federal 
government, a response of a deficiency payment, a response 
that they thought, they hoped, would bring the price up to $6 a 
bushel for the wheat they produced in the last crop year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — It’s a national obligation produced by the 
national obligation of the United States and Europe to support 
their farmers. 
 
Now this federal government was quick to respond to failed 
banks. They were quick to respond to I oil companies. The 
farmers of this province have waited and waited and been 
hanging on that cliff — hanging in misery, I might add, because 
I know the situation out there. They have become frustrated. 
They have become angry, because they wanted details. 
 
And even today, with this disappointment of $415 million, and I 
say disappointment because it’s not the need . . . Whenever 
somebody is doing something to construct a building or 
whatever it is, they do a need study. Where is the need study 
that was done? The need said $5 million by Mr. Premier in 
Edmonton — billion, sorry — $2 billion to $5 billion by the 
wheat pools and other organizations. That’s the need study. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — There is nothing in the statement to say what 
each individual farmer will get or when they will receive it. 
These people are sitting out there, three weeks before 
Christmas, loans overdue, hanging there, waiting. We still don’t 
know why you urged the government, Mr. Devine . . . to urge 
his counterpart in Ottawa to get the cheque out quickly so the 
people know specifically know what they’re going to get 
because they need it. 
 
They need a much larger deficiency payment. They need a 
much larger deficiency payment right now, and they 
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

81 
 

need a much larger deficiency payment in years to come if the 
present trend continues of the grain price war that’s going on. 
 
Something that’s suggested out of this report is the fact that part 
of the payment will be made by the end of spring seeding in 
1987. That implies May. The government’s fiscal year Mr. 
Speaker, is March 31st — the federal government’s. But one 
question that comes to my mind: is this payment of $415 
million a response to the need in the 1985-86 crop year, which 
the farmers expected, or is this payment of $415 million going 
to be spread over two crop years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — I hope this does not set the tone for future 
deficiency payments. Because regardless of what this 
government has been saying as far as adequacy and meeting the 
needs, that they know the agricultural problems, we have here a 
short-term solution to a long-term problem. I add, it’s not even 
a solution, it’s a quarter solution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — We need this long-term commitment. I would 
urge, Mr. Premier, two things. I repeat: we need to know how 
much each farmer’s getting, when they’re going to get it, and 
we need to ensure that it’s going to be an ongoing program. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Martineau and the amendment 
thereto moved by the Hon. Mr. Blakeney. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday I 
congratulated you for being selected as Speaker of the House. 
Today I want to extend those congratulations again to you and 
to all the recently elected members of this Legislative 
Assembly. In particular, hearty congratulations to the many 
members who have been elected for their first time; to the 
mover and the seconder of the throne speech; and to all my 
colleagues on the New Democrats’ team, with special 
recognition to the members for Saskatoon Nutana and Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
As one of the three women elected on this side of the House, I 
am looking forward to working with you on issues of concern to 
us as women, as well as participating fully in the general 
debates. Being an MLA is a challenge I take up with great 
interest and enthusiasm, and hope that the day will come soon 
when many more women are able to join us beside our male 
colleagues in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last month the new members have 

spent time learning about the rules and procedures that govern 
the conduct of this legislature. We have been encouraged to use 
these rules for fair and democratic debate. Therefore we were 
shocked by the way this 21st session began. To hear in the 
throne speech that the government believes in referring revision 
of the rules of this Legislative Assembly to a special committee 
of the Assembly, and then to experience, during our very first 
day as new members, an attempt by the government to revise a 
rule without a special committee and without even giving prior 
notice, was alarming. Even more so was the way the members 
opposite attempted to dismiss our objections as unnecessary 
fuss over what they called a simple matter. 
 
Apparently, they don’t understand what it means to act in a 
principled way. They are willing to be devious and 
manipulative right from the start, promising one thing in the 
throne speech and doing precisely the opposite the very next 
day. This behaviour suggests to me that the throne speech must 
be approached, unfortunately, with heavy does of cynicism and 
mistrust. Therefore that is what I now feel forced to do. 
 
I know the constituents in Saskatoon Centre will be 
disappointed to learn that this session has started on such a sour 
note. They spoke to me often about the need for this House to 
conduct its business in a fair and co-operative manner. They 
find it hard to understand why there has been so much 
divisiveness. Now, Mr. Speaker, I know why, and I will have to 
tell them. Like most Saskatchewan people, the constituents of 
Saskatoon Centre are kind and fair-mined. They will not like 
what has happened any more than they will like what appears to 
be the thrust of the throne speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member of the Progressive Conservative Party 
who ran in Saskatoon Centre was reported in the Star-Phoenix 
of Tuesday, October 21st to have said on election night that he 
was defeated because, and I quote the newspaper: 
 

The demographic make-up of the riding, with a high number 
of low- and middle-income people and senior citizens, make 
it ripe for the NDP. 

 
Well, that time he was right. There are many low- and 
middle-income people in Saskatoon Centre, but Saskatoon 
Centre is not unique. Most Saskatchewan people fall into one or 
the other of those two categories. Many farmers, even with their 
valuable assets of land, buildings, and machinery, have little 
cash flow. They, too are low- and middle-income people. And 
every day more people in the province become senior citizens. 
If income and age make people right for the NDP, then there 
can be absolutely no doubt that in the next election we New 
Democrats will translate our popular vote into seats in this 
legislature and form the government of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — It’s true that the percentage of senior citizens is 
higher in Saskatoon Centre than other constituencies. 
Approximately one-third of the voters are over the age of 60. 
Many of them have recently moved in 
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

82 
 

from the rural areas, leaving a son or daughter on the land. 
Another one-third of the voters are between the ages of 20 and 
29. Many of them have recently left their farm homes and 
moved into the city, looking for work, education, job training. 
 
The links, the network between the core area of the city and the 
rural areas is strong. I don’t accept the urban-rural split that the 
government has attempted to promote. And I don’t see much in 
the throne speech to cheer anyone except those wealthy 
individuals who already have ample resources, don’t want to 
pay their fair share of taxes, and are on the look-out for tax 
dodges from their Tory friends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the election campaign the constituents of 
Saskatoon Centre expressed their concern that the policies of 
the PC government are harsh and cruel. While the cost of living 
continues to climb, more and more people are slipping into the 
low-income category. 
 
=sop there is nothing like the experience of going door to door 
during an election campaign to give a sensitive persona n 
awareness of other people’s situations. A great number o people 
have been thrown out of work, are threatened with losing their 
jobs, or can’t fin work to start with, and they are hurting. These 
people, I suggest, are among the many who will not be cheered 
by the throne speech, and nor am I. 
 
(1515) 
 
One of the solutions to our employment problems that the 
throne speech promotes is computer and information 
technology and the high-tech industry in general. Fifty million 
dollars of taxpayers’ money has already been promised to 
business firms to spur new technology in Saskatchewan 
industry, supposedly to create thousands of jobs, and to quote 
the Star-Phoenix of Friday, November 28th: 
 

. . . assist Saskatchewan in becoming another Ottawa Valley, 
Canada’s acknowledged high-tech centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, since 1982 this government has been on a 
high-tech roll. I heard the Premier at the fanciful Futurescan 
conference, some years ago, tooting the promise that Saskatoon 
was about to become a world-class Canadian prairie version of 
Silicon Valley, U.S.A. But even as he spoke the competition in 
Silicon Valley was collapsing under the force of monopoly 
capital as giant firms like IBM corner the market. Of course, 
technology is changing and changing rapidly, and of course 
Saskatchewan industry should have every opportunity to benefit 
from it, if it will mean stable job opportunities for our people. 
But does it? 
 
In Saskatoon we have seen the take-over of SED Systems, the 
effective closure of Microtel, Develcon is losing money, and the 
recent lay-offs at Northern Telecom have thrown another 124 
workers out of their jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have to question seriously the  

employment value of high-tech industries in Saskatchewan. We 
have to ask: does this throne speech promise more job 
opportunities or just more lay-offs; more stable jobs or more 
family stress? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say it is irresponsible of the government to 
promote high-tech without planning for all the consequences. 
I’m thinking of one young man I men during the campaign who 
confided in me that he was deeply worried about possibly 
losing his job with Northern Telecom. He was obviously 
educated, obviously trained, obviously skilled, yet he worked in 
a section of Northern Telecom where at that time rumours were 
flying that the place was going to fold. 
 
I ask you to put yourself in his shoes and in the shoes of the 
many others like him. Imagine what its’ like to hear the 
constant boosterism of high-tech and yet live with the reality of 
technological change. From one day to the next you don’t know 
what’s going to happen to you and you can’t control it. Will you 
have a middle income or no income at all? Will it be this week 
or next month or the spring. If you live in an apartment, as this 
man does, and as at least 65 per cent of the people in Saskatoon 
Centre do, and have a landlord demanding 400 or 500 or $600 
at the end of the month to keep a roof over your head, and when 
you’re facing the possibility of social assistance payments of 
only $345 total amount per month as a single employable 
person, you are scared. 
 
What goes does a 1,500 home improvement grant for a hot tub 
do you? What good does a $3,000 down payment on a home do 
you? Or a nine and three-quarter per cent mortgage? What plans 
can you make for a life? Can you risk having a family at all? 
 
Another person I met recently was an older woman, someone 
around my age, living in a stark, one-room basement apartment. 
She was just moving in. By the standards of the others living 
there she was well dressed. She had been a receptionist and a 
secretary, and she had just lost her job after 30 years of steady 
employment. She faces at least fifteen years on a $345 a month 
income before her old age pension kicks in. And why had her 
employer terminated her? Because he considered her too old to 
be retrained on the new word processor. She had been thrown 
out on very short notice in favour of high-tech. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there is even another side to these 
technological changes — their impact on the work place on the 
worker’s themselves. This government seems to ignore the 
threat to Saskatchewan jobs posed by technological change. 
And where do we find the government commitment to protect 
the safety of workers forced to handle new and hazardous 
chemicals where do we find the government commitment to 
protect the safety and job security of those forced to work with 
new microchip technology The impact and hazards of video 
display terminals, for example, warrants attention and yet the 
throne speech ignores these disruptive effects of technological 
change on the lives of working men and women. 
 
I hope that young man and the older woman I mentioned 
earlier, and the thousands of others like them, find 
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

83 
 

 another job. But right now they are walking the streets, using 
up their savings looking for work, being told they are 
over-qualified or not qualified or qualified in the wrong way, or 
not experienced or too experienced, or one of two or three 
hundred applicants for the same job, and being told by this 
government to retrain for the millennium, the coming 
information society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, computer technology, high technology is a 
two-edged sword. It has its uses, but it benefits us only when 
we plan its introduction wisely. High-tech, like farming, is 
risky. It restructures work places to make people redundant. It 
introduced new hazards which must be understood by all those 
affected, and it must be controlled. It promises efficiency and 
sometimes ends up costing a fortune. It’s a capital intensive 
industry, easily monopolized by giant corporations, especially if 
we pursue the free trade tack of the current government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the throne speech the government says it will 
continue to protect people from events beyond their control. 
What events, Mr. Speaker? Acts of god, like drought and 
grasshoppers? Yes, perhaps. Acts of employers and landlords of 
multinational corporations and agri-businesses? No, not very 
likely. 
 
The PC government sees nothing wrong with those interests 
having power over the lives of the rest of us. The PC 
government sees nothing wrong with destroying the supports 
that people have built up over the years to protect themselves 
from the worst effects of illness, disability, unemployment, 
unfair business practices, work place hazards, or the escalating 
cost of living. 
 
This throne speech also says the government intends to take 
further steps in the area of so-called regulatory reform to relieve 
small business and the public from unnecessary regulatory 
pressures. Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that the former 
government’s rent controls were not an unnecessary regulatory 
pressure on the tenants in Saskatoon Centre. Neither were the 
Labour Standards nor The Trade Union Act for working people. 
When the federal government deregulated the transportation 
industry, farmers were burdened with even more costs. The 
provincial government must have seen those transportation 
regulations as unnecessary because it said nothing to support 
the farmers. 
 
So I must ask: is the government preparing to further abdicate 
its responsibility to provide authoritative regulation in the 
public interest? And which regulations are to go — those which 
help ensure fair competition and protect the consumer’s 
interest; those which help protect working people; those which 
help protect us from hazardous and toxic environmental 
dangers? Is it regulations such as these, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government proposes to eliminate? 
 
On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the need for 
genuine regulatory reform. But when this government had an 
opportunity to help the Saskatoon farmers’ market co-operative 
with a reform that would have allowed the small food 
concessions to continue operating as an attraction tot he 
farmers’ market in Saskatoon Centre, it refused to do so. The 
pressure from large commercial enterprises won out over the 
pressure from a group of  

market gardeners. They were proposing regulations similar to 
ones already in effect in Alberta that would guarantee hygienic 
practices without forcing them to conform to the same 
regulations that govern commercial eating establishments. But 
the government did not support them. So while the PC 
government likes to talk about supporting small business, 
among which I count the market gardeners, it seems to care 
little for their prosperity and success. 
 
Many of my constituents are small business proprietors and 
many, many more work in small business in Saskatoon. They 
know firsthand how this PC government’s economic policy 
failures have increased the stress on Saskatchewan small 
business. One objective indicator of this is the federal 
government’s bankruptcy data. In 1981, the last year of the 
New Democratic administration in Saskatchewan, there were 
167 business bankruptcies in the province. After the PC 
government took office in 1982, there were 280 business 
bankruptcies — over 100 more than in 1981. And there were 
more than 300 per year in 1983, 1984, and 1985. Thus far, in 
1986, the number of Saskatchewan business bankruptcies is 
well ahead of the 1985 level. 
 
Saskatchewan small businesses are an important part of our 
economy, providing services to Saskatchewan people and jobs 
for Saskatchewan workers. But under this government’s 
policies they are under duress, and there are not encouraging or 
hopeful statement s for them or their employees in this throne 
speech. 
 
The throne speech was especially disappointing in its failure to 
address or even to acknowledge the many pressing problems 
facing women across the province. The women of my 
constituency and the women of Saskatchewan listened in vain 
to any reference to day care, pay equity, family violence, job 
benefits and job security for working women, affirmative action 
or income security for those left with no income before age 65, 
the majority of which are women. 
 
This government seems not to realize that without special 
measures to provide full and equal opportunities, many 
Saskatchewan women will remain unable to make their fullest 
possible contribution to our society. So often in the past this 
government’s policies have been particularly hard and unfair to 
women. The freeze on the minimum wage, the cut-backs in 
social assistance, the failure to enforce labour standards 
legislation — these policies should have been repudiated in the 
throne speech, but they were not. We should have seen some 
measures to increase people’s income to a level above 
destitution; we did not. Instead of helping women and all those 
who need support, the government proposes to create a 
monstrous department of human resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, calling people human resources suggests to me 
that this government sees us as commodities, like oil, potash, 
hogs, or grain. We are to be developed, by government decree, 
for trade in a market-place which has no room for us. This 
government does not care that 42 per cent of the people 
receiving social assistance are children under the age of 16. 
This government has no concern for the complexities of the 
relationship between the dominant culture and our minorities. 
This government 
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

84 
 

 has no respect for request from our native people that they be 
given the dignity to make their own decisions on the issues that 
effect them. In spite of its rhetoric, this government does not 
honour the roles all of us play as members of our families and 
nurturers of our children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week’s Speech from the Throne seemed to 
suggest that the government intends to reduce the range levels 
and quality of public services in Saskatchewan. Nowhere in the 
government’s program, as outlined in the speech, was there a 
clear recognition of the value of public services to 
Saskatchewan people. Those with a conservative or 
backward-looking approach may ignore or neglect the 
importance of public services, especially to those of us who are 
lower- and middle-income earners. 
 
Important public services such as consumer protection, human 
rights protection, occupational health and safety, labour 
standards, and environmental regulation help protect the citizen 
from some of the most harmful forces in our economy. Other 
services, such as libraries, schools, highways, the arts and more, 
help us to do together what we cannot do as individuals — help 
us together build a civilized society where we may hope to lead 
productive and fruitful lives. 
 
(1530) 
 
And no public service touches the lives of so many, so directly, 
as the basic provincial health care system. And yet this 
government has allowed that system to become eroded. Failure 
to commit itself to a badly needed new city hospital for 
Saskatoon, a resource not only for the city but for a major 
portion of the province, failure to provide adequate funding for 
our hospitals, forcing them to resort to lotteries, bingos, and 
charity to furnish and equip themselves; failure to provide 
adequate staffing. Nursing staff and other health care workers 
can document case after case of deteriorating standards of 
patient care. Failure to provide enough funding for home care; 
failure to provide adequate nursing homes, and failure to 
recognize that health care is fare more tan expensive and 
complex machines. It takes trained staff — staff provided with 
the time and opportunity to learn the new technology on the job. 
 
When this throne speech fails to acknowledge the importance of 
public services to Saskatchewan people, when it fails to commit 
the government to protect and expand a high quality health car 
system, when it appears to warn that Saskatchewan public 
services may be reduced and cut back, it is a warning that this 
government may have some badly misplaced priorities. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, this PC 
government has, over the past for years, attempted to drive a 
wedge between urban people and rural people. Although it has 
failed to do that, nevertheless there is some fear that they may 
try to do so again. But if they believe that urban residents are 
insensitive to rural issues, they are wrong. Similarly, rural 
people are very much aware o the issues such as job 
opportunities and job security that are sometimes called urban. 
There Is a very real community of interest in Saskatchewan, a 
linkage between rural and urban that is far stronger than PC 

strategists may realize. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — Saskatoon Centre constituents, like many rural 
residents, have been disappointed by this PC government’s 
approach to major issues facing Saskatchewan. They are 
concerned about the federal and provincial PCs’ infatuation 
with free trade, despite the obvious dangers for Saskatchewan 
farmers and Saskatchewan jobs. 
 
They are disappointed by unfair PC tax policies — unfair to 
both rural and urban people. They are alarmed by the financial 
stress driving farm families from the land, leading to greater 
concentration of ownership, large farms, fewer farms, and 
agri-business. 
 
Expensive projects like the irrigation of an additional 250,000 
acres announced in the throne speech concerned both urban and 
rural people. They want to know the rationale for such a 
development. What crops are to be grown? Where are the 
markets for the expanded yields if this project is for grain 
production? The international market is already glutted with 
train. Who will have access to this irrigation? What impact will 
it have on our water supply? How can small farmers afford this 
added expense? Both rural and urban people are asking the 
government if it really has plans to help the family farms or if it 
is just furthering the interests of agri-business. 
 
The PC government opposite may be tempted to try to divide 
rural people from urban residents, but such attempts will be 
negative, divisive, harmful to Saskatchewan and, I believe, 
doomed to failure merely as a partisan ploy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have no doubt that my colleagues will mention 
other issues that I have not had time to speak on in detail, but 
which concern me and the constituents I represent as much as 
the topics I have been able to touch on today. I urge the 
government to pay close attention to all these concerns because 
of the very difficult times we are living in right now. 
 
We must not let me, women and children continue to line up at 
food banks. We must not send people home to wait a year for 
surgery — waiting for others to buy enough lottery tickets to 
equip the province’s hospitals. We must not continue to blindly 
retraining as a panacea for all unemployment, nor short-term 
job creation projects as the answer to the need for meaningful 
work. We must not treat people like cogs in an economic 
machine, letting them be crushed when circumstances go 
against them, or forcing them to fit into a prescribed mould. We 
must not let more farmers go under. 
 
We must recognize the value of parenting and of children, and 
put our human resources at the heart of this business of 
government. We are here to serve the people of Saskatchewan, 
not abuse them. Let us proceed to make this province a happy 
and beneficial place for us all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am obviously supporting the amendment to the 
throne speech and voting on behalf of Saskatoon 
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

85 
 

Centre against the motion to accept the throne speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Deputy speaker, I am humbled today to 
rise in this Assembly and to accept this honour and privilege — 
indeed this opportunity — to speak to the House in response to 
the throne speech delivered by His Honour, the Lieutenant 
Governor. 
 
I would be remiss, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I did not take this 
first opportunity to extend to you, and to Mr. Speaker, my 
warmest congratulations on your election to the office as 
Speaker of this Assembly, and I am sure Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that you will convey this message to Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yours is a difficult but vital function in the smooth operation of 
our democratic process. I trust that with the co-operation and 
commitment of all members of this House you will find your 
new position a challenging but at the same time, a richly 
rewarding one. 
 
My initial address to this Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, must 
begin with the acknowledgement that it is a special privilege to 
be representing the good people of the Rosthern constituency, 
and I want to thank them for their strong support which permits 
me to represent them in this legislature. I want to assure them 
that I will listen to their concerns, listen to their ideas and make 
sure they are heard where it counts. 
 
The people of Rosthern are consistent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
They are, you might say, as constant as the northern star in that 
they have consistently — consistently rejected socialism. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Since 1905 our constituency has sent 
representatives from the Progressive Conservative Party, 
Liberals, and yes, even a Social Credit. But not once, Mr. 
Speaker, not once has it sent a socialist member to sit in this 
Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — And indeed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am proud 
of my heritage. As well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I must 
acknowledge the many years of exemplary service given to the 
Rosthern constituency since 1975 by my predecessor, Ralph 
Katzman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Rosthern is among the more unique 
constituencies in our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is a 
mosaic of satellite communities to Saskatchewan’s largest city 
and training centres of a diversely agricultural economy, where 
people have easy access to the amenities of the large city, but 
are still able to enjoy the pleasures of living in a rural setting. It 
is, perhaps, the best of both worlds. 
 
The aspirations and the needs of my constituents are much the 
same as those throughout the entire province.  

They understand the vital importance of our agricultural 
industry. Saskatchewan’s heritage is very much an agricultural 
affair. 
 
The land was settled for farming, and that is the very backbone 
of our economy; somehow, prior to 1982 the province and the 
country had forgotten that. And that is what the Devine 
government is working so hard to correct. In the constituency of 
Rosthern, most of our jobs and businesses are directly or 
indirectly related to agriculture. A healthy, agricultural 
economy means a healthy Saskatchewan. Unfortunately, the 
converse is also true. And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, quality 
agriculture is job one. 
 
At the same time, my constituents fully understand and believe 
in the need to create new opportunities through the 
diversification of our economy. As strong supporters and active 
players in the small business community, they are fully aware 
of the importance small business can band will play to build 
future growth through economic diversification. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they also realize the importance and absolute 
necessity for the continued strengthening of our education 
system. They know that our future depends on our children, and 
want every opportunity to be made available in order to 
challenge and prepare the young minds of today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they also realize the importance and absolute 
necessity for the continued strengthening of our education 
system. They know that our future depends on our children, and 
want every opportunity to be made available in order to 
challenge an prepare the young minds of today. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, all they ask of their government is that it 
provide the direction and access to opportunities and protection 
from the economic problems that they cannot solve. It’s a fair 
exchange, and one that I am proud to say has been the base of 
your Progressive Conservative government since 1982. 
 
Mr. Speaker — Mr. Deputy Speaker, excuse me — I want to 
take just a few minutes and focus on some of the action taken 
by your government over the last four and a half years or so to 
improve the quality of life in our constituency and provide new 
opportunities for everyone. 
 
We can look at construction and renovations in the school 
system: the W.W. Brown School in Langham; the Laird School; 
Martensville High School, and Valley Manor elementary, also 
in Martensville; the Prairie View elementary in Dalmeny; the 
Hepburn School; the Rosthern Junior college, the Osler, Clavet, 
Dalmeny and Hague schools. 
 
In health care, Mr. Speaker, a replacement special care home 
was completed in Dalmeny with nine new beds and 27 
replacement beds, and there are many more on the drawing 
board. 
 
Under the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation a total of 56 
rural housing, non-profit housing, and seniors’ public housing 
units have been built in the communities of Dalmeny, Hague, 
Martensville, Warman, and Langham. 
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

86 
 

Through the Saskatchewan Water Corporation, the upgrading of 
the water system was provided at a cost of $3.8 million for the 
communities of Osler, Dalmeny, Martensville, and Warman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these examples are only a few of the 
accomplishments of your Progressive Conservative government 
within our constituency and our people are fully appreciative. 
And they realize that through co-operation and consultation, 
that more benefits can be realized for their communities. 
 
(1545) 
 
They understand, too, that the priorities established by our PC 
government, its direction and commitment to the people, comes 
as a result of the leadership of our Premier, the member for 
Estevan. They know that he understands the problems that they 
face in agriculture, because of his background, his education, 
his experience and, indeed, his upbringing. 
 
They know, too, Mr. Speaker, that he is not afraid to fight for 
their rights, no matter what the forum. We have heard this 
afternoon a very critical and a very timely announcement being 
made with regards to the deficiency payment. This is the largest 
support program ever brought forth in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — We are talking, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
according to forecasts for 1987, instead of a =s farmer taking a 
reduction of 18 per cent in income, the Saskatchewan farmer 
now is going to be taking a look at an increase of 35 per cent. 
That is the difference that $415 million can make to the 
economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — That, Mr. Speaker, translates to $415 million, 
new money, money that was not there before and that is going 
to help Saskatchewan farmers pay for their bills. 
 
Instead, Mr. Deputy Speaker, according to forecasts for 1987, 
instead of a Saskatchewan farmer taking a reduction of 18 per 
cent in income, the Saskatchewan farmer now is going to be 
taking a look at an increase of 35 per cent. That is the difference 
that $415 million can make to the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, a few moments ago 
when the announcement was made, we heard in this House 
members opposite saying that $415 million for the 
Saskatchewan farmer was a miserable amount — miserable 
amount, $415 million. They did not applaud. They were not 
happy with that. They ridiculed that announcement and I say to 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the people ultimately will decide 
whether that was a miserable amount. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Neudorf: — I was shocked, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to hear 
and listen to the member from Humboldt get up in his seat after 
the announcement was made and indicate to the people of 
Saskatchewan: don’t send that $415 million to us now, we 
should first of all have a needs study — set up a committee, set 
up a commission, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to look into it whether 
we really need it or not. That is the response that we are 
listening to here. Does this mean then that the money is going to 
be handed out . . . I suppose the next step will be a means test to 
see whether or not they really do need it. 
 
The question I would have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, comes to my 
mind is, $415 million is not enough. Certainly we would like to 
have seen $4.7 billion as the opposition suggests, but, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, my question to Saskatchewan is: do you really 
believe that if we would have had another individual 
representing Saskatchewan in Ottawa, that that person would 
have come up with $415 million? Is there anyone across this 
House that would have been able to accomplish that? I suggest 
to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it takes a man like Premier 
Grant Devine. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — In that same vein, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I take 
great pleasure at this time to indicate to the House a very 
significant happening that occurred this morning in the city of 
Regina where, to the credit to this government, we have just 
added to our deal with Bulgaria, where on a 707 we were able 
to ship from the city of Regina — not in Toronto somewhere — 
from the city of Regina first time ever, a plane load of 75 Polled 
Herefords that have now been sold to Bulgaria. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — That, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you is a 
result of the progress and the leadership that we have in this 
Progressive Conservative government in the form of Mr. Grant 
Devine. He is a Premier that has achieved their respect, the 
respect of the people of Saskatchewan Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because of what he has delivered and because of his vision of 
the greatness that this province can achieve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and I call you now correctly, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you for joining the Chair. Mr. Speaker, I mentioned before, the 
vital importance of a strong agricultural community industry in 
our province. And I want to briefly continue in that vein. 
 
No government in the history of Saskatchewan has been more 
aware of the fact than your Progressive Conservative 
government. Through the production load program, the farm 
purchase program, the farm fuel rebate program, improvements 
to crop insurance program coverage, and the livestock cash 
advance program, farm families in Saskatchewan were provided 
the opportunities and protection they had to have in order to 
survive these last few difficult years. Mr. Speaker, amidst all of 
the problems in agriculture, your government took steps to 
provide for the future. 
 
The establishment of the $200 million agriculture 
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

87 
 

development fund was designed to finance the research, 
development, and testing that is so absolutely necessary if we 
are of the farming community are going to remain competitive 
on the world market. Those living in rural areas and small urban 
centres can now enjoy the same advantages as those in larger 
areas when it comes to the saving of energy costs, when it 
comes to our program of the distribution, the implementation I 
should say, of the Saskatchewan Gas Distribution program. Mr. 
Speaker, the agricultural policies of your PC government are 
not only innovative, they are among the most effective in this 
country. 
] 
The men and women who seed and harvest our fields, who arise 
the livestock, they are quick to tell you that your government 
has done a good job in agriculture. They are quick to point out 
that here is much more that ha to be accomplished, but they are 
confident that your PC government is more than capable of 
resolving the problems and building our number one industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe their confidence in well placed and well 
founded. Already your government is moving to increase the 
manufacture of agricultural chemicals and fertilizer in order to 
reduce the input costs of our producers. Your government is 
also proposing legislation to extend the provisions of The Farm 
Land Security Act during this very session, continuing with the 
protection that it established in 1982. This government is going 
to continue working with the producer to develop programs of 
practical and lasting value on the farm. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I indicated previously, economic diversification 
in the Rosthern constituency is also of paramount importance. 
We all realize the need to provide new jobs. The Speech from 
the Throne has addressed this subject with renewed emphasis 
for agriculture, for business, for tourism. Put simply, it means 
that Saskatchewan is going to work harder than ever before at 
building opportunities based on our strengths, our resources, 
and our people. 
 
Saskatchewan people are exceptional in their enterprising spirit. 
As an example, we have the largest recreational vehicle dealer 
in the country in North Battleford and they are now going to 
manufacture motor homes — jobs previously reserved for 
British Columbia, they are now in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — The world’s largest Versatile dealer is located 
in Kinistino. Western Canada’s largest farm truck dealer and 
North America’s largest, four-line General Motors dealership 
are located right in our constituency of Rosthern, in fact, in my 
home town village of Hague. 
 
The list could go on and on. All of these are the work of 
ambitious, dedicated hard-working people who live in rural 
Saskatchewan towns — people who are builders, people who 
are the movers and the shakers of this world. I firmly believe 
that it is the purpose of government to serve that energy and to 
reward individual initiative. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Speaker, these are the same people who 
have helped make other success stories across Saskatchewan, 
who just need an opportunity to repeat that miracle time and 
time again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the towns and villages in Rosthern constituency 
want to become more a part of the economic diversification that 
is vital in stabilizing our economy. Since more than 70 per cent 
of all jobs are created by small business, it only makes sense to 
us to look to our rural areas as a location. Here we are close to 
the supply, service, and transportation facilities of a major city; 
yet, Mr. Speaker, we can offer a quality of life and sense of 
community only available in our towns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take a few minutes to talk about a 
subject that is very close to my heart. Having been a teacher and 
an education for some 22 years in this province, I was proud to 
see your Progressive Conservative government commit itself to 
a process of renewal and development in our primary and our 
secondary schools, and yes, our universities. 
 
As evidence, Mr. Speaker, I must note that this government has 
increased education funding by almost 52 per cent since 1982 
— 52 per cent. Through a partnership with all participants of 
the education community we are now ensuring that our children 
have the solid education they require to meet the demands 
presented by a changing, a dynamic, and challenging 
work-place. 
 
Your PC government committed $275 million for kindergarten 
to grade 12 students in order to improve learning resources, 
promote efficiency measures in areas such as the sharing of 
services, program cut reductions, and energy conservation, and 
develop initiatives to increase school effectiveness, improving 
student performance and reducing the drop-out rate. To ensure 
we have the resources to develop Saskatchewan’s great 
potential, our PC government committed $125 million to our 
universities over five years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our commitment to education is borne out by the 
following statistics. Your PC government has provided $22 
million more to students and approved over 1500 more 
applications, and increased the average student loan by $1100. 
This, all more than the previous administration. 
 
(1600) 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, your Progressive Conservative 
government has increased graduate scholarships by 155 per cent 
over 1982. Your government, Mr. Speaker, extended its 
commitment to the students of Saskatchewan by offering 6 per 
cent interest rates on student loans with no parental means test. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I submit, your government has led the nation in 
providing for the educational needs of our children. While other 
jurisdictions are holding the line, or cutting back in education, 
Saskatchewan was wisely using its resources to meet and 
conquer the challenges we face. 
 
Mr. Speaker, your government has been charged by the  
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

88 
 

people with the responsibility of providing a new sensitivity in 
protecting the needs and creating new and exciting 
opportunities for all residents. 
 
We must maintain the quality of health care that has been 
renewed since 1982. Our commitment of $1,200 million per 
year is designed to accommodate that objective. That translates 
to $1,200 for every man, woman and child in this province of 
Saskatchewan, and that commitment is unparalleled any where 
in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Further, Mr. Speaker, we must continue to 
improve the quality of life of our senior citizens. We must 
continue to improve and provide the women of this province 
every access to the opportunities that are available. We must 
continue providing protection for our home owners and their 
families. We must continue working hard to increase the 
efficient and effective operation of government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the challenges are many. There are no easy 
solutions. We have brought forth imaginative programs, fiscally 
responsible programs, designed to stimulate the economy while 
crating much-needed employment and security. Indeed, other 
parts of Canada and the United States recognize Saskatchewan 
as the leader in many of our policies, and we must continue to 
provide and enhance that leadership role. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe in Saskatchewan. I believe in its people, 
and I have faith in our future. 
 
Our problems appear overwhelming and they are of deep 
concern, no doubt about that. But we have risen to the occasion 
in he past and we will again. The appalling negativism and 
cynicism pervading the election rhetoric degraded us all down 
to the lowest common denominator and we were subjected to 
more of that fatalism yesterday and today. In spite of these 
attacks, for those of use on the Devine team, there’s optimism 
on our vision for the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in their heart of hearts, the people of 
Saskatchewan and, indeed, the people of the Rosthern 
constituency share that optimism and they share that vision. It is 
one of building — Saskatchewan building — government and 
people working together while helping those who cannot help 
themselves. 
 
The Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, outlines very clearly 
that our intentions are to lead this province closer to what we all 
can become. To that end, I commit myself to the service of the 
people of Saskatchewan for the next four years and for many 
years thereafter. It has been a pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to speak to 
the Speech from the Throne and I fully endorse it, Mr. Speaker, 
as I urge every sincere member in this Assembly to endorse it 
as a document that shows clearly the way to the future for this 
great province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to enter this debate 
by congratulating the newly elected members 

from both sides of the House, and I’m sure that we all realize 
the importance of the task ahead and we will work to serve this 
House to the best of our abilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to take a moment to speak about my riding. 
Prince Albert-Duck Lake. Prince Albert-Duck Lake is a unique 
riding because of its diverse nature. The riding is two-thirds 
urban, one-third rural — an interesting combination. Prince 
Albert-Duck lake is home to a fascinating mosaic of people — 
people from many ethnic backgrounds and many vocations. It is 
home to labourers, business people, tradespeople, professionals 
and farmers. Métis, Indian, German, Polish, French, Ukrainian 
and Asian people, people of other backgrounds make their 
home in my riding. Income levels in my riding vary from those 
who have much to those who have little. The riding stretches 
from steep Creek, east of Prince Albert, to west and south pat 
the town of Duck Lake. The riding runs between the North and 
South Saskatchewan rivers. The urban part of my riding covers 
the west side of the city of Prince Albert. There are two major 
rural trading areas. Macdowall and Duck Lake, and the member 
opposite is right. With the legislation that may be before us, it’s 
very possible that the ridings in this province may not be 
recognizable, if the gerrymander comes that we’re expecting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, as well, I would want to 
indicate that Prince Albert-Duck Lake is home to two Indian 
reserves, Muskoday and Beardy-Okemasis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened to the throne speech. And as I listened, it 
became clear to me why my constituents are saying they cannot 
trust this government. The speech didn’t address the issue of 
jobs for our young people. It offered no hope for the 
unemployed or the underemployed. It offered no hope for those 
who have been forced to live in poverty because of this 
government’s inaction. It offered no relief from the debt load 
that our farmers are facing as they struggle to stay on their 
farms. Mr. Speaker, it was a disaster. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m a small-business man, and I can tell you that 
my colleagues on Central Avenue in Prince Albert weren’t 
jumping for joy over this piece of work that was done by a 
cash-starved government. This throne speech did not address 
the dangers facing our education system because of under 
funding. It didn’t address the dangers facing the health care 
system through under funding. It threatens our citizens who are 
dependent on social programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of the sever under funding of the 
universities by this government, they’re forced to cut back on 
programs in place and they can’t afford to introduce new 
programs. School boards in this province are forced to make 
decisions regarding the future of our children’s education based 
on the fact that they don’t have enough money because the 
government has failed in assigning a priority to education. 
 
The throne speech promised to continue its review of social 
service and incoming support programs. That worries me, Mr. 
Speaker. When this government talks  
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

89 
 

about social services and reviews of support incomes, it means 
cut-backs. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s poor and temporarily 
poor cannot be cut back any further. They are now depending 
on private agencies for food, clothing, and emotional support 
because this government has failed so miserably in its sport of 
the underprivileged. 
 
The government has promised to review the changing 
requirements for health care. Mr. Speaker, what changing 
requirements means to this government is cut-backs. Adults 
may have only one free eye examination every two years. 
Children, who were once covered under the dental plan, are no 
longer. Waiting time for assistance from SAIL (Saskatchewan 
Aids to Independent Living) has lengthened. 
 
And now the government says it’s going to introduce 
technology into our health care system. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
concerned what the government means is machinery and 
computers, and not trained nurses or other health care 
professionals. I’m concerned that the government will be 
cutting back on health care professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I travelled through my riding in past weeks, and 
as I talked with people in Steep Creek, and in Davis, and as I 
met with people from Macdowall, Lily Plain, and Duck Lake, it 
became clear to me that the damage done by this PC 
government in the past term must be repaired and repaired soon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have the opportunity to take 
on the old guard of that government. New members can force 
them to correct the mistakes that the government made in the 
pat term. The corrupt, insensitive, misguided direction of the 
government in the last four years doesn’t have to be repeated. 
When the veterans of corruption and destruction want to keep 
on building the deficit by handing out favours tot heir same old 
friends, the new members across the way have got to say no. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m concerned at what I’ve head and what 
I’ve seen from the new members in the past few days because 
I’m afraid that that direction isn’t going to change; we’re going 
to have more of the same, and I don’t believe it’s right. They’ve 
got a chance to correct it and they should start now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — When the old guard wants to replace the 
fair and impartial electoral boundaries commission with a group 
of Tory political hacks who will gerrymander this province, 
who will twist and bend and convolute and divide, and will say 
whatever is necessary or do whatever is necessary to keep them 
in power, the new members have got to say no, enough is 
enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has got to take control of the 
monster deficit that they’ve created. And they can’t do that by 
cutting back on the people that have the least amount of money. 
They can’t do it by under funding our health care system and 
our education system and our municipal governments. But they 
can control the deficit if they cut out the lavish, irresponsible 
spending. They can control it if they stop heaping cash gifts on 
their friends, the multinational oil companies; if the government 
would quit giving away pulp mils in Prince Albert and  

adding to Weyerhaeuser billions; and if the government quits 
giving away our forests; and if the government quits allowing 
the Pocklingtons of the world to take our cash, abuse our 
workers, like they have in Alberta, our neighbouring province; 
the deficit can be controlled. 
 
It can’t be done with record-size cabinets and bloated expense 
accounts from the members of that cabinet. That’s got to stop. 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are tired of the 
give-aways, the gifts and tax breaks to those who don’t need it. 
 
Business people in this province are also tired of the corruption 
that the government has introduced in the tendering of 
government contracts. I’ve received calls from many business 
people that tell me they’ve been unfairly dealt with. The 
Saskatchewan business community still remembers a tendering 
system where the low bidder won the contract, even if that 
system hasn’t been used since the election of this government 
over four long years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the former members for Prince Albert, and Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake, and The Battlefords, and Moose Jaw North, 
and Moose Jaw South, and all those in Regina, and Saskatoon 
seats were returned to the private sector to seek employment — 
not because they were particularly bad MLA’s — they were 
returned to the private sector because the people of this 
province are tired of having a corrupt, inefficient government 
determine their futures based on political support and 
background. 
 
(1615) 
 
Business men are tired of losing government contracts because 
they don’t donate money to a political party. And, Mr. Speaker, 
this government must realize that it’s their unfairness and 
inconsiderate actions that make the people in this province 
tired. The government must return to the practice of fairness 
and decency in awarding contracts and hiring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members of this House have an opportunity to 
give the people of Saskatchewan an early Christmas present by 
supporting our amendment and committing this government to 
being decent — soundly run, soundly managed — and being 
fair to all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the new members opposite to remember the 
history of this great province, Saskatchewan, when they caucus 
with their old crew. I ask them to remember that our province 
was built on the concept that we are our brother’s keepers, not 
just the keepers of our brothers who are rich and healthy, but of 
our brothers that are infirm, poor, and struggling. 
 
There are those in communities that need help from the rest of 
us who have the resources to share in upholding the fine 
tradition that makes Saskatchewan what it is. We have a moral 
obligation to share. Our parents and our grandparents came 
from all over the world to make their homes in Saskatchewan. 
My grandparents came from Russia and, Mr. Speaker, one of 
the reasons they came to Saskatchewan was to avid the type of 
life that this government seems determined to create here. 
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

90 
 

My grandparents, and thousands like them that settled this land, 
had a vision of a country and a province where the government 
accepted the principle that, regardless of whom you are, you 
have the right to a decent standard of living, the right to a first 
class education, and the opportunity to work with your friends 
and neighbours to make a strong community, a strong province, 
a strong country where not one person suffered in need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is creating in this province a way 
of life that my grandparents came here to avoid. They’re 
creating a province with two classes of citizens — the elite 
super-rich on one hand, and on the other, those of us who 
survive from the crumbs that fall from their tables. 
 
Let me give you some examples of past actions that show the 
insensitivity of this government. The government introduced a 
flat tax. The flat tax is not a tax that bothers the super-rich but, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a tax on middle- and lower-income groups in 
this province. 
 
The government for a time had a used vehicle tax, Mr. Speaker. 
The super-rich don’t buy used cars; they buy new cars. The 
used vehicle tax was a tax on the people who can’t afford new 
cars. It was a tax on the middle- and lower-income groups. Well 
this government across the way finally recognized that the 
people of Saskatchewan wouldn’t tolerate the tax and they 
removed it. But they’ve never offered to pay back those who 
were forced to pay that tax. 
 
That’s the kind of unfairness that this government has shown 
the people of this province. You had to lose a by-election in 
order for you to understand that the people wouldn’t accept hat 
kind of taxation. You learn your lessons hard, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s no Robin Hood on that side of the government. 
 
The government removed the home owner’s grant. This grant 
was a pittance to their fat cat friends, Mr. Speaker, but when I 
talked to my friends and neighbours in Prince Albert about what 
that grant meant, they talked to me about money that would 
help them pay their annual house insurance, or money that they 
used to buy winter coats for their children, or it meant food on 
their tables. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the lack of caring and understanding shown by 
this government is deplorable. Food banks have sprung up 
across this province because of the policies of the members 
opposite. The members should be embarrassed that in a 
province that once could feed its people, the need for food 
banks exists, and it exists because the members across the way 
do not believe that government must care for her citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I, like all my colleagues in this House, admire and 
respect the volunteers and donators, the people that run these 
food banks and help to feed Saskatchewan’s hungry. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I and the people who donate, and the volunteers who 
help run those food banks, deplore the fact that their existence 
is necessary because of the conditions created by a PC 
government that doesn’t care. 

Mr. Speaker, middle- and lower-income families are being 
taxed into poverty. Farmers are being starved off their farms 
and the only people that seem to be benefiting under this 
government are friends an supporters of the government. The 
large corporate farms appear to be the vision of Mulroney and 
his spokesman in Saskatchewan, the Premier of Saskatchewan. 
 
We heard no commitment in the throne speech to restructuring 
the enormous debt load he farmers are facing. We didn’t hear a 
commitment to support the family-owned, family-run farm. We 
heard no new direction, no new ideas, no solutions for our 
farming communities — the backbone of the economy of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have rejected the 
open-for-business mentality of this government; they have 
rejected the Pocklington give-away in North Battleford; they 
have rejected the give-away of the pulp mill in Prince Albert; 
they’ve rejected the callous treatment of potash workers in 
Lanigan. Northerners have rejected them for their inaction in 
the north. This government has lost the respect of the people in 
our largest cities, Regina and Saskatoon, and I see my 
colleagues sitting around there who represent those ridings. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — they’ve lost trust in the good people of 
Moose Jaw. This government has lost respect of over 55 percent 
of the people in Saskatchewan, and that was shown clearly in 
the last election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I challenge the members on 
the other side of the House to work with the members on this 
side. Work with us to restore fairness and honesty to 
government. Work with us to draft legislation that will allow all 
residents in our province a decent standard of living and an 
opportunity to help build this province for the future. 
 
I will be voting for the amendment, Mr. Speaker, as will my 
colleagues. And I ask the new members on the other side of the 
House to consider doing the same. They’ve had an opportunity 
to judge this speech for what it is. Simply put, it’s more of the 
same. And the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, deserve 
much, much better. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with a feeling of 
pride and humility that I rise from my seat to speak in reply to 
the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to add my personal 
congratulations to you on your election as speaker to the 
Assembly — a very important position and I am sure that you 
will fill it with honour and distinction. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
take this opportunity to add my congratulations and a few 
words of praise to the member from Saskatoon Eastview for 
moving the Speech from the Throne, and also to the member 
from Pelly who seconded  
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

91 
 

the speech of a very forward and positive and complete 
document. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations also to all the members on their 
election, and especially to those who, like myself, was elected 
for the first time. Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I did not 
take this opportunity to thank the residents of the Wilkie 
constituency for displaying their trust in me, and thank all those 
who helped me in any way. I will do my utmost to deserve that 
trust and will tackle my duties and responsibilities with 
sincerity, always placing the needs and concerns of my 
constituencies as my major priority. Mr. Speaker, I will 
continue to support the very positive and forward-looking thrust 
of the Progressive Conservative government in creating new 
jobs and diversifying the economic base of Saskatchewan, 
expanding our markets outside the borders of this great 
province. Our majority representation on this side of the House 
is a positive sign that the people throughout Saskatchewan all 
support these initiatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt in my mind that under the 
dynamic leadership of our Premier, the member from Estevan, 
the Progressive conservative government will continue to 
produce the kind of legislation that will build this province and 
improve the quality of life well into the next decade and 
beyond. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must congratulate the Premier and his 
government for coming to the aid of the farming community 
during the past four and one-half years. We all realize the 
importance of agriculture. It forms the largest part of our 
economic base. In my constituency of Wilkie the $25-per-acre 
production loan program at 6 per cent was very positive. Mr. 
Speaker, without it many farmers in our area would have found 
it very difficult, and in many cases indeed impossible, to have 
planted a crop in 1986 without the support of that $25 an acre. 
 
The Farm Land Security Act was another very positive and 
effective piece of legislation. By offering protection against 
foreclosure, it enabled many grain farmers and ranchers to 
readjust their financing, improving their ability to ride out the 
economic crisis that has surrounded the farming community. 
Without it many of our friends and neighbours would have lost 
everything they had worked so hard throughout their life to 
obtain. 
 
Indeed, Mr. Speaker, it was very positive assistance, and when 
used in conjunction with the counselling made available it was, 
without exaggeration, the difference between staying in 
business and bankruptcy. And, Mr. Speaker, what better way to 
assist farmers than providing farmers who have proven skills in 
management and production to provide the counselling, Mr. 
Speaker, farmers helping farmers, and the government clearing 
the way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Progressive Conservative government never 
wilted under the many pressures and obstacles it faced in 
dealing with the agricultural industry. It never once suggested 
that the responsibility of assistance was for another jurisdiction. 
Mr. Speaker, our Progressive Conservative government did not 
offer to buy anyone’s land, but instead it provided initiatives to 
ensure the right 

of every farm family to own their own property. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were many more programs that were of 
significant value developed by our government. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to take just a few minutes to mention just a few of them 
and the benefits they provided to the constituency of Wilkie. 
 
The livestock cash advance provided $5.9 million to the farmers 
in our area. The irrigation assistance resulted in over $2.7 
million, Mr. Speaker. The production loan program, which I 
have already mentioned, providing $32 million to the Wilkie 
constituency — very positive assistance indeed. The assistance 
with the grasshopper control amounted to $16,000. The farm 
purchase program provided over 41.4 million to allow young 
people the opportunity to purchase or expand their operation. 
The livestock transportation program, over 41.8 million in 
assistance. And, Mr. Speaker, the hog assured returns program 
(SHARP), delivered $1.1 million for the local producers in my 
area. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the beef market insurance program contributed 
$2.9 million to the Wilkie constituency. The livestock 
investment tax credit and the livestock facilities tax credit 
combined to provide $1.4 million in benefits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over $21 million came into the Wilkie 
constituency through the Canada-Saskatchewan crop insurance 
program. No government in the history of this province has 
provided more for agriculture than the Progressive Conservative 
government since 1982. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am going to concentrate on the Wilkie 
constituency for just a few minutes. Mr. Speaker, new school 
construction or renovations has been assisted by our 
government at the St. Peter’s Elementary School in Unity to the 
tune of $139,000; the Macklin School, $1.8 million; $1.5 
million; the James Charteris Composite High School in 
Kerrobert, $414,000; the Denzil Composite High School, $1.5 
million; Tramping Lake School, $30,000; Unity Composite 
High School, $183,000; and the St. George Separate School in 
Wilkie; $38,000. Education has not been neglected by this 
government in the Wilkie constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: — Mr. Speaker, I must also point out that a new 
hospital has been approved in principle for Macklin and that 
special grants totalling $45,000 were provided in this year for 
the central home care district and the Greenhead district, in 
recognition of the high level of service needs in those districts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier has promised to protect and provide 
opportunity for Saskatchewan people, and there is no doubt that 
he has kept his word. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: — As a “for instance”, Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon, $415 million in cash money — no reason to  
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

92 
 

repay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government’s accomplishments are far too 
many for me to mention in my first speech to this Assembly. 
However, Mr. Speaker, I must point out a few. 
 
In the area of health care, our Progressive Conservative 
government eliminated extra billion and the moratorium on 
nursing home construction, providing 1,500 new nursing home 
beds since 1982. 
 
In education, Mr. Speaker, our government provided long-term 
protection for our students and guaranteed our children a solid 
education through the development of both the education 
development fund and the university renewal fund. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, education has not been neglected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for our senior citizens, who are the pillars of our 
communities and the builders of our province, the Progressive 
Conservative government provided the senior citizen’s home 
repair program, the senior citizens heritage program and 
approved increased assistance that will amount to 100 per cent 
on seniors’ income. Mr. Speaker, our government has not 
forgotten our senior citizens. In my constituency there are many 
retired people who appreciate the assistance that has been 
provided and applaud our government for having the foresight 
to create the first-ever pension plan in the country. Mr. Speaker, 
they whole-heartedly encourage every eligible person to take 
advantage of this opportunity to prepare for a secure retirement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must also mention the benefits of the 
Saskatchewan home program, providing the opportunity for 
home owners to improve the quality of life while at the same 
time providing long-term security and new job opportunities. It 
is not only commendable, Mr. Speaker, it is exemplary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the direction established by the Speech from the 
Throne is a result of the communication between my 
government and the people it serves. People want to see 
economic diversification. They want continued protection from 
economic crisis that they cannot control themselves. And they 
want to see more effective and efficient use of government 
resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I support our Progressive Conservative 
government and the excellent Speech from the Throne. I will be 
supporting the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I must apologize for minor 
impoliteness when I rose to address the Assembly the other day, 
and take the opportunity now, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate you 
on your selection to serve as Speaker of this Assembly. And I 
wish for you the rewards and satisfactions of chairing 
meaningful debate which will be in the interests of 
Saskatchewan people over the period of time that is ahead of us 
here. 
 
I would also like to extend my congratulations, Mr. Speaker, to 
all new members of this Assembly and, in particular, to those 
members from the opposite side who  

had a special privilege — the member for Saskatoon Eastview 
who had the privilege of moving the Speech from the Throne, 
which was seconded by the member of Pelly. Special 
congratulations to those two members through you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’d like to begin my maiden speech in this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, by making some reflection upon my 84-year old 
grandmother who my children refer to as Grandma Great, and 
she truly is. Grandma was born, and has deeply entrenched 
roots, here in Saskatchewan, and in fact many years ago in the 
western part of this province had the privilege of influencing, 
I’d like to believe, in some small way the formative years — 
she baby-sat Woodrow Lloyd who went on to become the 
premier of this province to introduce the now-famed medicare 
system to Saskatchewan, and that spread from here across the 
country. 
 
I like to make reference to Grandma Great, Mr. Speaker, 
because of mainly two things, and one which is a plaque that 
hangs prominently on the wall of her kitchen that was given to 
her some years ago. And the plaque very simply, Mr. Speaker, 
reads: “What this world needs is fewer politicians and more 
grandmothers.” Now I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that that is not so 
much as a statement about grandmothers, but it is definitely a 
statement about politicians and reflects the sentiment that a 
growing number of people are expressing these days. 
 
Now I would also like to share with this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, as well, a conversation that I had with my 
grandmother, both this summer speaking to her in a hospital in 
Calgary, and also the day after the election when I called and 
shared with her the joy of being elected to represent the people 
of Moose Jaw North in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
My grandmother said to me, “Before I die I would like to see 
one of my grandchildren in the Legislative Assembly.” And I 
say that, Mr. Speaker, knowing and hoping that my 
grandmother has many, many years of good life and health and 
happiness ahead of her, but reflecting and understanding that 
she is one of those who seem to be fading in number, who 
believe that politicians are to be respected, that politicians are to 
provide leadership and to find solutions to the problems that 
face people here in Saskatchewan today, rather than to be 
contributing to those problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my wish that in serving the people of Moose 
Jaw North and the people of Saskatchewan that I will be able to 
do so over the next four years, or however long it will be, in the 
manner that is befitting the trust of Grandma Great and many 
like her. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well there are many like Grandma Great in 
Moose Jaw North, Mr. Speaker. Moose jaw North is a 
constituency which encompasses the northern half of Moose 
jaw’s third largest city, or I should say of Saskatchewan’s third 
largest city. 
 
The constituents represent a cross-section of the people of 
Saskatchewan, and I also would like to join many other 
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

93 
 

members of this Assembly by expressing my thanks to those 
people of my constituency. My thanks to those who worked for 
me in earning the right to represent them here in this Legislative 
Assembly. And I would also like to express my thanks for those 
who voted for me. 
 
But I would equally like to express my thanks, Mr. Speaker, to 
those who did not vote for me but worked and took part in the 
election campaign. I would like to thank them for making 
democracy work, and I pledge myself to say that it is now my 
turn to work for you and for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
That cross-section that I referred to of constituents in Moose 
Jaw North, Mr. Speaker, is made up of a number of people. 
About a sixth of my constituents are senior citizens. There are 
also located in Moose Jaw North a large number of labouring 
people, farmers — both retired and still active, business people, 
professionals, young and middle-aged families, students who 
are attending either the Saskatchewan Technical institute or the 
Coteau Range Community college. And also, Mr. Speaker, 
there are a number of people who are handicapped living in my 
constituency, as well as a number who have been forced to 
receive social assistance in order to survive. 
 
I’ve said many times that Moose Jaw North is a riding that is in 
effect a microcosm of the province and can be referred to as 
your average riding, Mr. Speaker. It is the home . . . Moose Jaw 
North is the home of Saskatchewan’s first and foremost 
post-high-school technical school, the Saskatchewan Technical 
Institute, referred to fondly by the people of Moose Jaw North 
as the STI. 
 
And just as . . . Interest aside, Mr. Speaker, I point out that in 
the recent election there were four communities in this province 
who have within their boundaries the post-high-school 
educational institutes — either technical institutes or 
universities — and I point out that those communities sent 20 
New Democrat representatives, of a possible 24, to represent 
them in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that there is 
possibly a message that was being sent to the government in 
that. With that fact there is a message about employment and 
there is a message about education, and unless anyone is foolish 
enough to ignore it, it is a message that cannot be forgotten by 
the members opposite. 
 
Moose Jaw itself also, Mr. Speaker, sent a message to the 
Government of Saskatchewan about being ignored, as the city 
of Moose Jaw sent two New Democrat representatives to the 
Legislative Assembly and sent both of those representatives, I 
might add, with the largest majority that has ever been held by 
New Democrats MLA’s in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I come bearing some 

messages from Moose Jaw to this Legislative Assembly. It will 
be known by some that within my riding of Moose Jaw North 
there are located the Moose Jaw exhibition grounds which are 
run by the Moose Jaw exhibition Company. And the Moose Jaw 
exhibition grounds are the home of Saskatchewan’s finest horse 
shows, our annual fair, horse-racing, and a large number of 
other events. And the people who operate the exhibition 
grounds are in need of funding, Mr. Speaker, for capital 
expenditures and would be most happy to simply receive a 
prorated equivalent by population to the grants that have been 
given recently to the Regina exhibition board. Now, these 
people of the Moose Jaw Exhibition Company, Mr. Speaker, 
are dedicated and reasonable people; with a good reputation, 
and I simply ask that they be fairly and properly included in 
future government plans. 
 
Let me turn my attention as well, Mr. Speaker, to the issue of 
downtown revitalization in Moose Jaw. Moose Jaw is a city not 
unlike some others in this province who have experienced the 
need for downtown revitalization — cities like Prince Albert 
and Regina and Weyburn, which were privileged to have some 
development assistance. I am afraid to say, for the members 
opposite, it was assistance that they received from the former 
New Democratic Party government. And Moose Jaw was in 
need of that assistance when the government changed hands in 
1982. Discussions were under way at that time with the 
previous government; however, since that time simply nothing 
has happened. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, with the typical character of the 
members opposite, just before the election it was announced by 
the provincial government that it intended to pay half the 
consultation study fee to recommend a redevelopment plan to 
the mayor’s task force on downtown development. And that 
plan has now been tabled, Mr. Speaker, and we of Moose Jaw 
are looking forward to an exciting concept for downtown 
redevelopment, focusing on Moose Jaw’s famous — or in some 
people’s opinion, infamous — river Street, capitalizing on the 
city’s steamy history, both real and mythical. 
 
And I note the government opposite — albeit uncloaked in 
rhetoric about tourism and diversification — committed itself 
both during the election and since to assisting and supporting 
tourism, and committed itself during the election to working in 
support of the redevelopment plan in downtown Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this House, I look forward to working in 
co-operation with the government opposite to make firm strides 
forward for the people of Moose Jaw and the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, there are also a good number of 
small-business people in my riding who also sent a message on 
October 20th. There is no mention in the Speech from the 
Throne, Mr. Speaker — and conspicuous by its absence — 
there is no mention of programs for small business, and in 
particular for small businesses 
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

94 
 

which in fact are family businesses. And that’s the typical small 
business not only in Moose Jaw but here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The small-business people in my riding and around the province 
badly need tax relief and also look to the kind of relief, through 
funding from the provincial government to the municipalities, 
to allow them to withdraw the unfair business tax, which is a 
double taxation for small businesses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also, the small businesses in my riding and elsewhere, Mr. 
Speaker . . . Or small-business people tell me that they need 
security for expansion of their small businesses and that they 
have no reason to feel confident in the economy, based on the 
current levels of unemployment and the escalating deficit that 
has been initiated by this provincial government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, small-business people in Moose Jaw, 
family-business people in moose Jaw, want to be a part of the 
solution of getting Saskatchewan working again and look to the 
province for leadership. And they are no different from 
small-business people from other parts of the province as well. 
 
Well let me turn my attention, Mr. Speaker, to some issues of 
provincial interest. Many of us noted with a great deal of 
interest that there was one line at the end of the Speech from the 
Throne which made reference to a correction or an amendment 
to the election boundaries Act. And I am sorry to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that my constituents are beginning to cynically refer to 
that Act as the gerrymander Act. 
 
I am disturbed, as well, by the cynicism that’s being expressed 
in terms of the government’s commitment to fairness and the 
commitment to democracy, Mr. Speaker, and that sadness me. 
And let me repeat a comment that I made just the other day. Mr. 
Speaker, when all three of the Lieutenant governor, yourself, 
Mr. Speaker, and the Premier of this province called on the 
members of this Assembly to conduct themselves in the best 
interests of Saskatchewan people and set aside their partisan 
political interests. 
 
And I call on the Premier to lead by example, to make clear the 
intentions of the side opposite, and to consider following his 
own advice when it comes to considering the electoral 
boundaries review Act. I believe that Saskatchewan people are 
informed and dedicated and they will not take gerrymandering 
lightly. And if anyone doesn’t’ believe that, they can simply ask 
the predecessors of the member form Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 
Let me also, Mr. Speaker, turn to the issue of drug abuse which 
was discovered by the government opposite just days before the 
provincial election. I, like may others, welcome initiatives to 
deal in very real ways with addressing this very, very serious 
social problem that has, by the way, Mr. Speaker, has been 
around for a long time around the province of Saskatchewan. 
And like many others, I have to question the sincerity and the 
motives of a government that officially opens a facility for 
treatment of youth who were suffering from alcohol and drug 
addiction, opening that new facility just days prior to the  

election, a facility which has not yet finished its renovations and 
which is also lacking in residents and staff. 
 
And I point out, Mr. Speaker, that the province of 
Saskatchewan introduced a program in 1975 to address the 
issue of deaths related to the abusive use of alcohol and other 
drugs. And that was introduced, Mr. Speaker, specifically to 
focus on deaths on the road. I am referring, Mr. Speaker, of 
course to the Saskatchewan driving without impairment 
program. It’s a program which has experienced some success, 
Mr. Speaker, and for the last two years in this province of 
Saskatchewan, I am pleased to say that for the first time in over 
15 years, in the last two years we lost fewer than 100 people on 
the roads of Saskatchewan in accidents that involved a drinking 
driver. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, there has been a significant reduction 
in the rate of recidivism for convicted impaired drivers, for 
those who have attended and participated and completed the 
driving without impairment program. 
 
Members opposite who take interest in the treatment of drug 
abuse — the problems — will be, I am sure, familiar with 
SASKAADAS, the Saskatchewan Association of Alcohol and 
Drug Abuse Societies — a collection, Mr. Speaker, of volunteer 
groups who are community based and trying to address drug 
abuse in our society in meaningful kinds of ways. And those 
societies, Mr. Speaker, for the last several years have called for 
compulsory attendance of driving without impairment programs 
prior tot he reinstatement of licences for convicted impaired 
drivers. 
 
Now on November 19, 1983, the former minister of Highways 
who loved to fly and has now flown the province, I note, stated 
a commitment to DWI people who were gathered in Saskatoon, 
that by January of 1985 he would have completed the 
preparatory work to introduce the regulations that would require 
compulsory attendance at driving without impairment programs 
prior to licence reinstatement. And I note, Mr. Speaker, that 
January 1985 has come and gone. And January 1986 has also 
passed, and January 1987 approaches shortly. And I ask the 
government opposite, Mr. Speaker, to consider that in a very 
specific way — in a very publicly acceptable way, I might add 
— it is possible for the government to demonstrate commitment 
to reducing the carnage on the road caused by the abuse of 
alcohol and other drugs, and to introduce a regulation requiring 
the attendance at driving without impairment programs prior to 
the reinstatement of driver’s licence; to show some real 
leadership and to save some real lives of Saskatchewan people 
on the roads in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — But let me turn my attention as well, Mr. 
Speaker, to the Department of Social Services. People have 
been referring to the stated, and probably just as much as stated, 
rumoured restructure of the department as the creating . . . 
bringing into existence here in Saskatchewan the creation of a 
department in charge of oppression. And we await specifics of 
that restructuring, Mr. Speaker, with the hopes that we are not, 
as a matter of  
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

95 
 

fact, going to be creating in this province a department in 
charge of oppression. 
 
But let me comment on some specific statements made in the 
Speech from the Throne, having to do with socials services. 
There was a statement that stated . . . It said, I quote, “Special 
attention will be given to the methods of delivery . . . ” And if 
this means that there will be more local control over the type 
and the quality of delivery of social programs through 
well-managed, non-government organizations with sufficient 
resources, then the Minister of Social Services, Mr. Speaker, 
will have an ally on this side of the House. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, if this means that there will be a shifting 
of responsibility to non-government organizations without the 
resources, in order to be able to deliver, to do their jobs, or if it 
means that there will be a shifting of financial responsibility for 
social services to local governments . . . And I note yesterday in 
question period, Mr. Speaker, that the minister indicated that 
shifting of financial responsibility to the local governments is 
an option that is being considered by this government. Then in 
that case, Mr. Speaker, the minister will have a fierce opponent 
on this side of the House. 
 
And I also sincerely hope, =sop, that in reconsidering the 
delivery of services to handicapped citizens in our province, 
that changes, if any, will promote the opportunity for 
normalization, for independent living for handicapped people, 
and that will allow them to more equally be able to determine 
their own fates and their own futures in this province of ours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — The Speech from the Throne as well, Mr. 
Speaker,. Stated, and I quote, the government “will continue to 
review its social assistance and income support programs . . . ” 
And the members in this House will be aware, I’m sure, that a 
recipient who is defined as fully employable in this province 
receives a maximum — a maximum of $345 per month; $345 a 
month to cover rent, food, clothing, utilities, and other personal 
expenses. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that there will be many 
in this House who will spend more than that amount on 
Christmas presents alone this year. 
 
A person who is fully employable, I may describe as a person, 
for those who may not be aware, who is fully capable of 
working but who is no longer eligible for unemployment 
insurance — it has run out — and because of inability to find 
employment has been forced to receive social assistance from 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And if the Minister of Social Services is proposing that there 
will be rate increases to bring the allowances for social 
assistance recipients in line with the real costs of survival in 
Saskatchewan, then the minister again will have an ally on this 
side of the House. 
 
However, if the minister of Social Services proposes rate 
changes as an attack of oppression on the least fortunate of our 
citizens, couched in the rhetoric of reform as we’ve  

seen before, then the minister will have a fierce opponent on 
this side of the House. 
 
Let me make some comments before moving on, about the facts 
because I think, Mr. Speaker, the facts speak for themselves. 
And I refer to the facts related to unemployed, fully employable 
people who’ve been forced to live on social assistance. In 
November of 1981, Mr. Speaker, in this province there were 
2,584 people — and I’m not proud of that fact, but it is a fact — 
there were 2.584 fully employable people who were 
unemployed in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, let me be kind to the government of the day, Mr. Speaker, 
and use the most recent statistics available and refer to the 
numbers of fully employable people who were unemployed in 
August of this year. The number in August, Mr. Speaker, was 
10,073. Five years ago 2,500 fully employable people who were 
not able to find employment and forced to live on social 
assistance. Now, five years later, that number has increased 
fourfold to over 10,000. 
 
After five years of conservative government rule, Mr. Speaker, 
is it fair to say that we have four times as many people in this 
province who have grown lazy? I suggest no. After five years of 
Tory government is it fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that we have 
four times as many people who have grown shiftless? And I 
suggest not. 
 
But I do suggest, Mr. Speaker, that after five years of 
Conservative government in this province we have four times as 
many people who have experienced disappointment; we have 
four times as many people who have become disillusioned; we 
have four times as many people who have been deserted by the 
province of Saskatchewan in carrying out its number one 
responsibility: to provide the opportunity for employment to 
make a living and provide for their families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Finally, let me turn, Mr. Speaker, to the crucial 
issue of employment, an issue which got no mention 
whatsoever — virtually no mention whatsoever — in the 
Speech from the Throne. I repeat that I believe that, Mr. 
Speaker, it is the first responsibility of the provincial 
government to provide an environment in which people have 
the opportunity to be employed and to provide for themselves 
and their families. 
 
And what did we find the Speech from the Throne, Mr. 
Speaker? There was no strategy referred to for employment of 
our young people. There was no mention of a winter works 
program. There was no reference to government leadership for 
northern employment. There was no reference to meeting 
provincial needs through employment-stimulating measures 
such as highway construction and repair and the construction of 
nursing homes. There was no reference to assistance to small 
businesses to encourage this important sector to create new 
jobs. And most seriously of all, Mr. Speaker, there was no 
reference to a long-term strategy to get Saskatchewan working 
again. 
  



 
December 9, 1986 

 

96 
 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that in this province we have an 
opportunity to provide meaningful employment — rewarding 
employment — to Saskatchewan people related to the 
development and the processing of our abundant natural 
resources. And at the very least, Mr. Speaker, we deserve an 
economic development strategy tied to a training development 
plan to prepare Saskatchewan people for Saskatchewan jobs 
with a future. The failure of this government is no more clear 
than its record on employment. It is a disappointment that it got 
no mention in the Speech from the Throne. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, may I say that I believe that the 
Speech from the Throne misses badly in the crucial area of 
employment for Saskatchewan people. It does not address the 
topic, it bodes ill omen for those who are least fortunate of the 
Saskatchewan citizens, and it ignores blatantly the 
small-business people and particularly family-run business 
people in this province. 
 
I cannot support the motion, Mr. Speaker. I would be happy to 
join my colleagues in support of the amendment moved by the 
Hon. Leader of the Opposition. I look forward, Mr. Speaker, to 
addressing issues of importance to Saskatchewan people over 
the next four years. I eagerly look forward to serving the people 
of Saskatchewan and the fine folks of Moose Jaw North at the 
Legislative Assembly, and thank you for the opportunity to 
deliver my maiden speech today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


