


















































May 8, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 8, 1986 
 

1145 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: —  Mr. Speaker, today it is my privilege to 
welcome six distinguished Saskatchewan people seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery. These individuals are the most recent 
recipients of Canada’s highest honours. Five have been invested 
into the Order of Canada in recognition of their outstanding 
contributions to our country, and one was awarded the Star of 
Courage for his extraordinary bravery. 
 
The significant accomplishments and the selflessness of these 
individuals is a source of pride to every one of us here in the 
province. They have spoken, Mr. Speaker, by their actions, that 
the people of Saskatchewan can and do leave their mark on all 
segments of Canadian society. 
 
On behalf of this government, Mr. Speaker, I wish to extend my 
congratulations to each and every one of the individuals. Your 
achievements and the honour you bring to Saskatchewan fill us 
all with a deep sense of pride and satisfaction. The people of your 
communities and your province and your country thank you very 
much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to have had the opportunity to pay 
tribute to these outstanding citizens, and I will now leave the 
honour of introducing them to the members of the legislature. 
Welcome the outstanding people here today. 
 
Hon. Members: —  Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rousseau: —  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
my privilege to introduce to you, and through you to this 
Assembly, Mr. Frederick W. Hill, D.F.C., member of the Order 
of Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: —  Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rousseau: —  After distinguished war service, Mr. Hill 
embarked on a career in real estate development in the Regina 
area which earned him a reputation for business acumen across 
western Canada. He is equally well-known as a supporter of his 
church, generous contributor both financially and personally to 
many charities and causes, and as a major contributor to the 
success of Notre Dame College in Wilcox, Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Frederick Hill, member of the Order of Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: —  Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Currie: —  Mr. Speaker, it is indeed an honour to introduce 
to you and through you to the members of this Assembly, Mr. 
Douglas A. Lee, C.M., C.D., member of the Order of Canada. 
 
Director of administration and community relations for CKTV in 
Regina, he has for many years been a leader in fraternal, civic, 
and veterans organizations, the military and ecumenical projects 
in both the Regina area and

provincially. One of the key volunteers in the community, he is 
dedicated to helping others whenever and wherever the 
opportunity presents itself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I present Douglas A. Lee, member of the Order of 
Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: —  Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Embury: —  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
privilege to introduce to you and through you to the members of 
the Assembly, Myrl Leyton-Brown. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mryl Leyton-Brown became known and respected 
in every town and city in the province through her work as 
president of the highly successful Regina and Saskatchewan 
Canada Week committees. She has since further distinguished 
herself as director of the Council for Canadian Unity and 
Saskatchewan president of the Terry Fox Canadian Youth 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Myrl Leyton-Brown, member of the Order of 
Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: —  Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rousseau: —  Monsieur le Président. Au nom du député, 
pour la circonscription de Kinistino, c’est un plaisir pour moi de 
presenter à vous, Monsieur le Président, et au député de cette 
Assemblé, Monsieur Mederic Zephirin McDougall, member de 
l’ordre du Canada. 
 
Ancien employé de la municipalité de St. Louis, commissaire 
d’école et conseiller du villege, il à travaillé au development de 
sa communauté. Fidèle toute sa view à peuple et à la langue 
française, il à été membre fondateur et délégué de la societé des 
Metis et président du cercle local de l’Association Culturelle 
Franco-Canadienne de la Saskatchewan. Bien que la retraite il 
s’occupe du mieux-être des personnes du trozième âge, et a pris 
une part active au centennaire de Louis Riel. 
 
Monsieur Président, je vous presente Monsieur Mederic 
McDougall, membre de l’ordre du Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: —  Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege 
today to introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, Dr. 
Robert Williamson of Saskatoon, member of the Order of 
Canada. 
 
Founder of the Eskimology Centre of the Department of 
Northern Affairs, of the Innuit magazine, Inuttitut, and the 
University of Saskatchewan’s Arctic Research and Training 
Centre, this anthropologist has devoted his life to researching and 
solving the problems of the North. Over the past 35 years he has 
spent much of his time in the North working to provide the Innuit 
with social, economic, and political opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I present Dr. Robert Williamson, member of the 
Order of Canada. 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1146 
 

Hon. Members: —  Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Baker: —  Mr. Speaker, today I’m honoured to introduce 
Howard Richter. 
 
Shortly after midnight on December 18, 1984, Howard Richter 
of Asquith saved three-year-old Travis Reid, who was trapped in 
a raging fire in his parents’ home. When he arrived on the scene, 
Mr. Richter hurried to the back door, broke in, and went into the 
hallway and to the child’s room. The flames and the intense heat 
forced him back. He immediately went around the house, found 
a ladder, armed with a piece of wood broke the window, and went 
upstairs to the room. He heard the faint crying of the child, 
blinded by the thick smoke leaned inside, tried to grab Travis. It 
was in vain. He brushed away the broken glass, and without 
regard to danger climbed into the room and found the toddler, 
grabbed him by the leg, hoisted him out the window to safety to 
his mother’s arms. Flames completed engulfed the room 
moments after Mr. Richter had crawled outside. 
 
Later in June this year Mr. Howard Richter will receive the Star 
of Courage. I am pleased to introduce Howard Richter. 
 
Hon. Members: —  Hear, hear! 

 
Mr. Pickering: —  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, 13 grade 1 to 6 students from the Parry elementary 
school, which is down in my riding. They were to be in here on 
— I think it was — Tuesday, but they couldn’t make it because 
of the snow and the rain, which was more than welcome, I’m 
sure. 
 
They’re accompanied here today by their teacher, Brenda 
Arnold; chaperon, Doreen Filmore; and bus driver, Reg Zieg. I 
hope they find the question period entertaining and perhaps 
educational, and I will be meeting with them for pictures right 
after question period, and refreshments. I would like all members 
to welcome them to the legislature and wish them a safe journey 
back home. 
 
Hon. Members: —  Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: —  Mr. Speaker, I would like to add a word 
of commendation on behalf of my colleagues in the opposition to 
the words of congratulations and appreciation expressed by 
members with respect to the recipients of Canada’s national 
honours. 
 
I think no one can question that in each and every case the honour 
was well merited. It’s been my pleasure to know a number of 
them. Mr. Fred Hill, whose contribution has been noted; he is 
certainly a business man of acumen, not only in western Canada, 
but throughout much of Canada and the United States, serving on 
the boards of major financial institutions and having real estate 
and resource development enterprises in Canada and the United 
States. I have known him perhaps best with respect of his work 
with the Father Athol Murray College of Notre Dame at Wilcox, 
in respect of which he has been a generous, indeed unstinting 
contributor of both his time and his money. We join with the 
others in congratulating Mr. Hill.

Doug Lee is a person who is known in this city to make things 
happen. He has been a tireless contributor to many, many efforts 
of this city — efforts in charitable and community affairs. And 
we perhaps do not often enough recognize the major contribution 
of these animators and facilitators like Mr. Lee, and I’m very 
happy to see that he is being appropriately honoured. 
 
Myrl Leyton-Brown is a person whom I have worked on many 
— countless perhaps — Canada Day celebrations throughout the 
1970s, at a time when, if we will cast our mind back, we were 
wishing to emphasize the character of a united Canada when 
there were other voices abroad in the land. Mrs. Leyton-Brown 
took a major role in focusing the attention of people in this 
province on being Canadian and what it means to be Canadian. 
 
Mederic McDougall is an old friend. The biog indicates his 
contribution to his community and to the Metis society and the 
Association Culturelle Franco-Canadienne. May I also 
recommend Mr. McDougall as a person to take you around the 
museums in the Batoche area. I have fond memories of going 
about with him and saying, that came from my 
great-grandfather’s home, this one came from my wife’s 
grandmother’s home. He has a very, very great knowledge of the 
Metis in Saskatchewan — when they came from the Red River, 
where they settled, and who they think they are, what is their 
sense of being as a community in Saskatchewan. Much of the 
sense of being a community, which the Metis people in this part 
of Saskatchewan are, much of that sense has been developed by 
Mederic McDougall. 
 
Dr. Williamson has been a leader in the study of the North, and 
his work along with others has made the University of 
Saskatchewan a centre of research and the garnering of 
knowledge about Canada’s North. Dr. Williamson has worked on 
the anthropological side; some others have worked on other 
aspects of the North; all of which has contributed to the 
knowledge of all Canadians of this vast part of our country and 
has made the University of Saskatchewan a fitting centre for that 
study. 
 
Mr. Richter, I have not known. The simple recitation of why he 
is being awarded the honour says more than anything I could add, 
except that I want to express our admiration not only for the 
obvious courage, but for the very real resourcefulness which was 
displayed and which led to the saving of the life of Travis Reid. 
 
I join with the Premier and others in congratulating all of the 
award recipients this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: —  Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Cost of Advertising by SGI for 1985 
 

Mr. Shillington: —  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the minister responsible for SGI, and it has to do 
with this government’s spending priorities. This 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1147 
 

morning in Crown Corporations Committee of this legislature, 
you revealed that SGI spent just under $2.2 million on 
advertising in 1985. Mr. Minister, when your government is 
preaching restraint to everyone else in this province, can you 
explain why SGI felt it necessary to spend $2.2 million on 
advertising last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Speaker, I’d be pleased to respond to 
that. If the member would have been at the Crown Corporations 
Committee, he would have heard the explanation. In brief, part 
of the reasons for the expenditure of that amount was because in 
1985 there was significant expenditures for such programs as the 
Lights On For Life and the program of the rebate for good drivers 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  Mr. Minister, I had an opportunity to read 
the transcript and in fact it was the reading of that transcript that 
prompted these questions. Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, indeed we did. 
 
Mr. Minister, the figures you supplied earlier today show that in 
fact nearly 30 per cent of your total advertising budget last year 
went to the good driver bonus rebates. These rebates, Mr. 
Minister, were forced on you by the Public Utilities Review 
Commission because you had gouged drivers in their vehicle 
insurance in previous years. You spent nearly $600,000 
taxpayers’ money bragging about a decision which was forced 
on you reluctantly. 
 
Mr. Minister, when your government is cutting food subsidies for 
northern Saskatchewan families so they can’t put fresh food on 
the table, how do you justify spending $600,000 on such 
hypocritical and, I may say, dishonest advertising? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Speaker, if I could pick up on a few 
points made by the member for Regina Centre. Mr. Speaker, he 
says this government through SGI has been gouging the 
motorists. Mr. Speaker, it was the government of the opposition 
right now that gouged the motorists in this province. Rate 
increases in the neighbourhood of 20 per cent in 1980, 28 per 
cent in 1981; increasing the deductible from $200 to #350; 
compared with this government through SGI, basically 
decreasing the rates in four years. Mr. Speaker, as well, under 
this administration the benefits have accrued. For example, the 
amount of liability insurance that comes along with it has risen 
from $100,000 to $200,000. Mr. Speaker, I submit to you that it 
is extremely hypocritical for anybody from the NDP to ever make 
those kinds of statements. 
 
Some Hon. Members: —  Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: —  Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 
minister in charge of SGI. It appears that the Minister of Tourism 
in this legislature yesterday revealed that last year his department 
had spent $2.25 million on tourism advertising, and that much of 
that had been put through Dome Advertising. You admitted this 
morning that over 90 per cent of the $2.2 million that your 
corporation spent on advertising last year went to Dome 
Advertising, which is the PC’s advertising agency for election 
purposes.

The question which I ask you is this: was your campaign 
developed with the interest of taxpayers in mind, or was it 
developed with the interest of Dome Advertising in mind? And 
isn’t it reasonable to assume that when you’re spending over $2 
million, much more than a normal advertising budget, and 
putting it through Dome, isn’t it reasonable to assume that the 
interests of Dome Advertising in the Progressive Conservative 
Party at least played a part in the decisions which you made? 
 
Some Hon. Members: —  Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Speaker, in response — what was the 
main interest in the spending advertising dollars through SGI? — 
Mr. Speaker, we advertised the good drivers’ rebate program, 
which in fact gave them back money through SGI through their 
rate stabilization reserve to drivers in the province of 
Saskatchewan who had good driving records. And we advertised 
that, Mr. Speaker, because we think it is very important that 
drivers drive as safely as possible on our highways. And Mr. 
Speaker, I might also point out significant expenditures on the 
Lights On For Life program. 
 
And I might add here, Mr. Speaker, that I have had 
correspondence with the member for Regina North East, and all 
this morning throughout the Crown Corporations Committee on 
SGI. And Mr. Speaker, they always bring up: how much did it 
cost? Where did it go? Not once, not once has a member of the 
NDP ever asked: what are the results? Is there any reduction in 
traffic collisions out there? Is the public more aware of it? That’s 
what people out in Saskatchewan ask, but not the NDP. They 
don’t care about safety; we do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: —  Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: —  Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the 
minister. Was it the decision of your board or of Dome to decide 
that when the Lights On For Life campaign was on television, it 
ought to feature, first, the hon. member for Regina South, until it 
was clear that he was no longer going to stand; and then began to 
feature one Mr. Nicholson, who was widely reported to be a 
candidate for nomination for your party? 
 
What caused you to use those two people to advertise Lights On 
For Life? Couldn’t you find anybody else? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Speaker, what caused us to use these 
people on some of the advertisements . . . Mr. Speaker, the Lights 
On For Life safety program was introduced by this government 
through SGI. Mr. Speaker, when the program was introduced, the 
member for Regina South was the minister responsible and he 
was the minister who piloted this through; therefore I think a very 
good spokesman to go out in front of the public of Saskatchewan 
on behalf of SGI. 
 
And Mr. Nicholson, who you bring up, is head of the safety 
committee through the board of directors of SGI, and very much 
appropriate, I believe, in developing the program and, therefore, 
being a spokesman for the program. 
 
And let me reiterate once again, the purpose of the 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1148 
 

program is for safety, and I hope that is sinking in a little bit on 
the NDP benches. 
 
Some Hon. Members: —  Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: —  Final supplementary, Mr. Minister. Can 
you explain again why it was necessary to spend $600,000 to 
advertise the fact that you were sending out government cheques, 
cheques which you were required to send out by the Public 
Utilities Review Commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s the first time in 
the province of Saskatchewan, certainly within the last 15 years 
or so, that drivers in this province get rewarded for good driving 
records. 
 
Some Hon. Members: —  Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  And through the good driver rebate program, 
there were pamphlets put out with their cheques and their 
envelopes, and there was advertising programs. Because I think 
it is laudable, Mr. Speaker, that every driver in Saskatchewan 
should aim towards the best driving record possible, and if ever 
another program like this comes out, that they will get a rebate 
cheque. 
 
Some Hon. Members: —  Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —  Supplement to the minister, Mr. Speaker. 
I wonder if the minister could outline the procedure that went 
into choosing this ad agency. Was it done by a proposal or tender 
process? Can you tell us what the policy of the government is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Speaker, this has been covered in 
committee this morning. I made it quite clear that the process that 
has been followed is one that has been followed in this province 
of Saskatchewan for many, many years; one that has been 
followed by the NDP, whereas an agency of record is put in 
charge, and that is through the agency of record for 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance, is Dome. 
 

Tenders without Contract 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: —  Mr. Speaker, new question to the Premier, 
and it deals with another area of awarding contracts, and 
particularly contracts to Associated Business Consultants, which 
is owned by one Ron Ryan, a former employee of Dick Collver’s 
in the PC Party. 
 
And I wonder whether the Premier can confirm that in recent 
months the company owned by Ron Ryan has been awarded first, 
an $85,000-a-year contract, without tender, by the Department of 
Supply and Services to distribute government brochures and 
other propaganda in Saskatchewan grocery stores and shopping 
malls; and secondly, awarded an $11,000 contract without tender 
by your office to compile a report on NDP convention resolutions 
at taxpayers’ expense, and a $10,000 contract without tender by 
the Department of Tourism and Small Business to do something 
called a summer monitor; and finally, award a $20,000 contract 
without tender by the Department of Tourism and Small Business 
to provide management advice to businesses in Kipling.

I wonder, Mr. Premier, can you confirm this list, and do you 
know any other government contracts awarded to this company 
without a tendering process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: —  Mr. Speaker, I can’t confirm the list but I 
can say, Mr. Speaker, that certainly from time to time in this 
administration, and in the previous administration, there are 
contracts that go out to people in the private sector, and certainly 
they have taken place without tender if they’re small contracts 
and those that are designed to do specific things. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will gladly get the information. I don’t have it 
with me, but I will respond when I have a chance to look at the 
numbers. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: —  While you’re taking notice of that 
question, I wonder whether you would provide the Assembly 
with the guide-lines, when it comes to tendering to 
small-business people contracts such as the ones we have 
mentioned here, because many small-business people in the 
province are saying very clearly, there’s only one way to get a 
contract from this government, Mr. Speaker, and that’s to buy a 
PC membership. 
 
And I wonder whether you could report back and tell us what 
your policy is when it comes to tendering, or the lack of tendering 
contracts to small-business people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: —  Well, Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite 
wants to get into a partisan argument about contracting, we can 
get into a partisan argument. I can bring to the list here, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: —  Order, please. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: —  Mr. Speaker, in this province for years 
Service printers received contracts without tendering. In this 
province for years, people like Roy Atkinson would receive 
money without tendering — large sums of money, Mr. Speaker. 
From time to time the previous administration had contracts with 
individuals without tendering. 
 
Now in the province of Saskatchewan, most of small business 
supports our government, virtually all of them have a PC 
membership, and virtually all of them, Mr. Speaker, may get an 
opportunity for contracts because they’re interested in the kinds 
of things that we’re doing. We’re building projects; we’re 
creating economic activity; we’re head and shoulders against the 
NDP in terms of economic activity and projects like paper-mills 
and bacon plants, processing fertilizer and everything else. Mr. 
Speaker, they’re against them. 
 
So the Government of Saskatchewan deals with the private 
sector. And they know how to deal with them very well, Mr. 
Speaker, and they support the kinds of things that they see here. 
That’s why they booted the guys out over there. 
 

Hiring of Private Consultant 
 

Mr. Engel: —  I have a new question for the Premier in the 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1149 
 

absence of the Minister of Tourism. 
 
At a time when your government is running a $2 billion deficit 
and has already hit hard-pressed Saskatchewan taxpayers with 
the biggest tax increases in our history, people want to feel that 
you are spending their money efficiently and effectively, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
Can you tell, or can you confirm, and explain why you had the 
Department of Tourism pay out a private consultant more than 
$7,000 of our money to prepare something called a “dude ranch 
opportunity profile”? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: —  Mr. Speaker, with respect to spending 
money on tourism . . . Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the young 
people in the legislature would like to listen to the response. 
Okay. So if the members opposite — would you like to listen? 
 
Mr. Speaker, listen to them holler. I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, 
and they’re afraid to listen. The whole public, all of 
Saskatchewan, can listen to the member from Quill Lakes holler 
from his seat, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: —  Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: —  Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite will 
be quiet enough for a minute, I will give them the answer. Okay, 
the answer, Mr. Speaker, with respect to advertising tourism, Mr. 
Speaker, is extremely important because it’s creating economic 
activity in the province of Saskatchewan. We are creating jobs in 
an industry that’s growing very rapidly across North America, 
and Saskatchewan is going to get its share. 
 
Under the previous administration, Saskatchewan was the best 
kept secret in North America. Nobody wanted to come here; 
everybody was leaving the province of Saskatchewan. We are 
advertising, Mr. Speaker, to encourage folks to come here, 
whether it’s Americans or Japanese, or others. They want to 
come to ranches; they want to come to duck hunting excursions. 
They want to go fishing up North. They want to go sailing in 
Lake Diefenbaker. And all these packages are done in other 
provinces. They weren’t done under the previous administration. 
The tourism industry here endorses the kinds of things we’re 
doing to create that awareness of Saskatchewan for people all 
over North America, and indeed those coming to Expo, Mr. 
Speaker. To give you a perfect example, there’s one NDP 
administration in this country, Mr. Speaker, and they don’t even 
have an exhibit at Expo because they don’t know about tourism 
and they don’t know about marketing . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: —  Order. Supplementary. 
 
Mr. Engel: —  Mr. Premier, you cam to office claiming that you 
were going to cut the cost of government and get government out 
of people’s lives. Instead the government has increased its 
spending by 45 per cent, and you assume that private investors 
are not even capable of doing their own market research to decide 
where they’re going to build a dude ranch. Can you explain why 
the taxpayers should be shelling out $7,000 for this kind of 
market research rather than the private investors who, you say, 
could handle that kind of a project?

Hon. Mr. Devine: —  It’s co-operation. The private sector, Mr. 
Speaker, wants to co-operate with government, work hand in 
hand to build the tourism industry, to build projects, to build 
fertilizer plants, to build bacon processing, to build all kinds of 
things here, Mr. Speaker. It’s the co-operation; it’s one of 
attitude. 
 
In the province of Saskatchewan under this administration, the 
private sector feels comfortable in co-operating in building in the 
province. They don’t want to see all the tourism go to Alberta. 
They don’t want to see all the tourism go to British Columbia. 
They want to see it coming to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
You don’t understand that. But I’ll tell you, an awful lot of people 
do, and they know that the fastest growing, renewable industry 
in the province of Saskatchewan is tourism — a great future for 
our young people. The young people in this gallery today, Mr. 
Speaker, on both sides of the House, want jobs. They want jobs, 
and they want opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: —  Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: —  Mr. Speaker, many of those jobs are 
coming in tourism, and if we can encourage tourism in 
co-operation with the private sector, you’re going to see more 
opportunities for young people here than you would have if we 
hadn’t have done it and, Mr. Speaker, it shows that we are in the 
forefront. For the first time in decades, Mr. Speaker, this province 
will be in the forefront, creating opportunities, and particularly 
opportunities for young people in a brand-new industry, in a 
growth industry — tourism. 
 
Some Hon. Members: —  Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: —  Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Two of your 
cabinet ministers are living in dude ranches in Alberta — two of 
them. And in the documents that you tabled, or were tabled by 
your minister, it says: the dude ranch opportunity profile, the 
purpose is to access the feasibility of dude ranches in 
Saskatchewan; amount $7,000 and 1,100 was spent this year, and 
5,900 last year. 
 
My question is: these documents describe the purpose of the 
contract, to access the feasibility of dude ranches in 
Saskatchewan. Why were Saskatchewan taxpayers called upon 
to pay the shot rather than a private investor who might be 
interested in the future of dude ranches? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: —  Mr. Speaker, if you want to initiate some 
programs . . . Let me give you an example. We have a new 
company starting up in Saskatchewan, in Regina, called 
Supercart International. That company was started with the help 
of government working hand in hand to create a brand-new 
project and a brand-new plant and manufacturing here in the 
province. As a result of that, Mr. Speaker, we can see the fruits, 
the benefits of the government working with the private sector, 
hand in hand, in terms of industrial incentive programs, in terms 
of investment, in terms of research, and putting a package 
together with venture capital. So, Mr. Speaker, as a matter of fact 
we can have a brand-new company here. 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1150 
 

A small investment, Mr. Speaker, in tourism now might lead to 
millions and millions of dollars being invested, because they say 
they’re aware of the province of Saskatchewan, and they know 
what kind of economic activity can take place here, because the 
government is behind business — behind business, not against it. 
 
It’s just the opposite, Mr. Speaker. The NDP are against business. 
This government supports small business in working together to 
create new opportunities, particularly in tourism and many other 
things that are happening now in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: —  Hear, hear! 
 

Air Travel — Frequent Flyer Plans 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, on May 6th the member 
for Quill Lakes asked a question, of which I took notice. The 
question was as it relates to Agdevco and the Air Canada Aero 
Plan. 
 
The member for Quill Lakes alleges that according to Public 
Accounts, Mr. Speaker, that this government spent $1.1 million 
on Air Canada last year. And I accept that; I don’t quarrel with 
that at all. I think he can likely read Public Accounts, and I accept 
that he did that. I should point out that that compares to $1.1 
million spent in 1981 and ’82 on Air Canada by the previous 
administration. I just point out that. 
 
But the question quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, quite specifically: 
was the Aero Plan associated with air travel, the Aero Plan of Air 
Canada, and were there any employees of Agdevco that belonged 
to that plan; what was the policy of this government and Agdevco 
as it relates to benefits that accrue from those kinds of plans; and 
were there any personal benefits taken from the accrual of those 
benefits to those plans? 
 
Now that he knows what the question is, I’ll give him the answer, 
Mr. Speaker. The answer, Mr. Speaker, is that there are four 
people at Agdevco who belong to the Air Canada Aero Plan. 
They are the president, they are the vice-president of 
international services, and they are the manager of livestock and 
livestock products, and they are Karen English, project 
administration who, by the way, has just joined in the last couple 
of days. 
 
Now have any awards been taken by any of these members? In 
the case of Karen English, the answer is no. All of the benefits 
. . . I will get to that part later. In the case of the manager of 
livestock and livestock products, the answer is no. In the case of 
the vice-president, international services division, the answer is 
no. In the case of the president, the answer is as follows: on June 
1985, at the invitation of the Bulgarian government, Mr. Wells, 
and the delegation that included the then minister of Agriculture, 
went to Bulgaria . . . I would point out that in the last four years 
we have sold $4.5 million worth of cattle to Bulgaria. But in any 
event, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Wells, in fact, did take his wife on that 
trip. He did take his wife on that trip. He used the benefits that 
had accrued to him under the aero plan to partially pay for his 
wife’s airfare.

Mr. Speaker, he, at that time I believe, did it in all innocence 
because he was not aware of the policy that existed at that time. 
He has, however, Mr. Speaker, immediately upon learning of the 
policy that shows that all benefits of these plans accrued to the 
government or the corporation, reimbursed the corporation. Mr. 
Speaker, those are the only members of aero plan at Agdevco 
(agricultural development corporation) and that is the only 
benefit that has been used for any purpose except to the benefit 
of the corporation, and that has been reimbursed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Koskie: —  I understand that the minister has new 
information from what he had the other day. But I want to ask 
you, Mr. Minister, if you would in fact, since you said that there 
is a government policy in respect to it, whether or not you would 
be prepared to indicate whether it’s in writing, and would you be 
prepared to file the policy in respect to this with the legislature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: —  I’m sure the policy is written — well, 
as a matter of fact I’m very sure it’s written, and I can read it into 
the record. I can read it into the record. And it reads as follows: 
 

The use of flights paid for by government for credits can 
only be permitted if the government is the direct beneficiary 
of any travel rewards. Benefits to the government would . . . 

 
That’s it. The benefit of any travel plan cannot be beneficial to 
the individual, but only to the Government of Saskatchewan. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if reading it into the record isn’t good enough, 
I’d be more than glad to provide the hon. member from Quill 
Lakes with a written copy, and perhaps he can find one of his 
colleagues that could read it to him. 
 
Mr. Speaker: —  Order, order. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

Mr. Speaker: —  Before orders of the day, I would like to lay 
on the Table and annual report of the Commonwealth 
Parliamentary Association, Saskatchewan branch. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 34 — An Act to amend The Highways and 
Transportation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: —  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. By 
way of introduction, it does give me a great deal of pleasure to 
speak to the amendments now before this Assembly regarding 
The Highways and Transportation Act. In very simple terms, Mr. 
Speaker, these amendments establish the legal authority for the 
Minister of Highways and Transportation to allow business and 
community signing adjacent to a provincial highway. 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1151 
 

This authority, Mr. Speaker, is within reason in regards to both 
safety and visual appeal, and the intent and the integrity of this 
legislation as it now stands will remain intact. 
 
What we are really doing, Mr. Speaker, is responding to a 
relatively new trend that has developed in recent years. In the 
past, Mr. Speaker, a number of years ago, signing adjacent to a 
provincial highway was very, very limited. Businesses and 
community signing for goods and service was restricted to urban 
limits only. 
 
But as you know, Mr. Speaker, there has been a change in 
direction and a change in philosophy in our province. There is a 
new climate in this province’s small business sector and rural 
communities. And for the purpose of this legislation, that new 
climate has resulted in a need for greater expression. Small 
businesses located within our rural communities want to extend 
their invitation to do business. Rural centres want to promote 
their events and express their various community attributes in a 
more direct manner. As government, we have noticed this trend 
and now we are taking the appropriate action. 
 
(1445) 
 
I would like to acknowledge the efforts of my colleague, the 
Minister of Tourism and Small Business. He has assisted in 
bringing to focus the desires of our small business sector and 
rural communities on this matter. Consequently officials from 
my department and his met with community representatives to 
develop appropriate signing options. 
 
Needless to say, Mr. Speaker, the amendments to the Act will 
allow this government to implement a new policy regarding 
highway signing. And that policy will satisfy the wishes and the 
desires of hundreds of small-business people and rural 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the past this government has responded to the 
special signing needs of its citizens. Last year amendments were 
introduced that provided directional highway signing for rural 
businesses located a distance from a provincial highway. This 
year, Mr. Speaker, we are now responding to the highway signing 
needs of businesses and activities located within corporate limits. 
In effect, Mr. Speaker, these amendments will allow permits to 
be issued to allow advertising signs to be erected along a 
provincial highway within the controls established by regulation 
and by policy. 
 
I want to assure the members that regulations and policies will 
ensure that both aesthetics and safety are retained, while still 
allowing in the adjacent communities to make the highway user 
more aware of services available in that town. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that concludes my remarks to you today, and I do 
look very much forward to a more detailed discussion during 
committee of the whole. 
 
Mr. Lusney: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I listened to the minister’s 
comments with some interest, and I’d have to say that it appears 
that they spent a lot more money on signs and advertising than 
they have on highways. I

would like to, however, have the opportunity to review the 
minister’s comments in second reading. I therefore beg leave to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mrs. Smith that Bill No. 22 — An Act to 
amend The Education Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: —  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I indicated 
when the minister introduced this Bill in second reading, I 
wanted to take some time and consider the remarks that the 
minister had made, as well as consult some other people. I have 
had an opportunity to do both of those, and therefore I’m 
prepared to make just a few comments on the Bill and then have 
the minister conclude debate if she so wishes. 
 
First of all, Mr. Minister, I have looked at section 7(2) of the Act 
which is being repealed, and I see no great difficulty in that 
amendment. The Act is being repealed because . . . It seems to 
me that it could have very well have been put into The 
Department of Education Act initially when there was a 
consolidation of education legislation several years ago. So I 
think that I would say that that probably is a good move and 
certainly has not raised any questions in my mind. 
 
The other portion of the Bill deals with rural school divisions. 
And as you know, Mr. Speaker, having been involved with 
school board work, that school divisions are divided into school 
districts, each of which has a board of trustees. And as I 
understand it, this section, the amendment here is a provision . . . 
Being amended provides for matters related to the holding of a 
first election after a school district is established, and the 
appointment of a returning officer therefore seems necessary. 
And I think it is clear from, as I understand the Bill, and from the 
few comments that the minister made, that in a discussion on the 
principle of the Bill that that is something that I think is 
necessary. 
 
I do have some concerns about another portion of the Bill. And 
if I just may refer to the section, so that I . . . because I’m going 
to ask the minister to . . . I’m not going to talk about the section 
itself, but simply because I’m going to ask the minister if she 
would, in her remarks, clarify some of the questions that I’m 
going to ask. 
 
What the Bill does, Mr. Speaker, is change a provision in which 
parents who had students in a school below the age of 18, who 
could get the school records at request according to school board 
policy, as established by the school division board. What the 
amendment does, Mr. Speaker, is change that now, so that 
parents or guardians . . . The reference to the age of 18 is 
removed, and the amendment now will say that parents or 
guardians of a student would be able to make a request to get and 
see the record of the student. 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1152 
 

Now neither the explanatory notes nor the minister in her 
comments explained what it is that has brought about the need 
for this amendment. If I recall, Mr. Speaker, the minister did say 
that this phrase has not been a problem, referring to the way that 
the legislation is presently written. If there is not a problem, and 
there has not been the problem, I hope that the minister will, in 
her closing remarks or, if not then, then during committee, 
explain why it is therefore necessary to have this amendment 
brought in. 
 
One of the things that I think is significant here, Mr. Speaker, in 
this Bill is that it talks of the pupil as a dependent. That leads me 
to understand — and if I’m wrong, I would appreciate being 
corrected — that if I had a nephew or a niece living with me, 
going to school, having been out of school for several years and 
therefore maybe 21, 22, or 23 years of age, and if I was putting 
up the board and room, which therefore I suppose would make 
that person dependent on me and my wife or our family, that I 
would be able to have access to that person’s records from the 
school if this amendment is passed. 
 
Now I’m not sure whether I want to say that I’m in favour of it 
or against it because I would really want to know what the 
explanation of “dependent” is in this kind of a case. The thing 
that was lacking, I think, in the explanatory notes and in the 
minister’s remarks is that, has the department — and I would like 
the minister to consider this and maybe respond to it — has the 
department and the minister considered all of the possible 
implications of this new amendment and this lack of a definition 
of what a dependent is? 
 
I think it’s obvious, although I know that in committee of the 
whole last year, or the year before, this issue was raised. I 
understand that. But I think that there are some rather broad 
implications here that need to be considered, and certainly during 
committee we are going to want to consider them with great care. 
 
But I really think that maybe not enough thought has gone into 
the preparation of this amendment when one asks the question 
which I have asked: one, what is the definition of a dependent or 
what is the definition of a dependent going to be? I don’t see it in 
the amendment. 
 
And two, does this mean that anyone who may be living with 
anyone else, regardless of age — because the references to the 18 
years of age has been removed — will, whoever he or she lives 
with, have access to that person’s record? Because without a 
definition of dependent, I think that possibility is there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other amendment that is in the Bill, which the 
minister explained, deals with equalized assessment. And I think 
one of the things that is not clear in the legislation — and I will 
want the minister to respond, if not in the closing of the debate, 
then certainly when we get to the committee — is: what is meant 
by the idea of a stage, when she refers to “staged” introduction 
of reassessment? 
 
There is no explanation in the remarks of the minister or in the 
explanatory notes, nor in the Bill. What is meant by “staged” 
introduction of reassessment in a number of

rural municipalities? That is, I think, needs some explanation. 
And I’m sure than not only I, but people who might be affected, 
will have some interest in it. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the idea that a school board or school 
division board should be able to amend a by-law by resolution 
strikes me as really, I think, putting the whole concept and the 
process of how you go about passing a resolution and giving the 
taxpayer an opportunity to have some say in it . . . the idea that a 
resolution may be able to therefore amend the by-law, I think is 
quite questionable, and the proposal that the minister has put 
forward to do away with the concept that you can change a 
by-law by simple passing of a resolution, I think is a good 
amendment. I think we certainly . . . I have no concerns about 
that. I and my colleagues will welcome it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is all I want to say on this particular Bill. I know 
there is another one that comes along with it, and I will have said 
all of my comments in this case, and I shall await both the 
concluding remarks of the minister and the committee when we 
can pursue the issues that are here at greater depth. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: —  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
from Regina North East raises some very good questions today, 
and as committee of the whole is the time to get into a great deal 
of detail and specifics, I would gladly have that information 
available at that point in time. 
 
Perhaps, though, a few remarks on two of the issues that he has 
raised. Section 146 of the Act, in dealing with the year — the 
18-year-olds — it is my understanding that when we had an 
amendment before this House last year, it was considered 
non-controversial and, therefore, went to the committee which is 
also made up of the members of the opposition. 
 
At that time, the committee asked the department to monitor and 
reconsider the phrase that we had in there at the time which was: 
the pupil “is 18 years of age, or less, and . . .” Now that phrase, 
Mr. Speaker, has not created any problems that we could see with 
boards of education, nor with the department. And we suggested 
that it neither added nor did it detract from the intent of the 
section. 
 
And the intent was that the key element is whether or not the 
pupil is dependent on the parent or guardian, not whether the 
pupil was of 18 years or less. And, of course, the member will be 
well aware that 21 years is also covered in legislation as to the 
age category that a board of education must be responsible for 
educating, if that’s what the 20- or 21-year-old within the 
divisional boundaries insists upon. 
 
However, as I said earlier, some of the questions that he has 
raised are very good questions, and I will make sure that we have 
the answers when we get into committee of the whole. 
 
Just on the issue of section 279, Mr. Speaker, and reassessment, 
it is my understanding, for the benefit of the member of Regina 
North East, that assessment has normally been on a 10-year 
cycle, and that, in fact, 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1153 
 

councils and R.M.s have had the opportunity to phase in over that 
period. For example, the city of Saskatoon, I believe, chose to do 
a three-year phase-in. Well this year, Mr. Speaker, is the last year 
of the reassessment, and some have not even began the phase-in. 
And what this does is allow a phase-in for next year, which many 
of them have already had the opportunity to do. It’s nothing more 
than that. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1500) 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Recess to Greet Distinguished Guests 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: —  Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 
I move, seconded by the member for Kindersley: 
 

That this Assembly do now recess for 30 minutes to greet 
our distinguished guests, the recipients of the national 
honours. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 3:30 p.m. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mrs. Smith that Bill No. 23 — An Act to 
amend The Department of Education Act, 1983 by now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: —  Thank you for waiting, Mr. Speaker. I just 
want to simply say that the amendments in this Bill are 
consequential to the previous one, as I indicated with I spoke on 
that, so I will not repeat what I have already said. They’re 
necessary because of the amendments to section 7(2), in 
particular, in the previous Bill, so I simply will indicate that we 
are quite satisfied with the amendments because they’re simply 
consequential. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Culture and Recreation 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 7 
 

Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’d 
like to introduce the deputy minister for Culture and Recreation, 
Mr. Bill Clarke, seated to my immediate left. Behind us we have 
our two assistant deputy ministers: Mr. Keith Rogers, in charge 
of programming; and Mr. Dave Babiuk, in charge of operations 
for our Department of Culture and Recreation.

Item 1 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  Mr. Minister, I wonder if you’d begin by 
giving me the - you may supply this in writing if you like — the 
names, salaries of your personal staff. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Chairman, we have that for the member. 
We’re just going to get a copy of it and we’ll sent it over to you 
shortly. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  I gather, Mr. Minister, that’s something 
you’re going to photocopy and send over as soon as you can 
photocopy it. I see the minister nodding his head. I’ll leave it at 
that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would give us the details of your 
out-of-province trips in the last fiscal year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Chairman, I’m sending a copy of the 
information required over to the member right now. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  Did you say that you’re supplying this, Mr. 
Minister? I’m sorry. I didn’t hear you for the interference, for the 
static. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Yes, Mr. Chairman, I did, to his last 
question. I sent over the information he asked for, and I have the 
information from his first question in front of me right now that 
I could send over. 
 
Mr. Chairman: —  Order. Order, please. Go ahead. Why don’t 
you just let him ask his question. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  Do I take it, Mr. Minister, the first two 
named, they’re executive assistants; the last two names are 
secretarial staff? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Chairman, yes, that’s the case just as last 
year. They are all classified as ministerial assistants, but the way 
we’re most familiar with it, the first two names are executive 
assistants, if you wish; the second two names are secretarial staff. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  Were any of these individuals awarded any 
increase in pay during the last 12 months for any reason? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Chairman, to make sure we have the 
information exact, I will take notice of that and make sure. My 
understanding is that it’s just the regular increments that have 
accrued. There was no percentage increase, but I will take notice 
of that and come back to the member with the exact information. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  Thank you very much. Mr. Minister, some 
time ago you announced, if I recall correctly, some new plans, 
I’ll put it that way, for the MacKenzie Art Gallery. Could you 
give me the current status of that? I may say by say of 
background, it wasn’t at all obvious what the status was when 
you made the announcement. It was not obvious to what extent 
the proposal depended upon federal government financing and it 
wasn’t obvious to what extent, obviously, till now that you have 
it in place. So I ask you for an update on that. 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1154 
 

Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Chairman, I’ll give you the information. 
I’m not exactly sure what you’re getting at. Is it the financial 
contributions of each of the parties involved? If that’s the case, 
when the announcement was made, I’ll give that to you here. 
 
The federal government . . . Mr. Chairman, if the members 
opposite would keep it down a little bit so the member can hear 
the answer. The federal government is contributing to this project 
$2 million; the city of Regina, 1.05 million; the provincial 
government for their share of the natural history museum, 4.5; 
and for the provincial government’s share for the Norman 
MacKenzie Art Gallery, 3 million; for a total provincial 
contribution of 7.5 million. And also the friends of the 
MacKenzie, or their fund raising, will be raising $2 million. 
That’s the status as it stands. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  I’m having some difficulty, Mr. Minister, 
hearing you. You’re dropping your voice in the beginning, in the 
middle, and at the end. I want it known that the chatter which 
surrounds me has nothing to do with my inability to hear your 
answers. 
 
Could I, Mr. Minister . . . Could you tell me what the federal 
government’s portion of the funding is again. You may have said 
it; I couldn’t hear you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure if my voice was 
dropping or if the voices of some his neighbours there were 
raising. The federal government contribution was $2 million. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  And that is in place, is it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  That is in place and announced. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  Mr. Minister, when do you expect 
construction of this to start? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Chairman, according to the plans that 
have been developed through all parties concerned, and I’m 
reading from the schedule that was submitted at the 
announcement of the project, construction is scheduled to start in 
August of 1987. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  And what do you anticipate as the 
completion date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  The completion date here is listed as June 
1989. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  Mr. Minister, I want to move on to the item 
of funding of the arts. This comes about from your department. 
Funding for the arts comes through a number of spigots, if you 
like, from your department. But by fair, I think, the most 
important to the arts community is the Arts Board itself. 
 
I have, Mr. Minister, estimates for the fiscal year ended March 
31, 1983. Those are fond memories for your government. They 
were the first year you were in office and your incompetency in 
a number of areas had not yet been as fully demonstrated as it has 
now. 
 
I also have the estimates for this year. I compare the two

figures. Mr. Minister, there has been a 14 per cent increase in 
funding to the Arts Board over the four years, now going on five, 
at a time when there’s been 27 per cent inflation, at a time when 
your government’s revenues have increased by 32 per cent and 
your expenditures have increased by 33 per cent. 
 
Put very plainly, Mr. Minister, the arts have not got their share of 
the bounty of this province, such as it is. Mr. Minister, the Arts 
Board were, I think, critical — I think that’s not putting it too 
strongly — of the level of funding which was provided under the 
former administration. Their situation has actually deteriorated 
in the four years you’ve been in office. You have . . . Their 
funding has dropped by 18 per cent, I suppose, in real terms. 
 
That’s a very significant drop to a group for which there was no 
fat. Artists have one of the lower standards of living of any 
occupational group in Canada. We pay any number of groups — 
no doubt merited — a great deal more than we pay artists. And I 
think it’s fair to say that the talent needed by artists is a good deal 
more. 
 
Let me give you an example. We pay zoo keepers about twice, 
on the average, what we pay artists. I’ve got nothing against zoo 
keepers; they no doubt perform an important role. And I’m not 
being critical of . . . Well I leave aside the role of the whip in 
government caucus. He no doubt qualifies for the same 
occupation — that of a zoo keeper. But I wasn’t particularly 
thinking of him. 
 
I was addressing my concerns to those who harbour animals 
which there’s some hope of taming; not the whip of government 
caucus. Mr. Minister, the issue is not your government caucus, 
the issue which I want you to deal with is the funding to the Arts 
Board. 
 
(1545) 
 
In real terms it has dropped very substantially and, Mr. Minister, 
I want to know why you think it is that the artistic world should 
be singled out to make a contribution to your government’s 
extravagance in other areas when others, such as members of 
Executive Council, are not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Chairman, let me respond to that by 
saying that indeed the funding for the arts and the cultural 
activities that have gone on in the province of Saskatchewan has 
increased rather dramatically in the three or four years since we 
have been government. 
 
But to address the questions more succinctly on the point that the 
member raises to do with the Saskatchewan Arts Board; he 
quotes a figure of 15 per cent. But I’d like to indicate, Mr. 
Chairman, that there has been a lot of consultation go on between 
our Department of Culture and Recreation, between the 
Saskatchewan Council of Cultural Organizations and the 
professional arts community through their representatives on the 
arts alliance. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, even though it shows up in the blue book this 
year as expenditure, I believe $2.153 million . . . In fact through 
these consultations and in conjunction with the Saskatchewan 
Council of Cultural Organizations 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1155 
 

which received the lottery money in the province of 
Saskatchewan, that through these consultations agreements have 
been worked out within this process that indeed some moneys 
from the lotteries are going to the Arts Board, and it’s an 
arrangement that has been worked out for the Summer School of 
the Arts out in Fort San. So, in fact, if you add to last year’s figure 
an amount of $250,000 to what is in the blue book and then for 
the coming year, this year, the 2.153, if you would add $350,000 
to that, that is really the contribution that is going into the Arts 
Board this year. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  I’m going to get those figures from you 
more specifically later on today or tomorrow or at some time? 
 
Let me tell you, Mr. Minister, that even if your figures are 
accurate, the increase to the arts is still pathetic. I said 14 per cent. 
I’d opened the books and done the calculation mentally, quickly, 
and I made it in error. I was unduly generous to your government. 
The increase in the figure from the first year you were in office 
to your fourth year is not 15 per cent but it’s 7 per cent. If you 
add in the figures — and I’m going to get to that in a moment — 
if you add in the sums you suggested, you still just get up to about 
14 per cent. So in real dollars the arts community are getting 
along with a lot less now than they were. So I ask you, Mr. 
Minister, to address yourself to the question I asked, that is, why 
you think it is that the arts community should be singled out for 
treatment which you haven’t accorded the government generally. 
 
Let me remind you again, your government spending during the 
period of time you have been in office has gone up by 33 per 
cent; your revenues have gone up by 32 per cent. But you have 
increased the funding to the Arts Board by a niggardly 7 per cent. 
I ask you to address yourself to that discrepancy, Mr. Minister, 
and stop wandering off on a whole lot of other areas which are 
only remotely related. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Chairman, I don’t think that’s really a 
fair comment to say that I was wandering off. Indeed, it is 
addressing the very question that he has asked, that over the past 
few years there has been a number of consultations that have 
gone on to parties interested in this specific area of culture and 
the arts in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think if you look at the amount that is being expended on 
cultural spending, it is really rather phenomenal. The member 
keeps bringing out just one area, as in the Arts Board, and I’ve 
explained that indeed that figure should be inflated by $350,000 
this year. And indeed the Arts Board, we’re in consultation with 
the Arts Board. And if the members opposite would remember 
that the Arts Board is an arm’s length organization from 
government, and that indeed they do with the money, if you wish, 
as they wish. So indeed we don’t have any direct say in how their 
money is expended, rather we give them the total blanket amount, 
and it is up to that Arts Board to pay it. 
 
And as I explained earlier, in the last couple of years we’ve had 
extensive consultation with the groups concerned. And, Mr. 
Chairman, I’m very proud to say

that, indeed, on the amateur side of culture in the province of 
Saskatchewan, through the Saskatchewan Council of Cultural 
Organizations, they’ve been able to sit down and recognize, 
along with the professional artists, that there is some problem, 
and they have bent over backwards to help. 
 
And if we go back in history . . . and I’m sure the member 
opposite will remember that in approximately 1982, I believe it 
was, that when the crisis was hitting under the former 
administration, a choice was made by the professional artists in 
the province of Saskatchewan, and their choice was between 
going to lottery revenues or going to the Arts Board. And they 
chose the Arts Board, and it worked out quite well. 
 
But as we’re all aware right now, lottery revenues are increasing, 
and therefore to the benefit of the amateur cultural organizations 
and professional artists, even though they’ve had increases of not 
being as great. So therefore the importance that I believe, that the 
two groups can consult with each other and try to alleviate the 
situation for the betterment of the whole cultural and arts scene 
in our province. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  Mr. Minister, I wonder if you’re going to 
deal with the question I raised. I’m delighted to know you’ve 
been consulting, Mr. Minister. That’s really heart-warming. I’d 
be interested in your views, though, on the funding. There’s no 
question, and I gather you’re not disputing it, but in absolute 
terms, even assuming you can add in the extra funds from the 
lottery, there’s no question that in absolute dollars, in constant 
dollars, you’re funding has dropped. Would you please address 
yourself to that issue and stop avoiding the subject by talking 
about a whole lot of things which are only marginally related. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Chairman, I don’t think we should be 
narrowed down too much when we look at arts spending or 
cultural spending throughout the province, as I’ve alluded to. The 
member looks at figures, which are just that — moneys expended 
by the Government of Saskatchewan to the Arts Board. I’ve 
indicated that in fact those figures are higher because of the 
lottery funds that are coming over to it. 
 
But I think we have to look at the whole cultural scene in the 
province of Saskatchewan as it relates to the arts and cultural 
expenditures, and you know there’s been numerous projects that 
have been funded. One of which is a benefit to the professional 
artist is what’s going on now out in Vancouver — it’s called 
Expo ’86 — where a million dollars is being provided by this 
government for performers to go out and show their wares to the 
whole world. So I think it’s rather narrow to look at it just in the 
one scope of the Arts Board. 
 
And I look down here at cultural spending: 1982-83, of 
approximately $8.8 million; 1983-84 of $12.5 million; 1984-85, 
$17.2 million; 1985-86, estimated at $20.2 million; and estimated 
for 1986-87, another $13.54 million. And the reason for the . . . 
(inaudible) . . . in there of course was the heritage year, which 
was in 1985, and a few other items. But indeed when you look at 
cultural funding across the province of Saskatchewan, which 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1156 
 

 includes funding to the Arts Board and funding to professional 
arts, has indeed fared out very well. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  Mr. Minister, would you send me, just so 
we can all use the same figures, would you send me the detail of 
what you believe has been provided to the client groups of the 
Arts Board through the lottery foundation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Chairman, if the member is asking how 
much went from the lottery to the client groups, we don’t have 
that information specifically with us right now, and we’d have to 
send that over later. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  When will you be able to supply that to me, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Chairman, I’m informed that the annual 
meeting for the lottery groups is going on right now, or will be 
coming up very shortly, and until that final meeting ratifies the 
actual expenditures going out there, that information will not be 
made public. But after that, when it is public, I will certainly see 
that member gets that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  Where did you derive the figures from you 
gave me a moment ago? You were using a figure of 300,000. 
What were you making public then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Chairman, I thought that was fairly 
clear. Those were a special arrangement that has been arrived at 
in the last two years, where the amateur cultural organizations 
who receive the lottery funds have entered into an agreement 
with the Arts Board for the operation of the Summer School of 
the Arts at Fort San, whereby they would split the operational 
administration costs out there, which last year amounted to 
$250,000, and this year to $350,000. And the effect that that has 
is that the Arts Board would not have to pay out that amount of 
money for the Summer School of the Arts, but rather could use 
it. 
 
And I am informed that they have used that for the specific area 
that I believe the member is getting at, and that is the funding of 
professional arts in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  Mr. Minister even with that included, the 
fact remains — to which you will not address yourself — the fact 
remains that in constant dollars you’re spending less now than 
you were then. You’re providing less money through the Arts 
Board. It is the Arts Board that provides funding to artistic groups 
in this province. And in constant dollars they’re getting less — a 
good deal less — in constant dollars they’re getting about 16 per 
cent less now than they were in 1982-83 when you first came into 
office. And that, Mr. Minister, simply won’t do. 
 
Why is it that your government feels that this is not a priority, 
that extravagant trips to China by the now Minister of Tourism 
and Renewable Resources is a priority, taking 11 people with 
him; that $2 million advertising to SGI is a priority; that another 
sum in excess of $2 million with Tourism and Renewable 
Resources is a priority? But the artistic community, through 
which this province and the people of this province attempt to 
come to terms with themselves and their environment and their 
society, why is it that the artists are not the priority that

self-serving government advertising and elaborate trips to China 
are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Chairman, I think the member is trying 
to compare apples and oranges, to a large degree, here. Indeed, 
funding has been increased to the professional arts, to the Arts 
Board in Saskatchewan over the past few years. And indeed, if 
the member wants to talk about priorities, and I think our Premier 
and many others have alluded to what the real priorities are — 
they’re agriculture, they’re job creation, they’re health, and 
they’re education. And the members can maybe dispute that. 
 
But I’ve also articulated that indeed the professional arts 
community has been receiving increases over the past few years, 
and now that there is a distinct willingness for all the groups 
involved to work together so that these problems can be 
addressed, rather than the way it was through the former 
administration where the only money they got was through the 
Arts Board. Now there are other avenues, and indeed it’s rather 
narrow to talk about culture in the province of Saskatchewan and 
keep it to just the Arts Board expenditures. 
 
(1600) 
 
Cultural activities are going on around us throughout the whole 
province, and indeed they’re enjoying, I think, increases in 
funding through the lotteries that are just really unsurpassed. And 
they’re putting them to very good use. They’re conducting 
activities; their organizations are flourishing all the way out the 
province, and that is really of benefit to all the communities, to 
the major centres and, as I’ve explained, it is also of benefit to 
the professional artists in our province. 
 
So I think when you look at other jurisdictions who some may 
have cut, others have frozen, indeed, if you look at the pure black 
and white, which the member just wants to do, there has been 
increases in the province of Saskatchewan. But as I have 
explained, those increases are really much higher, and I only 
allude to special projects such as the $350,000 that is coming 
over to the Arts Board this year, the $1 million that is going to 
fund Saskatchewan performers out in Expo ’86 this year. 
 
We look at the expenditures that have gone on for . . . You know, 
Western Development Museums. For the past few years there’s 
been a lot of money spent on culture under the broad text of 
culture in the province. I don’t think it’s really necessary to look 
at just one area, because it is much larger than that. 
 
And if we go by our consultative approach with the professional 
arts community, they seem to be rather happy. I think anybody 
would like to see more funding come. But I’m sure they would 
take quite a large bit of exception if they heard the example that 
the member for Regina Centre gave, of comparing Saskatchewan 
artists to those tending zoo. 
 
Indeed, Saskatchewan artists have a tremendous amount of pride, 
and they go out there and they expend their wares. They’re proud 
of it. And they’re not on a set wage, my friend, and the 
government does not pay them 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1157 
 

directly. Rather, the are out there for the benefit of their 
community, and the community supports them as well as through 
avenues such as the Arts Board. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  The minister knows very well I did not — 
I was not being in any sense derogatory to the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: —  Yes, you did. You were so. We’re gong 
to let them know. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  Well the member from . . . Trust the 
member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden to attempt to twist words out 
of their meaning, yelling from his seat, making no sense, and 
being, I might add, quite dishonest in the allegations he’s 
attempting to make. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you take out the $6 million which is now in your 
estimates for a culture and recreation facilities grant which 
wasn’t there in ’83-82; take out the $500,000 for the Young 
Canada Games; your department has received over the four years 
you’ve been in office — now going on five, to the chagrin of 
everyone — now into its fifth year, your department has gone a 
3 per cent increase in funding, a 3 per cent increase in funding. I 
have not gone through these things department by department, 
but I will bet . . . I would venture to say this is the lowest increase 
in government. 
 
I’m gong to get on to some of the other areas in due course, Mr. 
Minister. Nothing will hide the fact that your department is the 
forgotten child of the Conservative government. Your funding to 
the Arts Board — notwithstanding some changes which I want 
to get to in due course, in which you moved in some relatively 
high-profile supporters into that Arts Board — notwithstanding 
that, you gave them a 7 per cent increase. The figures which you 
allude to from the lottery are not a permanent program. And even 
if you add them in, it only comes to 12 per cent. Mr. Minister, 
you have frozen this department. 
 
There are other areas I want to get to afterwards, but I want to 
deal with the Arts Board. And I wish you’d deal with that and 
stop tripping off to Expo and repeating what a great job you’ve 
done in consulting. I may say, I don’t agree with that. I may say, 
I just do not agree with the success you claim in talking me into 
somnolence. 
 
It may have worked at one point in time. You may have been able 
to talk your way out of this freeze at one point in time. But my 
experience has been in dealing with the arts community, that after 
four years you’ve got to quite blaming it on somebody else. 
You’ve got to get out of the paralysis by analysis syndrome that 
you experienced during the first year, which some of your 
colleagues have shaken off but which you have not. You are still 
consulting them after four years, when the time for action is long 
since past. It is long since past. 
 
Mr. Minister, a 7 per cent increase in funding to the Arts Board 
over three years simply isn’t enough. The artists are saying that, 
and all the consulting you’re doing is wearing awful thin. They 
believe it’s time for some action. Goodness knows, you might get 
around to doing something in this department a month or two 
before an election. That might not be considered precipitous — 
to

finally getting around to doing something at what is not just the 
11th hour but the 11th hour and the 50th minute in the 11th hour. 
 
As my colleague from Regina North East said, the only 
significant change that anyone can see is that you changed the 
name. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would ask you to address yourself to the funding 
for the Arts Board, to the fact that it’s been a 7 per cent increase, 
and stop dealing with every other issue. I know you’d dearly like 
to talk about Expo or about your consulting or about anything 
else. Please address yourself to the Arts Board, just for a few 
minutes, and tell this Assembly why you think the artistic 
community is not deserving of the largess that so many others 
have received. 
 
And I will name some of the people who have done very well 
under this administration. The advertisers, not the least of it. So 
I ask you to address yourself to the arts community, and let’s get 
to Expo ’86 when the conversation naturally gets there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Well, Mr. Chairman, you know, we’ve gone 
around this already numerous times. The member makes specific 
reference to the arts community. I have explained, I think in some 
detail, that indeed the funding to the arts in the province of 
Saskatchewan is much larger than that one expenditure of $2.153 
million to the Saskatchewan Arts Board. And indeed that figure 
is higher through an agreement worked out with the cultural 
organizations. Add $350,000 if you want to look at it narrowly. 
 
And I think if you want to expand on that argument . . . I don’t 
know what kind of comments you’re looking for me to come up 
with unless you come up with some specifics. Name a group, 
name a series of groups, and what their concerns are. We go 
through out mail every day in my Department of Culture and 
Recreation. We have consultations with the Arts Board. My 
department people have consultations. We’re not aware of any 
tremendous, overpowering burden that is being placed out there. 
 
Rather, the community seems rather positive. Nobody’s going to 
say that everything is just great, but rather it’s adequate. Their 
needs are being looked after through the system we have set up 
through the Arts Board and through the lottery programming. 
 
And once again, when you’re looking at the arts community in 
the province of Saskatchewan, it is much larger than the figure 
of $2.153 million. Rather, it’s all the moneys that come in from 
lotteries, through our Department of Culture and Recreation, as 
well as through the Arts Board. And indeed the funding is there. 
And if the member wants to pursue this, then please bring up 
specific examples and we’ll address ourselves to it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  Well, I would be delighted to pursue this, 
Mr. Minister. You say that there is other funding available to the 
arts community; that has always been the case. I wonder if the 
minister would tell me when the SaskSport fund first began to 
give grants to people other 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1158 
 

than sports. You claim that they’re now getting money from the 
lottery fund. Would you tell me when artistic groups began to get 
money from the lottery fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Chairman, in response, when this 
agreement that lottery funds would be used for sport, culture, and 
recreational groups and the funds are split, as the member knows, 
50 per cent sport; 40 per cent culture and 10 per cent recreation; 
and indeed that started I believe in approximately 1972-1974. 
 
But I will point out, seeing that the member has brought it up, 
that the money has already been going there; that in 1982-83 the 
amount of money paid to cultural organizations from the lottery 
trust was $1.191 million. In 1986-87 it is estimated to be $4 
million, which I’m sure the member will even agree is a rather 
large increase. So when we’re looking at the cultural community 
as a whole, they are receiving quite a large amount of money. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  Has the formula changed since this 
government has taken office for division of the money between 
the various groups? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  No it hasn’t, Mr. Chairman. As I’ve just 
explained it is still 50-40-10; sport, cultural, recreation. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  But the government’s contribution to the 
lottery is not the government’s contribution to the arts. The 
lottery is a contribution which the artistic community get in this 
province and don’t in many others because of the foresight of a 
previous administration. If it had not been for the foresight of a 
previous administration, I doubt that this bunch of spendthrifts 
sitting opposite would have ever given those lottery funds away. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to talk not about the contribution of lotteries 
in this province; but I want to talk about the contribution of the 
government. The artistic community throughout time has never 
been entirely free-standing. They always depended upon patrons. 
That was true in ancient times in the royal courts; it was true in 
medieval times; and it’s true in modern times. 
 
In modern times in many countries it’s head offices, major 
industrial and commercial and business concerns which provide 
the funding. In this province for a variety of reasons, which I 
think a majority of people are anxious to get back to, the 
government and the Crown corporations comprise virtually the 
only large head offices we have. There are some exceptions, the 
wheat pool and so on, but they tend to be rare exceptions. And 
with this government in office, there’s getting to be fewer of them 
as Pioneer Trust and others disappear. 
 
Mr. Minister, there is a role for the government to play. It is a 
role which historically has always been played by someone in the 
position of the government. It was true in ancient times; it’s true 
in modern times. It’s just that in this province, the industrial and 
economic activity operates a bit differently than it does in some 
other parts of the world. So, Mr. Minister, I ask you to concern 
yourself with the government’s contribution to the arts. That is 
by and large through the Arts Board. 
 
Oh, there’s some exception. There’s grants, subvote

number 13: grants in support of the arts, multiculturalism, 
heritage, and museums. That, Mr. Minister, is down by 7 per 
cent. Let me restate that, Mr. Minister. The grants in support of 
the arts, multiculturalism, heritage, and museums in 1986-87 is 
only 71 per cent of what it was when we took office. It’s down 
very considerably. And not all of that money goes to the arts. 
Some of it, of course, goes to museums and multiculturalism. 
And I want to get to that subvote in due course, but some of that 
money goes to the arts. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want you to deal with the government’s 
contribution to the arts. It is down very considerably. 
 
Mr. Minister, you stated a moment ago that the Premier had said 
your priorities was agriculture, health, education, and I think you 
stopped there. Do I take it from that that cultural activities are not 
your government’s priority because the Premier didn’t mention 
those, and that’s why your department is, as I said, the forgotten 
child of the Conservative government? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Well, Mr. Chairman, we can go back and 
forth here. The member once again, to quote, says “cultural 
activity” in the province of Saskatchewan, which I say is much 
larger than what appears in that expenditure of $2.153 million 
through our department and through the lottery trust, which the 
member, as former minister of this department, should know full 
well that the government directs the lottery funds. They specify 
who gets what percentage, etc. He should know that. 
 
And indeed when we look at total cultural and arts expenditures, 
let me just go through this for the past four years: 1982-83, and 
I’ll give you a tip that these are the items that I have listed here: 
Arts Board, Centre of the Arts, Centennial Auditorium, Western 
Development Museum, Museum of Natural History; heritage 
conservation; cultural and multicultural support; grants to arts, 
multicultural heritage, and museums; facilities; the regional 
offices; and Heritage ’85 in the years ’84 and ’85, of course. 
 
And I’ll give you those totals: 1982-83, $7.6 million 
approximately; 1983-84, $8.8 million approximately; 1984-85, 
which is the start of Heritage ’85, so the figures go up rather 
dramatically, $11.7 million; and this past year, ’85-86, which was 
heritage year ’85, approximately $13 million. 
 
So when you’re looking at funding for the arts and for the culture 
in our province of Saskatchewan, those are figures which I 
believe are relevant — which takes in much more than just one 
subvote you might want to look at. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  Will the member give me a copy of that 
document you are referring to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Chairman, I’ll not be sending this over, 
but I’d be pleased to specify whatever question you might have 
on it. I’d listed the categories that I was quoting from and the 
total figures, and I’d be pleased to go over them. 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1159 
 

Mr. Shillington: —  Why don’t you give us the sheet? Mr. 
Minister, you read that far too fast to copy down. We will be able 
to deal with it tomorrow when Hansard comes out; we’ll can’t 
deal with it today. Why don’t you just send the thing across? Why 
be so devilishly secretive? Is there something on that paper that 
you’re deeply ashamed of? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Chairman, in a spirit of co-operation I’ll 
be glad to send a copy over, and we can discuss it if he wishes. 
But I hope he remembers the point that we have been discussing 
is the total cultural funding in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  At the moment I think a paucity of pages. 
One, I guess, is passing water around. Mr. Minister, while I’m 
waiting on that, let us go to another issue then, the Centre of the 
Arts. Centre of the Arts, first year you took office, got $494,310. 
This year they’re getting $300,000. They’re getting 60 per cent 
of what they got in 1982. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you’d deal 
with that cut in your budget. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Chairman, we are talking about the 
Centre of the Arts. I have the history of it in front of me right 
from 1970 to ’71, the funding that has come to that institution. 
And in 1985-86, the total figure that was given was $350,000. 
 
As the member well knows, since he was minister at one time, 
that there’s a couple of variables that go into this. There’s the 
annual appropriation, plus the supplementary funding, which is 
in fact to cover the deficit of the operation of the Centre of the 
Arts. And I think when we look at it this year, or 1985-86, the 
$50,000 that was paid for the supplementary funding to cover the 
deficit should really be a feather in the cap of the board of 
directors of the Centre of the Arts, as well as their management, 
because they have managed the facility at a smaller loss than 
usual. 
 
So I think it’s a misnomer when you look at the funding of the 
Centre of the Arts. And if you say that we’re not supporting it by 
not giving enough money . . . If we have to give it more, that 
means that it’s costing the taxpayer more because of the 
operations that are incurred. Rather I would like to see that go 
down every year because that signifies better management in my 
view. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  With this government we have come to 
understand that what it normally signifies is skimping on 
maintenance. 
 
Mr. Minister, when the amount you’re spending in that building 
goes down I suspect that what you’re skimping on is long-term 
maintenance. You can do that for a while. You can do that for a 
few years, but you soon, Mr. Minister, meet yourself coming 
around the corner. You soon meet yourself with a deteriorating 
building. 
 
I think it’s fair to say that Saskatoon, in the Centennial 
Auditorium, had that problem — may have now met it — but 
certainly had that problem at one point in time. That building 
deteriorated to the point where it was sadly in need of some 
additional funding. And I suspect that’s the case here, Mr. 
Minister. I suspect that when you’re asking

them to get along on less, what you’re doing is you are not 
continuing proper maintenance of the building. You can do that 
for a period of time but after a while it is always being penny 
wise and pound foolish and after a while the foolishness of it 
shows. 
 
Mr. Minister, I suspect that we’re going to find — when this 
government finally has the courage to call an election, and is 
excused shall we say from further duties — I expect we’re going 
to find that there is some long-run problems which have 
developed which the minister has not been dealing with, which 
this government has not been dealing with. 
 
I say, Mr. Minister, if you have reduced funding to the Centre of 
the Arts to 60 per cent of what it was and you can’t specifically 
point to the savings — and I think I know where they are — I 
think it’s maintenance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Chairman, I was interested in the 
comments of the member for Regina Centre as he explains how 
this goes on about long-term renovations that are needed. Surely 
as a former minister, he would remember that the Department of 
Culture and Recreation, or the department of culture and youth 
as it used to be called, is responsible for the operation through 
the board of directors of the Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts, 
and any project of maintenance over $5,000 is not the 
expenditure of the Centre of the Arts, but rather comes through 
the Department of Supply and Services. 
 
And also as I’m informed that the Wascana Centre Authority also 
is responsible for the upkeep and maintenance of the grounds 
around the Centre of the Arts. So I think to suggest that they are 
being neglected is not in fact true, when you look at the figures 
that show up in our budget, and I think it’s rather a feather in the 
hat of the management over at the Centre of the Arts that they’re 
only in this part year incurring a funding deficit of $50,000 which 
had to be picked up at the end of the year. So we could go down 
the whole list. We could go right back to 1970-71 if you wish, if 
we follow your rationale, and I could give you the supplementary 
funding if you so desire. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  Mr. Minister, I want to go back to the area 
of the arts. I’ve had a look at your figures. You have included in 
here a figure of 1.6 million for facilities. That, Mr. Minister, isn’t 
of great assistance to the artist directly. It doesn’t put food on the 
table nor does it contribute to their income. Even if you include 
that, I may say, even if you include the figure, the expenditures 
have only gone up by 23 per cent, and government expenditures 
have gone up by 33. So they’ve only got two-thirds of the 
increase in the expenditures of this government. 
 
If you take that figure out, then there’s virtually no increase in 
funding to the arts, and I go back to my original point. Mr. 
Minister, if you take out the $1.68 million listed under facilities, 
then you have a virtual freeze on funding to the arts. 
 
The item under facilities does not find its way, under normal 
circumstances, to the artist. But I ask you to deal with the issue, 
Mr. Minister; stop trying to avoid it. Why have you singled the 
artistic community out for a freeze 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1160 
 

on funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m absolutely amazed 
at the comments of the member for Regina Centre. he said: why 
would you put facilities in for cultural funding? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t recollect too many professional arts groups 
performing on Second Avenue in Saskatoon out on the street. 
Rather they need facilities to perform in and to carry on cultural 
funding. 
 
(1630) 
 
As a matter of fact, I remember distinctly one of the first 
functions, when I was appointed minister in 1983, was to present 
a cheque in the amount of $180,000 to Persephone Theatre in 
Saskatoon for their facility. So for the member to say, why is 
facilities in there, is absolutely ludicrous. 
 
And for his information, the number of projects that have 
received, or cultural facilities that have been funded by the 
cultural and recreational facility grant program since April ’83 is 
322. So I can’t quite follow the logic of the member opposite 
saying, facilities that are used for cultural purposes should not be 
included in cultural spending. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  But the funding does not go to the artists. 
The funding does not go to the artists, nor does the funding from 
the Arts Board go to the artist; facilities are something different. 
 
I want, Mr. Minister, to deal with the funding which goes to the 
artistic community, professional or amateur. I say, Mr. Minister, 
the funding which finds its way into the hands of the artistic 
community, not in any sense arguing with the facilities, aren’t 
needed. But the funding which finds its way to the artistic 
community has increased by 7 per cent, if you concentrate on the 
funding through the Arts Board. That’s less than a quarter of the 
increase in the provincial budget since that year. That’s a 
decrease in constant dollars. That’s less money that’s available 
to the artistic community. 
 
Please, Mr. Minister, deal with that issue and stop traipsing off 
into a lot of irrelevancies to avoid the issue. The funding which 
finds its way into the hands of the artistic community, in constant 
dollars, is down very considerably. Would you deal with that 
issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Chairman, we’ve been dealing with that 
since we started — the funding. And I’ve asked the member on 
a couple of occasions to give any specifics. He doesn’t want to 
give any specifics, obviously. I’m saying, when you look at 
cultural activity, cultural expenditures in the province of 
Saskatchewan have gone up considerably. He asked for the list. 
I furnished it to him. It goes down in detail, year by year, for the 
last four years; projected for this year. 
 
The member says, facilities are not cultural. I guess he figures 
the Persephone Theatre that got $180,000 towards their facility, 
which you’re very aware of, Mr. Chairman, that’s of no benefit 
to them. I’d be very interested in hearing the comments of 
Persephone Theatre on that. Persephone Theatre, as well, 
receives

funding through the Arts Board, through their allocation. 
 
Mr. Chairman, all I ask is that he bring up a specific. He wants 
me to address it; I’ve addressed it. He wants to go with the figure 
of 7 to 14 per cent. I’m saying cultural expenditures have 
increased much more dramatically, and that through our 
department, through the Arts Board, through lottery funding, and 
through sponsorship of corporations, if you want to get into that, 
your long historical diatribe on how the arts are funded. I’ve 
attended numerous functions where such corporations as Xerox, 
Imperial Oil, have supported the arts. There are more benefactors 
for the arts in Saskatchewan than the government. And I think 
that should be encouraged. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  I never said that, Mr. Minister, nor will my 
words bear that interpretation. If you think it will, I invite you to 
send those comments to Persephone Theatre. 
 
Mr. Minister, I again want to . . . I want to make a comment to 
you about specifics. Every time that I have risen in estimates and 
I have said, people are complaining about this, you ministers 
always say, give me the name. I say that the one thing this 
government has become renowned for is its vindictiveness. If I 
gave you the name of the artistic groups who suggest that there 
was room for improvement it would be the last grant they’d ever 
get, if you people had anything to do about it . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Minister, you know full well that even with governments 
which have a sense of fairness — that you lack — discussions 
which are held in that context are confidential. And you are being 
silly, and I could put it a lot stronger than that if I wasn’t in the 
Legislative Chamber. You’re being silly to keep raising the 
suggestion that I should give you specifics. 
 
Let’s deal with what is before the Assembly, Mr. Minister, which 
is your estimates. Your estimates are up in spite of the hyenas 
opposite who are trying to shout me down. I’ll say to you, your 
estimates for the Arts Board are up by 7 per cent; that won’t do. 
 
Mr. Minister, I say the government has an important role to play 
in the funding of the arts. If you disagree with that fundamental 
statement, then let’s start from there. But you haven’t said, so I 
gather you admit it. You do not . . . The lotteries are something 
separate and apart from government. You stated a moment ago 
that the government directs the lotteries. There’s not a word of 
truth to that and never has. One of your officials may well be a 
director of the lottery foundation, but he has earned that on the 
basis of merit, and not sitting there in an ex officio capacity. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, to deal with the government’s funding 
of the arts, that is down very considerably. The government’s 
funding of the arts, through the Arts Board, was $2,012,340 in 
your first year in office. In your last year in office, and believe 
me it’s going to be your last year in office, it is $2,153,200. If 
you wish to add to that, Mr. Minister, grants in support of the 
arts, multiculturalism, and museums, you’ll find, of course, Mr. 
Minister, that the sum total of those is down. 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1161 
 

So let’s deal with your role — not the lottery foundations, not the 
corporations, not whatever it is you’re doing at Expo; let’s deal 
with the government’s role in funding of the artistic groups. 
You’ve been short-changing them, Mr. Minister, and I say that 
you’re short-changing the public of this province when you do. 
 
Every society has a story to tell. Those story-tellers are largely to 
be found in the artistic community and you’re short-changing 
them. And when you do you short-change the public of this 
province who haven’t the same means by which to come to 
understand themselves, their heritage, or their future. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, to deal with the government’s role in 
the funding of the arts, and not every other subject under the sun 
which you think of. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Well, Mr. Chairman, obviously the member 
does not want to deal with any specifics. And, you know, 
certainly since I’ve been Minister of Culture and Recreation, I’ve 
been more open to meet with any group, professional, amateur; 
anything to do with culture or sports or heritage groups 
throughout the province of Saskatchewan. And where they’re 
going to him — and he can’t seem to remember their names, and 
he won’t seem to furnish them to me — then I cannot comment 
specifically. 
 
But the member says arts funding is being cut. I should indicate 
to the House that in 1982-83 the figure he was very correct on 
was $2,012,335. Indeed, that was our first year of operation, 
which he knows. But I should point out that that year was a 23 
per cent increase in the funding to the Arts Board. And the figures 
that I have presented to him, if you want to use, you know, simple 
figures: from 1982-83, culture and arts expenditures, which you 
have right in front of you, $7.6 million; 1985-86, estimated $13 
million. That is almost 100 per cent increase in funding to the 
cultural and the arts. Obviously if you don’t want to deal with 
specifics, then let’s deal with the figures that are in front of us, 
and I’ll deal with the whole cultural scene across the province, 
and you can deal with whatever you wish. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  Mr. Minister, I’d ask you to deal with your 
government’s role. What on earth does the funding from the 
federal government have to do with your government? Mr. 
Minister . . . and some of those are. Those items, Mr. Minister, 
are not your government’s role in the arts. Your government’s 
funding of the arts comes about through the Saskatchewan Arts 
Board and to a lesser extent the subvote number 12, grants in 
support of the arts, multiculturalism, heritage, and museums. 
That’s your role. That’s down. Would you deal with that, Mr. 
Minister, and not deal with every other figure under the sun. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  I’ll deal with that figure if you’ll give me 
some specifics. The member distinctly said that there was federal 
funding involved in here. Could he please point that out? 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  I ask you, Mr. Minister, to deal with your 
funding. I ask you to deal with your role. I ask you to deal with 
your role.

Mr. Minister, I don’t have the figures in front of me which you’re 
using. What I have in front of me is the estimates, and I ask you 
to deal with the estimates and not a whole lot of figures which 
we don’t have access to. 
 
And when I get the figures, after a great deal of badgering, I find 
you’ve included a number of things which aren’t strictly relevant 
to the subject. So I ask you, Mr. Minister, to deal with your 
estimates. Deal with subvote number 8, subvote number 13, and 
if there’s other subvotes in here which go to assist the arts, then 
I wish you’d point it out to me. 
 
We’re not dealing with a whole lot of other subjects and a whole 
lot of other moneys which I don’t have. We are dealing with your 
estimates. So if there’s something in your estimates which we’ve 
missed, then point it out to me. Otherwise deal with the estimates, 
and not with a whole lot of other figures which you’re snatching 
out of the air which we don’t have. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Chairman, there is no snatching out of 
the air at all. I explained approximately an hour ago that that 
figure that you’re pointing to for the expenditure from the 
Government of Saskatchewan to the Saskatchewan Arts Board, 
which reads $2,153,200, is in fact the figure. Plus if you add to 
that for direct contribution another $350,000, if you want to look 
exactly at that subvote, that is the amount of money available to 
the Saskatchewan Arts Board this year. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I remember him distinctly saying there was 
federal contributions on the sheet I gave to him. Perhaps I’ll go 
down the list and he can point out, stop me where the federal 
contribution is: Arts Boards; Centre of the Arts; Centennial 
Auditorium; Western Development Museum; Museum of 
Natural History; heritage conservation; cultural and multicultural 
support; grants to arts, multicultural, heritage, and museums; 
facilities, regional; Heritage ’85; multicultural books; 
Saskatchewan university museum; Expo; operation of 
administration centre; Ukrainian encyclopedia; Western 
Development Museum; heritage; Louis Riel diary; grand total — 
grant total at the bottom, the member asks, right at the very 
bottom — 1982-83, $8.8 million. At the end of 1985-86, $20.2 
million. 
 
Name one figure in there that is federal. He made the statement. 
Please point it out. 
 
Mr. Shillington: —  You didn’t give me any figures, then or 
now. You simply read off the items. My point was that about half 
. . . A goodly percentage of those institutions also get federal 
funding, Mr. Minister, and that’s also true of the artistic 
community. They also get federal funding. They also get private 
funding. 
 
But these estimates are an attempt — it’s ill-starred with this 
minister — but these estimates are an attempt to deal with this 
government’s role, not with what Xerox does, and not with what 
the lotteries do. Although you’re answerable in the legislature for 
that, these estimates are supposed to deal, not with the lotteries, 
but with your own estimates. 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1162 
 

I say, in your estimates, the funding which you have set out in 
your estimates, the funding to the artistic community has gone 
down. It has gone down in constant dollars, and depending upon 
how you break out the figure, the subvote, item number 13, it 
may have gone down in absolute dollars. 
 
So I ask you to deal with your estimates. Your estimates suggest, 
in constant dollars, less money now than you gave them in 
1982-83. 
 
We dealt for some six days, Mr. Minister, with the Minister of 
Urban Affairs. I suggested the same thing to him — that the 
urban municipalities are getting less money now than they did. 
For you to suggest that the lotteries make it up is a little like the 
Minister of Urban Affairs suggesting that the deficiency was 
made up in property taxes. It may well have been. It may well 
have been. But we were dealing with the government’s role in 
funding of municipalities. We are now dealing with the 
government’s role in the funding of the artistic community. 
 
In the list you gave me, Mr. Minister, previously, when you said 
that it had gone from 7 million to 13 million, you had included 
the Centre of the Arts, the Centennial Auditorium, the Western 
Development Museum, the Museum of Natural History, heritage 
conservation. Mr. Minister, none of those items are of direct 
assistance to the artistic community. I want to deal with the 
funding to the artistic community. 
 
(1645) 
 
Members opposite suggest the audience is large or small. I think 
members opposite are going to come and go without ever 
appreciating that this is not intended to be entertainment. It is an 
attempt, supposedly, to hold a government accountable for what 
it does with tax dollars. It is not supposed to be providing 
entertainment, nor am I trying to do that. I am attempting to get 
from this minister some answers. And I’ll admit that I am failing 
badly. 
 
So perhaps, Mr. Minister, you can give us some answers with 
respect to your estimates, why they’ve gone down, and leave to 
another forum, another court room, some other day, whether or 
not Xerox is doing an adequate job of funding the arts. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Chairman, certainly the member was 
minister of this department at one time, and I don’t know what 
he saw as his role, but I think support and the facilitation of the 
cultural activities in the province of Saskatchewan is a role for 
the Minister of Culture and Recreation, or as in your case, the 
minister of culture and youth. 
 
When we look at it, and you freely admitted that we have 
responsibility for the allocation of the lottery dollars, the figures 
I give are for the cultural expenditures in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You make reference to what happened in Urban Affairs, and I sat 
through those and my colleague had the distinct pleasure of 
having somebody ask him questions that were specific in nature 
so that he could give a reply to.

The only thing that you have come close to being specific in 
nature is subvote number 12, is that correct? Grants in support of 
arts, multiculturalism, heritage and museums. And in that case, 
the figures in that estimated 1986-87 is $1.080 million; and last 
year, ’85-86, estimated at $1.283 million, and I’ll explain that; 
that in fact there is one prime example of the co-operation that’s 
going on between our departments of Culture and Recreation and 
the lottery trust. And indeed one of the programs that has been 
no longer with our department is being picked up and funded 
through the trust. So if you want specifics, there it is. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: —  Mr. Minister, let me indeed get specific. 
I’m going to deal with subvote 8, and I wish that you would, in 
response to my questions. Subvote 8, grants to the Saskatchewan 
Arts Board. Mr. Minister, would you not agree . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman, if the members on the Conservative side of the 
House would settle down, the minister might be able to hear me. 
So would you please settle them down. You’ve been known to 
do that from time to time. I can’t hear what I’m saying; I’m sure 
the member opposite can’t hear what I’m asking. The member 
from Kindersley is a little unruly here but I will attempt to ask 
the question anyway, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you not agree that in 1982-1983, and if you 
want me to confirm it I can quote to you from the annual report, 
the grant to the Saskatchewan Arts Board was $2,012,335. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  I will confirm that figure. As I mentioned 
about five minutes ago, that was the first year of our government 
and that was an increase of 23 per cent to the Arts Board. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: —  Well, Mr. Minister, in 1986-1987 the 
grant to the Saskatchewan Arts Board is $2,153,200. Over four 
years, your fifth budget, an increase of $140,965 — 7 per cent. 
Am I not correct in those calculations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  I would say if you’re going by those figures 
alone, probably. But as I indicated, there was a 23 per cent 
increase in the first year. And when we started out the 
questioning I also indicated that moneys for use by the 
Saskatchewan Arts Board, at $350,000, that they directly used 
for that purpose. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: —  Mr. Minister, your comment about the 
increase from 1981 to 1982 is rather irrelevant here. We’re 
talking about the period of time in which you have been the 
government. And you have been the government since April or 
May of 1982. 
 
In 1982-1983 the Arts Board, an independent agency of 
well-renowned tradition, and well-reputed, admired throughout 
all of Canada and indeed by some places in the United States, 
where people have come up to take a look at the way it was 
structured, the way it was organized, and what it was achieving 
— it was a model. It was started here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Minister. 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1163 
 

When you took over in 1982-83 the budget was for the Arts 
Board, $2,012 million, and I’ll round it off. Now in your fifth 
budget you are showing over that period of time, over that 
five-budget period of time, an increase of 7 per cent to this 
independent Arts Board. 
 
Now you stand in the House, Mr. Minister, and you talk about 
the other places in which you’re providing funding to the arts. 
 
Well let me tell you what you have done. What you have done is 
you’ve taken the decision-making on how some of the arts 
community will be funding out of an independent Arts Board, 
into which the artistic community had some input, and you put it 
into the political hands of your government. That’s what you’ve 
done. And that’s what the arts community objects to and that’s 
what we object to. 
 
We have had a recent situation in Ottawa with the recent election 
two years ago of a Conservative government. The same kind of 
process took place. The minister was under severe attack from 
the arts communities throughout Canada, and he still is, Mr. 
Minister, because the government in Ottawa decided to reduce 
the funding to the Canada Council and make the decisions as to 
how the arts community would be funded — political decisions. 
That’s what you have done. 
 
The fact that you have reduced in real terms — when you take 
into account inflation — the fact that you have reduced in real 
terms the funding to the Arts Board, is that you have, like you 
have done with almost everything else your government has 
touched, politicized the funding to the arts. 
 
You want to be able to sit around, around your cabinet table with 
your colleagues, and say, well that looks like a pretty good place 
to provide funding this year because they haven’t rocked the boat 
very much. Now this other group, we’re not going to provide 
funding because we think maybe there’s a Liberal member on 
that committee who happens to support another political party. 
That’s what happens when you take funding away from 
something like an organization like the Saskatchewan Arts Board 
and put it into your political hands. 
 
That is the issue here and that’s what my colleague has been 
getting at all afternoon. And you have tried to deviate from it and 
talk about all kinds of other funding such as funding from Xerox. 
Now, Mr. Minister, wouldn’t you agree that what you have done 
is put more decision on where the grants are going to go in the 
hands of your government and less decision in the hands of the 
Arts Board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  No. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: —  Would you explain that, Mr. Minister, 
since now you are making the decisions in your department and 
no longer in the Arts Board. How do you rationalize that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: —  Mr. Chairman, the function of the Arts 
Board, which I thought the member had a fairly good handle on 
. . . the Arts Board . . . the members of the Arts

Board are appointed by the Government of Saskatchewan 
through our cabinet. Is the member saying that that has changed 
since 1982? Certainly it has not. If he can mention one instance 
where I have directed money that has come to the Arts Board, 
please say it right now; or I believe it should be incumbent on 
you, seeing that you said there was political involvement, give 
up your example right now, otherwise apologize. 
 
Some Hon. Members: —  Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: —  Mr. Minister, you have totally once again, 
as has the Minister of Urban Affairs and has the Minister of 
Health, tried to twist the thing around in order to defend your 
political backside. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I did not say that you tried to influence the 
Arts Board, although I wouldn’t be surprised if you may have 
tried. I’m sure the Arts Board would have told you where to go. 
I am saying, the fact that you’re reducing the funding to the Arts 
Board and channelling more of your funding through other 
sources where indeed you do have influence — you are turning 
over the decisions of the funding to political decisions, Mr. 
Minister. I don’t question the decisions of your officials; I happen 
to know they’re pretty good officials. I’m saying that your 
officials will determine how the funding is going to go and who 
gets them on your approval. 
 
Members opposite, Mr. Chairman, are sort of interrupting again. 
The member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake, in particular, thinks 
that this is a funny exercise. I, as my colleague from Regina 
Centre, don’t believe it’s a funny exercise. We’re here dealing 
with a serious matter. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me restate again as clearly as I can what has 
happened. You have the Saskatchewan Arts Board. You have, in 
real money, reduced the funding to the Saskatchewan Arts Board, 
when you take into account inflation. Because, when over five 
budgets you increased the funding to the Arts Board by over 7 
per cent, you cannot stand in this House and say that you have 
provided funding to the Arts Board so that they can at least . . . 
so they can even keep even. They’re not staying even. 
 
What you have done, Mr. Minister, is provided more funding in 
some other areas — not a great deal more — not through the Arts 
Board, and therefore you’re able to direct the way that money is 
allocated, politically, because it’s no longer decided by the Arts 
Board. 
 
The Arts Board can decide $2,153,000 worth, I’ll grant you that, 
but the other subvotes of funding to the arts, you decide. And 
that’s one of the reasons why the arts community is worried and 
concerned, because they know that the history of this government 
in the last four years has been one of rule by fear. If you threaten 
enough people that they may get cut off if they stir the boat, they 
get cut off. That’s what’s been the story of your operation in this 
government. 
 
Mr. Chairman: —  Order. The member is indicating that the 
government threatens people. I don’t see what that has to do with 
estimates for Culture and Recreation . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Order! I would ask the members to my left, the opposition 
members, please to be 
  



 
May 8, 1986 

 

1164 
 

quiet and not challenge the Chair from their seats. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: —  Mr. Chairman, I wish, Mr. Chairman . . . 
Let me slow down so that you can hear carefully the point I’m 
making. The point I’m making is this: that in the arts community 
one of the principles that has been defended for generations is the 
principle of the independence of the way that the funding is 
allocated through the Arts Board to the arts community. 
 
What the minister has made very clear in this House this 
afternoon with his answers is this: that more and more of the 
decisions as to how the funding goes to arts communities and 
artists are now made by this government and not by the Arts 
Board. That being the case, Mr. Minister, there are individuals 
and there are organizations out there that now are looking around 
and saying, we can’t go to the Arts Board any more because the 
Arts Board doesn’t make the decisions; the government does. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


