


















































April 24, 1986 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 24, 1986 
 

855 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Urban Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 24 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister please introduce his 
officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to the Assembly the senior officials from 
the Department of Urban Affairs. Beside me, Mr. Keith 
Schneider, assistant deputy minister. And other officials here 
today, Mr. Ron Davis, executive director of municipal finance; 
Henry McCutcheon, executive director, community planning; 
Don Harazny, director of administration; Ken Smith, director of 
municipal advisory services, and Mr. Richard Kilarski, also 
from municipal finance. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, my welcome 
to the officials as well. I’m sure that they will be very helpful in 
providing the minister with the information that we will be 
seeking. 
 
And let me begin by trying to be helpful in order that I may be 
able to assist the staff in having available the information as we 
get to it. I’ll outline first of all for the minister a number of 
questions which at some point in time during these proceedings 
I shall be asking. I’m not asking for them now, but just in order 
to assist the proceedings here I would like to indicate to the 
minister that among the questions that I and my colleagues will 
be presenting will be things like: we’ll want to know the 
numbers and the names of your personal staff and their salaries 
in the department, as well as the increases in salary that have 
taken place over the last two years, in each of the years of those 
two years. 
 
We will be asking about any advertising that the department 
does, who does the advertising for the department, what is your 
agency, the purpose of the advertising, and what your plans are 
for this coming year in your estimates. 
 
We’ll want to know about the minister’s travel, both the present 
minister and the former minister, because the present minister 
has not been in this portfolio that long. We’ll want to know the 
destination of those trips, the purpose of them, the costs 
incurred, and the passengers that were on the government 
aircraft during those trips. 
 
We’ll want to ask how you determined the revenue sharing 
numbers — in other words — what is your formula for the 
determination of what the revenue sharing ought to be? We’re 
going to be asking about what is the amount of revenue sharing, 
unconditional revenue sharing, for each of the municipalities in 
Saskatchewan for each of the years 1982, ’83, ’84, ’85, and 
what it will be for 1986-87. I know that that’s easily accessible 
on computers. I just serve notice that we will be seeking that 
information in order that we don’t sort of catch you in one  

day and expect to get it right away. 
 
Further to that, I will be asking some questions about the 
workings of the Local Government Finance Commission, which 
has been established for some time, any recommendations it 
may have made — and I appreciate that it’s not made a final 
report, but I know it has made some interim recommendations 
— what the dispositions of those are, what is the standing of 
this commission now in light of the fact that some people have 
pulled out of it, or some organizations have; so I will be asking 
about that. 
 
Because the Department of Urban Affairs administers the 
heritage grant program for senior citizens, I will want to know, 
when we get to that, the number of applications which have 
been made under this program and the amount of moneys that 
have been claimed or sent out, also the number of senior citizen 
beneficiaries under the former program, which was the property 
improvement grant and the education tax rebate. So I know that 
you may not necessarily have that handy with you, so I am 
letting you know that I will be asking that so that you can have 
it available. 
 
Also, we will be interested in asking about any polls that the 
department may have had taken, polling surveys or research 
over the last year, the purpose of those polls, what their findings 
were, the questions that were asked, and who did the poll. I’m 
not sure whether the Department of Urban Affairs has done any 
polling, but because the government appears to poll a great 
deal, we will be interested in knowing whether some polls have 
been taken and paid for by the Department of Urban Affairs. 
 
Also, we will want to know the list of all consultants which the 
department has hired — outside consultants — to do any 
consulting work for the Department of Urban Affairs, who they 
were, what the purpose of their work was, and how much the 
contract was — what they were paid. 
 
Those are just an indication of some of the questions which we 
will be pursuing, although there will be many others. And I only 
outline them here now in order to assist the minister and his 
officials in being prepared for them. I’m not sure whether we’ll 
get to many of them, indeed if we’ll get to any of them, this 
evening. But at some point in time we shall be pursuing that 
information. 
 
Mr. Chairman, let me begin by once again reminding the House 
and yourself something which has been made note of several 
times in recent weeks and that is, although today is the 27th day 
of this session — I think that’s what it is according to the blues 
— the sorrowful thing in many ways is that we have yet to have 
before this House second readings of legislation, and in our case 
considering these estimates, legislation involving the 
Department of Urban Affairs. And I think that’s worthy of note, 
Mr. Chairman, and I think it’s something we ought to be 
concerned about. 
 
I think the record will show that this is probably the first time in 
the history of this legislature where the House has sat for 27 
days and many proposals such as assistance for  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

856 
 

municipalities, who are being very hard done by because of 
changes in liability insurance . . . Even though assistance was 
announced and legislation was announced in the throne speech 
27 days ago, we have yet to see any signs of legislation which 
involves municipalities. 
 
There are a number of things. We have seen no indication of 
changes to The Urban Municipality Act, the Act which this 
government passed not so many years ago. There have been 
municipalities who have expressed a lot of concern with some 
of those changes and with the new Act. One of my colleagues 
will be raising some of that, and so will I. Yet we have had no 
indication that this government is prepared to address some of 
those problems and bring forward amendments to the 
legislation. When we get to that, I hope the minister will be able 
to outline to the House, and through the House then to the 
public, what it is that he and the government have in mind for 
this session to be able to meet some of those concerns. 
 
One of those things, as I have mentioned, is the question of 
liability insurance, and I will want to pursue that in about a 
moment or two. But I want to highlight before I do that what I 
think has been happening in the last four years which has really 
cost Saskatchewan taxpayers a great deal. If you pick up the 
newspaper any day of the week in the month of April, Mr. 
Chairman — and we all do because, I know, I’m sure we all try 
to keep informed — I don’t think there has been an edition of 
any of the daily newspapers and probably some of the weeklies 
in which there wasn’t some reference made to increases in mill 
rates in our municipalities, both for municipal purposes and 
school board purposes as well as hospital purposes. 
 
There have been a dramatic increase — there has been — of 
mill rates throughout Saskatchewan over the last four years, a 
terrific increase in taxation on property owners . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The Minister of Education chooses to speak 
from her chair, and when she is prepared to stand up and ask 
questions and make some comments, Mr. Chairman, I think she 
might be able to do that. But to speak from her chair while 
some of us are trying to ask questions and interrupt us, I think is 
really quite inappropriate on the part of the Minister of 
Education, the member from Swift Current. And I wish she 
wouldn’t do that so that we can continue with these estimates in 
a good way, in an expeditious way, and get all the questions 
answered so we can move on to another department. 
 
Now I was beginning to say before I was interrupted by the 
member from Swift Current, that every day in the newspapers 
we see indications of what policies of this government have 
done to property taxpayers — people who own property, 
families who try to maintain a home, families who try to 
maintain a home for their children and for the family as a whole 
in such a way that after they pay their taxes and other costs, 
they’re still able to provide adequate needs for the families in 
other need areas. 
 
While this has been happening, and these taxes have been 
increasing all over the province over the last four years in a very 
dramatic fashion, the average income of Saskatchewan income 
earners has decreased. Now you  

think about that for a while, Mr. Chairman. Property taxes and 
income taxes have been going up but average income has been 
going down. Now you put those two together, and it does not 
take a great deal of effort to understand the kind of pain and 
suffering and hardship that the policies of this government have 
brought about. 
 
We see in the budget speech an announcement that revenue 
sharing will increase this year by 3 per cent. Well that’s a nice 
round figure, but I submit to you, Mr. Chairman, and the House, 
that that figure is not 3 per cent. It’s less than that. The 
government says 3 per cent because it sounds better than 
something like two point something or other per cent. And I 
hope that the minister when we get into revenue sharing later in 
this evening will be able to indicate what in fact the increase 
has been to municipalities over this year, over last year, and this 
year over two years ago, because I think that that’s important. 
 
There seems to be no indication, and if there is, I know that we 
will be able to get those answers here today of specific problem 
areas and how they are being addressed. I asked a question in 
this House some time ago, which was raised with me when I 
made a trip to Prince Albert and met with city officials as well 
as others, whether the government was prepared to announce 
some assistance for the water treatment plant in the city of 
Prince Albert. We have yet not had an answer to that question 
and that’s fair enough. We did not pursue it after I asked that 
question in question period because I knew that we would be 
into estimates and I would be asking it again. 
 
(1915) 
 
I hope that since that time, which is about 20 days ago, that we 
will be able to get an answer from the minister, indicating what 
he is now prepared to do on behalf of his government to assist 
the citizens of Prince Albert, provide adequate treatment 
facilities which they already are building. It’s under way. I went 
and saw it for myself. But they have made requests to the 
government for some commitment. They have made requests 
from the two Conservative members from the city of Prince 
Albert to make a commitment that some assistance will be 
provided. 
 
Another concern that we have is that if you go and visit many of 
our communities, Regina included, many of our street and other 
kinds of infrastructure of that kind are deteriorating rapidly — 
not the fault of the city, because the city fathers are trying real 
hard and working very hard to maintain the services. But the 
fault is that this government has been so stingy in its revenue 
sharing that it has squeezed municipalities to the point where 
they are unable to keep up with the needs that they are faced 
with, and so as a result we are seeing things happen that should 
not happen. 
 
It makes far more economic sense to maintain facilities and 
streets and roads than it does to let them deteriorate quickly 
because of negligence, because of lack of money so that you 
have to rebuild them and then it costs a lot more money. And 
yet that seems to be the policy pursued by this government — 
neglect what is existing so that it  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

857 
 

deteriorates much quicker and then ultimately you have to 
rebuild it and it costs you more. I suggest that in our view that’s 
a wrong policy. It’s the kind of policy that should not be in 
place, and it’s just another area in which the government has 
been negligent. 
 
Part of the problem, Mr. Chairman, is not only the provincial 
government. I mentioned earlier that I would raise this in my 
comments here this evening. But we have seen, I think 
regrettably so, a transfer of the tax burden from the federal 
government level — the federal government which is a wider 
tax base and can spread its taxation and its revenue gathering 
systems much wider and thus create a smaller burden on 
individual people — we’ve seen a shift of the tax burden from 
the federal government to the provincial government which in 
turn has passed it down to the municipalities. And because the 
municipalities have not many options, the municipalities do not 
have many options from the point of view of where they can 
raise revenues. They basically have the property tax. And so 
what’s happened is that because of this tax shift, we have seen 
property taxes go up dramatically, and we do that . . . we have 
seen that happen with the quiet acquiescence of this government 
when the federal government has been using this approach. 
 
Now before I ask a question I just want to highlight what’s been 
happening. And I happened to pick a Leader-Post article dated 
April 22 of this year in which I think it clearly indicates the 
problems the taxpayers who own homes and live in apartments 
face today. This article, which is a survey of Regina taxes, as 
well as a survey of taxes of 18 major Canadian cities, shows 
that Regina home owners paid the second highest taxes among 
the property owners in 18 major Canadian cities surveyed in 
1985 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member from 
Maple Creek, who speaks from her chair, doesn’t believe this. 
Well she should read the paper. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s because of the council . . . 
(inaudible) . . . 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Isn’t that interesting. The member from 
Maple Creek sits in her chair and blames the city council. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Let’s talk about Saskatoon taxes. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I will talk about Saskatoon too. But I 
really think it’s unacceptable of an elected legislature to sit in 
this House and dump on city councils. We’re here considering 
the estimates of Urban Affairs. And I’m quite happy to accept 
the fact that the Minister of Urban Affairs is interested in the 
concerns of urbans, and he’s not getting much help from the 
member from Swift Current who says that all the fault — or 
Maple Creek — all the fault of rising taxes is the fault of city 
councils. I don’t accept that proposition from the member for 
Swift Current — Maple Creek, I’m sorry. I think that’s an 
unfair comment from the member of Maple Creek, and I wish 
that she would cease and desist making those kinds of 
accusations about municipal people. 
 
Now let me carry on further. It says in this article, Mr. 
Chairman, that last year the owner of a typical Regina home 
paid a total of approximately $1,636 in property  

taxes — that’s the total tax load on the average — and that 
Regina’s municipal taxes, if I may narrow it down just to 
municipal taxes, ranked fourth highest among the 18 cities, and 
it was at $801. And I think just so that everybody understands 
what we mean by typical home, it’s an average bungalow of 
three bedrooms, about 1,200 square feet, and so on. 
 
The interesting thing is when you make a comparison, Mr. 
Chairman, a very important comparison: in 1980, total property 
tax burden on that typical bungalow in Regina was $809 — 
that’s 1980. Six years later, 1986, it was $1,635. Now that is 
almost a 100 per cent increase — that is almost a 100 per cent 
increase, Mr. Chairman. Surely if this government had been 
serious in revenue sharing and had been more interested in the 
needs of municipalities in this province than they were in what 
they thought was rewarding the oil companies, they could have 
gotten more revenues from the oil industry — which they have 
given away; it’s gone — and they could have helped out these 
municipalities such as Regina and Saskatoon and Maple Creek 
and Swift Current and Humboldt and Watrous, so that this kind 
of a situation would have had to be created . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
And the member from Maple Creek is yelling from her desk 
again, and so is the member from Regina North, now Regina 
South. And I’m not sure whether it’s north or south because you 
never know where a fugitive is from or where he’s going. 
 
But I say that it’s not only the city of Regina. This is the kind of 
thing that has been happening across the province. And the 
member from Maple Creek asked: what about Saskatoon? Well 
I’ll tell you. In Regina the average increase over that period of 
time, if you average it out in the mill rate or in the cost, has 
been 16.2 per cent; in Saskatoon it is 12.8 per cent over that 
same period of time. And there is a difference between those 
increases, but I don’t think that’s important. The important 
thing is that those kinds of increases are unfair. Those kind of 
increases are unfair when people who are trying to maintain 
their homes are the ones who get saddled with that burden — 
and that’s what’s happened to them. 
 
Well some of the members opposite laugh. They think it’s a 
joke when you see property taxes increase from $800 to $1,600 
over a period of six years. I don’t think that’s a joke. I think that 
we all collectively here, whether we’re Conservatives or New 
Democrats, should be concerned when that kind of situation is 
faced by Saskatchewan people. But I’m sure that most of the 
members opposite probably are. I suspect that the treasury 
benches aren’t, because they have their particular agendas. But I 
think most fair-minded people would be concerned with that 
kind of a situation. 
 
Now as I said to the minister when I began, one of the things 
that we’re concerned about is that we have been here for so 
many days now, and we have yet to see the kind of legislation 
which would be in this House dealing with issues related to 
Urban Affairs. 
 
I remind the minister that in the throne speech is was very 
clearly stated by the Lieutenant Governor, who read this  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

858 
 

government’s throne speech, that this government was going to 
deal with the question of liability insurance. Well we’re still 
waiting. Municipalities are still waiting. School boards are still 
waiting. Hospital boards are still waiting. They’ve had to pay 
these exorbitant new fees — and I’ve got information which I 
will want to share with the minister over time. And there’s been 
nothing coming. 
 
So I ask the minister: in this issue which you addressed at the 
SUMA convention — and so did I, and so did almost every 
councillor who was there, and alderman — you indicated there 
that the government was studying the matter. Well, I was a little 
surprised at that, because I thought since this problem has been 
around for at least four years that the time for study had long 
gone by, and that was an appropriate time to announce what it is 
the government was prepared to do. That didn’t happen. The 
throne speech said the government was going to have a 
solution; 27 days later nothing has yet happened. I ask the 
minister: what have you decided that the government ought to 
do, or what is the government’s policy with regard to liability 
insurance so that the municipalities of this province don’t have 
to continue waiting while this burden is put upon them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The member 
opposite has raised a number of points which we indeed will 
want to deal with this evening and perhaps on into tomorrow as 
well — matters pertaining to taxation, for example. And I think 
we will be able to provide all of the members of the Assembly 
here this evening and certainly let the public know that the 
increases in property tax under the former administration were 
substantially greater than they have been in the last three or four 
years. We will provide that information and make it very clear. 
 
We will also indicate that the mill rate increases which are 
being projected for this year are very modest. We will also 
provide all of the information pertaining to taxation that the 
member opposite has been talking about here in the 
Leader-Post which suggests, for example, that Regina’s 
taxation is substantially high and that somehow that is a 
function of the provincial government. And of course the 
member opposite knows full well that that is not the case. 
 
If he had taken the time to read the entire article in the 
Leader-Post dated — and I have it here before me — Tuesday, 
April 22nd, he would know that one of the reasons why Regina 
has a somewhat higher property tax rate is that the council over 
the years here in the city, and certainly the council that we have 
at present, has decided to offer what they believe to be a much 
higher level of municipal service in terms of extra spending to 
pay for things, and I quote: 
 

. . . like better parks and recreation facilities, more paved 
lanes and more recreation centres, and more police and 
fire protection than is provided (for example) in 
Saskatoon. 

 
And that of course is a decision that the council can take if they 
wish to do so. But there is naturally going to be an incumbent 
increase in the taxation levels that they are going to apply to 
their citizens. 
 

I do know that a good number of people here in the city of 
Regina question seriously whether or not the council should 
indeed be applying the levels of property taxation that they do. 
In fact one of the most common concerns that I have expressed 
to me when I travel the streets of my constituency and talk to 
people these days is why in fact does the city council tax to the 
level that it does here in comparison to other centres. And of 
course the city council has given its own reason. It has decided 
to offer what they believe to be a higher level of service, which 
they believe is important. That naturally is going to cost the 
citizen of Regina significantly more. 
 
When you take a look at the overall expected increase in terms 
of property tax here in the province of Saskatchewan, you will 
find that in fact it is a rather modest level of increase that we are 
expecting this year. The projected mill rate increase, for 
example, pertaining to municipal tax levies in the province of 
Saskatchewan overall this year for all cities, is in the order of 
less than 3 per cent. In fact I believe the estimate is around 2.7 
per cent — a very reasonable, modest increase. 
 
And I think that we certainly want to commend the 
municipalities across the province for taking it upon themselves 
to manage their portion of the public purse as effectively and as 
prudently as they do to ensure that in fact the levels of local 
property taxation do not increase significantly. And I think 
when we see a projected 2.7 per cent mill rate increase across 
the province for municipalities, that indeed we are seeing 
evidence that our municipalities are managing their tax dollars 
very well. So I think that would suggest that the comments of 
the member opposite with regards to excessive levels of 
taxation simply don’t bear up under scrutiny. 
 
And I have before me here an article in the newspaper today 
which talks about, for example, the property tax increases 
expected by the Weyburn residents — one of our well-known 
municipalities here in the province. And from what the member 
opposite has been saying, you would think that they property 
tax increases were going to be dramatic or perhaps exorbitant or 
perhaps burdensome. I don’t know what kind of adjectives one 
could use to describe what the member opposite has been 
suggesting, but I would simply suggest to him and to the 
listening public tonight and to the members of the Assembly, 
that the property taxes in Weyburn are expected to rise in the 
order of 2 per cent this next year. Well I would suggest that a 2 
per cent increase is rather a modest increase, a reasonable 
increase, and to suggest that somehow that the senior level of 
government here in the province of Saskatchewan is not 
providing the appropriate level of revenue sharing, and 
therefore property taxes have increased and are increasing and 
will increase dramatically — that assertion simply does not 
stand up under scrutiny. 
 
(1930) 
 
In fact, the opposite is the case. What has happened is we have 
seen the senior level of government here, the provincial 
government, over the last few years provide very reasonable 
levels of revenue sharing increases into the pool which can be 
utilized by the municipalities. 
  



 
April 24, 1986 

859 
 

And I would, for the benefit of all members of the Assembly 
here tonight, provide some very interesting statistics. And I’m 
sure that the watching public will want to know for comparative 
purposes exactly what the mill rate increases were under the 
former administration during their last few years, and what they 
have been under this administration during the last four or five 
years. 
 
And when you take a look at that, if I can compare from 1979 to 
1982 — a three-year period, the last three-year period for the 
former administration — we see the weighted average equalized 
mill rate rising from 68 in 1979 to 87.3 in 1982. That was the 
year that we honoured the increases that you had basically 
promised. And we see that that is a 28 per cent increase — a 28 
per cent increase in the weighted average equalized mill rate for 
municipalities under your administration. 
 
When we compare that from 1982 to 1986, which is a four-year 
period of time — we’re now talking about a four-year period of 
time for this administration compared to a three-year period of 
time for your administration — we find that the weighted 
average equalized mill rate rose from 87.3 in 1982 to estimated 
99.4 in 1986, which is only a 14 per cent increase. A 28 per cent 
increase under the NDP in a three-year period of time; and only 
a 14 per cent increase in a four-year period of time under a 
Progressive Conservative administration. 
 
Now I think that kind of statistic shows very clearly that not 
only have we been providing a reasonable level of assistance to 
the municipalities here in the province; not only have they been 
able to keep their mill rates at a reasonable level as a 
consequence of that revenue sharing pool that this government 
is providing; but we find that in fact the mill rate increases 
under your administration were substantially higher. In fact, 
they were twice as high as they have been under a Progressive 
Conservative administration. 
 
So I think we need to attack this issue of taxation directly, at the 
beginning of our discussion; to point out very clearly that the 
assertions of the member from Regina North East simply do not 
bear up under scrutiny. The facts clearly suggest otherwise. 
 
The municipal tax increases under their administration were 
substantially more — indeed, dramatic; the municipal tax 
increases under the Progressive Conservative administration 
substantially less over an even greater period of time than under 
the former administration. 
 
As it pertains to the liability insurance matter, indeed we as a 
government have expressed concern about this particular issue. 
We do have a ministerial task force that is currently involved in 
addressing the issue of liability insurance. And in due course 
the commitments made during the Speech from the Throne will 
of course be kept, as indeed one would expect. 
 
As it relates to SUMA, the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association, which is the organization that is concerned about 
liability insurance, the organization that I of course have direct 
contact with, I have met with  

them personally, along with some of my colleagues. We have 
discussed this particular issue at some length. And we have 
agreed with them, that they would like to in fact conduct a 
survey of all of their member organizations here in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I have before me here the letter, signed by the executive 
director of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, 
which they have sent to all of their member associations. 
 
They indicate here that they have done some research on the 
matter but further information needs to be gained, and that they 
have been in discussion with the provincial minister responsible 
for SGI, as well as the Urban Affairs minister, and the Minister 
of Rural Development. 
 
And they want to survey their own member organizations to 
provide them with information on this particular issue as it 
pertains to liability insurance. And I have before me here in fact 
the questionnaire which the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association is sending out to their own members. 
 
Now it’s only appropriate that we engage in a consultation 
process with SUMA — with the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association — before any legislation would be 
brought in. There has been some suggestion by the urban 
municipalities association that they would like to set up their 
own form of self-insurance. And that of course, is something 
they can do if they so choose. Clearly, if they wish to survey 
their particular members to get detailed information on the 
liability insurance question, then I think it’s important for them 
that they have the opportunity to do so, that they have the 
opportunity to analyse that statistical information, that they 
naturally would want to share that information with the senior 
government, and that together we would sit down and then 
finalize exactly what the best method is of addressing this 
particular matter, of dealing with the liability insurance 
question, as it pertains to the urban municipalities association. 
 
As I indicated, they have suggested that they may want to 
develop their own particular solution to this problem, which is 
why they are engaged in this particular exercise of surveying 
their own particular members. So I think that has responded to 
the liability insurance question. 
 
The taxation issue, I just addressed. And if the member wants to 
raise it again, I certainly will be willing to once again reiterate 
what I have just mentioned, with regards to the very positive 
levels of assistance that this government has provided, which 
has helped to keep municipal mill rate increases much less than 
they were under the former administration — in fact half — 
even over a longer period of time. 
 
There were some other issues that the member raised in his 
initial comments, and I’m sure we will deal with them as time 
goes by. I would simply indicate to the member that any 
questions pertaining to the Local Government Finance 
Commission should be directed to the Minister of Finance. He 
is the minister responsible for this particular issue and will be 
answering questions with regards to the Local Government 
Finance Commission. 
  



 
April 24, 1986 

860 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I certainly will then direct 
some questions to the Minister of Finance with regard to Local 
Government Finance Commission, although I thought I 
understood there was some funding in your department for that 
commission. We will check that, and if there isn’t, then fine. 
I’m quite prepared to raise it with any minister who may be 
responsible. 
 
But I will also be raising it with you, Mr. Minister, because I 
think you, as the Minister of Urban Affairs, ought to have some 
concern about the workings of this commission because it will 
affect in a very significant way urban municipalities, as well as 
school boards, as well as rural municipalities. And as the 
Minister of Urban Affairs, I would think that you would be 
interested and would be able to speak about government policy 
on that question. 
 
We indeed will have a great deal to say and ask you about 
property taxes on homes in municipalities in Saskatchewan. I 
will want to deal, first of all, with the liability insurance 
question at some length here this evening. 
 
But just in response to some of the comments that you made. 
You seem to be very conveniently not including all of the facts 
when you quote your equalized mill rates over a period of time. 
You forget to include the fact that that was a period of time 
when inflation was much higher, when people had jobs in 
Saskatchewan, when the economy was strong and growing, as 
opposed to a time now, during the term of your government, 
when average incomes have decreased, when farm incomes 
have fallen in many cases to nothing, when your government 
has gouged the pocket-books of every family in Saskatchewan 
— particularly in the last budget — to the tune of thousands of 
dollars, when on top of that your Conservative federal 
government, for two budgets in a row, has done the same to 
those very same families. 
 
So it’s not a question of taking one form of taxation and sort of 
talking about it in isolation, Mr. Minister. You have to look at 
what your type of governments have done to the low- and 
middle-income earner — those people who are trying to 
maintain a home for their family. Your total taxation burden has 
become so immense that there is desperation out there. The 
federal government takes thousands in two years from each 
family’s pay cheque. The provincial government does the same. 
You impose a flat tax which is certainly not the reform that you 
pretend it to be, but once again takes the most money out of the 
wrong people. And then on top of that, you reduce the amount 
of revenue sharing to far less than it ought to have been. As a 
matter of fact, you froze it last year to municipalities, and 
therefore you caused property taxes to go up. 
 
And isn’t it interesting that you would stand up and talk about 
the increase in property taxes and not once mention the removal 
of the property improvement grant? Now I submit to you, Mr. 
Minister, and I’m sure your officials would be able to calculate 
this out for you very quickly, that if you put on the property 
improvement grant that you took away from the property 
owners in Saskatchewan, causing the greatest property tax 
increase in the history of this province, that the amount of tax  

increases during your term of government have been nothing 
short of atrocious. 
 
Now why wouldn’t you have mentioned the removal of the 
property improvement grant? Why would you have not wanted 
the viewers tonight, and those who they will speak to, why 
would you not want them to know that you did remove that? 
Maybe because you know that they know it. Because they have 
felt that $230 per home increase that they have had to pay 
because you did not provide property tax relief, so that you 
could provide money for the Pocklingtons and the Essos and the 
Shell Canadas and what not. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the city of Moose Jaw in 1981, the mill rate 
was 93.2; in 1985, it was 117.8; and we don’t know yet what it 
is going to be for 1986. I’ll probably have it later on. That’s not 
insignificant, and if you add on top of that the property 
improvement grant which you took away, it becomes a very, 
very, large tax burden and tax increase. 
 
In the city of Yorkton: 1981, the mill rate was 78; in 1986, 
because we have it now, it’s 101. In Saskatoon in 1981, 138.87; 
in 1985, 180.23. And that’s before you factor in the increase in 
the tax caused by your removal of the property improvement 
grant. Now I would like you to stand up in this House and deny 
that that was not a tax increase. If you can say to this House and 
to the public of Saskatchewan that when your government 
removed the property tax — the property improvement grant — 
that that was not a tax increase, then I’d like to hear you say 
that. 
 
Mr. Minister, you also said that the function of the tax increase 
have been municipal. Well I want to say to you that we have 
had in this country and in this province, a sharing of tax 
revenues. That is the tradition and that’s the right way to do it. 
 
You know, Mr. Chairman, and the minister knows, and we all 
know, that the ability for the province to raise taxes is far 
greater than the ability of a municipality to raise taxes. And we 
know that it’s only fair that that being the case the province is 
able to raise taxes in places where there is a great deal of wealth 
— some parts of the province — and then redistribute some of 
this wealth so that there’s some equalization of benefit from 
some of this wealth around all of Saskatchewan. When you 
freeze the revenue sharing, as you did last year, you took away 
that concept; you destroyed it. 
 
(1945) 
 
Now I found it somewhat interesting, the comments that the 
minister made about liability insurance. And I go back to my 
earlier proposition where I said that for four years it has been 
widely known that there was going to be a serious problem 
faced by municipalities and others with regard to liability 
insurance. That’s not a phenomenon that’s all of a sudden come 
running out over the horizon and square into the face of this 
government. That has been a known fact for several years. 
 
I ask the minister if he would be prepared to answer this 
question after I finish my remarks, and that is: why has it  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

861 
 

taken four years, knowing that the problem is there — and I 
know that you weren’t the minister, but you were part of the 
cabinet — then why has it taken four years for you to decide 
that you need a study when the problem has always been 
growing over that period of time? Why has it taken four years? 
 
I know the municipalities are now wanting to assist you by 
doing a survey. And I would encourage that, and I congratulate 
them for it. But if this government had provided the leadership 
at any time during that four-year period instead of following its 
usual piecemeal approach, I am sure that those municipalities 
would have done that survey before and would have been in a 
position to be able to assist you in meeting this problem 
head-on and we wouldn’t have had these kinds of situations. 
 
Let me give you some examples, examples which you have 
neglected as a government. In North Battleford, that city paid 
SGI $8,250 in 1985 for $5 million worth of comprehensive 
liability insurance with a deductible of $500. This year the 
deductible has doubled to $1,000, and the premium has more 
than tripled to $29,081. Now surely, surely that’s not the kind 
of situation that should have had to be faced by the city of 
North Battleford when you have had four years to address the 
problem. And they would not be forced to cut other programs, 
needed ones, or raise the mill rate to meet that tripled cost in 
insurance premium, which they have had to pay because 
nothing was done. 
 
In order to handle the liability insurance, SGI requires that they 
get all of the other insurance business of the city as well. So not 
only have they said to North Battleford, we’re tripling your 
premium, we’re doubling your deductible, but in order for us to 
provide you coverage — this is your Crown corporation, Mr. 
Minister — they say in order to provide you coverage, we are 
going to require that we get all of the other insurance business 
of the city as well, such as a $30.5 million coverage on city 
property which has a premium of $36,900. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister: why has it taken four years 
for your government to decide that it’s time to do a study? Why 
has it not been done earlier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if ever we witnessed 
a case of hyperbole in this legislature, we just saw it. I mean, 
talk about exaggeration — talk about exaggeration. 
 
Four years ago, the member suggests four years ago liability 
insurance was going sky high — absolute nonsense. Four years 
ago liability insurance was not an issue. Liability insurance for 
the majority of organizations that are concerned about liability 
insurance has become an issue within the last 18 to 12 months. 
It’s really been within the last year that liability insurance has 
become an issue. 
 
And this government recognized very quickly that liability 
insurance had become an issue. That is why we set up our 
ministerial task force on liability insurance. That’s why we have 
been meeting with the organizations that have been affected. 
That is why SUMA wants to, in fact, survey its membership to 
determine exactly what the  

extent, exactly what the magnitude of the problem is. 
 
If it had been a problem four years ago, then SUMA would 
have been surveying its membership four years ago. But it 
wasn’t a problem four years ago. And I think the member 
opposite owes it to this Assembly to not engage in such 
excessive hyperbole and exaggeration and distortion. That’s not 
the fact, and he knows full well it’s not the fact. 
 
He was elected by the citizens of Regina North East on the 
expectation that he would deal fairly and reasonably in a factual 
manner here in this Assembly. But you’re not doing that this 
evening. 
 
Liability insurance was not an issue four years ago. It has 
become an issue very recently. This government has recognized 
that it has become an issue very recently. That is why we are 
working diligently with the organizations affected. That is why 
we have been consulting with the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association. That is why they are now 
comprehensively surveying their own members to determine 
exactly what the extent of the problem is. Once they find that 
out, they will be back in consultation with us. Now that’s the 
reasonable and prudent approach to this particular kind of a 
problem. 
 
To suggest that the problems should have been solved four 
years ago, when it wasn’t a problem, is clearly a nonsensical 
suggestion. The member opposite should know that. I think the 
approach that has been taken is the reasonable approach. We 
will continue to meet with SUMA to discuss the matter with 
them, to reach as quickly and as expeditiously as is possible to 
most reasonable and fair way of dealing with this particular 
issue. And that is of course what the Saskatchewan urban 
municipalities would want this particular government to do. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I wish to remind the 
minister that he should at least read his mail, because as it came 
to my desk today, I’m sure it came to his desk yesterday — a 
newsletter. It was a newsletter in which it was referred to some 
comments made by the president of the insurance association of 
Canada. I think I have the correct title of the association. If I 
don’t, I will correct it tomorrow. 
 
But in that newsletter, the president states very clearly that the 
concerns about liability insurance were being raised, not only 
four years ago, but even before that. Presentations were made to 
different provincial governments, and I’m not sure whether they 
were made to this one, because this government does not seem 
to be quite willing to listen to people very well, but at least four 
years ago, presentations were made to provincial governments, 
not only by people in the public, but by the insurance industry 
itself which were warning that there were going to be serious 
problems in the liability insurance industry. 
 
And the minister stands up today and says the problem didn’t 
happen until this year. Surely, Mr. Minister, you don’t expect 
anybody to believe you when you say that, because you know 
that that’s not true, and you can stand up and say in your usual 
way all you want about that. The facts will not substantiate 
what you’re saying. Because  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

862 
 

one of the things that your government has lacked and the 
reason why the province is in the state that it’s in, is that it’s 
lacked the capability to provide the leadership, and to anticipate 
problems, and to foresee into the future because you didn’t 
bother to do some research and know what’s going to happen. 
Because you lack that leadership, you have not been able to 
address these concerns. 
 
You work on the crisis by crisis basis. That’s the problem. You 
go merrily along and then there is a crisis and you scramble 
around and you decide you’re going to deal with the crisis. So 
instead of planning for the future, you continue to try to put our 
brush fires which causes the problem to get greater. 
 
Now are you saying, Mr. Minister, and I will ask you this 
question again: in light of the fact that governments were being 
warned about this problem at least four years ago, why has it 
not been possible for your government to know about that and 
anticipate the problem and deal with it earlier than 1986? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, I wasn’t Minister of Urban 
Affairs four years ago, but I would like to comment about the 
time period for years ago. But before I do that, I want to draw to 
the member’s attention that if liability insurance was a pressing 
issue to urban municipalities four years ago, then one would 
expect that they would have brought forward resolutions and 
debated it and discussed it heatedly at their annual convention 
four years ago in 1982. I would expect that they would have 
done it again in 1983, and that they would have done so in 
1984, and likely even again in 1985, and they likely would have 
discussed liability insurance at their annual convention again in 
1986. Well if the member opposite doesn’t know, I will clue 
him in right now. 
 
The Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association debated 
the issue of liability insurance and brought forward a resolution 
for the first time at their last convention this year in 1986 — not 
1982 or ’83 or ’84 or ’85. The issue was debated in 1986 with 
their resolution. So for the member to suggest that it was a 
pressing issue four years ago, certainly doesn’t seem to jive 
with what the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association 
has been dealing with. 
 
In fact I suggest that four years ago the pressing issue here for 
the people of Saskatchewan was not liability insurance, the 
pressing issue was interest rates. And I would ask the member 
opposite: what did you do as minister of Finance to protect the 
people of Saskatchewan from high interest rates? Did you do 
anything? Did you anticipate the problem of high interest rates? 
 
You didn’t need to anticipate it. It had been with you for a long 
period of time. Not only did you not anticipate it, you did 
absolutely nothing to alleviate the problem of high interest rates 
facing the average person here in the province of Saskatchewan 
— absolutely nothing. And the people of Saskatchewan 
remember. They remember when interest rates were 18, 19, 20 
per cent; that it was an NDP administration that did absolutely 
nothing to assist them. 

And back in 1982 they remember that when you were minister 
of Finance it wasn’t liability insurance that was the pressing 
issue which you seem to suggest was the case back in 1982, a 
pressing issue was inflation, and the cost of gasoline in the 
province of Saskatchewan was going up and up and up and up 
in an inflationary way — not liability insurance going up and 
up, but gasoline was going up and up. 
 
And you were the minister of Finance and you did nothing to 
alleviate that particular cost. So I would remind the member 
opposite, this government dealt with interest rates, this 
government dealt with gas tax. Liability insurance was not an 
issue then. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, here you go again. 
I’m quite aware of the fact that you weren’t the minister of 
Urban Affairs until December when the Premier decided he had 
to make some cosmetic changes in the look of your cabinet. I’m 
not questioning that. But you were indeed a member of the 
Executive Council, and you would have been party to 
discussions around the cabinet table on issues of the day and 
problems that people and municipalities and families face in 
Saskatchewan. So you would have been part of any decisions 
with regard to liability insurance or property tax increases or the 
destruction of the revenue sharing formula which your 
government brought about. 
 
Don’t blame it on the municipalities. The members of this 
government always tend to slough it off on somebody else. 
When the Ombudsman brings a problem to your attention, you 
say he’s wrong and you’re right. Church organizations bring a 
problem to your attention, and you say they’re wrong and 
you’re right. Individuals bring problems to your attention, you 
say they’re all wrong but you’re right. You’re always right. 
That is not an acceptable way for a democratic government to 
work. Other people are right sometimes too. Or at least they 
deserve to have their problems and their concerns given some 
consideration. 
 
Your government in its arrogant way refuses to give them the 
time of day. Everybody who has ever brought any problem . . . 
We’ve debated that in the legislature, Mr. Minister, with regard 
to the Ombudsman’s report; we did it again today; and instead 
of giving the Ombudsman a chance to come in here and say 
what he’s got to say under questioning from all of us, you use 
your big majority to shut that down. Now if that isn’t arrogance, 
I don’t know how you would define the concept of arrogance. 
That is the worst kind of arrogance. 
 
You prefer to stand up and beat up on a defenceless public 
servant who was supposed to report to this legislature — he 
doesn’t report to any minister — rather than give him a chance 
to come into this legislature and be questioned by the members 
here so that he could make it clear what the problems are and 
provide the evidence to support them. 
 
So don’t blame the municipalities for the fact that you did not 
act in the last four years as a government to address the issue of 
liability insurance. The reason that SUMA had to deal with that 
in resolution form this year, Mr. Minister, is because of your 
inaction. You know that organizations  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

863 
 

like SUMA and SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association) set policy and express the direction that they 
would like the government to act on their behalf. But they also 
take action to pressure the government when they feel that their 
government is not acting on their behalf. 
 
And many of the delegates that I spoke to in SUMA felt 
strongly that your government had done nothing and that it was 
time to stand up at their annual meeting and say to the 
government, get off whatever it is you’re sitting on and do 
something about it. 
 
(2000) 
 
That’s why that resolution was considered this year, because 
during all the rest of the time they still had some faith in your as 
a government, that you would get around to doing something. 
But after they saw that you were not prepared to do anything, 
they knew that they had to use another course which they don’t 
normally do, but do when they feel that there is no other 
channel available to them. 
 
Why do you think they were concerned? Well, I’ll give you 
another example. Let me give you the example of the city of 
Prince Albert. Now if you were involved in the council of the 
city of Prince Albert, Mr. Minister, and you had this come to 
your attention, don’t you think you’d want to pass a resolution 
urging the government to take some action? The city of Prince 
Albert carried $10 million in liability insurance in 1985. They 
paid a premium of $30,000. The insurance coverage was 
renewed on December 31, 1985 and once again it so happens 
that the company was SGI, and it was renewed for $5 million, 
not 10, $5 million worth of coverage — half the coverage of 
1985 — and the city of Prince Albert is now paying $84,000 in 
premiums — triple what it was. 
 
And I ask you as a member of the Executive Council, are you 
saying to this House that your insurance company, a good 
insurance company, the Saskatchewan Government Insurance, 
was not informing the government over the period of the last 
four years that this was going to come? I suspect if it was, then 
either you weren’t listening or your minister in charge of SGI 
wasn’t reporting this information to the cabinet. Either way it’s 
wrong. Either way you have failed. 
 
Now there are many other examples of these kinds of atrocious 
increases. And you know as well as I know why these increases 
have taken place. They’ve taken place because Saskatchewan 
taxpayers are asked to pay for the tragedies in Beaupal and the 
Iran-Iraq war, and every time a tanker gets blown up, liability 
insurance companies have to pay out and the Saskatchewan 
taxpayer has his and her premium increase to pay for that. They 
have to have an increase to pay for that. 
 
Any responsible government, knowing that this was happening, 
would have taken some steps to take the initiative, meet with 
the SUMA people, meet with the school boards, meet with the 
hospital representatives, take the leadership and begin to work 
out with them some solution to the problem before it reached 
the crisis stage. But as it seems is the pattern of the way you 
operate, you wait for the crisis to hit you between the eyes like 
a broad  

axe and then you get woken up and you decide you must do 
something about it. 
 
Well you may eventually get around to do something about it, 
but you cannot any longer recoup the 80-some thousand dollars 
that Prince Albert had to pay as opposed to the $30,000 they 
had to pay a year ago. They spent that money. The insurance 
company has got that money, and one would have thought that 
you would have at least considered some program like — let’s 
use SGI. Let’s have SGI provide a liability coverage. Let the 
Saskatchewan government be the reinsurer. Let SGI set it’s 
rates according to the risk factor in Saskatchewan. 
 
And that’s quite a legitimate argument, because whether . . . 
Because ultimately you as a government — or the New 
Democratic Party as a government — but the Government of 
Saskatchewan, when there is a disaster, will have to bear that 
cost in one form or another. So if you bear it by spending 
money in a budget or by special warrant when the problem or 
the disaster is created, or whether you set up a mechanism 
through SGI where you become the reinsurer, it’s still going to 
cost you the money. But at least you would have been building 
up a fund which you could have used to provide insurance 
coverage. You chose not to do that. You chose not to do that. 
 
And now when SUMA, faced with these kinds of atrocious 
increases, passes resolutions and has a debate — and I’m glad 
they did — you decide it’s time to do a study. Oh heavens, you 
don’t do a study about how do you keep the cattle in the barn 
after the cattle have run away. You don’t do a study on how you 
keep the horse in the barn after the horse has gone, and then you 
shut the door. That’s what you’ve done. 
 
And I ask you again: why was your government not capable or 
willing to provide some leadership before the crisis happened, 
so that you could have begun to address the issue before this 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite has 
made a number of comments with reference to SGI I’m sure 
that the minister responsible for SGI will want to deal with 
those in the Crown corporations. But I would simply remind the 
member opposite that it was under the NDP administration that 
SGI got involved in a tangle of international reinsurance issues. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Mr. Minister, if I may suggest, we should 
stay as much to Urban Affairs as we could and not straggle out. 
The former speaker brought it up and straggled off topic but 
related it very quickly. If the minister would do that, we would 
keep the House in order this evening and get the business done. 
So would both members take that advice, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I appreciate the comments of the chairman. 
I certainly want to restrict our comments to Urban Affairs. And 
there is some tie-in to SGI because of the liability insurance 
issue as it pertains to municipalities. 
 
And of course one of the reasons why SGI had its difficulties 
over the year with the former administration,  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

864 
 

which we unfortunately are still living with today, is because 
the former NDP administration involved SGI in a terrible 
international tangle of reinsurance schemes which literally cost 
the taxpayer here in the province of Saskatchewan millions and 
millions of dollars. And we’ve been trying to extricate 
ourselves from that, and I’m sure the minister will want to talk 
about that later when he has time. 
 
I would simply remind the member opposite that the issue of 
liability insurance only became a pressing issue in late 1985, 
and it was at that time that we as a government in fact initiated 
discussions with some of the major organizations involved. And 
I would remind you that we have met with the Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association. We have met with the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities to discuss 
this matter. We’ve discussed this matter with the universities. 
We’ve discussed the mater with the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association — just to show you the broad scope of 
organizations that we have had the kinds of discussions that we 
should have. 
 
Leadership is not simply saying, ah, there’s a problem — here’s 
our solution; and jamming that solution down people’s throats. 
That may have been the approach that the former administration 
took. I don’t believe that that really is leadership at all. 
Leadership is in fact recognizing a problem, working with those 
particular organizations that are affected by it to solve the 
particular problem, to find the best possible solution. 
 
That is in fact exactly what we are doing at this particular point 
in time. And as I indicated, that is what the Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association is doing. They are providing 
leadership themselves as an organization to their member 
agencies, by sending out the questionnaire which they have, 
which is requesting very detailed and comprehensive 
information from their member associations. And they will be 
reviewing that. And on the basis of that they will be deciding 
whether or not they in fact want to set up their own particular 
insurance scheme. 
 
Now I suspect the member opposite would have liked to have 
seen the government impose some kind of a scheme upon the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association. That might 
have been the approach of the former NDP administration. It’s 
certainly not the approach of this Progressive Conservative 
administration. We would rather work with organizations than 
work against them or work at them. Working with them is 
leadership. And I think that that has been borne out in the past 
and you will find that borne out in the future as well. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, you say that liability 
insurance premiums became an issue in 1985, I agree — it 
became a crisis in 1985. But I once again remind you that 
leadership is to anticipate the potential problem and deal with it 
before it becomes the crisis. And that’s what we have been 
talking about here this evening. 
 
You did not anticipate because you did not bother to look 
ahead. A tradition of your government is you’re always looking 
either backwards, as you just did talking about  

the SGI’s liability insurance things, prior to 1982 . . . You talk 
about the past. You’re backward looking. You never talk about 
your record because you know it’s a bad one. And you never 
talk about the kind of leadership you’ve had because you 
haven’t provided any. 
 
If you had, in any sense, cared about the kinds of problems that 
municipalities might face — and that’s part of your 
responsibility as a government: look ahead, do some planning, 
anticipate the problem, and begin to deal with it before it 
becomes a crisis. 
 
Since you did not deal with it, are you now prepared at least, 
Mr. Minister, to provide municipalities with some funding to 
cover the extra costs that they’ve had because they have had to 
pay up to 400 and 500 per cent more in liability insurance 
premium? Is your government prepared to consider providing 
financial assistance to municipality to cover those costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, I think it’s important to 
remind the member opposite that the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association is presently undertaking a very 
comprehensive survey of its member organizations to determine 
exactly what their own liability insurance needs and problems 
are. And to suggest that somehow the senior government 
should, at this particular point in time, commit itself to 
providing additional funds to cover liability insurance costs, I 
don’t believe is a responsible position to take. 
 
What is a responsible position to take is to work with the 
particular organization, the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association, to find out with them exactly what the particular 
liability insurance needs are of their member organizations — 
and we don’t know yet what the survey is going to produce — 
and then to sit down with them to determine how best to deal 
with the particular issue. 
 
The member knows that we provide unconditional revenue 
sharing grants to municipalities. If he looks in the blue book 
this year, he will see that there is an increase in information, or 
in revenue, that will be provided to the urban municipalities. 
And of course they can spend that according to their own 
particular priorities. 
 
So I would simply reiterate that we recognized that the liability 
insurance problem has hit a number of municipalities, and other 
kinds of organizations, not just municipalities. We have moved 
to consult very quickly with the organizations that are involved 
and we will be working with them to not impose what we 
believe to be our solution, but to work with them to find out 
what we together believe will be the best solution for the 
organizations here in the province. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: Mr. Minister, it’s not a question of 
imposing. And I had not suggested that, and I would not suggest 
that. The issue here is not whether you impose something or 
whether you not impose something. You may choose to deviate 
a discussion to get away from answering the question. And 
that’s fine. That’s quite appropriate in debate, and I’m prepared 
to get into the debate with you. So we’re not dealing here with a 
question of what you might impose. We’re here dealing  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

865 
 

with a question of neglect by your government, and what you 
might be prepared to do to make up for the errors of your ways 
in the last four years. 
 
(2015) 
 
You must know, Mr. Minister, that in some municipalities the 
increase in money that they have to pay for liability insurance is 
greater than the increase in revenue sharing that you’re going to 
provide them this year. And that is a fact. Some municipalities 
will pay more in premiums for liability insurance than you will 
provide them in the increase in your revenue sharing of less 
than 3 per cent. 
 
And you say that you don’t feel you have any responsibility. 
Well I don’t agree. I think you do have some responsibility. 
You have some responsibility to provide in this year, while you 
are working co-operatively with SUMA, to find a solution to 
provide them with some financial assistance to cover this cost, 
or at least a portion of this cost, while you work out a solution 
with all of the other bodies affected. Now why wouldn’t you be 
prepared to do that? Why wouldn’t you be prepared to 
recognize for this one year at least some financial assistance for 
municipalities faced by this increase in premiums to the point 
where many of them are reducing their coverage? And I’m not 
sure that’s wise. I’m not sure that’s wise. Why would you not 
be prepared to do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, I have before me the 
resolution from the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association, and they in fact make no reference whatsoever in 
their resolution to asking the senior government here in the 
province to provide them this year with additional funds to 
cover the liability insurance problem that they have been 
meeting. And I think they have done so responsibly. 
 
They recognize that the reasonable and responsible approach is 
not to simply automatically ask the provincial government for 
additional funds to cover off the liability insurance increases 
that they may be experiencing, but the responsible approach is 
to work together, to define the magnitude of the problem, to 
determine what is the best way to deal with that particular 
problem. And that is what the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association has done. I want to commend them 
for taking that particular responsible approach. 
 
We want to work with them. We certainly will do whatever we 
can as the provincial government here in the province, and I 
certainly will do whatever I can as Minister or Urban Affairs to 
ensure that the liability insurance problem facing municipalities 
is dealt with as expeditiously and directly and effectively as can 
be done. 
 
But I would simply remind the member opposite that the issue 
came up late in 1985. We of course have responded and have 
been consulting with these particular organizations. They to 
date have not requested any special funding and they have been 
responsible in not so doing. And we will be dealing with this 
particular problem with them in a consultative fashion to 
address the particular issue that we together know is a problem 
that they are facing. 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, you may not in your 
term in your portfolio, which comes after your responsibilities 
in Social Services and others . . . I’m not sure whether you had 
the opportunity to address all of the issues surrounding this 
matter adequately up until now. But I remind you that maybe 
you should read a letter that was sent to the former minister of 
Urban Affairs from SUMA after last year’s budget, and that 
letter made it very clear how disappointed SUMA was and 
indeed felt betrayed by your government when you (1) froze the 
revenue sharing at the level it had been in the year before; (2) 
had used discussions that your government had had with SUMA 
around property improvement grants, and cut out the property 
improvement grants which increased by at least $230 on every 
household, and a lot more on farms, the tax burden. 
 
So don’t read one resolution and pretend that that is the only 
concern that this important body representing all the 
municipalities has had. Don’t expect them to incorporate in that 
resolution concerns which they have said to you and your 
government prior to that in the form of a letter to the Premier. 
The letter made it very clear how disappointed SUMA was in 
that your government had decided that SUMA was not going to 
be one of those so-called four pillars that you announced in the 
budget before this last budget. You forgot that the 
municipalities existed. After cutting out that kind of funding — 
because when you consider what inflation has done, when you 
freeze funding you’ve actually made a cut-back — after doing 
that and after SUMA reminding you that that was wrong and 
that they were dissatisfied, do you expect them to include it on a 
resolution which is dealing with liability insurance and what’s 
happening there? Come now, you know very well that that’s not 
a rational argument on your part. Whether SUMA, in their 
resolution, asked for assistance or not, do you not think that the 
government had some responsibility to look at what was 
happening with insurance premiums and provide some 
assistance to municipalities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, we have acted, I believe, 
very responsibly to consult with the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association on the matter of liability insurance. 
We continue to consult with them now. They are in the process 
of surveying their membership to determine the magnitude of 
the particular problem. Once that survey is complete, then we 
will, together, continue to address the particular issue of 
liability insurance. That is the responsible way to go. That is the 
way we will go. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, when did your consultation 
begin? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, I was taking some time to 
question my officials as to exactly when the matter was first 
brought to our attention as a pressing concern. And I would 
remind the member opposite, as a pressing concern on the part 
of the urban municipalities association, which of course 
represents the urban municipalities. 
 
And in fact they did not bring it forward as a pressing concern 
to our attention until early this year, in 1986. And  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

866 
 

in fact our consultations with them, my consultations, began of 
course in the early part of 1986 very soon after I became 
Minister of Urban Affairs. And the member is asking for an 
exact date. I don’t have . . . Well the convention was of course 
in January, so I will have had discussions with them, of course, 
during the month of January. 
 
But we did not receive, to the best of my knowledge, any 
written communication from any particular municipality 
expressing concern about the liability insurance issue. The 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association did not 
formally communicate that particular kind of a concern, as I 
indicated, until in the early part of this year when it in fact was 
dealt with officially and formally on their part and brought to 
our attention as a concern of theirs at convention time. 
 
So as I indicated, the issue really is a 1986 issue and not a 1982 
issue, as the member opposite would suggest. In fact, as soon as 
it was brought to our attention as a concern on the part of the 
municipalities, then we responded to it in consultative fashion 
with them, and we continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well now it’s become a 1986 issue. In 
our previous discussion you said it was a 1985 issue. And I’m 
not sure that you’re sure when the issue was an issue, Mr. 
Minister. Let me ask you another question then, because if you 
only realized that this was a problem in 1986 in February or the 
end of January when there were resolutions at SUMA and there 
were debates expressing concern, then you did not read the 
newspapers like I did, because I had found that this was being 
reported some time before that. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: when did your department 
bring this to your attention as a problem, or when did your 
department bring it to the attention of the former minister that 
this was a problem that the department was addressing and 
therefore the government should address? I know it wasn’t after 
the SUMA convention had raised it; I know it was discussed in 
the department. I want to know, when did the department first 
raise it with either you or the previous minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, my understanding is that 
along with most other provinces in our Dominion of Canada, 
the issue was first being discussed in the very late part of 1986 
— pardon me, 1985 — when the issue first became apparent. 
And I believe that the former minister may have had some very 
preliminary discussions with officials as a consequence of 
likely reading some of the same newspaper articles that were 
surfacing in the very late part of 1985 and the early part of 
1986. 
 
(2030) 
 
As I indicated, SUMA did not bring it to our attention as being 
a concern on their part — that’s the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association. They did not bring it to our 
attention as being a concern on their part until in the early part 
of this year. And of course we have been consulting with them 
and working with them ever since then to address the particular 
issue. 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — The intent of my question was to 
determine when it became a concern on your part, Mr. Minister. 
You’re therefore telling me that your department and the 
officials responsible did not address themselves to the issue of 
liability insurance before late 1985 or early 1986. Is that what 
you’re saying, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, I find myself reiterating the 
same point because the issue never really became an issue until 
municipalities began to receive their notification of renewal for 
their policies in the latter part of 1985, some of them in the 
early part of 1986. And it was only then that the issue — 
indeed, when they saw the increases that were there before 
them, that it became an issue for them. And of course the urban 
municipalities association representing the municipalities of 
course brought it forward at the convention, and we had 
discussions, of course, in January. 
 
So we’re talking about a very quick and rapid response in terms 
of consultation and discussion with the urban municipalities and 
their representative association here in the province of 
Saskatchewan — no different really than anything that has 
happened across the country. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, the issue was an issue in 
some provinces in Canada in the early ’80s, in the early 1980s. 
Are you saying that your department did not keep in touch with 
similar departments in other provinces and with whatever 
agency in the federal government is responsible for urban 
affairs? Are you saying that your department was not aware of 
some of the concerns that were being expressed in other parts of 
Canada and were being indeed addressed by other departments 
of municipal affairs in other parts of Canada? Is that what 
you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I would remind the member opposite, or 
bring to his attention, that in fact other provinces have 
addressed the problem in similar fashion, moving to consult 
with those particular organizations that are involved. The 
Federation of Canadian Municipalities as only raising it as a 
significant issue in the very latter part of 1985 and the 
beginning part of 1986, which was of course the same time that 
the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association began to 
deal with the issue in a formal way. All of that was happening 
at the same time — the Canadian organization, the 
Saskatchewan organization, and the Saskatchewan government 
dealing with the issue at the appropriate time in the appropriate 
way. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, in 1979 or 1980, I’m 
not exactly sure on the dates there, representations were made 
to a committee of the Ontario legislature, expressing concern 
about the impending problems with liability insurance. 
Representations made by, not only people of various industries, 
by the insurance association of Canada. 
 
Are you saying in light of that, that no government in Canada, 
which it happens in this period of the last five years or so has 
been almost all Conservative, thought it important enough to 
pay attention to those concerns which were being expressed to 
places like committees of  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

867 
 

the legislature of Ontario? None of those governments, 
including yours, thought it was important enough to have your 
officials do some research on it in order to determine where the 
problem was heading, and what solutions you might be able to 
find in consultation with municipalities, and school boards, and 
hospital boards, and other municipal organizations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I have to chuckle a little bit at the 
member opposite, it seems he kind of walked into this one. If 
you say that it was an issue back in 1979 — seems to me you 
were the government at that time. Seems to me if it was a 
pressing issue the, that you would have done something to 
anticipate the problem, and that back in 1979 you would have 
changed SGI to deal with the issue, or you would have brought 
in some kind of legislation to cap limits, whatever, on liability 
insurance questions. 
 
There’s a host of things that you could have done back in 1979 
if it was a problem. Because clearly you were aware that back 
in 1979, you say it was an issue and a concern. And you say, 
why didn’t this government do something? Well my friend 
you’re being very, very inconsistent. 
 
Back in 1979 if it was an issue and you were aware of it, then if 
you were expressing leadership at that time, you were in the 
cabinet, you would have done something about it. You did 
absolutely nothing about it at that time. And of course the 
reason nothing was done about it is because it was not a 
problem for municipalities back then. So let’s not be 
inconsistent. It was not a problem until very late 1985, early 
1986. That is when this government became aware of it; that is 
when it became an issue for the municipalities involved; that is 
when we began to consult and deal with the particular 
municipalities. 
 
If you want to say that it was an issue back in 1979, then of 
course my response has to be — you should have done 
something about it back in 1979. But you never did anything 
about it back in 1979. And you know full well it wasn’t an issue 
here in Saskatchewan back in 1979 either. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, back in ’79 and ’80 
the flags were being raised. And that’s the point that I’m 
making with you today. The reason I went back that far is 
because I want to highlight the fact that this issue did not come 
upon you or your government in late 1985 or early 1986. 
 
People were aware of it in 1979, and I suggest to you that if we 
had been the government . . . Because only the signals were 
being set, and there were people who were looking at the 
problem across Canada, including here in Saskatchewan. 
Except when you became the government in 1982, and then you 
forgot to follow it and consider it, like you did with lots of other 
programs in various departments of government. And you 
neglected it until 1986 when the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association and other local government bodies 
had to pass resolutions to force you to act. 
 
That’s the point. You could have in the last four years, as we 
would have had we been in the government, provided the kind 
of program or whatever was necessary to meet  

the problem before it actually became reality, which I agree 
with you it did, in late ’85 and early 1986. That’s not what I’m 
arguing. I’m arguing that you knew — maybe not you 
personally — but your government should have known the 
impending problem as other governments did, and should have 
done some work to prepare for 1985 and 1986. 
 
You did not do any work to prepare for 1985 and 1986, because 
you became the government in 1982, and all kinds of 
progressive planning in the Government of Saskatchewan came 
to an end. You became so overwhelmed with this need to help 
your friends in certain sectors of industry like the oil industry, 
certain picked and chosen contracting firms, certain picked and 
chosen advertising firms, that you forgot to address these kinds 
of issues, such as liability insurance, which now has become a 
crisis. And therefore, in order for you to try to soften up the 
political effect on yourself, you decided to announce another 
study. 
 
Mr. Minister, that’s not good enough and you know it. I ask you 
once again, and I ask you this quite sincerely: will you 
reconsider your government’s position and assist the 
municipalities and other associations financially for some of the 
burden that they have to bear because of these atrocious 
increases — and I remind you again, some of them as high as 
500 per cent — in liability insurance premiums? Will you 
reconsider, at least think about what you might do to assist 
them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, certainly it’s my duty as 
Minister of Social Services to draw attention to some of the 
inconsistencies that are being brought forward by the member 
opposite. 
 
He is saying that back in 1979 the flags were being raised. Well 
if they were being raised back in 1979, I will remind you that 
you were in government in 1982, and you brought in a budget 
and a speech from the throne and so on in the 1982 year. And if 
the flags were being raised, you had three years to see the flags. 
You seem to have missed them though, because you didn’t 
bring in any particular legislation to deal with the problem. And 
I can understand that. 
 
The fact of the matter is, it was not a problem back then. If it 
became a problem in 1983, then you would have expected that 
when the municipalities received their renewal notices for 
insurance, that they would have started bringing it to the 
attention of the urban municipalities association in this 
province. And you would have thought that they would have 
brought it to the attention of the Federation of Canadian 
Municipalities. But that was not the case. It was not brought 
forward as a big issue in 1982. 
 
Now if the flags were being raised in 1983, you would have 
thought that they would have — when they received their 
renewal notices — that they would have raised a fuss or a stink 
about it, that they would have brought it forward to the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association for discussion 
and debate. The Federation of Canadian Municipalities in 1983 
would have dealt with it in some formal way, bringing it to the 
attention of governments. But that was not the case. It was also 
not the case in 1984.  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

868 
 

And it was also not the case in 1985, until the very end of the 
year in 1985. 
 
So for the member opposite to go back to 1979 and say that 
somehow the flags were being raised then, therefore, this 
administration should be doing something or should have done 
something in ’83 or ’84 or ’85, simply doesn’t make sense. If it 
were the case, then certainly he should have dealt with it 
because he was in the cabinet under the NDP at that time. But 
they didn’t deal with it, and of course it was not an issue to be 
dealt with then. It was not a big issue at all. 
 
Now he makes reference to . . . well you have given certain gifts 
away to the oil companies. I would remind the member 
opposite, and I’m sure he doesn’t want to be told this 
information again, that it was under this administration that the 
oil patch came alive in the province of Saskatchewan. Under 
your administration the oil patch was basically dead, and 
municipalities as a consequence did not have the people 
working in the oil patch that they should have had working. 
Wells were shut in. Service companies did not exist. Small, 
medium, and junior oil companies were not at work in those 
municipalities paying taxes in those municipalities as they 
could have been. 
 
Under this administration, the oil patch has come alive, and 
year after year after year there have been record increases in the 
number of oil wells drilled. And as a consequence there has 
been a substantial entry of funds into the government coffers in 
the last three or four years. And as a result of that, this 
government has been able to provide capital to municipalities to 
do some of the very important things that need to be done that 
never were done under your administration. 
 
And I will only bring to the remembrance of the Assembly here 
today two examples. The first example, of course, is the 
Saskatoon arena. We see today that the citizens of Saskatoon 
are going to benefit from an arena. And that is something that 
the municipalities are of course very concerned about. Two to 
one, the people in Saskatoon voted in favour of that arena. And 
I understand that some members of the NDP opposition of that 
party were opposed to that particular project in Saskatoon. 
 
(2045) 
 
Now where does the funds come from? Where does the money 
come from to pay for these particular capital projects that are 
needed in these municipalities that citizens of a city like 
Saskatoon vote for in the magnitude of two to one? Well they 
come from an oil patch that has been booming over the last 
number of years here in the province and has brought a lot of 
money into the coffers. Now we know that the oil patch has 
fallen upon difficult times these last few months because of 
international oil prices. But had it not been for that revenue 
coming in over the last few years, the municipalities would not 
have had the funds that they have today. That’s my first 
example. 
 
But I want to bring to the member’s attention what I believe to 
be a very important example for me because I happen to be a 
member from Regina. And in this city, the citizens of this 
municipality for 11 years complained  

about the quality of water that they had to drink. In fact, people 
like my wife and many others refused to drink the water in this 
city during the months of July and August because of the foul 
taste and its foul odour. And I can understand that and 
appreciate that because there were times when I didn’t want to 
drink it either. And I suspect the member opposite who, 
although he lived in Humboldt, occasionally travelled here to 
Regina, he had the same problem with that water. 
 
But did you, when you were minister of Finance, find any 
money in the government coffers to fix up the municipal 
problem here in the city of Regina relating to water? You did 
nothing. For 11 years the people of this city complained, and 
rightly so, to their senior government, provide us with funds to 
fix up the taste and odour problem of Regina’s drinking water. 
Absolutely nothing was done. The Progressive Conservative 
government came into power in 1982. We immediately put in 
place a study to review the problem, to see what was the best 
way to deal with it, and then we took action. You were talking 
about leadership. Well I suggest to you that to leave that 
problem fester for 11 years certainly wasn’t leadership under 
your administration, or under your tenure as Minister of 
Finance. 
 
We moved very quickly, very expeditiously, to take the money 
out of a booming oil patch which is taking revenue into the 
government coffers, taking that money out of the government 
coffers, providing some of it to the municipalities that you were 
just talking about to say that they were underfunded, to solve a 
very serious problem here in the city of Regina that you were 
not interested in solving; that you never had money to solve; 
and that I suspect you weren’t going to solve if you had gotten 
power again. And I’m very thankful that you didn’t, because 
today the people of the city of Regina have good drinking 
water. It’s because this government is concerned about 
municipal issues and I think we can all be proud of that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, here we go again. Mr. Chairman, 
we have now opened up the debate fairly wide and the minister 
had decided to try to get away from the question of liability 
insurance and talk about other issues. Well fine. We can do that 
too. But obviously the minister has not been prepared to answer 
some of the questions that deal with whether the government is 
prepared to provide financial assistance to municipalities due to 
the government’s neglect causing great cost to them in liability 
insurance premiums. He has yet to answer directly the question 
whether his officials in the  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

869 
 

department presented him or his minister before him with any 
recommendation or any indication, prior to this 1986 year, that 
there was a problem developing in liability insurance that the 
government should be addressing. You have not yet answered 
that question, Mr. Speaker, other than talk about it in 
generalities. And I wonder why you would not answer that 
question. 
 
In 1982, if you want to get into that debate, I want to tell you 
what happened. There was in 1982 an adequate revenue sharing 
program. When you became the government, you destroyed it. 
You did away with the revenue sharing program which had 
been developed in consultation with the SARM and SUMA. It 
was as much their revenue sharing program as that of the 
government of . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member 
from Regina Victoria wants to shout from his seat. Well if he 
wants to shout from his seat, Mr. Chairman, I’m prepared to sit 
down and have him get up and make his remarks and ask some 
questions. 
 
Thank you. I’m glad he’s decided that he has nothing to say. I 
will continue. In 1982, Mr. Minister, the Government of 
Saskatchewan had a budget in which the revenue sharing 
program was a good and real revenue sharing program. When 
you became the government, you destroyed that revenue 
sharing program and it no longer existed in that form. There 
was no longer any way to determine how much municipalities 
were going to get in revenue sharing, because you wiped it out. 
You talk about constant dialogue with municipalities. Well I’ll 
tell you something. We had continuous dialogue with 
municipalities and together with the municipalities, we were 
able to anticipate problems and deal with them before they 
became a crisis — something you haven’t done with the issue 
of liability insurance. 
 
If you want to boast about the great viability of the oil patch 
today, you can go ahead and do that. If your policies have really 
done so much for the oil patch, I ask you why are there 
thousands of people in the oil patch of Saskatchewan being laid 
off and have been laid off and are without jobs. And you know 
that they are. You have a funny, perverted view . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Did the minister from Maple Creek have 
something to say? Because she’s yelling from her seat again. 
I’ll wait till she’s finished, Mr. Chairman. She’s now completed 
her comments. I will continue. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have a very . . . Your government has a very 
perverted view of how you develop economic policy. When the 
oil industry was healthy, as it was in recent years, what do you 
do? You pour money into the oil industry. When the oil 
industry was healthy, you handed over to the oil industry $300 
million a year and said, here, this is yours — when they didn’t 
need the help. 
 
Today, when the oil industry is in trouble, you say, when your 
Premier goes to Ottawa to meet with the Prime Minister — who 
isn’t there, because he’s down in Florida — when the Premier 
goes to Ottawa, what do they discuss? They discuss how they’re 
going to take off the PGRT (petroleum and gas revenue tax) tax 
but put it on the consumer so that the consumer has to then 
subsidize the oil industry. Now what kind of strange logic is 
that to raise funding to be able to provide adequate funding for  

urban municipalities? What kind of peculiar logic is that? I 
don’t understand. 
 
You’re asking the consumer, and you did ask the property tax 
payer, to almost double his taxes since you were in government, 
or certainly have a very significant increase. Because you were 
not prepared to take a fair rent from the oil which Saskatchewan 
people owned, you decided that the oil companies ought to get 
$400 million a year, and therefore you were not prepared to get 
that money and help municipalities pay for the cost of services 
that they were confronted with. 
 
If you had such a great entry of money from the oil industry, 
Mr. Minister, why did revenue sharing funds have to be frozen 
for the last fiscal year? You talked about the significant 
increases in oil revenues and how they were helping 
municipalities. Tell me, if that was such a great help to 
municipalities, because of this tremendous increase of revenue 
from oil, why did you freeze revenue sharing funds in 1985 and 
1986? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite has 
talked about a number of matters in his talk in the last few 
minutes. He talked about the oil companies, for example. And I 
think perhaps it’s important to deal with that particular issue to 
set the matter straight, because the oil revenue that this province 
has received has certainly helped this particular government 
provide the kinds of services to certain areas here in the 
province that municipalities are concerned about. 
 
Let me give you an example. The rural municipalities here in 
the province and some of the smaller urban municipalities are 
very concerned that we have a viable agriculture industry in the 
province. Without that viable agriculture industry those 
municipalities are going to suffer and those municipal 
governments are going to suffer. 
 
So we decided as a government that it was very important to 
take the funds that we had last year and to put those funds into 
agriculture. We all know that agriculture is the backbone of 
Saskatchewan’s economy. We all know that the Premier of this 
province and this government certainly understands agriculture 
far more so than the former NDP administration ever did. And 
we decided to place an emphasis on agriculture last year 
because of the very difficult straits that agriculture was finding 
itself in. 
 
Now we could have reduced the assistance that had gone to 
agriculture and we could have provided some more assistance 
— 1 per cent or 2 per cent or whatever increase — to urban 
municipalities. But we felt that it would be more appropriate to 
put a stress on agriculture, because that is the backbone of our 
economy. When agriculture is in difficult times, then this 
province suffers. And we believed that we needed to shore up 
agriculture, and indeed that is what the Premier has done. 
 
So that certainly was one of our priorities as to where the 
dollars were going to go. And then of course we had additional 
priorities, one of them being health care, to provide additional 
funding — and I don’t want to talk about the large area of 
health care because we spent a good deal of time dealing with 
that particular issue. 
  



 
April 24, 1986 

870 
 

But if the member wants to know where the significant dollars 
went in last year’s budget in terms of major increases, certainly 
the area of agriculture is where those dollars went. That is 
where they should have gone. And I think the member opposite 
betrays his misunderstanding, or lack of understanding, for 
what Saskatchewan is all about when he says that you should 
have been taking money from somewhere else and putting it 
over here. And agriculture would suffer as a consequence, and I 
think that’s what the implication would be. We don’t want that 
to happen. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite talked about the oil 
companies. And I think it’s important, as I indicated when I 
rose to my feet, that a number of points be stressed here. 
 
Under the former administration, grants were paid to oil 
companies to drill a hole. If they had a dry hole the grant was 
still paid out. Now the chairman is wondering whether or not 
this is on the topic. The member opposite was talking about the 
revenues that were coming from oil companies, and how those 
revenues were derived, and as a consequence how the 
municipalities receive more funds or less funds. Okay? So it’s 
important to understand. 
 
Under the former administration grants were paid to large oil 
companies — and that’s about all we had here in the province, 
were large oil companies; we didn’t have any of the small or 
junior or medium-sized companies — grants were paid to large 
oil companies even if they drilled dry holes. And millions and 
millions of dollars were paid out under the NDP administration 
to the large oil companies, the Mobiles and the Gulfs and the 
Shells of this world, even if they drilled dry holes. 
 
When this administration took over we changed that policy — 
we changed that policy. And as a consequence of that policy 
being changed, a large number of small and medium and junior 
and middle-size companies established here in the province of 
Saskatchewan — our own people setting up their own oil 
companies to drill for oil. As the consequence of that economic 
activity that was generated, literally thousands and thousands of 
jobs were created. As a consequence of that, taxes were paid 
that would not have been paid, revenue flowed into the 
government coffers that would not have flowed into the coffers. 
 
As a consequence, the government had a larger pool of money 
coming in from the oil patch that it can now pay out in various 
areas in terms of services. Many of those services went to 
municipal concerns, such as to fix up the water, to provide an 
arena, and to provide a host of other things. Some of that money 
last year went to shore up the agriculture problem here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I know the member opposite would like to deceive the 
public and suggest that $300 million was given away to the oil 
companies. That simply is not the fact; he knows it and I know 
it. What is the fact is that the oil patch boomed under this 
particular government; and as a consequence of that boom, 
revenue flowed into the government, and that revenue was used 
to do the kinds of  

things that should have been done a long time ago and were 
never done under your administration. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Mr. Minister, and Mr. Member from 
Regina, if we could tighten the subject back more to the 
estimates. Both members have been allowed to stray, and each 
time the straying gets larger and larger and larger. So would 
you draw the bow in tighter and try to stay on topic. And 
second of all, would members on their feet and in their chairs 
stop trying to draw other members in their seats into the debate. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I shall tighten this bow as 
soon as I respond to the remarks of the minister opposite. The 
minister opposite just talked about their oil policy, and I’m 
going to talk about their oil policy. Because the public of 
Saskatchewan knows, as well as you know, Mr. Chairman — 
because you have municipalities in your constituency that have 
paid a price, a very serious price, because this government 
chose not to make them a priority but chose to make their 
friends in the oil industry a priority. 
 
(2100) 
 
I say that the public of Saskatchewan knows that the taxpayers 
of this province lost $300 million a year in revenues from oil 
because of the following policy of this government. They 
allowed oil companies to drill new wells on existing oil fields 
called infill wells — no exploration involved, no risk involved, 
no expenditure of development money other than to drill a hole. 
And you know what they did, Mr. Chairman? They then said to 
those oil companies, you get a tax-free holiday. 
 
Now does that make sense to say to an oil company, here is the 
well, here is the field; drill anywhere inside this existing field 
that everybody knows about and pump the oil as hard as you 
can, because we’re not going to charge you any royalties for it. 
That’s why $300 million a year have been lost — because of 
that kind of policy. 
 
And so what do you think happened? Oil companies pumped as 
fast as they could out of those new wells. They reduced the 
pumpage on existing wells. They got the holidays on the new 
wells which they didn’t have to do any exploration for, and they 
ripped off the Saskatchewan public with the help of this 
government. That’s what happened. That’s why this 
government had to freeze revenue sharing and neglect all kinds 
of other funding for programs in many other departments as 
well as this minister’s department. 
 
And I know my colleague from Regina Centre, either later 
today or tomorrow, is going to show some good examples about 
how funding for all aspects of municipal affairs since 1982 have 
been reduced, because this department and programs under this 
department have not been considered to be important enough to 
this government to provide them the fair share of the provincial 
revenues. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you again: if there were such great revenues 
from the oil industries that were supposed to benefit all of 
Saskatchewan people, why did your government freeze the 
revenue sharing in 1985-1986? And don’t stand up and make 
the same old speech,  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

871 
 

because you can’t play God in here. 
 
Your budget was presented last year in April. That means that 
decisions on that budget were made prior to April; they were 
made in December and January, February, winter-time. Surely 
you’re not going to stand up and say that when you were 
making those decisions to freeze the revenue sharing that you 
knew there was going to be a drought? 
 
Don’t try to kid the troops, because nobody is going to believe 
you. You did not know about an agricultural drought. The 
money that you paid for drought relief was paid as special 
warrant; it was not paid out of any budget provision that was 
made in the 1985-1986 budget, Mr. Minister. 
 
So don’t try to argue that you froze revenue sharing because 
somehow you knew there was going to be a drought, and 
therefore you took money away from municipalities so that you 
can provide drought assistance and help our farmers — help 
which they badly needed. How can you say that you knew there 
was going to be a drought, and so you froze revenue sharing for 
municipalities because you were going to spend that money 
somewhere else? 
 
I ask you again, Mr. Minister, can you justify freezing revenue 
sharing in 1985-1986 when you say that your government was 
getting such terrific revenues into the treasury? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I wonder if the member opposite is in 
agreement with his leader, the Leader of the Opposition, who 
has recently come out in favour of tax holidays in the oil patch 
— in favour of tax holidays in the oil patch. Now you’re saying 
that you are not in favour of tax holidays in the oil patch. You 
can’t have it both ways. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition has seen the light, and he has now 
come out in favour of the program that this government has had 
in operation over the last four years. It’s unfortunate he didn’t 
see the light a lot sooner. 
 
I want to remind the member opposite that the tax holiday was 
put in place in 1982, and in ’83-84 there was a 7 per cent 
increase in revenue sharing to the municipalities. Pardon me, in 
’82-83 there was an 8.3 per cent escalator, plus cash; an 11.5 
per cent increase which we honoured — which we honoured — 
and we brought in a tax holiday at the same time. So to suggest 
that somehow the tax holiday had a negative impact upon urban 
municipalities simply is contradicted by the facts. 
 
Here are the facts: in ’82-83 a tax holiday is on which is 
generating revenue for the government, and as a consequence 
we have an 11.5 per cent increase during the course of that year; 
’83-84, the oil recovery program is in place and we have a 7 per 
cent increase to the revenue sharing pool; ’84-85, the tax 
holiday is in place and we have a 5 per cent increase in the 
revenue sharing pool; ’85-86, the oil recovery program is in 
place, the revenue sharing pool is held at zero because 
agriculture is in difficult straits in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And every farmer here in the province is very, very happy  

that this government took the decision it should take, and that is 
to provide significant amounts of assistance to agriculture, to 
the farmers of this province, to ensure that their livelihood is 
maintained. That’s the priority that the people of this province 
would want. 
 
So when you take a look at the overall picture, you will see that 
the oil recovery program not only created thousands of jobs, not 
only benefited those immediate communities and those smaller 
municipalities out there in rural Saskatchewan where the oil 
recovery program is taking place, but that program over the last 
three or four years generated substantial revenue which came 
into the government coffers and went out to do the kinds of 
things such as fixing up the taste and odour of Regina’s 
drinking water. I think everything has taken place exactly the 
way it should. 
 
I see the member opposite suggesting that Regina’s drinking 
water has finally been fixed up, and it certainly has under a 
Progressive Conservative government. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, my colleague wants to get 
into this so I’m going to let him — except after I say this. 
 
The difference between an incentive policy for exploration for 
new-found oil and your policy is really quite a wide difference. 
Your policy was to provide gifts to oil companies for putting in 
more wells in existing oil fields. 
 
Our policy would be to provide incentive for oil companies to 
go out there and find new oil fields, which is something your 
policy never did. It’s something your policy never did. 
 
Mr. Minister, your whole tax holiday has had a negative effect, 
and you just showed us how. In your own statistics you showed 
us how. You said that in 1982 and 1983, which was a budget 
which was presented by the former NDP government, which 
you honoured because you didn’t dare change that part of it — 
you changed many other parts of it, but that part you didn’t dare 
change — the funding to municipalities in revenue sharing was 
increased by 8.3 per cent. 
 
It went down to 7 per cent in 1983-1984 when your oil policy 
should have been bringing you buckets full of more revenue to 
the treasury, and therefore it should have been able to be shared 
with municipalities and assist them. Instead, instead you 
reduced the revenue sharing to 7 per cent. 
 
In 1984-1985, when that oil revenue should have just been 
pouring in, you reduced the increase to 5 per cent. And in 
1985-1986, before the oil industry was in trouble, you set a 
budget in which you froze revenue sharing. 
 
You’ve just defeated your own argument. You have just 
showed the kind of neglect that you have had for municipalities. 
Are you suggesting, Mr. Minister, that in 1985 when you were 
preparing the budget for 1985-1986, you were anticipating a 
drought? Is that what you’re saying, Mr. Minister? I don’t think 
so. You didn’t know that there was going to be a drought any 
more than  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

872 
 

the member from Saskatoon Eastview or the member from 
Regina North, or South — or any other of your members. No 
one can anticipate a drought and that’s why governments will 
always argue when you talk about those kinds of problems. You 
don’t budget for drought. 
 
Your own Minister of Finance said in his budget speech, you 
can’t budget for drought. You didn’t budget for drought when 
the farmers’ problems were really beginning. Mr. Minister, you 
froze revenue sharing because you refused to provide assistance 
to municipalities simply because you did not include them as 
part of those pillars of yours for whatever you call it. You 
forgot municipalities. And because you decided that instead of 
trying to share revenues around and charging from the oil 
companies an adequate amount of taxation, you were going to 
shift the tax burden, once again, on to property tax payers. And 
that’s what you did, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I would like to continue the discussion 
concerning the oil patch policy. I think the people in the oil 
patch certainly know what a benefit it has been in the many 
thousands of jobs that have been created. 
 
I would simply draw to the member’s attention that inflation 
rates, national inflation rates, ’83-84 for example, 5.8 per cent 
inflation and yet we provided a 7 per cent increase; and ’84-85, 
4.4 per cent and we provided a 5 per cent increase. I think that 
the levels in increase in the revenue sharing pool over the years 
have been very reasonable levels of increase. I think the 
decision to provide additional funds to agriculture last year was 
certainly the appropriate way to go. If you ask people here in 
the province of Saskatchewan, where should the dollars be 
spent when you’re in a time of drought, they would say, 
emphasize agriculture. And that’s certainly what this 
government has done. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. Mr. Minister, I 
wonder if you would give me the grants to the cities in 
Saskatchewan for 1986-87. Read them slow enough so that I 
can write them down. Either that or hand me the sheet if it’s a 
tear-off? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — To the member opposite I would ask the 
question: under what program? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I meant to say revenue sharing, if I forgot. 
Grants to the cities under revenue sharing for 1986-87. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I would ask the member: does he want the 
actual amount of grant that is going to each of the urban 
municipalities in the province or just the cities in the province? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The urban municipalities . . . If you’re 
going to read it it would be too lengthy to give me all the 
urbans. If it’s a tear-off sheet, that would be useful. If you’re 
going to read it, then I’ll have to be satisfied with the cities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We could xerox the entire copy off to you 
and provide that to you first thing tomorrow when we come 
back. I could read some of the cities off to you, but  

once again the list is not all that long but would take some time. 
Perhaps I should just xerox the whole thing and give it to you 
first thing tomorrow, or do you want me to read the list of the 
grants for the cities? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Just give me Regina, Saskatoon, and 
Moose Jaw now, and give me the rest tomorrow morning. We’ll 
have something to go on tonight. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The total grant for Regina would be 
$16,163,880; for Saskatoon, 15,242,059; for Moose Jaw, 
3,742,544. Is that sufficient or would you like me to keep 
going? 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes I do, actually. The member from 
Regina North, South, whatever it is for the next few months — 
it will be the ex-member for Regina North and then will not be 
the current member for Regina South — wants to know why I 
care. 
 
About a couple of months ago I had occasion to have the 
springs changed in a Chevette that I drive around town. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That little red one. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, a little red one. The person who was 
changing the springs was telling me what a land office business 
he had been doing. And I realized as I was listening to him tell 
me how great business was that I wasn’t the only one that was 
finding the streets awful rough. I think most citizens in Regina, 
and I expect Saskatoon, are finding the streets deteriorating 
very badly. 
 
When I look at the assistance given to the municipalities, the 
reason for that is obvious. The CPI (consumer price index) in 
Canada has increased by 27 per cent since April, 1982. Let’s 
say March to March, since the April figures aren’t in. Since the 
April figures, the CPI has increased by 27 per cent. The 
assistance given to the municipalities under revenue sharing has 
increased by 10 per cent. The difference, and I think one can 
generally assume that the urban municipalities have faced the 
same increases in cost as everybody else, the difference is seen 
in higher taxes, rougher streets, deteriorating surfaces. 
 
So I guess my question, Mr. Minister, having got these from 
you, and I want to see the rest: how do you expect 
municipalities to get along on a 10 per cent increase over the 
four years you’ve been in office when their costs have gone up 
by 27 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, I apologize for taking so 
long, but there were a number of statistics and pieces of 
information that we were looking at here. But I see that in the 
last year of the NDP administration, I believe revenue sharing 
was around 53 million. And it’s anticipated to be around 67 
million this particular year. And I would just check with my 
official here for a minute. That comes to a 26 per cent increase 
in revenue sharing and not a 10 per cent increase as the member 
opposite suggested. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — In the 10 years which you have been in 
office — in the four years — it seems like 10, it seems  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

873 
 

like 10; I tell you, it seems like a hundred. In the four years in 
which you’ve been in office, you have increased revenue 
sharing by 10 per cent, Mr. Minister. You’re actually spending 
less in this department now than when you were when you 
came into office. 
 
And I can go through some other statistics for you, Mr. 
Minister. Your increase has gone up by 10 per cent. If $60 
million was an appropriate figure in 1982-83, how on earth can 
67 million be an appropriate figure four year later with 27 per 
cent inflation. That, Mr. Minister, is why the gentleman selling 
springs and shocks is doing such a land office business in 
Regina. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, the member conveniently 
neglects very important pieces of information when he 
compares this particular four-year period. He forgets that water 
programs that were previously delivered in Urban Affairs, of 
course are now being delivered through the water Crown. He 
forgets that certain ambulance funding and programs has gone 
to the Department of Health. He forgets that funds for the 
property improvement grant have now gone to assist education. 
There are a number of things that, of course, he forgets, or 
neglects, or forgot about. I’m not too sure. So when he makes 
his comparisons, he, of course, in all fairness, needs to take 
those things into consideration, and he hasn’t done that. 
 
I would remind the member again that the revenue sharing pool 
went from 53 million in ’81-82, the last fiscal year of your 
administration, to 67 million under this particular government. 
That was a substantial increase in the order of around 24, 25, 26 
per cent, and I think that’s something that is very realistic. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, if the revenue sharing 
formula had been left in place, how much would the increase 
have been? If the revenue sharing formula, which we don’t have 
any more, but if the revenue sharing formula had been left 
untouched, what would the increase have been? 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I’m surprised that the member opposite 
would want to talk about the revenue sharing pool, because I’m 
sure all members of the Assembly will want to be reminded that 
that revenue sharing formula was tied in directly to that old stiff 
NDP gas tax. Well . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s inaccurate; that’s not right. 
You’re misleading. Your officials will tell you that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Under your administration — under your 
administration there was a gas tax. There was a gas tax. Now 
the members opposite have some concerns; they don’t want to 
hear the gas tax talked about. But there was a gas tax under 
your administration, and of course it was escalating. It went up 
and up, year after year. and as a consequence the municipalities, 
of course, had to pay far more for gasoline in comparative 
purposes than they have had to during the last four years. 
 
Without a gas tax, the municipalities have in fact saved 
substantial amounts of money, as have the school boards,  

as have many other organizations here in the province. All of 
those organizations that had substantial travel costs had to pay a 
very stiff NDP provincial gas tax. That tax was removed in 
1982, and since 1982 the municipalities have saved a 
substantial amount of money because that tax has not been 
there. 
 
Now we hear the members opposite wanting to assure the 
public of Saskatchewan that that gas tax would not be back on 
if an NDP administration was in power. Well, I remind the 
members opposite, and I remind the people of Saskatchewan 
that the NDP were wedded to a gas tax then and I suspect 
they’re wedded to a gas tax now. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you said earlier that the 
ambulance program and a water program had been taken out. I 
had already figured that into account. You’re still spending less 
now than you were when you came into office. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to make a comment about the revenue 
sharing which you patently do not understand. Well I will start 
again since the minister was engaged in something else. Let me 
say first of all that when I say you’re spending less now on 
money that goes to municipalities that you were when you came 
into office, I have already figured in the ambulance. I’ve figured 
that in; you are still spending less. 
 
Mr. Minister, with respect to the revenue sharing formula, what 
you said is just simply not accurate. They did not get a share of 
those taxes. That was used as a formula and they then got a 
percentage of the tax base. There is no reason why the formula 
could not have continued. It could have been continued, it could 
have been calculated just as well without the tax. The 
imposition of the actual tax was irrelevant to the formula itself. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s relatively easy to do, and I just did it. If 
revenue sharing had been left in place, the revenue sharing pool 
to municipalities would have increased by 19 per cent during 
that same period of time. That’s twice what they actually got. 
They got one-half of what they would have got under revenue 
sharing. They got one-third of the actual increase in cost. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister: is it any wonder that the people selling 
springs and shocks in the city of Regina are just doing grand 
under this government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We’re of course negotiating with SUMA 
to find an appropriate replacement for the revenue sharing 
formula. And of course the whole issue of revenue sharing is 
something that the municipal financing commission has been 
involved in analysing during its period of review of municipal 
financing, and we expect that the municipal financing 
commission will of course make recommendations with regards 
to that revenue sharing pool. 
 
But I would remind the members opposite again that that 
particular gas tax cost municipalities literally millions of dollars 
under your administration — literally millions of dollars. So on 
the one hand, you can talk about an ever increasing revenue 
sharing pool. But if in fact the municipalities have costs that are 
going up because of a  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

874 
 

gas tax, then that’s significant whether it’s school boards that 
have buses that they have to pay for, or whether it’s various 
kinds or vans or trucks that municipalities have that drive 
around the streets every day. And if you live here in the city of 
Regina, you will see them daily. I am sure that they have to fill 
up their tanks every day just like you and I do. Well under an 
NDP administration, not only did they have to fill up their tanks 
but they had to pay a stiff NDP gas tax. They had to pay that. 
 
Now you don’t want to be reminded of that. But I’m sorry, my 
friend, it is my duty to remind you of that. I have to. The people 
of Saskatchewan don’t like to be reminded about that stiff NDP 
gas tax. They certainly don’t want to see it back on. It’s 
certainly related to the costs of municipalities. That gas tax is 
now gone. And I can assure the member opposite that gas tax is 
not coming back on under a Progressive Conservative 
government. And as a consequence, the municipalities are not 
going to have increasing costs as a result of a provincial gas tax 
because there won’t be one under this particular government. 
 
Now the member from Regina Centre talked about pot-holes in 
the roads. And I would like to talk about that for a minute, 
because as I have travelled the streets here in the city of Regina 
and talked to people in my constituency recently, one of the 
concerns of people in this particular city has to do with what 
they believe to be the condition of roads here in this particular 
city. 
 
Well the senior government has an obligation to provide a 
certain level of funding to the municipalities, and we do that. 
And that is a certain amount of money that goes to the cities and 
they can spend those dollars as they please to assist them with 
their budgetary needs. 
 
But we don’t say to a city, you must have this many police 
officers; and we don’t say to a city, you must have this many 
firemen; nor do we say to a city, you must have this many parks 
in your city. We don’t dictate to a city the level of services that 
it chooses to provide. And if a particular city such as Regina 
wants to have more parks and wants to have more recreational 
facilities and wants to have more policemen and more firemen 
than other comparable cities here in the province, that’s their 
choice. They are obviously going to pay for it. They have their 
own priorities to decide upon, and it’s not for me to determine 
what their priorities will be. 
 
But clearly the priority decisions that they take are going to 
have implications for the way their dollars are going to be 
spent. Our obligation is to provide a reasonable amount of 
revenue sharing to the municipalities here in the province. And 
as I indicated before, when you take a look at the increases, the 
magnitude of increases over the last four or five years, we 
started out at 53 million in 1981-82, the last year of your 
administration, and that has increased to 67 million under the 
revenue sharing pool — a very substantial increase here in the 
province of Saskatchewan for municipalities. 
 
But on top of that you need to add the savings that each 
municipality has enjoyed because they haven’t had to pay a gas 
tax here, a provincial gas tax in this province, every year since 
1982. So not only did the revenue sharing increase from 53 
million to 60 million the first  

year of our administration, but there also was a saving because 
they didn’t have to pay a gas tax. And the next year when it 
went up to 62 million, there was a $2 million increase, but there 
was another saving that accrued to the municipalities because, 
again, they didn’t have to pay a provincial gas tax. And when 
you add on those savings to the municipalities, we’re talking 
about a substantial increase of money that the municipalities 
have been able to spend in addition to the revenue sharing pool 
that they have received from the provincial government. 
 
So I think, any way you want to cut it, the municipalities have 
seen an increase in the revenue sharing pool; they’ve seen a 
decrease in the gas tax that they have paid to fund their 
transportation costs. Certainly I think that’s something that the 
municipalities were happy to see. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, I’d like you to run that one by me 
one more time. I listened very carefully and you were saying 
how that part of this sharing aspect the RMs were stuck with is 
this big gas tax bill. Now were there two kinds of situations, 
and were the urban municipalities treated different than a rural 
municipality? I’ve served on a rural council, and I know that 
when the RM paid their gas tax, they did an accounting process 
and they got every cent back. They didn’t pay any gas tax — 
the RMs. The RMs didn’t pay one cent in tax. And I think the 
minister should know that or retract this statement and tell us 
that he didn’t intentionally mislead the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I’m not here to talk about rural 
municipalities. There is a minister in charge of rural 
municipalities, and you can address your question to him with 
regards to rural municipalities. If you want to talk about urban 
municipalities, I will be happy to do that. 
 
In the city of Regina, they of course have fleets of vehicles. 
Right? And they obviously have transportation costs that they 
accrue. And school boards of course have costs that they have 
to pay. Right? Well they’re going to have the same costs as 
everybody else is going to incur here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, so . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Will the member allow the 
minister to please reply to his question. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, I just made some phone calls and I 
checked while you were on the phone, and municipalities did 
not pay the gas tax. They paid it, and they have a form, and he 
tells me they’re still getting their reimbursement on the federal 
tax exactly like they used to on the provincial gas tax. 
 
And the minister has deliberately misinformed the House 
saying that municipalities had to pay a gas tax. Now I want to 
challenge you, Mr. Minister — straighten out the House at this 
time and tell us the truth for once, and quit misleading and 
trying to bring up old figures that are going to come back to 
haunt you. Because the municipalities had a form they could fill 
out; they got a reimbursement of every cent of provincial tax 
they paid, like they still do on the federal tax. And you to stand 
up in this House and say that they paid tax and paid more for 
their fuel than they’re doing now is completely unadulterated 
falsehood, because they’re paying three times as much for their 
fuel now as they did before you  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

875 
 

were in office and you know it. You know it. 
 
The price per barrel on fuel was $11 a barrel when you came to 
office, and today you want to freeze it and you’re forcing it. 
You’re arguing with your federal counterparts — freeze the 
price of oil. Keep it up at $20. Don’t let the price descend. 
Make the municipalities pay twice as much for their fuel as 
their counterparts in the United States are. If you raise the fuel 
issue, Mr. Minister, you’re hanging your own self because 
that’s an issue that you haven’t told the truth on, because they 
didn’t pay any tax, and if they did pay it on their vehicles, they 
could keep their forms and they got a reimbursement of every 
cent of tax they paid. So I want you to correct that statement 
tonight. 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, the gas tax issue of course 
is something that the people in the province of Saskatchewan 
were very happy to see removed in 1982. The people here in the 
province of Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Does 
the member want to hear the response or does he not? I’ll be 
happy to respond. The people were very happy to see the gas 
tax removed here in the province. It was of considerable benefit 
to them. Everybody who had a car out there, who drove a 
vehicle, benefited from it and they don’t want to see it returned. 
Municipalities had the option of a rebate on that particular gas 
tax if they chose to apply for it. The school boards here . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order! Would the members opposite 
please allow the minister to give his reply. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The school boards here in the province of 
Saskatchewan — and I was an educator at one time, and I recall 
the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What’s this got to do with urban affairs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, you were talking about rural 
municipalities. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I was talking about municipalities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — You were talking about the impact of the 
gas tax. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order! Would the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg please allow the member to reply. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, I think it’s fair to say, 
regardless of the difference of opinion that there may be about 
the gas tax, one thing is sure; under the NDP there was a gas tax 
and the people suffered as a consequence. And there will be a 
gas tax again under the NDP if they get back in. Under this 
administration there is no gas tax — nor will there be. And the 
municipalities here in the province of Saskatchewan benefit 
because there is no gas tax. Because the people here in this 
province have less tax to pay, there’s more money circulating as 
a consequence, and certainly every municipality is going to 
benefit as a  

result of that. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let’s decide if the 
minister is accurate in this statement. He decided to come on 
and be political, and I guess that’s when you don’t have to be 
honest. And you don’t have to be sincere. And you don’t have 
to be right. 
 
In 1976 . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Please be seated. Please be 
seated. Please be seated. I have heard comments back and forth 
in this House that are touching upon very shaky grounds. And I 
would remind the House of another ruling in Beauchesne’s. 
 
And just as a reminder and a caution, rule 322: 
 

It has been formally ruled by Speaker that a statement by a 
Member respecting himself and particularly within his 
own knowledge must be accepted, but it is not 
unparliamentary temperately to criticize statements made 
by a member as being contrary to the facts; but no 
imputation of intentional falsehood is permissible. 

 
And I would advise members of the House to keep that in mind 
in their discussions. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you for the ruling, Mr. Chairman. The 
minister stood up in this House and said that the tax is a good 
thing; it’s really . . . I want to tell him this: in 1976 a price per 
barrel of oil was $11 a barrel, wheat was $6 a bushel, and we 
were paying about $1.20 a gallon tax, all taxes in — $1.20 a 
gallon. 
 
Today we’re paying about 40 cents a litre in my country; it’s a 
little cheaper in Regina, but today in Gravelbourg car gas is 40 
cents a litre. So it’s $1.60 a gallon. So RMs are paying $1.60 — 
municipalities, I shouldn’t say the word RM but use 
municipalities. Municipalities are paying $1.60 for every gallon 
they’re using when they use to get it for $1.20. 
 
The buying power of the economy that time was $6 a bushel, 
not $3 per bush. And I want to tell the Minister, if he’s saying 
that there’s more money around now, that’s false. There’s less 
money around and we’re paying more for our gas because you 
have taken off the tax, and you’re not building roads. And I’d 
agree that the consumer can’t afford to pay the gas tax. 
 
But I want to make this argument, Mr. Chairman, that 
municipalities are getting a bad deal from this government. 
They’re getting less in revenue sharing. They’re getting stuck 
with paying more for gas because of the intentional philosophy 
of this government to keep the fuel prices and oil prices high 
when everything is low. And I think, Mr. Minister, that your 
performance tonight by trying to get political hasn’t deceived 
anybody but yourself. You’re the only one that’s being 
deceived and caught in this trap because the RMs and 
municipalities didn’t pay tax. I’d like to know how many didn’t 
apply to get their tax back if you think that was such a big cause 
that affected their cost sharing and on their revenue sharing, that 
they had a worse deal then. I think when  
  



 
April 24, 1986 

876 
 

you’re making your arguments, be careful, be careful; use facts, 
use facts. If you’re talking about income, remember that in ’76 
we were getting six bucks a bushel and the oil price was only 
$11 a barrel. Remember that your friends are trying to maintain 
. . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order. Would the member 
please be seated. Order has been called. I have given a fair 
degree of latitude in terms of the gas tax as it pertains to 
transportation costs for urban municipalities. I’ve allowed both 
sides to discuss the gas tax as they could keep it on topic of the 
additional costs in so far as revenue sharing to these 
municipalities. However, I feel that the focus is now gone off 
track, and I would ask the member, if he has any questions 
regarding urban affairs, to please come to that question. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chairman, I don’t have to 
ask a question. I can state my argument and make my defences 
as far as urban affairs are concerned. There is no rule in the 
book saying that we cannot put our position forward and 
challenge a minister saying that this is the rule, this is the rules 
we play by. 
 
And now the point I’m making, in response to the argument we 
made, the costs that the RMs and the municipalities, the urban 
municipalities, are facing — the costs of the urban 
municipalities . . . My urban municipalities are Gravelbourg; 
my urban municipalities are Assiniboia, Lafleche, Coronach. I 
have towns down there that are facing some very, very heavy 
costs because of this administration’s point of view, because of 
this administration’s philosophy. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Please be seated. I have 
already indicated an order before any member can call a point 
of order, and I would have you respect my point of order, first 
of all as chairman, to allow myself to elucidate on what I called 
order for. 
 
What I called order for was to bring the discussion back to 
Urban Affairs as opposed to the full administration as the 
member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg was alluding to. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, it’s obvious that some of 
the members of the House are a little on the testy side. I believe 
they’re tired on the opposite side of the House. But in any case, 
I would move . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg would just let me make this motion. 
Could you just be quiet while I make this motion, to shut down 
the committee for the night? 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would move that the committee rise, report 
progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:01 p.m. 
 


