


















































June 4, 1986 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 4, 1986 
 
 

1697 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure today to introduce to you, and through you to the 
members of the legislature, some distinguished guests that we 
have in the Speaker's gallery. I want to take this opportunity to 
introduce to the Legislative Assembly, the Hon. Evan Walker, 
Minister of Agriculture for the state of Victoria in Australia, and 
his wife, Mrs. Walker; and Mr. Michael Taylor, director of 
agricultural marketing services, the Department of Agriculture, 
state of Victoria in Australia. 
 
The Hon. Evan Walker and Mr. Taylor will be meeting with me 
after question period, and we will be discussing issues with the 
officials of the Department of Agriculture and Agdevco. As well, 
they will be meeting with the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and the 
Western Canadian Wheat Growers Association. We will be 
discussing things like trade, agricultural policies, domestic 
policies, both here and in Australia. We will be looking at export 
possibilities for both of us, and obviously the discussions will have 
some impact on trade negotiations that are going on around the 
world, as well as our continued concern and support for rural 
families and farm families in both of our countries. 
 
So I would ask all members of the legislature to give a warm 
welcome to our distinguished guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's certainly my 
privilege to introduce to you, and through you to all members of 
the legislature, some very, very distinguished guests that we have 
located in the Speaker's gallery. I am pleased to introduce to you 
His Excellency Emmanual Megalokonomos, Ambassador of 
Greece, and with him is the Consul of Greece, located in 
Vancouver, Mr. Jean Lacatzis. I understand that this is their 
second visit to our province of Saskatchewan, and it is the first 
visit to Saskatchewan for the Consul. I understand the 
Ambassador will be meeting with the Lieutenant Governor, as 
well as the Premier, the Leader of the Opposition, as well as the 
minister in charge of Science and Technology. 
 
I did have the very distinct pleasure of hosting a luncheon for 
these fine gentlemen, and I would ask all members to join with me 
in welcoming our very distinguished guests to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — May I join with the Premier and the 
Minister of Highways in welcoming Mr. Walker from the State of 
Victoria in Australia, and wish that he enjoys his stay in our 
province, and has a fruitful discussion with respect to agricultural 
problems, some of which are mutual between our two countries of 
Canada and Australia. 
 

And I also want to join in welcoming His Excellency, the 
Ambassador to Canada from Greece, and the Greek Consul. I had 
a delightful visit with them this morning. This is not the first time 
I've met His Excellency, and it was good to renew acquaintances 
and to discuss issues which are of common concern to Canada and 
Greece and, more particularly, issues whereby Saskatchewan and 
Greece may not have a more fruitful co-operation. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to introduce to 
you, and through you to the Assembly, on behalf of the member 
for Canora, 60 students from the Canora Junior Elementary 
School. They are accompanied by their teacher, Ron Hoehn, and 
they're here to visit Regina today. 
 
I would like to welcome them to the city, and to the legislature, 
and hope that they have a very interesting visit to the legislature 
and find it informative. I'd be glad to meet with them later on, if 
they have any questions. So I'd like all the members to join in 
welcoming them here to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Katzman: — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to welcome a 
group of students, 30 students from Clavet High School in my 
constituency. They are in the west gallery. They're here to watch 
the proceedings. Clavet School almost every couple of years has 
students here to watch the proceedings. I hope they enjoy the 
proceedings. 
 
If they look over towards the press gallery, Mr. Speaker, they will 
see a trophy sitting up there, because tonight is the annual ball 
game between the press and the MLAs. 
 
I hope they have a good trip home, and we'll see you all later. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. I want to join with other 
colleagues in the legislature and welcome 11 students, I gather, 
from the Urban Native Pre-employment program, accompanied by 
their teacher, Mary Jane Woronchak. I'll look forward to meeting 
with the students and with your teacher at the conclusion of 
today's question period, and I hope you find it educational and 
interesting. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to introduce 
to you, and through you, a group of students from Sturgeon 
Landing who are sitting in the east gallery. And I would like to 
introduce them on behalf of my colleague, the member for 
Cumberland. They are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Sam 
Rambaran, and chaperon, Mrs. Gertie Budd. They are down here 
on an educational tour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to, through you and the rest of  
  



 
June 4, 1986 

1698 
 
 

the Assembly, to wish them well and welcome to the legislature, 
and I wish you a safe trip home. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Grasshopper Infestation 
 
Mr. Engel: — I have a question to the Minister of Agriculture. 
And I also would like to bring my personal greetings to the 
Minister of Agriculture from Australia. I hope they don't have the 
same problem with grasshoppers there as we do here. I'm not sure. 
I've never heard Australians complain that much about the 
grasshoppers. 
 
But we had a serious problem last year, Mr. Minister, and the 
question I have today deals with grasshopper infestation which 
thousands of Saskatchewan farmers are already battling. Last year 
grasshoppers cost Saskatchewan farmers about $100 million in 
crop damage. Since last fall your own department — and I have 
several brochures here that you have published — have forecast 
that the problem would be even worse this summer. yet in spite of 
all the warnings, farmers are finding that there is a shortage of 
insecticides at many of the dealerships. Did your government not 
push that chemical companies and others would stockpile these 
insecticides over the winter months to avoid shortages this spring 
like we had last year, where we spent hundreds of thousands of 
dollars flying it in? Did you make some precautions for 
grasshopper control? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, sir. Mr. Speaker, as of last fall, in 
anticipation of severe problems associated with grasshopper 
infestations this spring, I contacted all the suppliers, the chemical 
suppliers, and wrote them and said that we wanted to make sure 
that there was adequate supplies of grasshopper spray throughout 
Saskatchewan. The suppliers wrote me back and have assured me, 
as late as today, that there are adequate supplies in Saskatchewan. 
If you're raising the concern that there may be some dealers that 
don't have it from the central depots, that could very well be the 
case. I would like to confirm that, but they've told me that they 
have a great deal of it on supply and here in inventory, and they're 
prepared to ship it wherever. 
 
I'm also advised, as I'm sure that you know, that with the great 
deal of rain we had in southern Saskatchewan it postponed the 
hatch, then with the hot weather that came on we found out that 
there was a hatching in a uniform pattern right across southern 
Saskatchewan. And right now it presents the possibility for, as 
well, a uniform kill on an awful lot of the grasshoppers that have 
been hatched, on a comprehensive basis, if you will. So the 
spraying now that will take place, the supplies that will be there, 
will give us a reasonable shot at controlling them in the near 
future, and hopefully with a good spraying program right now, not 
only by the farmers, but by R.M.s and so forth where we are 
prepared to spend up to $8.5 million, we can have a reasonable kill 
of grasshoppers in the spring of '86. 
 

Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, when I look at last year's map — and 
the blue area is severe, you can see from there — and then when I 
look at this year's map, the area of severity seems to be worse than 
it was last year. And the part of my question that you didn't answer 
is: are you going to be helping farmers further than the program 
you announced in March where you said that you'd provide 
assistance for road allowances? 
 
In Alberta, we have assistance where all the land is covered and 
my question is . . . only a fraction of the land is included in the 
road allowance, maybe 1 per cent or less. And in the Moose Jaw 
district some farmers have already had to spray their crop land two 
or three times. I know my neighbours are phoning me this week, 
since I left home, that they are spraying for a second time. Will 
your government now consider a program which will reimburse 
farmers for some portion of all their spraying costs, not just 
spraying the road allowance? 
 
In Alberta, as you're aware, they're paying 50 per cent of the cost. 
Because if we can control them where they are now they won't 
spread further north next year and so we're doing some good for 
all of Saskatchewan. We think all of Saskatchewan should be 
expecting to pick up some of the cost. So will you consider the 
similar program to what Alberta has where you'd pay 50 per cent 
of all the cost of chemical, not just on the road allowance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as we examine the problem 
and the situation now, we know that farmers across southern 
Saskatchewan will be spraying on a broad basis, and we'll 
examine it in the next few days and the next week to find out 
exactly what the kill is like. 
 
I'm advised by departmental officials in Agriculture that there's an 
opportunity to get a very widespread uniform kill of these very 
young grasshoppers because of the uniform way that they've 
hatched. If they go at it right now across the board, and we will 
monitor and watch it, then we have a much better opportunity this 
year — much better this year than we did last year in terms of a 
uniform kill and a comprehensive attack on the grasshoppers as 
they exist. 
 
So I'll be watching it day by day. I certainly get the requests and 
the information into my office, not only as Minister of Agriculture 
but as Premier, and we'll be staying right on top of it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — A new question, and it deals with the same 
issue as my colleague from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg has raised. It 
has to do with the issue of setting up a program where all the spray 
used to kill grasshoppers would be covered by your plan, similar 
to the Alberta program. As the minister knows, the money that 
you would save in crop insurance would be great indeed if you 
were picking up the chemical cost for the farmers to spray for 
grasshoppers, because the production would be increased. 
 
But what I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, is this: are you at this 
point in time considering extending your program now rather than 
later so that farmers who haven't got the cash in their pocket to pay 
for chemicals will be able to go out and buy it, if you were to 
announce it today, knowing  
  



 
June 4, 1986 

1699 
 

full well that you'd get compensated for it later. 
 
What we're having a difficult time, as farmers, understanding is 
how you announce program after program after the effect of the 
grasshoppers or drought has taken place. Why don't you come 
forward with the program now? You could save that money in 
crop insurance later in the fall, and I'm sure would be in the best 
interest, not only of the farmers, but of the taxpayers as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The problem, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
opposition never recognizes the money that is already out there. 
Let me give you an example. We have $25 an acre — $1.2 billion 
— out in cash to farmers right now. And they don't have that in 
Manitoba, and they don't have that in Alberta. 
 
That's a great deal of cash. I mean, it seems to me, if you wanted 
to be fair, you would recognize the fact that we have put literally 
hundreds of millions and billions of dollars — cash — into rural 
Saskatchewan. Now that money can be used to help pay 
mortgagees, to pay for chemicals, to pay for all kinds of things. 
 
This year, Mr. Speaker, we have $8.5 million allocated to spray 
for headlands and road allowances and so forth, Mr. Speaker. Also 
the farmers are applying for, if there have been problems with 
grasshoppers and they want reseeding, the crop insurance covers 
that, Mr. Speaker, through application. And we have the chemical 
supplies in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So when we look at the various number of programs that we have 
used to put cash into farmers' pockets, I mean at least I think it 
would be fair, in the legislature, if you could acknowledge the fact 
that when they're looking for cash that they've received 6 per cent 
money more than they've ever got in the history of the province 
with respect to operating cash to use as they like. 
 
Now that's been in place for some time. They have the money 
now. It's certainly in advance of any problems that may come up. 
And as you, I'm sure, will admit, $1.2 billion is a fair amount of 
money. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Supplement to the Premier. He's indicated 
that farmers are doing great because of all the money that the 
government is sending out. 
 
However, in Swan River he indicated to the federal government 
that he needed at least $1 billion to bail the farmers out so they 
would in fact be able to spray for grasshoppers and take their crop 
off. He was indicating that clearly to the federal government. The 
wheat pool, Sask Wheat Pool, Mr. Speaker, has indicated $2 
billion is needed. 
 
The suggestion we're making here today is that you save money 
next fall when you pay out crop insurance by doing some 
preventative action now by allowing farmers a subsidy or a refund 
on their chemicals, so you won't have to pay so much out later in 
some of your goofy programs that you have suggested in the past 
and then backed off from. 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — But, Mr. Speaker, I mean, again the hon. 
member talks about $1.2 billion in credit to farmers is goofy. I 
mean, I don't think that's fair; I don't think it's reasonable. We've 
got that cash available now to people all across this province to 
deal with these kinds of problems. And I would suggest that $1.2 
billion will be used to spray for any kind of insect that's out there, 
whether it's midge or whether it's grasshoppers, and they will be 
spraying. And if $1.2 billion in cash doesn't help them spray for 
grasshoppers, then I would be surprised. And I would suggest 
virtually all farmers, virtually all farmers that have access to $15 
an acre are going to have sufficient funds to spray once or twice 
for grasshoppers if they see that it's a problem now. And you 
shake your head and say, no, they don't have the cash to pay for it. 
 
Well again, Mr. Speaker, that won't acknowledge that we've given 
1.2 billion. Secondly, they won't acknowledge now that the federal 
government and the provincial government . . . Mr. Speaker, if the 
Leader of the Opposition would get control of his members over 
there so that they'd be quiet enough to listen to the answer, we 
could deal with a really significant problem. Rather than hollering 
from your seat you could listen to the response. 
 
The response is that there's been billions of dollars put in by the 
federal government and the provincial government in cash that 
was never done before. We've had grasshoppers here before; 
we've had drought here before, and never has the Leader of the 
Opposition, under his leadership, provided any money like it. All 
they can do is sit and holler from their seats because he's got no 
control over any of them. They didn't even bring it up last year 
until our member from Thunder Creek raised the issue. Now 
they're bringing it up after we've put billions of dollars of credit 
out there. Mr. Speaker, they don't even deserve the time to listen to 
the whole bunch of them. 
 

Minimum Wage Rate 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the Minister of Finance. It has to do with this 
government's economic policy. 
 
Last evening in the Assembly your colleague, the minister 
responsible for the Women's Secretariat, defended this 
government's decision to keep the minimum wage low because, 
she said, an increase in the minimum wage would increase 
inflation. Is that the position of the Department of Finance and 
your officials? Does that represent economic policy of this 
government, and do you have any economic studies which show 
that an increase in the minimum wage rate has a significant impact 
on the inflation rate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Let me remind the opposition, Mr. Speaker, 
that Saskatchewan today under the Progressive Conservative 
government has the highest minimum wage in North America. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is not of itself an argument as the opposition 
makes that it should be — what? — $7.50 an hour, I believe, or $7 
an hour. Whatever percentage. It was 10 yesterday. Well the 
small-business community in Saskatchewan is going to be 
watching with a great deal of  
  



 
June 4, 1986 

1700 
 
 

interest if the hon. member is proposing $10 an hour minimum 
wage. 
 
Certainly the minimum wage must be monitored from time to 
time, Mr. Speaker, to ensure: one, that it is a fair level of 
compensation; and secondly, that it is at a level that the small 
business can afford, so that raising it too high does not cause 
unemployment. That's the last thing that we want. It may be the 
first thing that the NDP want; but again, I must remind the hon. 
members opposite that it is the highest in North America. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
one or more of your colleagues wanted the quotation. Let me give 
it to you. This is a direct quotation by the minister in charge of the 
Women's Secretariat. 
 

Prices go up. Expenses go up and they're still at the same point 
they were before. The theory seems to be that there's a direct 
relationship between inflation and the minimum wage. 
 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, whether or not you have any documents 
or any studies from your department to support such a ludicrous 
theory? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member indicates that 
costs go up, and that's one of the things that this government has 
been trying to deal with, particularly for those on salary — low 
income. We've reduced the sales tax on clothing, which is a direct 
benefit to the people of this province. We've taken the sales tax off 
clothing. We've protected mortgages. I can go on and on and on, 
Mr. Speaker. It's been well debated in this Assembly. 
 
But let me caution the hon. member that your policy of last night, 
which may be a little different of your policy two weeks ago, 
which may be a little different from your policy of three weeks 
ago, to find out that last night you're advocating $10 an hour 
minimum wage, I suggest would be highly inflationary. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Supplementary. Mr. Minister, perhaps I could 
get you to deal with the question as distinct from every other 
subject under the sun. Mr. Minister, you stated a moment ago that 
the minimum wage was the highest increase in Canada. Let me 
give you the percentages. 
 
Over the period of time since you have come into office, the rate 
of inflation is 21 per cent, but the minimum wage, Mr. Minister, 
has been held to 6 per cent. Are you aware of those figures, and do 
you think that's a fair way to treat those at the bottom of the 
economic ladder? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I did not indicate any percentage increase. I 
suggest to the hon. member that's why we have a hearing aid plan 
is so that perhaps you can begin to listen. I indicated that 
Saskatchewan has the highest minimum wage in North America. 
Certainly the minimum wage must be monitored from time to time 
with the two objectives. One, is it a fair compensation; secondly, 
at a level that the small-business community who are affected can 
afford to pay so that there are no lay-offs? We are continually 
monitoring. 
 

I find it very interesting that an NDP government in Manitoba has 
a minimum wage considerably below Saskatchewan's. 
Saskatchewan has the highest in North America, and we'll 
continue to monitor it. 
 

Salary Rate Increases for SaskTel Executives 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 
Minister of Finance and the minister responsible for SaskTel. Mr. 
Minister, you've just told us that you feel that a 6 per cent increase 
in minimum wage over a period of time when the cost of living 
went up 21 per cent is appropriate and that you're monitoring it 
and that you'll make no change. 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday in Crown Corporations Committee you 
confirmed that the 18 senior executives at SaskTel received total 
salary and benefits last year of $1.335 million, or an average of 
just over $74,000 a year, and you told us that they had had 
increases during that year of 13 per cent. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, when your government claims that an increase 
of 6 per cent over more than four years, five years, in the 
minimum wage is appropriate, and you're monitoring it; and that 
an increase of 13 per cent for executives getting $75,000 a year is 
appropriate; would you indicate why you think that executives 
getting that kind of money should get 13 per cent increases per 
year when people at the bottom of the ladder should get 6 per cent 
over five years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I've indicated now three times that our 
province has the highest minimum wage in North America. I 
suggest to the hon. member that your proposals, again reconfirmed 
last night, of some $10 an hour are not financially responsible. 
Secondly, that the question of the minimum wage — the 
minimum wage is a floor price. It is not a salary that we would 
hope most people would stay on; that it is a starting wage, and it is 
the highest in North America. 
 
Should it be monitored from time to time? Certainly it should, as 
we are doing that. And I suggest that all of the factors that have 
traditionally gone into determining the minimum wage will be the 
factors that will be dealt with by this government. But to suggest 
that the minimum wage should go up on a constant basis — that's 
a questionable argument on your part, and I think you know as 
well as I do what impact that would have throughout the economy. 
 
So having said all of that, I repeat that we now have the highest in 
North America. Should it be monitored? Of course it should be 
monitored, and it is being by the government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In view of 
the fact that any reference by the minister to my colleagues or I 
advocating a minimum wage of $10 an hour is a flat falsehood, 
and I regret that the minister doesn't know it, and in view of the 
fact, Mr. Minister, that you are agreeing that a 6 per cent increase 
in minimum  
  



 
June 4, 1986 

1701 
 

wages over a period of five years is appropriate, how then do you 
justify increase of 13 per cent over one year for the top 18 
executives in your corporation, SaskTel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We went through that particular debate 
yesterday as to how that arose. The overall increase in SaskTel 
was in the range of 3.2 per cent — obviously that not picked up by 
the members opposite . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Well I'm glad to hear, because I thought it was totally irresponsible 
for the opposition to now no longer support $10 an hour. Because 
we've had 70 per cent of the industrial rate — which is what? — 7 
or $8 an hour. We've had the immediate one, the hon. member 
from Regina North East — I believe was what? — $5 an hour 
immediately. And so it's nice to see at least one figure that the 
party opposite has been throwing out is one that's now being 
disowned by the leader. 
 
So I suggest to the hon. members that right now it is the highest in 
North America, and we will continue to monitor the minimum 
wage. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question to the 
Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, in a period of economic 
restraint, when taxes have been increased and the province is 
already running a $2 billion deficit, how do you justify spending 
taxpayers' money on bonuses for top Crown corporation 
executives who are already averaging about 75,000 a year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well if your argument that the executives of 
the corporation should not be paid those salaries, I'll be quite 
happy to pass that on to the Crown corporations. I'm sure they will 
be very, very interested to know it. 
 
Let me reiterate, because no questions were forthcoming 
yesterday, about the performance of SaskTel as a corporation, and 
I think that the record earnings for the corporation, the fact that 
there has been no rate increase for the last couple of years; the fact 
that we will be able to supply individual line service to rural 
Saskatchewan with no rate increase; that we have some of the 
lowest phone rates again, not only in Canada but in North 
America, is a credit to the management of SaskTel, and they have 
been recognized. 
 
I suggest that all of those factors should be taken into account. If 
your argument is that the people running a several hundred million 
dollar Crown corporation should not be paid the competitive 
salaries, which I gather is your argument, I will be most pleased to 
put that to the officials. I'm sure they'd be very interested in 
hearing the NDP's position. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — A question to the Minister of Finance, Mr. 
Minister, you always seem to tend to get off track of the question, 
and you make up some of your own answers regarding what 
someone may have said. 
 
Mr. Minister, at a time when someone, or when this province is 
really in debt, one would think that we would not require to pay 
executives a bonus in order for them to want to keep their job and 
to do an honest days' work. 
 

And nobody is saying that they are getting paid too much, but we 
are talking about the bonuses. They are making 75,00 a year, and 
it is the bonus that we are questioning. 
 
Mr. Minister, for those that are on minimum wage, they don't 
require, or at least they haven't been receiving, a bonus to keep 
their job and to try and make a living. Why, Mr. Minister, would 
the executives of SaskTel require a bonus when they are making 
in a $75,000 range? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I'm disappointed to find out another new 
policy from the NDP, and that is that they are against bonus for 
good performance, and that is certainly the very thrust of the 
comments made by the hon. member. 
 
We are trying to encourage a better performance in the senior 
management and have undertaken . . . And again I can reiterate the 
record of SaskTel, but all we need to do is remind people of the 
record rate increases when the NDP were in power, of telephones, 
and the fact that people couldn't even buy their own phones under 
the NDP. There was an antediluvian approach that they had such a 
restrictive policy over there. We have now opened up SaskTel so 
that we can satisfy the customers of Saskatchewan. We are 
making more money. We have lower rates; we have had no rate 
increases. We're bringing in individual-line service. And I think 
that that type of performance should be rewarded. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I think we should remind the hon. members 
that many people on minimum wage do in fact improve 
themselves and get moved up into the higher hourly rate increases, 
whatever it may be, and try and get off minimum wage. So again, 
we look upon it as a floor, not as a guide-line for people to shoot 
for as the NDP seem to indicate. 

 
Cost of Advertising in the Saskatchewan Report 

 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question 
to the Deputy Premier. Mr. Minister, can you inform the 
Assembly how much your government has spent on advertising 
space in the Saskatchewan Report news magazine which is owned 
by one Bill Hunter. And if you are not aware of the exact amount 
now, and I assume you are not, will you take notice and provide 
that figure to the Assembly as soon as possible? 
 
I just want to point out, specifically I'm asking for the total amount 
of advertising purchased in the news magazine by the government 
departments, agencies, and Crown corporations. Will the Deputy 
Premier undertake to provide that figure as soon as possible? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, of course I will get the 
information. And as the hon. member rightly anticipated. I 
wouldn't have that particular information at my fingertips. But I 
want to invite all members to join with me in wishing a happy first 
anniversary to that particular publication. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
  
  



 
June 4, 1986 

1702 
 
 

Bill No. 48 — An Act to establish the Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency and govern its activities and 
to provide for an appeal board with respect to certain 
assessment matters 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to 
establish the Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency and 
govern its activities and to provide for an appeal board with 
respect to certain assessment matters. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 49 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of 
The Assessment Management Agency Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
respecting the Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts 
resulting from the enactment of The Assessment Management 
Agency Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 
 STATEMENTS 
 
 Apology by Member 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I seek leave 
to make a brief personal statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Monday evening in estimates debate I used a 
phrase that may have been offensive to an ethnic group. I certainly 
did not intend it to be an offensive statement to anyone and 
sincerely regret making it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I withdraw that remark unequivocally and without 
reservation. I apologize to anyone I may have offended by that 
statement. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 23 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — When we left off last evening, the minister 
had given me a commitment to send some items. And I wonder at 
this time if he has the increases for his personal staff and for the 
top executives in his department, as well as the flights made using 
executive aircraft; and he also indicated that he would be sending 
the number of people who were on the flights, but he was refusing 
to give the people who rode with him or with members of his staff 
on the executive aircraft. And I just want to leave it at that. I'm not 
going to keep pushing the minister because, obviously, if he's 
embarrassed about who flew with him on the flights, that's his 
business. 

But I will want to follow up with a number of other questions on 
oil production and potash production and that type of thing. But if 
you would indicate that the flights will be sent across and just 
confirm what you're going to be sending me, then we'll get on with 
some of the other issues. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, as it 
relates to the staffs, first of all, I think will you now have a couple 
of sheets that I've sent over. In terms of my office staff, other than 
for two of the secretaries that are listed there, everyone else was 
the same, and the secretaries had small increments; I think you can 
see that. 
 
As it relates to the air travel, that was a fairly exhaustive exercise, 
and I can assure you that the officials have been working hard all 
morning to provide it. They have nearly completed the 
departmental number crunching, and maybe we can even have 
some of that over here yet this afternoon. It's not that we aren't 
working hard to undertake it or that we don't want to undertake to 
provide it to you; we do. It's just that the exercise has been a rather 
onerous one. And as soon as we can, we will give you what we 
have as we have it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, I appreciate that and that's fine. I 
really didn't expect all of those numbers on the flights to be here 
today. But if you're giving that commitment, that's fine. 
 
The other number that I want to ask about is on the sheet that you 
sent across for your deputy ministers. As I read it here, January of 
'85, 70,248; and then a slight increase in April of '85 to 73,058; 
and then in September of '85 up to 75,250, for an increase of 
$5,002. Is that reading that correctly in 1985, and that there was no 
increase so far in '86? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, that's 
correct. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — This then would have been at the maximum 
of the formula. Would it have been, or would it have been the 4 
per cent plus 2, or the 4 per cent plus 4, for performance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The increment and the September '85 
was a 3 per cent overall economic adjustment for all out-of-scope 
staff. 
 
An Hon. Member: — 2 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — 3 per cent. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Okay. So then for the deputy then, we 
would have had a 7 per cent increase in 1985? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Your number, 7 per cent, is right, but the 
period that you applied it to wouldn't be correct. In fact we'd have 
to go back into '84 and into '86, which would be the entire period 
that that 7 per cent would cover. So we would not want to make 
the mistake of saying 7 per cent per annum; I'll put it that way. 
 
(1445) 
 
  



 
June 4, 1986 

1703 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Okay. And it's a little bit misrepresenting 
because actually the numbers that we are looking at here are from 
January 1st, '85 to September of '85 and that may be misconstrued 
as a 7 per cent increase in actually nine months. And I understand 
what you're saying, that it actually goes back a little ways, I 
suppose, into 1984 and something into '86. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, that's correct. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to move now to a subject which is 
related, but it has to do with the out-of-province travel of the 
minister. We have talked now about the executive aircraft, and 
you've given me a commitment to providing me with that list. Can 
you as well tell me now what out-of-province trips would you 
have taken, and your deputy, in the period from January 1, 1985 
up till April 1 of 1986? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Your question would raise some travel 
done while I was minister of Agriculture and, the more latterly, 
while I was Minister of Energy and Mines. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Keep it at Energy then. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Energy and Mines? We can undertake to 
put that together for you. I don't have it, but we can undertake that 
exercise. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — If the minister would have someone 
working on that now, I would think it would be an extensive list, 
and if somebody would put that together for us so we could have it 
before we complete our review of these estimates which I hope, if 
things roll along here, won't take too, too long. 
 
I want to say as well that the minister or his staff — the memo that 
I got is signed by the minister — sent me a package of material on 
June 2nd. I want to say that it makes things go a little quicker, and 
I appreciate that. 
 
If you have information, I want to start out on what you have 
titled, "The six-year quarterly statistics for Saskatchewan oil 
industry performance." If you have that sheet in front of you, we 
may be able to move along here a little quicker. 
 
What I'm looking for here under the subtitle "wells drilled," you 
have listed there '85, '84, '83, '82, '81, '80. What I'm looking for 
here is the first quarter of 1986 under wells drilled. If I could get 
that number of the number of wells drilled in Saskatchewan in the 
first quarter of 1986. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — First quarter 1986 — 617. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to as well, if you could — down that 
page if you would follow me through there — give me the metres 
drilled in the first quarter, the crude oil production the first quarter, 
and the land sales revenue in the first quarter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Okay, to go down the sheet then: wells 
drilled first quarter of '86 is 617; metres drilled is 615.9. The crude 
oil production — we don't have the  

numbers yet because of the time-lag in the reporting on the 
production numbers, but my officials advise me in fact that our 
first quarter production this year, in their minds, is going to be, in 
fact, higher than first quarter last year. The land sale revenue, 8.3 
million. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — On the crude oil production, if you could 
have somebody just give me a rough-and-ready number, and I'll 
treat it as such. What we were looking at last year, in '85 in the 
first quarter, was 2.551 million cubic metres. Can you give me ball 
park figure there, and I will treat it as such? You're saying it'll be a 
little bit more, but can you be a bit more precise? And then if you 
would agree to send me the actual when the lag is picked up. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I think for 
the purpose of our discussion, I'm advised that 2.6 would be as 
good a number as any to use. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — So there is another question in terms of the 
wells drilled that I want to follow up. When we're looking at the 
wells drilled, we find that it is slightly lower than '85 — 160 or 
150 wells less in the first quarter. And as I understand it, the 
petroleum incentive program of the federal government was still in 
place, and there were people drilling into the end of the PIP 
program to try to make sure that they wind up drilling programs 
for the previous year. And even at that we had a reduction of 150 
wells. 
 
Can you give us a look into the crystal ball and see whether or not 
that trend of about 150 less will be basically constant? Or are we, 
as I am assuming, having a major reduction after the end of the 
petroleum incentive program, where we will be looking . . . as 
most of the major oil companies and a number of the junior oil 
companies out of Calgary are telling us, that they're basically 
cutting their drilling program in about half. And I know that isn't 
an automatic rule, but I've talked to a good number of them and 
watched the press. And Husky and others are saying that their 
drilling program will be about half of what it was last year. 
 
And when we're looking at the first quarter of '86, we're still 
actually in the '85-86 fiscal year for many of the oil companies. 
And I suppose the more telling tale will come in the period from 
April to June of '86. And do you have the number of wells drilled 
and metres drilled for April and May of '86? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, the first 
thing I would say, I think your observations about the effect that 
the PIP program and its expiry at the end of the first quarter are 
valid and, I think, reflected in what we saw in terms of the drilling 
activity to that point in time, and it only being down, as you point 
out, something in the order of 150. 
 
In so far as what our expectations are — and I think as you put it, 
do some crystal ball gazing — very difficult. I an my officials who 
advise me, it would put us in a position that we wouldn't disagree 
with your number of 50 per cent. 
 
But I guess I would also add that the number one factor in 
determining what drilling goes on or does not go on is  
  



 
June 4, 1986 

1704 
 
 

strictly world oil prices. And crystal ball gazing what tomorrow's 
price might be is very difficult in what are still very turbulent 
times out there in the market-place. 
 
It also varies somewhat with the size of the company, 
independents versus the nationals, in so far as who has the greater 
financial capacity. 
 
The other thing I would like to point out is the first-quarter trend, 
because of things like PIP, are not likely to be repeated. So that 
was probably the beset phase we've seen on drilling. We're not 
likely to just find ourselves with 150 less wells each quarter. And 
in fact the April 1 to May 23rd, which is our most recent set of 
statistics, show that the number of wells drilled there is 19. 
 
Now I caution you to put . . . over-react on that number as well, 
because that was the break-up period. And the metres drilled was 
28.8. 
 
But I would be kidding you and everyone else if I said that we 
believe that drilling was going to only be 150 wells off per quarter 
through the rest of the year — unless, of course, something 
happens on the world oil pricing. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister has indicated that the . . . And 
I didn't catch the time period that 19 wells were drilled. Maybe he 
will give that to me, that there were 20 . . . I didn't catch the 
number of metres either. But would you do a comparison with '85 
for that time period? And I will take it for what you tell me. 
 
Obviously the road bans were on during break-up for part of that 
time, and especially in the south-east where they got the 
tremendous rains last fall and they weren't able to move very 
much. If you would give me a comparison on that time period 
with '85. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I have these highly competent officials, 
and it turns out they do have the comparable number for April 1 to 
May 23, which was the time frame. This year it is 19, and last year 
was 237. And the metres drilled that you had said you had missed 
was 28.8 — 229.4 last year; 28.8 this year. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I think that the observation of that 
kind of a dramatic reduction in drilling is startling. I would hope 
that that trend wouldn't continue, just as the other one isn't going to 
continue, and that somewhere in between, probably a 50 per cent 
drop in drilling, we would hope, would be able to be maintained, 
which would end the year around something a little under 2,000 
wells. Maybe a little more than that if the first quarter keeps us up 
there. 
 
But what we're getting back to is a drilling program of around 
1,500, I would imagine, which is what it was in 1980, and 
probably where, in Saskatchewan, where we can realistically 
believe that we can maintain oil drilling over a longer haul. 
 
And I just make this point, that there are people in the industry 
now, and particularly in the small-business sector, in Weyburn and 
Swift Current and Kindersley and Lloydminster, who are now 
saying to us that that peak period and the heady days of 1984 and 
'85, where we  

were drilling 3,500 wells or 3,000 wells, that in many ways the 
infrastructure that we built up in '84 and '85 in some of those cities 
. . . And the minister will well know in Weyburn, where the 
business trip along the highway — they doubled the number of 
motel rooms and they doubled the number of eating outlets — that 
if we could do it over again, that we would be better off as small 
business in those communities to have a constant growth in the oil 
industry, of 1,500. If we could maintain 2,000, so much the better. 
 
But to have this violent swing from 1,500 to 3,800 and now back 
down to 1,500 is going to have a tremendous impact for those 
small-business people who went out and, on the predictions of the 
Premier, built new motels and new cafes, based on the fact that 
they believed what he said when he led them to believe that this 
would go on for ever. 
 
There were very few people who were looking at what was 
happening here from the outside when there was a more general 
downturn in the U.S., and it was gradual and it wasn't nearly as 
profound. They could see the false economy that was being 
created in Saskatchewan in the boom and bust cycle that we were 
setting up. I'm not here overly critical of what the government was 
doing because during those days when things were booming, it did 
appear to be good for everyone. But now we're facing the 
inevitable of the bottom falling out, which it always does in the oil 
industry, and it will again. We'll have peaks and we'll have troughs 
in the oil industry, and what we have to do, I believe, is have 
incentives for oil companies when times are bad. I believe that 
what you're trying to do now, Mr. Minister, has some validity to it 
where you're trying to help out the small operators when times are 
in one of the troughs. 
 
(1500) 
 
What I could never figure out is why, when the peak time was on, 
we would add to the heated-up market and create an even more 
false economy in an industry where psychology is everything. And 
if you've been around that industry very much you will know that 
when times are booming and you're drilling an oil well, money 
means nothing if the times are good. But on the reverse side of it, 
when the times get tough, the reverse is true, and you always have 
these exaggerated circumstances. 
 
And of course my preference would have been — and, I suppose, 
hindsight is always more perfect than looking ahead — but we 
predicted that this would happen, that when you heat up an already 
heated market, which you did with incentives for drilling oil wells, 
especially infill drilling — and I'll qualify my criticism to giving 
royalty free periods for infill drilling as opposed to exploratory, 
because I can understand even now a New Democratic 
government would have incentives for exploratory drilling the 
way we did in the 1970s — I understand that. 
 
But to have royalty-free periods for infill drilling never made a lot 
of sense to me. And I think we gave away a good deal of money in 
the good times that the treasury should have been taking so we 
could pay it out to the oil companies and the small operators now 
that times are tough. 
 
  



 
June 4, 1986 

1705 
 

Here I'm not being argumentative, but I'm just stating what I 
believe to be a better policy of public administration within 
government . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member for 
P.A.-Duck Lake is once again talking from his seat in his jocular 
and foolish manner which he always does. And it's hard for me to 
believe that he's the Minister of Justice, talking about salt water 
. . . Many oil companies drill dry wells, obviously. What oil 
companies do is drill oil wells, and some have oil and some don't, 
and that's not unusual . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, we 
drilled a number of oil wells last year; I think the company I'm 
involved in drilled 10, and some of them were dry, some of them 
had salt water, and some of them had oil. And that's not unusual. 
 
The thing that is stupid is the minister from P.A.-Duck Lake not 
understanding the oil drilling area to the point where he doesn't 
even understand that all oil companies don't drill dry wells and, in 
fact, don't use salt water in the extraction of oil. I mean this shows 
how ridiculously naive the Minister of Justice is. and I suppose as 
the days go by, Mr. Chairman, is how that member has nothing 
better to do with his time . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I believe that the member is 
wandering from the topic, and I ask him to get back to the topic. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And I would very much appreciate from the 
chairman, if when the member from P.A.-Duck Lake is yelling 
that . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Just get back to the topic please. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I think the debate was going on very well 
here between the minister and myself before the Minister of 
Justice got into it, and if he would choose to do a little work from 
his seat, we could carry on because I think this is an important 
issue and one that was a great number of questions will be asked 
as the day goes on, and I appreciate the candidness with which the 
minister is answering questions. 
 
And if we continue on, if we want to get into a political harangue, 
we can do that too, where we've been able to do that from time to 
time; and if we want to do the business of the department, we can 
do that, or we can have a harangue with the Minister of Justice 
who continually shouts from his seat and carries on. 
 
But I want to go back to the important issue of the cycle and 
continuous growth within the oil industry. And I want to ask the 
minister a question bout the massive amount of incentives that 
were given to the oil industry at a time when the world prices were 
the highest in the history of the world. They'd never been higher in 
the period when you were giving massive incentives for infill 
drilling. 
 
And what infill drilling is, basically, is an oil company, who 
previously had 160-acre spacings, would apply to the department 
for 80-acre spacings, and this was happening in my area. They 
would come in and apply to have the spacings changed from 160 
to 80; it was being granted, and they were going out and drilling 
new wells  

into the existing oil field and getting a royalty-free period — no 
risk involved. The geology clearly indicated that there was oil 
under the 80-acre spacing that they were applying for, and they 
would get a royalty-free period. 
 
Now we're not talking about small amounts of money. Some of 
these wells that were drilled in our area, on 80-acre spacings rather 
than 160-acres spacings, were producing 3 and 400 barrels a day. 
And if you look at a royalty-free period, the pay-out on those wells 
totally was less than 60 days — was less than 60 days — and they 
paid no royalty for 365 days. And they were very, very lucky, I 
suppose, and I understand why they would support a conservative 
government who would have that kind of revenue, on behalf of the 
taxpayers, to give away. 
 
But in retrospect, I wonder whether or not the minister would 
agree that if we could do it over again, that some of that money 
that we had — that some of that money that we had, if we could 
do it over again, would be better put into the oil industry today on 
the bottom end of the cycle where many small operators are going 
broke. And we really can't do what we should be doing now 
because we're $2 billion in the hole; we didn't save up the money 
when world oil prices were high, and now we're in a position 
where we should be helping out the oil industry, and we don't have 
the cash to do it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, a number 
of points were raised in your remarks. The first one I would make 
is based on your observation about the effect of boom and bust or 
cycles in the oil business or, for that matter I suppose, any 
business, and the effect on the Weyburns of the world and Swift 
Currents, and so on. Because we recognize that there is so much 
employment, firstly; and secondly, so much economic spin-off 
that's enjoyed by communities like that and because this industry 
is so important in Saskatchewan, it's because of observations like 
that that we made the changes we did here three or four weeks 
ago. It's not just good enough to tailor-make something or focus it 
on those who directly have jobs in the oil patch; it's also important 
to recognize those who work in the restaurants and the cafes 
because those jobs are intimately tied to the oil patch. So it's 
exactly why we made the changes. 
 
Relatives to your comments about why would we heat up an 
already heated up market, well obviously your definition of an 
already heated up industry and mine are quite different. In '81 and 
'82, in this already heated up industry, as you described it, there 
were 807 and 809 wells drilled, based on that sheet I sent over to 
you. That hardly sounds like a heated up oil economy. Plus, during 
that time when your administration was in power, you had the 
luxury of an expectation there amongst the oil producers of a 
world oil price that was going to be $60 a barrel. So here we had 
an oil producer under an NDP administration looking at possibly 
$60 a barrel, and the best he could do was 807 and 809 wells. 
 
When we came along in '82, already the pendulum had started to 
swing. Oil producers were more cautious in their expectations; 
down trends were starting to establish themselves. And during that 
time of certainly something less than $60-a-barrel forecasts, 
drilling picked up dramatically with the changes that we made 
here in  
  



 
June 4, 1986 

1706 
 
 

Saskatchewan. 
 
So all I've got to say to you is that Weyburn doesn't want 
NDP-style heating up of the oil economy again because when it 
was heated up under the NDP, our oil patch was shut down. There 
was virtually no drilling. The El Rancho was boarded up — and 
you know that place well, and there's people there today from 
Shaunavon originally who are doing very well and just love to 
have those seismic crews in there month after month after month. 
 
Weyburn doesn't want to have to go and do again like they did in 
the middle of the last decade and circulate all across their town 
and that city petitions urging an NDP government to do something 
in this heated up economy. It was so heated up that half the town 
was closed down, half the businesses were closed down, and the 
oil patch was idle. So we don't want any more of this NDP heating 
up the oil economy; we can't stand it, it's so good. 
 
Now as it relates to infill drilling: this is something that we take 
very seriously, as do you. We are custodians of this resource of the 
people, and we don't want to see the provincial taxpayers abused. I 
think you would agree with both of those goals. We're all 
interested in conserving and looking after this valued and 
treasured non-renewable resource as best we can, not only for this 
generation but for generations to come. And there is no infill 
drilling allowed unless it's proven to the satisfaction of my 
officials and our department that in fat that well is going to, by 
drilling it, going to get some oil that would otherwise not be 
gotten. That is a fact. 
 
And hence, if we also have the goal, you and I, of securing and 
assuring a future oil supply here for the next generation, and if it 
makes some sense to get that oil out of the ground we wouldn't 
otherwise get, we allow for the one-year royalty holiday on infill 
drilling. Because to not, and to use your logic, then it would 
suggest that (a) that well wouldn't get drilled; (b) that oil wouldn't 
get pulled out of the ground. 
 
And it wouldn't matter what the royalties on it were — 80 per 
cent, 90 per cent, 210 per cent — it wouldn't matter because it 
would stay in the ground; it wouldn't get drilled. So you wouldn't 
need seismic crews; you wouldn't have people stopping at the El 
Rancho; you wouldn't have the restaurants busy; you wouldn't 
have the service sector busy; you'd have neither jobs, economic 
activity, nor revenue for the province if it stayed in the ground. 
 
But I shouldn't be surprised by your question because you and I 
obviously have a different philosophical approach on how you 
treat the industry and whether you're interested in conserving in 
the long-term security of this industry. The other point, and one 
that very often fails to be appreciated and really does address the 
whole question of security supply down the road, is that in many 
of these instances the infill well becomes part of a larger strategy 
for some of these producers in terms of enhanced oil recovery 
projects, in terms of injector wells, that kind of thing. 
 
(1515) 
 

So I would argue that we get a lot of economic spin-off, maybe 
much more than conventional drilling, by allowing the infill well 
to be drilled to get that extra drop of oil. Now you have argued that 
there is absolutely no risk, I think those were the words you used. I 
suspect that I could find a number of oil producers that would 
laugh in your fact at that remark because that game is something 
less than ever having any certainty about it in terms of putting 
down a well and expecting it to perform as one would like. 
 
So I think you're off the mark in your comments that there is 
absolutely no risk. But the overriding factors and the ones that we 
must remember is there are no infill wells drilled unless these 
people here are satisfied, point number one. Two, it often fits a 
larger strategy in terms of EOR (enhanced oil recovery). 
 
And the other reason that this government has employed the 
overall strategy we have in dealing with the industry is, quite 
frankly, not only could Weyburn not afford the NDP heating up 
the oil industry, the provincial taxpayer couldn't afford to have you 
people heating up the economy any more in the oil side. Because 
your incentives, if we look at '81 for example, the taxpayers gave 
the oil companies $77,000 on average to drill a dry hole. In 1985, 
our numbers last year, if you factor in the incentives — $32,000. 
And, of course, we only have the successes. 
 
So I think our record stands. What I hear the oil industry people in 
Weyburn saying, whether it's the waiter or the waitress of the cafes 
in Weyburn or the people who work in the oil patch in the service 
and supply sector, quite frankly they're scared that you guys might 
even get close to the levers of government again when it comes to 
their jobs. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister has made several statements 
about what happened in the period 1980 and '81, '82, and for the 
record I just want to indicate to them, by your own estimates or 
statistics you sent over, 1980 under Al Blakeney an the New 
Democrats there were 1,498 wells drilled. Then came the national 
energy program, it went down to 807. And if you look in Alberta 
that change . . . the scale is directly comparable with the national 
energy program, and I'm not asking you to accept that, I'm just 
stating facts and that it was in large part due to the national energy 
program. 
 
It's as legitimate for me to argue that it was the national energy 
program that reduced it from 1,500 wells to 800 as it is for you to 
argue that we're going to go from 3,800 this year down to less than 
2,000. How, on the one hand, is it the total responsibility of the 
provincial government to keep oil drilling up when there's a New 
Democratic government, but when there's a Tory government it's 
outside influences that are forcing the number of wells drilled 
down this year? And I mean the public will decide which 
argument is true or which is accurate, and of course that's fair. But 
you have just indicated to us that last year, in a period from April 
1st to, I believe, May 21st, the number of wells drilled this year is 
19, down from 229 last year. I want to say that never in the history 
of the province has there been a drop in well-drilling in this 
province like that time period — never before. That's the  
  



 
June 4, 1986 

1707 
 

worst record in terms of a reduction in wells drilled . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . It is true. Going from 19 this year, from what was 
229 last year, is the worst record for that time period ever in the 
history of the province. 
 
And I'm not blaming that on the Conservatives — I'm not blaming 
that on you. I'm saying it's circumstances that are from the outside. 
I would appreciate if you would have the at least common decency 
to appreciate, with the national energy program, what was 
happening in Alberta and Saskatchewan as a result of taxation by 
the federal government, was a cutting in half of wells being 
drilled, because the government didn't change between 1980 and 
'81 when there was a great drop in the number of wells drilled with 
the national energy program. And I know the people in your 
department understand that. I don't know whether the minister 
understands or whether he's just playing the political game. 
 
But I'm not going to play the political game of saying that the 
reduction this year from last year, from 229 to 19, is the 
responsibility of the Conservative government. And the reduction 
in Alberta, which is similar to that, is not the responsibility of the 
Conservative government, but is simply a mechanical 
responsibility to what the world prices are doing. 
 
The simple fact is that when I talk about psychology in the oil 
patch, the oil price today in Saskatchewan is higher than at any 
time in the 1970s — higher than any time in the 1970s. Even 
today, as we speak, the oil prices today the oil producers in my 
area and your area are getting are higher than at any time in the 
1970s. And that's what we're talking about — that's basically what 
we're talking about — is that we drilled many of the wells in 1984 
and '85 that would have been drilled in 1986. 
 
It's like having a program for building houses. And I agree that 
when you give incentives, people react to it, but the reaction lasts 
for a certain length of time, and I don't care how many incentives 
you give now. The biggest thing is whether or not they can sell the 
oil. And if there's no sale for it, they're not going to drill wells, nor 
should they. Why would they? And that's what was happening in 
1981 and '82. That's what was happening; there was no sale for it. 
 
And you remember why the wells were shut in. The price was all 
right, but they couldn't sell it. What are you telling us — that 
you're really trying to make people believe that people were 
shutting in wells because there was a Conservative government or 
an NDP government? 
 
I mean, everyone knows that that is a naive position and that 
everyone knows that they're not quitting drilling this year because 
there's a Conservative government. Obviously that isn't the reality. 
The reality is that oil companies will drill when there's a profit to 
be made. And they're not drilling this year because they can't sell 
the oil and because the price isn't as high as it was last year. 
 
But I'll tell you, if the market was wide open and there was 
optimism in the world market for oil, regardless of what 
government was in Saskatchewan, they would drill for oil. And 
that's a fact, because they've done it before. In 1980 — 
1,400 - 1,500 wells — that's what was drilled. 
 

And that's when they were selling and making a buck. And yes, I 
suppose they would rather have a Conservative government than 
an NDP government because they make more money under your 
government. That's a fact; they do. 
 
But on the other hand, the people of the province are getting less, 
which leads me to my next question. I have here a list of 
provincial revenues from oil. That includes the royalty and the 
land sales. And I just want to check these with you. 
 
In 1982, the numbers that I have here, revenue from royalty and 
from land sales was 700 million; in 1983, 685 million; in 1984, 
740 million; in 1985, 655 million; and in 1986 the estimate in your 
Estimates, 511 million. And yet you've already indicated that 
production in the first quarter has increased from where it was last 
year. 
 
I understand on the oil companies' side why they liked the 
Conservative government — because they make more money. I 
agree; I concede that, that they make more money. And if you 
gave them more breaks they would even make more money. I 
understand that. That's fairly simple. 
 
But on the other side, the people who own the oil, how are they 
making out? I understand your argument about jobs and that. I am 
now talking about the people who own the oil. That's the million 
people who live in the province. How are they making out? 
 
In 1982 — I want you to confirm this — the revenue from oil and 
land sales was 700 million. Is that an accurate estimation, within 
10 or 20 million, in terms of what we got from oil and land sales? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member picking up 
on some of your earlier comments here, you made the point about 
how . . . the reason that drilling went down from 1,500 wells down 
to that 800 level. It was because of the national energy program. I 
guess the observation I would make, and those in the oil patch 
make to me, is that that's what we got from the Trudeau-Blakeney 
coalition. That was their idea of standing up against Ottawa on 
behalf of oilfield workers. 
 
We hear a lot, Mr. Chairman, in this legislature, particularly from 
the Leader of the Opposition, about how you've got to stand up 
against Ottawa — stand up against Brian Mulroney. Well I'll tell 
you what, Mr. Chairman, what did we get when the former leader 
of the opposition stood up against Ottawa? The only thing he did 
is when he stood up his arches caved in. Because we didn't get the 
capital gains tax removal; we didn't get the taxes off farm fuels; 
we didn't get the elimination of PGRT (petroleum and gas revenue 
tax). What we got was a shut-down oil patch in conjunction with 
NDP policies here. 
 
So I'll tell you what, Mr. Chairman, I'll take, any day of the week, 
our Premier standing up and speaking on behalf of Saskatchewan 
in Ottawa, any day, over those members opposite, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And when it gets to records, and records in terms of  
  



 
June 4, 1986 

1708 
 
 

revenue, I remind the people of this province and members in this 
House, and these so-called good times and times of high oil prices 
in the mid-70s and the early '80s that the hon. member referred to, 
once again in Saskatchewan the taxpayers, the people of this 
province, couldn't stand those good times. In fact they were so 
good in 1975 we got zero dollars in land sale revenue in these very 
good times of the high oil prices that the hon. member talked 
about. In 1975, zero dollars; not one piece of land was sold, Mr. 
Chairman. Not one piece — zero dollars. 
 
In fact, Mr. Chairman, our program has become the envy of the 
nation and, in fact, the envy of countries of the world over. They 
have followed our lead. And some would say imitation is the 
sincerest form of flattery. 
 
The hon. member has also tried to leave the impression, 
erroneously, that a Tory government is good for the big oil 
companies. Two things wrong with that. First of all, 70 per cent of 
the producers in Saskatchewan are small independents, family 
operations, not unlike probably the one the hon. member is 
involved in. The first thing wrong with that statement is that 70 per 
cent of the work done here is done by independents, small 
independents. Okay. Point number one. 
 
The second point is, Mr. Chairman, is he tries to leave the 
impression that these big oil companies get all this cash from the 
Tory government, and their pockets are just overflowing with it, 
and they fly the province, they fly the country. Well the reality is, 
Mr. Speaker — I think the numbers that I would use are from last 
year, certainly in the last year or two — is that they reinvest to the 
tune of 106 per cent. We've got a net inflow into here, Mr. 
Chairman, not an outflow. 
 
So these big, bad oil companies, not only are they spending every 
dollar, but they're finding 6 cents and spending $1.06 going right 
back into this province, Mr. Speaker. Now that hardly is consistent 
with the image of these big, bad oil companies drifting off to some 
place else with our money. It's just not true, Mr. Chairman. Just 
not true. 
 
Now the hon. member referred to in his final remarks, asking the 
question, asking me to confirm in fact that oil revenue in '82-83 
was $700.3 million. No, revenue from provincial sources, Mr. 
Chairman, was in fact 425.1. The difference is: the export tax was 
217.4, and the NDP incentive expenditure had to be paid out 
which was 57.8, which brings us down to something in the order 
of 425.1. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — What I'm asking you is: from royalty on oil 
and land sales, what was the revenue in 1982? That's the question 
I'm asking because I want to make a similar comparison for this 
year. What I want to know is what the royalty from oil and land 
sales was in 1982? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The numbers are: oil royalties and 
freehold tax production, 419.4; bonus bids for land sales, 43.0, 
which gives you a total of 462.4. But I caution the member in 
terms of how he uses those numbers so as not to twist and distort 
them, because those are the two  

numbers you asked for very specifically, but of course that doesn't 
include things like the pay-out for the NDP incentive, okay? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Where are you getting these numbers from? 
Are they from the blue book estimates or as a result of the final 
result? Because this is not what was estimated in the '82-83 blue 
book, nor is it the actual. What I'm looking for, and I will refer you 
to my Estimates — I'll have someone go pick them up for me. but 
in '82-83 you're either totally out to lunch on what you're telling 
us, or else the blue book estimate is not accurate, because we're a 
ways off on that. And I want you to confirm what you're talking 
about there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, these are 
'82-83 actuals. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister has indicated that these are 
actuals. The production for that time period, can you give me that 
number? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, 53.6 million barrels. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Would you convert that to cubic metres for 
me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, 8.5 million cubic metres. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And what was the total value of that oil 
when it was sold, the total value at that current price? And if you 
could also give me the average price of a cubic metre for that time 
period. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The value of oil production was 1.4323 
billion — 1.4323 billions of dollars; average oil price, $26.73 per 
barrel. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Would the minister then give me, for the 
period '85 - 86, the same figures for the total amount of 
production, the average price, and the total price of oil sold that 
year? And also the revenue to the province for land sales and 
royalties? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, to expedite this, I've 
taken the opportunity of converting the production to millions of 
cubic metres. So oil production, '85-86 blue book, '85-86 
production, 11.6 million cubic metres, or 72.9 million barrels. The 
value of the production, 2.4183 billions of dollars; average oil 
price, $33.17. And to provide you with the parallel numbers in 
terms of the revenue, oil royalties, and taxes, 512.9 million; the 
bonus bids from our land sales, 110.0, for a total of 622.9. And I 
think that should enable you to do the calculation I think you have 
in mind. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — What we have seen here then is the total 
price of oil. I just want to confirm this going from '82-83 from 1.4 
billion up to 2.4. I would like you to confirm that first, that the 
increase in total revenue from oil in the province has gone from 
1.4 in '82-83, to 2.48 in '85-86? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member,  
  



 
June 4, 1986 

1709 
 

what I've given you were blue book Estimates, 1985-86. I think in 
the final analysis, what they will show is that they are on the high 
side, but that is the origin of the numbers. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The numbers that I gave you, or that I'm 
confirming here, 1.4 billion in '82-83, and 2.48 or 2.5 billion in 
'85-86. Those are accurate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The '85-86 blue-book number for the 
value of oil production is 2.4183 billions of dollars. That's '85-86. 
it went from 1.4323 billion to 2.4183 billion. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — So that's basically an increase in the total 
amount of revenue from oil of 1.1. billion, roughly — 1.1 billion 
increase in that time period? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Approximately 1.0 billion, yes. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And then on the other side where you talk 
about the provincial revenue, '82-83, 462.8 million; and '85-86, 
622.9 million, or an increase of 156 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In terms of the revenues, the two 
numbers that you have are in ’82-83, 462.8 million; and ’85-86, 
622.9 million. Once again I caution you because either you've got 
to subtract out the NDP incentive or add 110 million, I think it is, 
to our numbers. So in terms of what you're going to do with them 
down the road, I just throw in that caveat. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well the clear indication though is there's a 
drastic increase in the oil revenue in the province, in that time 
period, of approximately 1.1 billion, and the revenue to the people 
of the province, their share of the 1.1 billion by your numbers, is 
156 million, and that the other 844 million has gone elsewhere. 
 
And you can talk about the drastic increase in spin-off and what it 
has done for the province, but the simple fact is that if you look at 
the unemployment in the province in that same time period, it's 
gone up by about 3 or 4 per cent. If you look at the deficit of the 
province in that time period, it's gone up by $2 billion. If you look 
at the number of people on welfare, it's gone from 45,000 to 
64,000. So at the same time as you're talking about this great 
boom in oil and all its done for the people of the province, there 
are people in the province who don't believe that there has been a 
great, exciting time as the result of increasing their production, 
which has happened from 8.5 to 11.6. They wonder whether or not 
they have been getting their fair share of the return from the oil. 
 
And I just say to you, it's a bit difficult to believe when we go to 
this year's estimates, and I want to turn your attention to the 
estimates for 1986-87, in terms of the revenue from oil. 
 
Even though you have indicated that in the first quarter there is an 
increase in production, the estimate that we're looking at actually 
show s a decrease. And maybe you will give me that number for 
'86-87. What are you estimating the revenue from oil and land 
sales to be? 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, as I 
warned you — or cautioned you, rather — because I feared that 
you might be making some calculations and using only selective 
numbers . . . And I suppose why I was suspicious that that might 
happen is that I've seen it happen before when I sat here in 
estimates, when my predecessor dealt with the opposition on this 
question. 
 
(1545) 
 
You come up with a difference in revenues and you come up with 
a difference in value of oil production and make the argument that 
some . . . over $800 million just . . . the oil companies got $800 
million-plus, and the taxpayers got not nearly what they should 
have got. 
 
But once again you forgot that when the NDP took money in on 
behalf of the province and the treasury and the taxpayer, under 
your program you gave some back. Do you remember that? And 
that's why, if you want to be correct about this, you've got to factor 
in that $57.8 million, in '82-83 actual, that you paid out. You 
collected, under oil royalty and taxes, this 419.4, and bonus bids, 
43, but then you turned around and gave 57.8 back. And you 
failed to adjust the subsequent calculation you did for that number. 
Worse than that, for the provincial taxpayer you actually got an 
IOU out there to the tune of about $300 million you left us with 
when we took office. So now if we really made these numbers 
right, I don't know what we'd end up at; at $357.8 million that 
should have been given back. 
 
So that's why I caution the hon. member, you've got this phoney 
mathematics that you apply in terms of your logic here. But worse 
than that to try and leave the perception and to try and scare all the 
folks out there in the oil patch that there's $800 million that sort of 
somehow grew wings and left the province, that too is untrue. And 
I make the point again, and I make it very, very clear: 106 per cent 
reinvestment — a net inflow, not outflow. That' where the money 
came. Not only did we get more for the taxpayers, but we had it 
coming in from other provinces into this province. And you made 
the case that in your mind the taxpayers, the citizens of this 
province, weren't getting their fair share. 
 
The question I ask is: how can the NDP be right and everybody 
else wrong in their observations on this one? Is it not true, as I 
stand before you here in the legislature today, is it not true that 
Saskatchewan has, even with the adjustments we made three 
weeks ago or so, is it not true that Saskatchewan has the highest 
royalties in North America? 
 
Now I can see why the member is hanging his head, because 
virtually everything you've put up in this last set of questioning 
here has been warped, you've used mathematical jiggery-pokery, 
and in fact you haven't presented the correct face on what's 
happening. 
 
I say, Mr. Chairman, in this province under this administration, the 
Grant Devine administration, the taxpayer is the winner; the 
people who have jobs in the oil patch are the winner; the people at 
Saskatoon Oilfield Manufacturing are winners; the people who 
work in restaurants and cafes are winners. Everybody is a winner  
  



 
June 4, 1986 

1710 
 
 

as much as one can be a winner today, Mr. Chairman, in this 
province, given that we're dealing in the 12 to $14 a barrel world 
oil price. 
 
The '86-87 estimates that you asked for: oil production, 11.6 
million cubic metres, 73.1 million barrels; value of oil production, 
$1.7026 billion; average oil price, 23. 29; oil royalties and taxes, 
413.6 million; bonus bids, 75.0 million. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And I want to ask you: if you add the . . . 
Well first of all on the bonus bids, how are we making out 
working our way towards that 75 million? How do you break that 
down? How do you expect those sales to go? I just want to get you 
on record in your prediction. We have seen the estimate of 75 
million. I'd like you to break that down so I can follow you 
through in the June sale, and so on, where you're going to get the 
75 million. I'd like to get your prediction on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, as you 
will know, in this fiscal year we have yet to have a sale. The first 
one, I think, is slated for June 10. My officials advise me that the 
postings look good, and it really does depend on what the oil price 
is about that time. 
 
When oil was $10 a barrel in March, it wasn't all that encouraging. 
Ourselves, like Alberta, ran at about 30, 35, 37 per cent of the 
previous sale year over. And in terms of sort of estimating this 
fiscal year versus last fiscal year, the only land sale we've had 
since we've had to deal with this new low world oil price was the 
March sale. And I suppose it met our expectations in terms of 
being in the ballpark versus sales in Alberta, but obviously down 
from a year over. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I want to indicate to you that 
what we see happening here is a direct shift in the provincial 
government's take from oil as a percentage of the total sales, has 
gone down fairly significantly; and that the amount that the 
taxpayers are getting from their oil, even though production has 
increased relatively dramatically, has not increased 
correspondingly. And you can argue that any way you like, and I 
think the indications are all there that we're not getting our share. 
 
The simple fact is that you can't deny that we have a $2 billion 
deficit. I mean, that's clearly an indication of how well you're 
doing in terms of getting our share out of our resources — that 
you're not getting our share. And here we have an indication, an 
estimate of $488 million coming from oil. 
 
Now if we look at what we're planning to get from income tax — 
and the Premier likes to say, always, that we get more from oil 
than we do from any other area of taxation — if you look at the 
estimate that we're predicting to get out of individual income tax 
this year, 612 million. 
 
And I would ask you: when is the last time that we got less from 
oil in this province — less from oil in this province than from 
income tax? It's a fair little while ago. Even in the tough times of 
the national energy program, believe it or not, the money coming 
from oil . . . And that was in  

relatively tough times here and in Alberta. And I find it interesting 
how you separate Alberta from Saskatchewan when the cycle is 
going that way with an NDP government, but now in your era you 
want to compare yourself in saying the same thing is happening in 
Alberta. But when it happened in 1980-81 there was no 
relationship and it was all because of the NDP, but now when it's 
down here, no comparison being made with the fact that it's 
because of a Conservative government here. And I find that quite 
interesting and pretty simplistic.  
 
I really don't believe the minister believes it. I really don't believe 
that he expects people to believe him when he says that oil drilling 
in this time period, from April 1st to May 21st, has gone from over 
200 to 19 and that's not the responsibility of the Conservative 
government — a decrease of a good deal more than it was from 
1980 to '81 under the NDP government, but that was the fault of 
the NDP government and not the national energy program — even 
when the same decrease was occurring in Alberta in that same 
time period. 
 
When we talk about standing up and fighting, I think Peter 
Lougheed, the premier of Alberta at that time, and Allan 
Blakeney, did a good job under the circumstances. I believe they 
did. And if you're saying Peter Lougheed, with 90 per cent of the 
production of oil, didn't go a good job, and you're on the side of 
Getty in Alberta, Don Getty, who people in the oil industry laugh 
at compared to Peter Lougheed, I'll say that Al Blakeney and Peter 
Lougheed did a good job under the circumstances. 
 
And if you can blame them for the reduction in well drilling from 
'80 to '81, and yet are not responsible for the reduction in well 
drilling this year as minister, that's drawing a long bow. How can 
you possibly say that the minister and the premiers who were in 
place in 1980 and '81 were responsible, but now that you're the 
minister you're not responsible for the reduction in wells being 
drilled? I mean, that's as phoney as a plugged nickel. 
 
And I expected more from you. I don't believe that's the words that 
are coming from your advisers. I just don't simply believe that they 
would say that premier Blakeney in 1980 and '81 was responsible 
for that reduction in wells being drilled, but somehow the Devine 
government is being let off the hook. I don't believe that they're 
advising you that that was the case. 
 
I think that, if you were being honest with the committee and 
listening to your advisers, they're telling you that in 1980 and '81 
the reduction from 1,500 to 850 was in large part due to the 
national energy program; and that similar reduction in Alberta was 
not the responsibility of Peter Lougheed but was the responsibility 
of Pierre Elliott Trudeau and others in his cabinet; and that today, 
in large part, the reduction — and I'll give you that credit — I'm 
not blaming it in a political, partisan way that the reduction from 
227 to 19 in the period from April 1st to May 21st is totally your 
responsibility. 
 
But what I'm saying is that always in the oil industry there's going 
to be outside impacts that will shut in oil wells, as they will be in 
this province if the trend continues of a world oil glut. If you stay 
until next April, and hold off and are fearful of going to an 
election until  
  



 
June 4, 1986 

1711 
 

next April, and all the oil wells shut in as a result of a world 
demand being reduced, I'm not going to blame you. 
 
But simply in fairness you should have, I think, the argument 
straight that, if Al Blakeney and Peter Lougheed were responsible 
for a reduction in wells being drilled in 1980 and '81, then you 
would be man enough to stand up and say: and I am responsible 
for the reduction today. 
 
Like, the two arguments aren't consistent, and the public out there 
know that. And maybe this is one of the reasons that people in 
Weyburn are so disappointed that this doublespeak that we hear 
coming from the minister — when he has trouble in agriculture as 
minister of Agriculture, and now has trouble in energy and Mines 
— to say it's not my fault, I have no responsibility; but I'll tell you, 
the premiers who were back in '81 and '82, they were responsible, 
but when I'm minister I'm not. 
 
I say that's a minister who's not doing his job, and I find it hard to 
believe that that's what your advisers who are sitting by you are 
advising you to say. I don't believe it. I think you're making this 
up, sort of going by the seat of your pants. And I would say to the 
minister, if that is how responsible he is — that he would say he's 
not responsible for the reduction in wells being drilled but 
previous ministers were — that isn't a consistent argument. 
 
And before I take my place I see that individual income tax this 
year in Saskatchewan will be 100 million more that individuals 
will pay in income tax than we're getting from oil. And I wanted to 
ask you: when is the last time we got more from income tax than 
we did from oil revenues? When was the last time? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member makes 
the point that politicians shouldn't be held responsible for world 
factors, I suppose. And I suppose he's right except that, how do 
you explain in the early '80s when oil prices were going up and 
drilling was going down, and today oil prices are going down and 
drillings going down? There's an inconsistency in the logic there. 
 
The question of whether the taxpayers' getting the fair share . . and 
as I pointed out earlier, we as much as anyone are of the view that 
in fact we are custodians of this resource and in fact do want to get 
the best out of it for this generation and next. And I think our 
record stands as a tribute to those two goals. Because I could stand 
here and point out the additional spin-offs. And I would argue that 
if we had not done what we'd done, you'd be criticizing us for not 
creating jobs out there, and you'd rather have some program where 
you pay a grant or something for a short-term job. I mean, that's 
the NDP style. 
 
Our view was, let's take the industry in a very fundamental sort of 
way and see if we can't put some good underpinnings here. And 
hence we did get the jobs, and we did get the economic spin-offs, 
inside and outside the oil patch. 
 

And I could also talk about the . . . I think it's something in the 
order of now $50 million-plus that farmers receive in surface 
rights — not an inconsequential number, but certainly one that 
doesn't show up in the blue book. But certainly they are people of 
Saskatchewan and taxpayers in this province. 
 
And I could talk about the . . . I think it's something in the order of 
200 R.M.s out there that receive some revenues from oil 
producers, seismic, that kind of thing. And I mean, one has only to 
drive around, certainly in my constituency, and see the 
contribution that those oil producers have made to the quality of 
the roads — all-weather roads. 
 
I saw the numbers one time about how much an oil well represents 
in terms of land assessment. It's very substantial. And if we added 
it and factored all those things into this, the report that I would 
give to the legislature would be even more glowing that that which 
I have already given. 
 
And that doesn't count the income tax. Maybe that's why the 
income tax revenues is up to this $100 million additional, as you 
pointed out, is because of all the income tax we collected from 
these drillers and oil producers and operators and waitresses and 
waiters. I mean, that's all the spin-off, the indirect revenue as 
opposed to the direct. 
 
But you continue to suggest that we have the give-aways, that 
we're not getting our fair share. You continue to suggest that we 
should raise royalties, that there should be no incentives. But we 
don't want the oil patch shut down due to governmental policies 
that are maligned. We want to do what we can. 
 
Our total goal as a government is three-fold. And today I would 
suggest to you that the human dimension is the most important of 
all, and that is maintaining jobs in the oil patch and in those 
industries that are indirectly related to the oil industry. That is our 
first goal. Because, since 1982 through to '85, the number, directly 
and indirectly working in this industry, doubled. That's a fact — 
doubled. And there's just too many families out there today for 
them to have to take this NDP abuse every time, and to be 
embarrassed that they're in the oil industry, and that they be called 
crooks and robbers, and that the minister is a minister of social 
welfare for the oil companies. Then you wonder why they're 
scared that you'll even get close to the levers of government again. 
They are the most important. There's too many jobs and too many 
families' livelihoods at stake. 
 
And the hon. member referred to my constituency, Mr. Chairman. 
The hon. member referred to my constituency. And I would like to 
tell him a story of what happened in my constituency in 1982 
when I was campaigning there. And the Hon. Leader of the 
Opposition will be interested in this story, because it exemplifies 
the NDP approach and treatment of the oil industry versus the 
Grant Devine approach. 
 
And in '82, when things were as good as this hon. member told us 
earlier, about how the oil industry was so heated up under an NDP 
administration, here is what I got in Weyburn, Saskatchewan, in 
my constituency which you referred to earlier on. Here is what I  
  



 
June 4, 1986 

1712 
 
 

got. I got at a door in Griffin, Saskatchewan, 18 miles east of 
Weyburn, knocking in the election campaign; met at the door by a 
husband and a wife, a babe in arms, and another little child at foot; 
and the wife is almost in tears as she tells me that because the 
NDP and the Trudeau-Blakeney coalition has shut down the oil 
patch, he, who had a job for 11 years in that oil industry, is now 
out of a job. And she is nearly in tears with those two young 
children. 
 
And I'll tell you what, Mr. Chairman. We can sit here and haggle 
about what is the right number and what's been subtracted in and 
what's been subtracted out, but I'll tell you, in the final analysis 
what this policy is all about is providing jobs and livelihoods for 
the families of this province. And to this day I, personally, will 
never forget the look of fear and despair and frustration in the eyes 
of that young family. 
 
So as much as you might want to be preoccupied with the debate 
on this, what we view too s a cash cow, the time has passed where 
you can simply view the oil patch as a cash cow. We're going to 
get every penny we can for these taxpayers in this province from 
that cash cow, but the larger dimension today is the human 
dimension — the jobs and the families out there. 
 
The third dimension, over and above revenue and jobs, is the 
economic spin-off in the communities of rural Saskatchewan. You 
can have all the commissions that you like, and all the studies that 
you like, but I'll tell you what: you go across rural Saskatchewan 
and you look at places like Griffin and Halbrite and all of those 
centres around your area in Shaunavon, the cafes that have 
sprouted up that the farmers and their friends enjoy for morning 
coffee, and the service industries that have sprouted up in these 
small towns. 
 
I drove down and I spoke to the oilfield technical society in 
Estevan here just two or three weeks ago. I drove down Highway 
39 from Weyburn to Estevan — driving, not flying, I would point 
out, to Estevan for this meeting. And I'll tell you I, myself, was 
amazed — and I've driven that area; I know it like the back of my 
hand from my practice days — I, myself, was amazed at how 
many businesses had grown up because of that oil patch industry. 
 
Those three dimensions, Mr. Chairman, are what make this 
industry important to us, and quite frankly I am sick and tired of 
them being abused and kicked around. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, I'm going to ask a question 
or two arising from the annual report of your department for the 
year 1984-1985. And the first question I ask is: during the period 
covered by this report, do you agree that the effective royalty on 
oil and gas was reduced — that the effective rate of royalty on oil 
and gas produced during the period covered by this report was 
lowered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I'm having 
a little trouble understanding exactly the thrust of your question. 
The rates haven't changed, given the '84-85 annual report I think 
you were talking about. I  

mean, they changed here; we adjusted them three or four weeks 
ago. But up until this point in time they hadn't changed. 
 
Now the effective rate relative to the mix of what was on the 
market that year versus three years ago, for example — that's 
changed. We've got a greater proportion of new oil, EOR, heavy 
— that kind of thing. And that affects your . . . If you just take a 
straight percentage of the whole mix, that can change. But the rate 
themselves up until three or four weeks ago had not changed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I'm not 
talking about the nominal rate. I'm talking about the effective rate. 
And a royalty is essentially a share of the value of production. And 
what I'm asking you, Mr. Minister, is: during the period covered 
by this report, as opposed to the year before, do you not agree that 
the share or the value of production received by the Crown has 
decreased? — whether because of mix or because of the 
application of the royalty holidays. For whatever reason, the 
people of Saskatchewan are getting a smaller share of the 
production dollar in the year '84-85 than they did in the year 
'83-84. Do you agree on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, as I'm 
advised, yes, and that probably would be true for any two years 
you might compare. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, that's interesting. I will 
not pursue that because the rebuttal is so obvious. 
 
If in fact each year the effective rate of royalty goes down, then it's 
pretty hard to accuse — and any year, as you say — it's pretty hard 
to accuse the New Democratic Party or anyone else of constantly 
raising royalties. I mean, we obviously cannot have constantly 
rising royalties on a constantly decreasing share of the gross 
production. And in fact I want to point out a few facts covered by 
your report. 
 
Your report on page 8 says that the revenue from oil and gas going 
into the Heritage fund is going to increase by 8.8 per cent. And I 
invite you to look at page 8, and you will see. Then I invite you to 
look at page 24, and you will see that oil production — and I 
admit that the periods covered may not be exactly the same, so 
that an exact comparison may not be possible, but they are all 
substantially accurate — oil production went up 13.2 per cent. So 
one would think that the oil revenue ought to go up 13.2 per cent 
— rudely, one would think that. If production goes up 13.2 per 
cent, then revenue ought to go up 13.2 per cent, and royalties 
ought to go up 13.2 per cent if nothing else is changed. 
 
But something else did change, and that was prices, and average 
prices went up a significant amount, about 8 per cent. And if we 
have production going up by 13 per cent, and average prices going 
up 8 per cent, then the return has gone up about 23 per cent. That 
follows; that's just a mathematical calculation. If you produce 13 
per cent more and you get 8 per cent more for all your production, 
you're getting about 23 per cent more than you got the year before. 
And we got in revenue an extra 8 per cent. Now that, Mr. Minister, 
represents a fairly significant drop in the effective return that we 
are getting — we, as the  
  



 
June 4, 1986 

1713 
 

people of Saskatchewan, are getting — for the oil which is 
produced. 
 
One can quarrel around the edges by saying one covers a calendar 
year and one covers a fiscal year, but that will not affect the 
general direction of what I'm saying. If production has gone up 13 
per cent, which it assuredly has, and if prices have gone up 8 per 
cent, and I look at your graph on page 25 or your numbers on page 
25, then pretty clearly we should be getting around 20 per cent . . . 
the companies are getting 20 per cent more in gross revenue, and 
we ought to get about perhaps 20 or 25 per cent more in our 
revenue. And in fact we're getting about 8 per cent more. 
 
And I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that represents the situation 
which flows from your royalty mix and your tax-holiday mix. And 
together they have produced a significant drop in the effective rate 
of return in the share which Saskatchewan people get of every 
dollar of crude oil or natural gas produced. 
 
Incidentally, some of the figures mix natural gas, but certainly our 
share of natural gas has not gone down. So the more so, therefore, 
that oil has gone down. And in any case, the oil figures are 
overwhelmingly larger than the natural gas ones — 
overwhelmingly larger. 
 
(1615) 
 
The argument, I think, can't be gainsaid, Mr. Minister, that we are 
getting fewer cents per dollar of the value of oil produced in 
1984-85 than we did in 1983-84. And it was, Mr. Minister, a 
period of rising prices. And generally speaking, the companies can 
afford to pay a little more money when prices are rising than when 
prices are falling, because some of their cost are fixed and will not 
go up with increased oil prices. Some of their costs are not and 
will go up. We acknowledge that. 
 
Do you not agree, Mr. Minister, that we are getting, during the 
period covered by this report, a smaller share, fewer cents per 
dollar of the gross value of oil production than we did in the period 
covered by your previous report of '83-84? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And since we 
got a smaller percentage in '83-84 than we did in 1982-83 — and I 
could illustrate that by a reference to virtually the same pages in 
your annual report — what we are certainly, I think, establishing 
— and you say we got compensating benefits for it otherwise, and 
in economic activity and jobs and spin-off — we simply want to 
establish the fact that there has been a substantial decrease in the 
numbers of cents per dollar which Saskatchewan people get from 
the oil produced in Saskatchewan, from the value of oil produced 
in Saskatchewan. And I'm happy to have the minister 
acknowledge that in '84-85 we got a smaller percentage than 
'83-84. 
 
I ask a couple of other questions now, Mr. Minister. I want to ask 
a question with respect to the Co-op upgrader.  

Could you, Mr. Minister, give us a progress report, not on the 
operation of what's happening — I can ask that again — but on 
where we stand with respect to the legal deal between the federal 
government, the provincial government, and the Co-op? 
 
It was reported in March, Mr. Minister, that the federal 
government wants to see more private money backing the Co-op 
upgrader in Regina and, as a result, Co-op officials are spending 
time looking for financial institutions to put up some of the 450 or 
$500 million that is involved in the construction of the Co-op. 
 
I want to ask a couple of specific questions, Mr. Minister. It is my 
understanding, and you'll correct me if I'm wrong, that a 
memorandum of understanding was signed between the three 
parties last August or September — and you can give me the 
month if you would. Have any documents been signed since that 
time which elaborate on the responsibilities of the three parties, 
particularly with respect to financing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, before I 
get into response on the NewGrade question, I must pick up. I 
gave you a simple answer to a simple question, your question 
before. then you went on to editorialize somewhat after I answered 
the question. And hence I must make a few additional remarks. 
 
Your simple question was more versus less. And I gave a simple 
answer. But once again, that's the classic NDP approach: reduce it 
to a simple duality — black, white; them, us; yes, no; north, south; 
oil industry against agriculture; oil worker against those who work 
in other industries. And that's not fair, nor is it right. 
 
Yes, you were right with your numbers, and I don't quibble with 
them because they're out of our annual report. Yes, you were right. 
and even the year doesn't exactly balance, but that doesn't matter 
because I don't quibble with that either. But the point is, you went 
on to give the why there's a difference, and you didn't ask me if I 
agreed with the reasons you gave. And I do not — I do not. You 
failed to acknowledge some facts that happen to exist for those 
who work and understand the oil patch. 
 
The fact is, out in the oil patch, you know, wells tend to have their 
production decline as they become older wells — fact, fact. 
Secondly, as our conventional oil pools in this province tend to be 
drawn down, and as the oil that's pumped out this year, over last 
year, over three years ago, is of quite a different type . . . For 
example, a 40 per cent royalty rate on old oil, non-heavy, would 
hardly bring in as much revenue . . . would bring in much more 
revenue for the province than 5 per cent on enhanced oil recovery. 
 
So you have to look at all the reason that go into why there is a 
difference. And to suggest that if there was an NDP government in 
there the mix coming out of the ground would be different, would 
be quite in error. The good Lord himself put those pockets in there 
— not you or I. So your observations were right; your conclusions 
were wrong. 
 
And Mr. Chairman, even if he was right— which he is not 
  



 
June 4, 1986 

1714 
 
 

 — even if he was right, it once again demonstrates the only 
mentality that they have, and the Hon. Leader of the Opposition 
has, towards the oil companies, is that they're big, they're bad, and 
they should be viewed simply as a cash cow. That's the classic 
mentality, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I'll tell you what, even if you were right and we were wrong, 
it's a small price to pay for jobs in the communities of this 
province. It's a small price to pay, Mr. Chairman, even if you were 
right, and you were not. 
 
The question that the people of Saskatchewan want answered by 
that hon. member is: where do you stand on oil royalty holidays? 
Where do you stand? Are you in favour of them or are you against 
them? Stand up and tell the people of Saskatchewan where you 
really stand on this issue. Because the story, Mr. Chairman, the 
story is different in Nipawin than it is in Estevan; it's different in 
Saskatoon than it is Weyburn, let me tell you. 
 
I say to the hon. member: where do you stand on oil royalty 
holidays? Where do you stand on economic development in the 
communities of this province? Where do you stand on providing 
jobs and employment for the people in this province, Mr. 
Chairman? Mr. Chairman, we know where they stand. There's two 
stories in this province when it comes from that party. 
 
Mr. Chairman, relative to NewGrade, the MOU (Memorandum of 
Understanding) was signed in September and there has been no 
further document signed since then. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I don't 
know what I did to precipitate that outburst from the minister. I 
hoped I was asking questions in a clear and rational way and did 
nothing to upset him and to somehow irritate his spleen. But 
something I have done has produced that . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Mr. Chairman, I wonder if you would say a word 
to restrain the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order, please. I said: order, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you. Because I think we have 
some important work to do here, and I want to ask some questions 
about the upgrader in Regina. I don't want to suggest to members 
opposite that they're not interested in the upgrader. I don't want to 
precipitate any interruptions from them. 
 
An Hon. Member: Doublespeak. I think . . . (inaudible) . . .  
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — That comes the problem, Mr. Chairman. I 
am trying my very best to ask what I think are clear and rational 
questions. The minister has asked for a statement on where we 
stand on royalty tax holidays, royalty holidays for oil wells. I've 
given it many times. I'll give it as very quickly as I can. 
 
We obviously have no quarrel with those incentives for 
exploration wells, for exploratory wells. The incentives could take 
the form of royalty tax holidays. They did under our 
administration at times. We have no opposition  

in principle to a royalty tax holiday, that form of incentive for 
exploration wells. What form of incentives you use will depend 
upon the circumstances at the time and what one is trying to . . . 
what type of development one is trying to engender. 
 
With respect to royalty tax holidays for infill wells, we have 
believed that these were far too costly a way to encourage the 
development of infill wells. And we have expressed our 
opposition to that type of incentive for infill wells, and I state it 
again. And I say this in Estevan and I say it in Weyburn and I say 
in Nipawin. 
 
Now I want, Mr. Minister, to ask you about what the financial 
arrangements are between the federal government and yourself, 
your department in your government, with respect to the upgrader 
at Regina. I ask again: have any documents been signed among the 
parties since the Memorandum of Understanding last summer or 
fall? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I'll repeat the answer. I 
gave it at the end of my last remarks, and I think you were 
preoccupied and missed the answer. The MOU — I think you 
originally asked the question of when it was signed. It was 
September. There has been numerous meetings since then but no 
further documentation signed. 
 
And just to pick up on some of your remarks once again, about 
your policy and about how it's been simply and clearly stated 
many times. What you are saying then — if I'm to take for what 
you say today as the policy — is that, other than for infill wells, 
your policy would be the same as ours, and hence your revenues 
and land sales, everything else, would be the same as what is 
under our administration, if that is what you're saying. Because the 
only thing you would subtract is infill wells, which is something 
less than one in 10. And what I am saying to you is the people 
simply don't believe you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I don't 
want to get into a long wrangle with the minister. What he had 
asked me was a policy with respect to royalty tax holidays. That I 
gave him. I didn't deal with land sales and the rest because he 
didn't ask for it, and I don't propose so to do. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, what the financial arrangement is 
for the upgrader. I understand it to be the Consumers' Co-op 
Refinery, CCR, is putting up 5 per cent of the equity, or 5 per cent 
of the total cost as equity; Saskatchewan is putting up 15 per cent 
of the total cost, and the Government of Saskatchewan, as equity 
— and I'll come back to this 5 per cent again, where the Co-op is 
getting it — and that Saskatchewan and Canada are jointly 
guaranteeing 80 per cent of the total cost of the project in debt 
refinancing. I ask you, Mr. Minister: of that 80 per cent, is the 
Government of Canada guaranteeing 40 per cent or 35 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The total project: 35 per cent Canadian; 
45 per cent Saskatchewan. 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, is it accurate that the  
  



 
June 4, 1986 

1715 
 

5 per cent of the share of the equity . . . and now I'm talking about 
cash that is being put up by the Consumer's co-operative Refinery. 
and I now wish to acknowledge that they are also playing a major 
role in this project because of the existence of their refinery and 
the fact that if the refinery wasn't there, the upgrader would not be 
economically feasible, at least with respect to those numbers. And 
I want to acknowledge that so that no one misunderstands that. 
 
With respect to the 5 per cent of the cash which the Co-op 
Refinery is putting up, is it accurate that they have an arrangement 
whereby they borrow that from the Government of Saskatchewan 
on terms whereby it is repaid out of the earnings of the project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, that's 
correct. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Therefore is it accurate, Mr. Minister, to 
say that all expenditures now that are going ahead with respect to 
the project are at the expense of the Saskatchewan taxpayer? 
Aside from perhaps incidental expenditures over at the refinery, all 
of the expenditures on the upgrader that are going ahead now are 
at the expense of the Saskatchewan taxpayer? 
 
The Government of Canada has guaranteed nothing. The 
Government of Saskatchewan has, in fact, guaranteed nothing by 
way of debt for the project. All of the money which is now being 
used is equity money which is being advanced by the Government 
of Saskatchewan either as its 15 per cent share or its 5 per cent 
loan to the Co-op Refinery. Is that accurate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member, I 
apologize for the delay, but I am relying heavily on officials for 
this. I'm not making any apology for relying on them because 
they're very good officials, but the CMB (Crown Management 
Board) has been manning this, and hence I'm not as familiar with 
it as maybe I should be, but obviously it impacts on our 
department, and the staff certainly are the ones that are the 
resource people all along. 
 
In answer to you question, the formula relative to who's paying 
what, the same formula as was established for the planning phase, 
or phase one, is the one that we're still operating under. And that 
has 50 per cent Saskatchewan, 10 per cent co-operative, and 40 
per cent Canada. So to answer your question — are we picking up 
the entire bill, I think was the essence of the question — the 
answer would be no. It's this breakdown. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. With respect to 
the Canada contribution . . . I'll not now deal with the relative 
position of the co-op and Saskatchewan. With respect tot he 
Canada contribution and with respect to any expenditures which 
are now going forward, did I understand you to say that 40 per 
cent of the expenditures are being borne by the Government of 
Canada? And if for any reason — and I'm not suggesting this — 
but if for any reason the refinery did not go ahead or was delayed 
for a substantial period of time. 40 per cent or thereabouts of the 
expenditure to date, including the expenditure which may be made 
last week or next week, would be at the  

expense of the Government of Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, that's 
correct. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I ask 
these questions because in previous meetings of this committee, 
your predecessor, the member for Sutherland, has answered a 
number of these questions and has done so in a very forthright 
way, and I know that if you think they shouldn't be answered, you 
will tell me so. 
 
This has to do with the economic basis for the upgrader. And in 
earlier committees — and I will summarize and don't want to try 
to misrepresent in any way — but it's been suggested that the 
spread between the feedstock and Alberta light sweet crude, that 
spread, as opposed to the spread between the feedstock and the 
syncrude that will come out of the upgrader. So I'm talking about 
the spread between whatever will go into that refinery, that mix of 
heavy and medium crude, and the Alberta light sweet, which was 
the bench-mark, needs to be about $6. Now the $6 figure has been 
frequently quoted. I can find a quote but . . . 
 
Mr. Minister, it's always a little unclear, but this is something 
quoting Harold Empey — and I'm not sure it's an accurate quote 
so I'm not attributing it to him — saying: 
 

For the co-op upgrader to break even, the difference between 
the heavy crude and the refined product has to be at least $6 per 
barrel. 

 
Now that's a different thing than what I've said. So perhaps I'd 
better ask a question or two. 
 
On what basis is the refinery being planned? What does the spread 
have to be between the feedstock and, first, Alberta sweet; and 
second — Alberta sweet is now what's going into that refinery — 
what is the difference between the feedstock and the refined 
product, what I'll call the syncrude? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, and hon. member, the 
spread between the Alberta light and feedstock, if it's $6, we've got 
a real nice viable project. If it was to slip back into that $4 range, 
the project still works but no expectation of return on investment 
— retire the debt, but don't look for any return on investment 
necessarily. 
 
The syncrude, versus Alberta light, we would reckon a premium 
of $1.50 to $2, something in that range. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I think 
on a project like this, the sensitivity analysis must show that it is 
quite sensitive to crude oil prices and very highly sensitive to the 
spread — and you've already indicated that. 
 
About what is the spread between — I'm quoting from an old 
clipping here saying that the . . . and when this was in, the spread 
between the syncrude and the feedstock was about $5.50. give me 
a spread, either one, because we can calculate it. What's the 
spread, for  
  



 
June 4, 1986 

1716 
 
 

example, between that feedstock — and I admit it's a mix — and 
Alberta sweet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, roughly 
$5. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — So Mr. Minister, you're saying that 
between the feedstock and Alberta sweet, the spread is now 
approximately $5. So that the project then is still in a range where, 
with a little luck, it might fly, if I may put it that way. 
 
What is the position of the department with respect to the 
comments by Mr. Wilson — reported comments of Mr. Wilson — 
saying that he was looking for some more private sector money, 
that he was looking for another investor that he, in effect I 
suppose, wasn't too happy with the current arrangement whereby 
100 per cent of the risk was divided between the two 
governments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — On the issue of getting some private risk 
capital into the project, it's alive and well is so far as the 
possibility. In fact this very day, I'm advised there's a meeting on 
between advisers and guarantors and the board relative to a 
proposal for private risk capital at start-up. I guess I can't say 
anything concrete at this point time, and I even wondered if I 
should go that far, but the possibility is alive and well to date. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, do you 
see any other major impediments to that project going ahead? Are 
there any other problems which are of a major nature which are 
unresolved? I know that there are always . . . I'm not suggesting 
the ordinary problems of getting it designed and that sort of thing, 
but are there any insuperable problems of an environmental nature 
or otherwise? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I'm 
advised there's no major problems in the finance area or 
elsewhere. In fact, the comment that my advisers gave me, which I 
think says it all, is everybody keeps continuing to throw their 
money in the pot, and I think things are going along reasonably 
well in fact. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, Mr. 
Minister, before I being my remarks I would just like to have a 
preamble, and I'd like to follow up on some of the political 
statements that have been made by the member from Shaunavon 
rousing your administration, the Devine administration. 
 
As you well know, I come from a border constituency, the western 
border, which borders Alberta. I happened to pick up an article 
and it was written by a Don Braid, which is "a View from the 
West," and he's a journalist, a political journalist, for the 
Edmonton Journal. It goes to say here, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 
Minister that: 
 

Saskatchewan's ruling Conservatives are causing headaches 
(and in brackets) actual gas pains for their cousins in Alberta. 
This is an ironic touch since the previous NDP government 
never showed much desire to challenge the economic  

dominance of Tory Alberta. 
 
It also went on to say: 
 

But times have changed. Premier Grant Devine is determined to 
do for Saskatchewan what Peter Lougheed did for Alberta. 

 
It went on to say, in my preamble, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 
Minister — "Envy of others" is the title — and it went on to say: 
 

But Saskatchewan's outlook is the envy of other provinces. The 
Tories tend to consider all this a holy reward for their election. 
As Premier Devine likes to tell crowds, we will not participate 
in this recession, we'll go out and do it. The Tories do deserve 
some earthly credit however, especially for bringing the 
province's oil patch out of its long lethargy. The policy is a 
sharp reversal of the NDP view that the oil should be left in the 
ground until prices rise. And the question is: at what price and 
how long? 

 
There was also some statements made as to who is responsible, 
whether it be inside or outside influences, on the type of problems 
we have within the oil patch today. 
 
Well, the people of Lloydminster appreciated the fact, Mr. 
Minister, that you, as well as the past Finance minister and the 
present Finance minister, have visited the city of Lloyd on a few 
different occasions to discuss with the oil industry the problems 
that we're now facing with a soft price in the oil patch. 
 
The people also realize that the inside influence in the past were 
the NDP. It was like an impact of what we are now facing from 
the OPEC countries today; and that if there was ever a return of 
the NDP administration in this province, that would be almost like 
having a double whammy of what the NDP are actually doing 
now, or what the OPEC nations are doing now — which leads me 
into some of the questions that I would like to ask you, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, as the price of oil remains soft and no one is sure 
which direction it will ultimately head, the problems the industry 
are encountering and may have to deal with are well documented. 
Every company in all sectors are engaging in a re-evaluation of its 
spending plans. These sector changes have resulted in the loss of 
jobs in the oilfield, and subsequently in the spin-offs, due to the 
instability of the world oil prices. 
 
The question I have for you, Mr. Minister, is: what have you done 
— I realize, but for the record I would like you to answer it — 
what have you done? What was your policy, in the past few 
weeks, of your announcement? And to add to the question: does 
your department have any type of statistics into being able to tell 
me how many jobs you may figure have been maintained and/or in 
fact added to in the oilfield and the surrounding spin-off 
operations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I share 
with you my concern of what would happen if the  
  



 
June 4, 1986 

1717 
 

oil producers out there were faced with a double whammy of the 
depressed oil prices that they have today plus the prospect or even 
the suggestion, the hint of the possibility, of an NDP government 
here. It would be a disaster for the oil patch. 
 
In terms of what have we done and what have been the results. To 
reiterate quickly, our program announcement of three or four 
weeks ago had one objective, and that was to maintain jobs, as you 
so rightly pointed out. And to that end, and because most of our 
jobs are in the service and supply sector, we have put in place a 
program wherein 40 per cent of the cost of work-overs is picked 
up through a royalty reduction. 
 
Secondly, we selectively reduced royalties to maintain production. 
It was to nobody's advantage if wells were shut in. It wouldn't 
have mattered what the royalty rate was. If they're not pumping, 
everybody loses. And so we were hopeful that by reducing 
royalties somewhat, albeit that they're still the highest in North 
America, that we could keep those wells in production. 
 
And the other initiative which I think has got some fair relevance 
in your constituency with the heavy oil production, some royalty 
changes on the EOR projects, which certainly are high-cost and 
often tend to be fragile at best. 
 
What are the results of these initiatives? it's probably been even 
beyond our best expectations. We had set aside initially $6 million 
for the work-over program. We've had applications for work far in 
excess of that, so it seems to me that that bodes well for all those 
people out there who have jobs in that service and supply sector. I 
think we're going to see, as the days pass, even more and more of 
that response evidenced in a very concrete sort of way with the 
trucks rolling around out there in the oil patch. 
 
In terms of whether reducing our royalties maintained wells on 
production or brought on wells that were shut in, the answer there 
is a resounding yes. And fortunately in your area, in the heavy oil 
where we had — at least I personally — had some of the greatest 
fears because of the high costs associated with getting it out of the 
ground . . . And certainly a week or two ago we heard the 
announcement from Art Price at Husky where they were going to 
bring in 350 wells back into production in your area as a result of 
our program. That's the kind of results we wanted to see, because 
if the well is pumping, it has to have, as you know, an operator out 
there on a daily basis. So that maintains the jobs, which was our 
goal originally. In fact, there have been more wells than just that 
brought back on production since we made those changes. And 
I'm advised that we now have something in the order of 500 wells 
that have been brought back on because of those changes. 
 
So at this point in time the program meets our expectations. At the 
same time it's been a very responsible approach. We don't have, so 
we couldn't do it . . . we don't have megabucks so we couldn't 
throw megabucks out there in an incentive program. I like to think 
that we've used our money in a smart way to create and maintain 
jobs out there. And certainly the results, in an area that was as hard 
hit and an area that was in  

jeopardy as much as any in that heavy oil area, the results have 
been even more encouraging than I might have expected 
originally. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, in light of the 
program that you had announced a few weeks ago, and in light of 
the things that are happening now and wells are being brought 
back into production, Mr. Minister, the program that you had 
announced, it was only a program for about a period of about three 
months. Have you any plans, has your department any plans to 
consider extending — or do you have any plans or new programs 
coming into effect if the price of oil remains soft? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member is quite correct. The 
program we did announce is a three-month program; it is a 
temporary program. At that point in time, what more will be done 
will depend on, in fact, where the world oil price is. 
 
At the same time, we're not about to sit on our hands. And in the 
event that three months down the road we have as big a problem 
with the world oil prices as we do now, in anticipation that it may 
not go away, we have a working group of ourselves, B.C., Alberta, 
the federal government, looking at what longer-term response we 
may have to make to maintain the jobs out there, in the event that 
three months down the road we're still dealing with a very, one, 
turbulent market, and, two, new lower world oil price that in fact is 
a new baseline. 
 
I can't tell you this very day what that longer-term response may 
be. I think it's safe to say that all options are open. We've given the 
mandate to the committee to be as creative as they so desire in 
terms of looking at possibilities there. But I can tell you it's under 
serious consideration, and in the event that we have to respond, 
we'll be well prepared in terms of having worked up the options. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I would like to 
go into another subject, and it's important to myself and my 
constituents, and indeed the province and Canada, and it's the 
project, the Husky Oil upgrader. 
 
I would like to know, Mr. Minister, if there has been any further 
negotiations, or if you can enlighten me on anything in regards to 
further negotiations on the Husky Oil upgrader; and also if you 
can indicate to me whether the engineering studies that have been 
previously announced are on schedule, and at what particular time 
you feel that we can hear some announcements on these 
engineering studies. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, if you'll 
recall, in the history of this project and with the election of the 
Brian Mulroney government — and rightfully so, and I can't 
criticize the federal government; they wanted to review the project 
that had been signed by a previous Liberal administration — there 
was some view that that review might take the form of 
unnecessary foot-dragging, and hence there was a period of 
anxiety and insecurity, not only for the provinces but certainly for 
the people of Lloydminster area. 
 
  



 
June 4, 1986 

1718 
 
 

Fortunately, as a result of a meeting with Premier Devine and 
myself and other ministers, including federal ministers, an 
agreement was struck, even in these turbulent times, to proceed 
with the pre-construction engineering. And I cannot this very day 
give you the latest progress report because the very first progress 
report meeting, if you like, is being held this Friday in Calgary. 
 
One thing I do want to say, though, and clarify, because in 
response to a member's question in this House previously, I 
indicated that Saskatchewan's contribution of $13.5 million would 
be a pro rata share of the actual engineering cost, and therefore it 
would be reduced if the actual costs were less than $90 million. I'd 
like to clarify that, because that is something less than absolute in 
its correctness. I'd like to clarify that. The government 
contributions are lump sum, not pro rata; and the lump sum 
method is incorporated into the final agreement because the 
governments are confident that the $90 million estimate is 
accurate, perhaps even too low. 
 
And we rejected the pro rata percentage sharing to assure that 
Husky would be solely responsible for any costs in excess of the 
estimate. So that in fact it goes over that, we're locked in, period, 
at 13.5 million. And if it's 100 or 110, we don't have to ante up 
extra dollars. And that was the reason we had ours set at 13.5 
million. Period. 
 
So I wanted to clarify that because, in response to a previous 
member's question some time ago in this House, I hadn't made that 
clear. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:03 p.m. 
 
 


