


















































March 27, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 March 27, 1986 
 

239 
 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to welcome to the Assembly 23 students from Holy 
Rosary Elementary School in Regina, accompanied by their 
teachers, Mrs. Moski and Mrs. Chaskavich. I’ll be meeting with 
them at about 11:15, I gather — 11 o’clock. I’ll look forward to 
meeting with the students and discussing with them what they 
see here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rybchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, a group of 
adult students from the Regina Plains Community College in 
Regina. They are eight in number, and they attend classes at the 
former St. Thomas School, soon to be named the Regina 
Friendship Centre. 
 
They’re seated in the west gallery, I believe, and are 
accompanied by their teacher, Ruth Quiring. I’ll be meeting 
with them shortly after question period for pictures and 
refreshments. I hope your stay is educational here at the 
legislature, and I ask all members to give them a warm 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, It’s a pleasure 
for me today to introduce to you, and through you to this 
Legislative Assembly, my mother and father from Hudson Bay, 
Saskatchewan — true pioneers, Mr. Speaker. They moved up 
into the north-east part of the province in the early 1930s from 
the southern part of the province. They’re here with us today, 
accompanied by my sister, Peggy, my niece, Debbie, and her 
son, Chris. And I’d like everybody here to give them a warm 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
honoured to have not one, but two groups here today. I also 
wish to welcome eight students. These are adult students from 
the Regina Plains Community College, taking English as a 
second language, accompanied by their teacher, Maria 
Castaneda. I look forward to meeting with these students in 
about three-quarters of an hour. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Reductions in Saskatchewan Income Tax 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Premier, and it deals with promises your party has made to the 
people of Saskatchewan to cut the income tax of all 
Saskatchewan people by 10 per cent. And I have here a number 
of ads that set out very clearly . . . the member from Rosemont, 
at that time Mr. Dirks, promised to 

reduce personal income tax by 10 per cent. A second . . . Mr. 
Hodgins, before he was elected . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The member can 
refer to other members by their constituency or their position, 
but it is not permissible to use names. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I am reading from 
newspaper clippings, and the names of individuals are 
mentioned. But I will refer to the constituencies. The member 
from Melfort stated in his ad, “A Progressive Conservative 
government will provide a 10 per cent reduction in provincial 
income tax.” The now member from Prince Albert stated, “A 
Pogressive Conservative government will cut income tax by 10 
per cent.” And others, the now member from North Battleford, 
member from Saskatoon, all stated that they would cut income 
tax by 10 per cent. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Premier, if you can outline why you have broken 
that promise and commitment to the people of the province, and 
whether or not you expect people of the province to believe 
you, sir, when you make commitments to them in the future, 
when you’ve raised income tax a great deal in the past four 
budgets. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, what the hon. member says 
is just not true. We have cut taxes . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well let me tell you. We have cut the income tax for 
low-income people. If you’re making $15,000 or less, your tax 
rate now is 50 per cent lower than it was when they were in 
power. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — If you’re looking at $30,000, it’s 20 per 
cent lower than when they were in power. And we’ve done 
something else, Mr. Speaker. What we did is that we decided 
we were going to tax the wealthy, and we have got 97 per cent 
of the people who didn’t use to pay tax at all paying income tax 
in this province, with big tax cuts for low-income people. And 
that’s fair, and that’s what the people want to see. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, your own budget 
document, on page 56, outlines indeed what has happened to a 
family earning $30,000 a year. And what it says is that a family 
earning $30,000 a year pays one of the highest income rates in 
the country. In fact, only families in Quebec and Newfoundland 
pays more than the families in Saskatchewan. And we have 
gone from being one of the lowest — third lowest in the 
country — to third highest in four years, and this is by your 
own document. Your own document states that. If you would 
care to read it on page 56, we are now third highest in personal 
income tax. 
 
And I ask you, sir: how can people believe what you say when 
they see what you do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is looking 
at page 56, and if you go across the provinces, the taxes charged 
on people, we’re the second lowest in Canada — the second 
lowest in Canada. 
  



 
March 27, 1986 

240 
 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — And no other province has the tax off 
clothes and tax off gasoline and the tax off utilities, except 
Alberta. And low-income people in this province have their 
mortgages protected; they’ve got the tax off all the things that 
they think that are essential; they’ve got interest rate protection, 
and when you add it all up in the province of Saskatchewan — 
and there’s no premiums on health care — we’re the second 
lowest in the country. 
 
The member opposite forgets that we have lowered taxes for 
low-income people, and we have raised taxes for people who 
never paid tax before. Ninety-seven per cent of all the people 
who didn’t pay tax in the province of Saskatchewan now pay 
some tax. 
 
And I think that’s fair, Mr. Speaker. The wealthy should be 
paying their fair share, and the low-income people should have 
their taxes reduced and sales taxes removed. That’s exactly 
what we said we’d do, and that’s what we’ve done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier, 
and it deals with the fact that the little chart that he reads leaves 
out the fact that the property improvement grant has been given 
away. That’s not included in his chart and in his total. But if 
you would care to look at the income tax charged by you, sir, 
you will find that you are the third highest personal income tax 
on a family earning $30,000 anywhere in Canada. 
 
I say to you, you made a commitment to lower income tax, and 
you’ve raised it considerably. And I ask you whether, in all 
honesty, you expect taxpayers to believe anything you say when 
they see what you do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the people believe 
when we say we’re going to deliver. We said that we would 
provide rural gas, and we delivered it. We said that we provide 
interest rate protection — we were the first in Canada — and 
we delivered it. And we said that we were going to take the tax 
off gasoline, and we did, and we delivered. We said that we 
were going to take the tax off clothing, and it’s gone as of 
midnight last night. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We said that we were going to build rural 
Saskatchewan, and we delivered. We said that we would protect 
farmers, and we have. We said we would not close uranium 
mines . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please! I want to 
caution the members that calling one another liars in this 
Chamber is not permitted . . . When I’m on my feet, there’s to 
be no talking. I hear the members very definitely calling people 
liars, and I’m going to ask that that cease. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Supplementary, Mr. Premier, you said that we 
didn’t make promises to cut income tax by 10 per cent. The ads 
are there. Every one of them said they cut the income tax. 
Everyone said your decision to impose a 

cut . . . How does that relate in line with cutting income tax by 
10 per cent if you make a decision to impose a flat tax? 
 
I looked through the budgetary revenues on page 6, and there’s 
no line in there about flat tax. Nowhere is there a flat tax in 
there. So the flat tax must be included in the income tax. Will 
you confirm that the government is taking $107 million out of 
the pocket-books of taxpayers for flat tax? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member must agree 
that there were thousands of people that didn’t pay tax at all in 
the province of Saskatchewan — thousands of them — wealthy 
people that didn’t pay any tax. We put in a flat tax to get 97 per 
cent of them to pay their fair share of tax. At the same time, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve cut the taxes for low-income people, people 
making less than $30,000. They’ve got themselves a major tax 
break in the province of Saskatchewan, not only on clothes, not 
only on gasoline, not only on interest rate protection, but in 
terms of income tax. 
 
And if he wants to look at the changes and compare them across 
the country, you can look at places where they charge large 
premiums for health care. There isn’t any of that in the province 
of Saskatchewan. And for low-income people to receive low 
taxes, no tax on clothes, no tax on gasoline, no payroll tax, no 
taxes with respect to utilities, and then see that the wealthy are 
paying their fair share, it seems to me, my friend, that they’d 
say, now that’s reasonable because I want those wealthy to pay, 
and I’ve seen major cuts for low-income. 
 
You talk about a 10 per cent cut in tax. Mr. Speaker, we’ve had 
a larger than a 10 per cent tax cut for low-income people, much 
better than we even thought we could do. When we opened the 
books and said it’s possible to help low-income people and 
home-makers and seniors, we have, and we’ve reduced it 
significantly. You won’t see any better treatment for seniors 
and home-makers anywhere in this country except in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And we’re proud of that fact, and 
people are saying this morning — right on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — Supplementary. Mr. Speaker, I didn’t ask for a 
speech. I asked for a straight answer. I didn’t ask for a speech; I 
asked for a straight answer. You lowered the boom. In 1984 the 
income tax was 554; in ’85, 625; in ’86, 698 million. That’s 
lowering the income tax by 10 per cent. Is that number, 698 
million, does that include 107 million flat tax? That was my 
question. Yes, or no? Just one word. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have raised taxes for 
wealthy people so that they pay. And he says the total is going 
up. The total tax is going up because the province is growing 
like it never grew before. We’ve got over a million people. 
We’ve got 500,000 people in the work force. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — And when you see projects being 
  



 
March 27, 1986 

241 
 
 

built, and you see upgraders being constructed; when you see 
paper mills going in, when you see the kind of construction in 
rural Saskatchewan, a natural gas distribution system, 
individual line service — those kind of projects are real, and 
people pay income tax when they work. 
 
In the province of Saskatchewan, we’ve never see a work force 
as large as it is today. You’ve never seen so much investment, 
and yes, the income tax will rise because there’s more people 
working and more people paying tax. And that’s exactly the 
way you want it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. With all your vain 
babbling, are you saying you don’t know what the impact of flat 
is going to be? I want to know how much the flat tax is going to 
impact the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. How much is it going to 
be? Is it going to be 107 million, or don’t you even know what 
that amount is going to be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I know that by our tax 
reform, a tax reform that has been encouraged across the 
country, wealthy people in Saskatchewan that didn’t used to 
pay tax at all are now paying taxes. That’s what I know. And 
you must agree with that. You’d be the first person to say I 
think those wealthy should at least contribute something to the 
tax base here. They are, in the province of Saskatchewan, and 
with our tax reform 97 per cent of them that didn’t used to pay 
tax are now paying tax, and it’s about time. 
 

1985 Deficit 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — A question, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of 
Finance, and it involves debt management in the province of 
Saskatchewan. By way of background I’d like to quote from the 
1985 budget speech: 
 

Let me begin by saying that we will not finance these 
priorities (and that was government programs) with a 
massive increase in the deficit. It is our firm objective to 
finance these measures in a manner involving our 
commitment in managing the debt. 

 
I would ask the member from Qu’Appelle, on page 3 and also 
on page 22 in the confusing document he tabled in the 
legislature last night, it quotes two figures for 1985 debt. And 
going to page 3, the first figure is 595 million — and I can 
quote from the document. It says: 
 

The combination of revenue decreases and our additional 
assistance to farmers will result in a 1985 deficit of $595 
million. 

 
If we go to page 22, we will see that the actual 1985 deficit — 
“$379,796,000.” I ask the minister: is this part of your debt 
management program to confuse the people of Saskatchewan 
about the actual debt in the provinceforf 1985? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s only about 10 
people in the whole province confused about the 

budget, and they happen to be sitting opposite. The same 
individual last night that didn’t know that a 25 cent tax on 
cigarettes is 1 cent a package for a pack of 25 is going to have 
difficulty with this budget. And I think we have to accept that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have indicated what the deficit would be. We 
did not predict, nor are we predicting, a drought this year. We 
don’t expect one. I know the members opposite hope for one, 
but we don’t expect one. We didn’t predict the drought last 
year. We made it abundantly clear to the farmers and to the 
people of this Saskatchewan that we would try as hard as we 
could to try and help them out in difficult times. We responded 
to the drought situation. Most farmers believe we’re trying. And 
that’s what they can expect from this government, is a sincere 
effort to try and help them out. 
 
And that’s why the deficit was higher — we made those 
commitments. And we’re not going to apologize if there are 
problems this year. We’ll try and respond the best we can again. 
And we’ve done that every time, and we will continue to do 
that. And that’s why the deficit was higher than we had 
estimated. But we’re not going to apologize as a government for 
trying to stand behind the farmers and help them out in difficult 
times. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — What was the actual debt in 1985? You’ve 
got two figures in this document. What was the actual deficit in 
Saskatchewan in 1985? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I told you what the deficit . . . Now don’t 
get mistaken as to what is counting when you’re refinancing 
because that shows up in a budget. You’ll have to figure that 
one out. I told you what the deficit was last night. We predicted 
about 595 million. That’s what I said what it was. 
 
The hon. members say it’s $2 billion cumulative deficit. What 
they don’t tell you: if they had have simply put all of that 
money into uranium, and potash, and into the money-losing 
P.A. pulp mill, and whatever else — the malting plant — that if 
all of those investments had have been put into a credit union at 
interest rates of prime plus one till 1981, and then when interest 
rates went up if they had have taken a guaranteed investment 
certificate like many people, many of the average taxpayers did 
in 1981, and put that into a guaranteed investment certificate 
available to everybody, Saskatchewan today would have an 
accumulative surplus of nearly $700 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Elimination of Sales Tax 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to address a 
question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, I have here a copy of your 
commitment, endorsed — an advertisement with your picture 
on it during the last campaign. And I’ll tell you what it says, 
Mr. Premier, and I’ll tell the people of Saskatchewan what you 
promised them, ‘eliminate the 5 per cent sales tax’, and you say 
the complete elimination 
  



 
March 27, 1986 

242 
 
 

of the sales tax in its first term of office. 
 
Mr. Premier, that was your basic commitment to the people of 
this province, and I say if you look at the budget last night you 
have not only not kept that promise, you have increased in 
collecting E&H tax in the amount of $386 million. I ask you, 
Mr. Premier, was this not a sincere and honest promise to the 
people of Saskatchewan? And will you admit that you didn’t 
keep it? And will you agree that the people of Saskatchewan are 
justified in not trusting you again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have continued to 
reduce tax since 1982. We have taken the tax off clothes. We 
have the tax off gasoline. We have taken the tax off utilities. We 
have lowered income tax for low income people. And yes, Mr. 
Speaker, we did raise taxes for the wealthy because they 
weren’t paying at all in the province of Saskatchewan. We now 
have 97 per cent of them contributing to the tax base in this 
province. 
 
We will continue to protect low income people, to protect 
farmers, to protect families, to protect home-makers, to protect 
single parents, to protect those small businesses that were not 
protected when interest rates were 22 per cent. 
 
I ask the member opposite: where was the NDP when the 
interest rates were 22 per cent? Where were the big promises? 
Where were the interest rate protections? Nothing; not a thing. 
We protected interest rates and we cut taxes and we cut sales 
taxes, and I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan will remember that for a long time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Supplemental, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask the 
Premier again: could he clarify to the people of Saskatchewan 
whether in fact the advertisement that he put out during the last 
campaign, a very major promise in my view, which says, in 
fact, that the complete elimination of the sales tax in the first 
term of office. Did you or did you not make that and will you 
indicate to the people of Saskatchewan: can you be trusted in 
the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, when you talk about trust 
and about keeping your word, I want to give you an example of 
the kinds of things that we will see in the province of 
Saskatchewan. I’m reading from the Pipeline magazine that 
happens to be in the oil patch. The Leader of the Opposition 
says this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You don’t want to hear 
this. Well you’re going to hear it anyway. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition says we do believe in generous 
incentives and we have no objection . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please! Order. You asked a question. 
The member is answering. Give him the opportunity . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the question was with 
respect to trust. Okay. Trust . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It 
was with respect to trust. Mr. Speaker, this article quotes the 
Leader of the Opposition as saying he believes in oil 

royalties and big incentives. That’s what it says. It quotes. You 
take this article and it says the NDP would break all tax 
royalties and they’d cancel them. They don’t believe in them. 
So they’re running in Regina and they say they don’t believe in 
tax royalty breaks for the big oil companies. When they’re in 
my riding and publishing in the Pipeline, they say: we do 
believe in generous incentives, and we have no objection to 
royalty tax holidays. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they can’t have it both ways. People don’t 
believe you. They don’t believe you because you say one thing 
in town; you say something else in the country. And people 
know that all across the province. They kicked you out in 1982 
because they no longer trusted you and they no longer believed 
you. You quit listening, and they still know that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A very simple question, Mr. Premier. And I 
want to ask you, and I want you to direct it because here is an 
unqualified promise that you made to the electorate during the 
last campaign: the complete elimination of the sales tax in the 
first term of office. I ask you, Mr. Premier, did you indeed 
make that promise to the people of Saskatchewan? Have you 
kept that promise, and why should they trust you in the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have been cutting taxes 
since 1982, and we continue to cut them. We take the tax off 
gasoline; we take the tax off clothes; we take the tax off the 
utilities. We have protected people against high interest rates, 
and we have reduced the tax burden, and particularly for 
low-income people. And we have never stopped cutting taxes 
for ordinary Saskatchewan families. And we’ve cut them and 
we’ve cut them and we’ve cut them. And last night we made 
another big move to reduce the sales tax in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We have never stopped reducing the sales tax 
burden on Saskatchewan families, and particularly for those that 
need the help, Mr. Speaker. And we will continue to cut the 
sales tax. 
 
I didn’t see any sales tax cuts by the previous administration. 
They all went up. Income tax went from 31 per cent to 56 per 
cent, or 51 per cent. Sales tax was going up all the time. They 
had sales tax on clothes, and they had sales tax on gas. They 
had sales tax on utilities, and they took from people who were 
poor. People who were very, very poor and somebody would 
die, they’d have succession duties, so they taxed the widows 
and the orphans. They would tax people at a time of death; 
that’s what the NDP did. They had sales tax on everybody and 
everything. They would tax people at a time of death. They 
would tax orphans. They would tax widows. And if you 
couldn’t pay the tax, Mr. Speaker, they charged you interest on 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order, please. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Premier, obviously I would be uneasy as 
you were when you were answering this question because you 
have deceived the people of Saskatchewan, and they don’t trust 
you any longer. I want to ask you, when you imposed that most 
intelligent budget on the 
  



 
March 27, 1986 

243 
 
 

people of Saskatchewan last year and you laid to them $107 
million in flat tax, was that a commitment of reducing taxes on 
the ordinary Saskatchewan people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how many 
times that I have to go over this with the member opposite. We 
have cut income tax for low-income people. If a family makes 
$15,000 or less, the income tax has been cut by 50 per cent. If 
they make 30,000 or less, the tax has been cut by 20 per cent. 
And we did raise taxes for the wealthy people. All those folks 
that never paid tax before now contribute to the tax base in the 
province of Saskatchewan because of the flat tax. We still 
reduced the tax burden for low-income people because they 
don’t have to pay tax on clothes; they don’t have to pay tax on 
utilities like they did under the NDP; they don’t have to pay tax 
on gasoline  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order! I’m going to 
caution the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. He has 
hollered consistently through this whole question period, and I 
would ask you now to maintain a little silence while the 
question is being answered. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that the levels 
of deception, the index of deception, runs high on both sides of 
the House. I think it sort of leans to the NDP as far as the most 
aggressive measure. 
 
By way of a supplementary, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
suggest to the Premier that his own estimates indicate that 
individual income taxes in the province are estimated at rising 
by $73 million in 1986-87. It does not support your argument 
that families in this province will be paying less income in the 
next year. How do you explain your own estimates, Mr. 
Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, when you have more 
families and population growing, and more people working, 
there’s more tax collected. I mean, if you had twice the 
population, you will have twice the income tax collected, and 
the sales tax. I mean, it’s not that difficult to figure out that 
when your population is growing, and you have more families 
working and a larger work-force and they’re all contributing, 
that the tax collected by the province increases. 
 
What I’m saying is, they don’t pay any tax on clothes. All of 
them. All 500,000 people in the work-force, everybody else in 
Saskatchewan, doesn’t pay tax on clothes any more. They don’t 
pay tax on gasoline, and they don’t pay tax on utilities. But the 
tax collected is going up because the population is increasing 
and we have more people in the work-force. So that isn’t too 
hard to put together. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed of 
the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly 

resolve itself into the committee of finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, when I adjourned last 
night, I had made some preliminary comments on the budget. I 
had not at that time had an opportunity to examine the financial 
data which supported — or in this case, failed to support — the 
budget. But I do want to make some extended comments today 
on some aspects of the budget. 
 
First I want to talk about not what was in the budget, but what 
was not in the budget speech. I think the people of 
Saskatchewan were surprised that some pressing problems of 
Saskatchewan were not referred to in a document which was 
supposedly an economic plan for the future. It supposedly dealt 
with the economic problems of Saskatchewan and laid out the 
solutions offered by the government opposite. But many things 
in it were unbelievable, and it was unbelievable, having regard 
to the fact that it purported to be a plan, that it did not contain 
some other things. 
 
At a time when the Mulroney government at Ottawa is 
relentlessly and unilaterally cutting back on crucial funds for 
hospitals, medical care, and post-secondary education; at a time 
when the Mulroney government is going to cost the people of 
Saskatchewan $100 million a year in those funding cuts, is there 
any mention of this item in the budget? There is not. 
 
Any mention of the Mulroney government’s increase in the 
federal sales tax, or the federal income tax, or the farm fuel tax? 
No mention, no. Any recognition of, or opposition to, the 
Nielsen tax force report’s proposals which would spell disaster, 
or near disaster, for Saskatchewan agriculture? Not a word. 
 
The message this budget sends to Ottawa is a clear one. It says, 
in the words of the Premier: keep up the good work, Brian. 
That’s what he says, and that’s what is repeated by the Minister 
of Finance in his budget. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that is not the message that the people of 
Saskatchewan want sent to Ottawa. They want a provincial 
government that will vigorously oppose, and not supinely 
accept, federal cuts in medicare and hospitals and education. 
They want a provincial government which will vigorously 
oppose, and not meekly accept, the disastrous proposals set out 
in the Nielsen task force report; a provincial government that 
will fight for Saskatchewan farmers; a provincial government 
that will stand up for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Unfortunately, in this budget they got 
the words from a government which will not stand up for 
Saskatchewan at Ottawa, but will say only, keep up the good 
work, Brian. 
 
And I want to turn to a comment on the deficit contained in this 
budget. In 1982 the then minister of Finance, the member for 
Kindersley, stated that it was the Devine government’s policy to 
balance the budget over the four-year life of the government. 
That’s what they said when they came to office. That was what 
their first budget 
  



 
March 27, 1986 

244 
 
 

said. That’s what they said they would deliver and, Mr. 
Speaker, they have not balanced it once. 
 
They have not managed in five budgets to come even close to a 
balance. The member for Kindersley failed. He brought in four 
consecutive deficits, and according to last night’s budget those 
first four produced a cumulative deficit of $1.5 billion. 
 
Each of these were straightforward; the process was always the 
same. On budget night the government estimated its deficit and 
said — I don’t know whether sincerely or not — the deficit will 
be so many hundreds of millions of dollars. And at the end of 
each year they admitted it was more. They hadn’t quite guessed 
it right, and it was more. And the accounting and reporting were 
conventional and straightforward and easy for the public and 
the press to understand. They at least didn’t fiddle with the 
books. 
 
This year something has changed. Oh sure, the minister tells us 
that the budget deficit will be $389 million. But I said anyone 
who believes that will believe in the Easter bunny. He is 
engaged in some very creative accounting. To be blunt, this 
budget in accounting terms is flimflam. 
 
He doesn’t count in his expenses the $158 million he’s 
borrowing for his gimmicky property management corporation 
to pay for capital projects. Let me talk about this a little bit. I 
invite members to take their Estimates. I invite them to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’ve got it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — All right, the member opposite says 
he’s got it. I ask him to turn to page 18 and see what is 
budgeted for university buildings. Last year, $8.4 million; this 
year, zero —zero. See it on page 18. Turn for parks. At page 73 
you will see, last year budgeted for parks, for capital 
construction, $4.2 million; budgeted for parks this year, zero — 
zero. Let us turn to health. Let us turn to health, Mr. Speaker, 
and look at page 52. And you will see that last year budgeted 
for capital construction, $36.9 million; this year budgeted for 
hospital construction, zero — zero. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that money will be spent for 
hospital construction. We know that money will be spent for 
park construction. We know that money will be spent for 
university building construction. Why isn’t it in the budget? 
And I will tell you why it isn’t in the budget — because they 
propose to use non-budgetary moneys. They propose, instead of 
using tax moneys, to go out and borrow all of the money they’re 
going to use for building university buildings, all of the money 
they’re going to use to build parks, all of the money they’re 
going to use to build hospitals. 
 
Now they say they’re going to do it with this corporation of 
theirs, the Saskatchewan property management corporation. 
And obviously if they were funding the Saskatchewan property 
management corporation out of the budget, it would be a mere 
difference in administration. But I look at the expenditure list, 
and there is no money there for the Saskatchewan property 
management corporation. 

So I ask you, Mr. Speaker, and all members of this House: if 
they’re going to spend $50 million on hospitals, and they 
haven’t a penny in their budget, and then they say it’s going to 
be done by the property management corporation, then we say, 
where is the property management corporation going to get its 
money? There’s not a penny in the budget. Then we know that 
compared with previous budgets, this one is flimflam — this 
one is flimflan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — He hasn’t counted this 158 million he’s 
borrowing for his property management corporation. He hasn’t 
counted the $100 million that he is borrowing for the 
agricultural and commercial equity corporation. And I invite 
members to look at what’s going on there. Just see what is 
being done here. 
 
They are borrowing $100 million, probably doing it all at one 
table. They’re getting their bank to lend them $100 million. 
They’re using that money to buy shares in an agricultural 
corporation. They’re then buying lands which have been owned 
by this province — some of them since 1930 — for $100 
million, and they’re saying that’s income, income this year. 
That’s exactly what they’ve done, and they wonder why people 
are suspicious about the numbers they’re putting out. 
 
I will say this for the member for Kindersley. At least he put out 
numbers which you could more or less believe. But I say to the 
member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, this budget, in terms of its 
believability, is a wash-out, flimflam, hocus-pocus. 
 
I invite anyone to look at page 10 and explain to me how this 
government is going to get $240 million from the Saskatchewan 
Liquor Board. Mr. Speaker, this is a very large sum of money 
which ought properly to have been explained in the budget 
address. It was not. Let me quote for you what they’re claiming 
they’re going to get from the Liquor Board. They said for the 
year ended March 31, 1985, they would get $71 million; for 
1986, they’re going to get $149 million; and for 1987, $240 
million. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we all know that the Liquor Board has never 
made more than $120 million in its history. 
 
An Hon. Member: — In your history. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And yours. In any history, of any 
government, and yet these people say they’re going to get 240 
million in one year. Do you believe that? 
 
Well they’re going to get it only be selling off assets, only by 
selling off assets yet again. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, the 
proposition of the government opposite that you can sell off 
assets, take all the money into revenue in one year, and claim 
that that is appropriate revenue on which you can build 
long-term investment, long-term expenditure, is flimflam and 
will come back to haunt any future government of 
Saskatchewan which has to deal with this budget. 
 
So the deficit, I say to you, Mr. Speaker, is not $389 
  



 
March 27, 1986 

245 
 
 

million, but using the same method of calculation used by the 
member for Kindersley, the last minister of Finance, would be 
closer to $700 million. 
 
(1045) 
 
And I would invited anybody to analyse the three or four items 
that I have indicated and suggest to this House why they should 
be counted as revenue when they have never been counted as 
revenue before; why they should say this year, and this year for 
the first time in 40 years, that money spent on building of 
university buildings is not a drain on the public, that money 
spent on building parks is not properly paid for out of taxes, that 
money spent on hospitals is not properly paid for out of taxes. 
This is what they’re saying. I say it is bad policy, and I say it 
deceives the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members sitting on the government side of the 
House, and the Minister of Finance, may feel he can explain his 
numbers to the people of Saskatchewan. I know one thing is 
true: he will not be able to explain them to the bond-rating 
agencies. They have already caught up with him. They have 
already lowered the credit rating of this province, and this 
budget will lower it further — lower it further on two counts: 
not only because of the massive deficit of close to $700 million 
which it provides for, but also because they see a government 
which is now trying to hide the deficit by flimflamming the 
figures. 
 
That always disturbs anybody in the credit business. If you’re 
having trouble, and you put it down, and put it so that everyone 
can read it, it engenders at least confidence that you’re not 
trying to deceive the public or yourself. But when you start 
flimflamming the books, and for the first time for 40 years 
decide that hospitals are not a budgetary expense, that 
university buildings are not a budgetary expense, that parks are 
not a budgetary expense, then you know that we have 
government which is trying to deceive the public and, 
regrettably, is probably also deceiving itself. 
 
So when we add up the real numbers, we find that the figures 
show a deficit of close to $2.2 billion. It’s interesting. This can’t 
be hidden when you look at the borrowings. Because while you 
can claim that it doesn’t cost tax money to build a building, it 
certainly costs money to build a building. And if it isn’t tax 
money, it’s got to be borrowed money. And I note that they 
have left out the table, financial debt indicators, which they 
used to put in the budget speech and budget papers. Last year 
they put that in at page 32. This year they presumably drew it 
up, didn’t like the look of it — small wonder — and left it out 
— and left it out. Another indication that they don’t want to 
level with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
May I tell them they won’t be able to similarly fail to give the 
facts to their rating agencies, and our credit rating will be 
further impaired. These people, Mr. Speaker, promised to give 
us business-like government. They have given us government 
which is giving business a bad name. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I turn now to who profited and who did not 
profit from this budget. One good test of a 

government, and a good test by which to judge a government 
and a budget, is to find out who are the winners and who are the 
losers from its policies. Now where does the PC government 
put its priorities? Who wins, who loses by this budget? 
 
Well the winners are pretty clear. The big business friends of 
the government opposite — they’ve done nicely. Peter 
Pocklington, the Alberta millionaire, gets $10 million. Manalta 
Coal has already got their $145 million in guarantees. 
Weyerhaeuser — yes, indeed —Weyerhaeuser proposes to get 
$248 million with no repayment terms — no repayment terms. 
And we heard the Premier already acknowledge that yesterday. 
 
Members opposite have not yet been willing to disclose the 
terms on which they are lending $248 million to Weyerhaeuser. 
And members opposite suggest it’s not being lent. That’s a 
remarkable view. If you have a house, and you sell the house to 
somebody, and he doesn’t give you any money but he gives you 
a promissory note, are you not lending him money? Of course 
you are. 
 
And when you sell a pulp mill, and the buyer doesn’t put up any 
money but gives you a promissory note, are you not lending 
him money? Of course you are. And I think it is only right and 
fair that the public know what the terms are. And the 
government opposite has been unwilling to explain either the 
payment terms or the rate of interest. 
 
So these people are doing quite nicely. A very large number of 
people in Saskatchewan would like to buy public assets if they 
could buy them by giving a promissory note which did not 
contain any obligation to repay, which has interest payments 
which are undisclosed. 
 
Look at other people who are winning from this budget. The 
bankers and the bond dealers must be fairly licking their chops 
at the prospect of a massive $1.6 billion borrowing program out 
of last night’s budget. Two hundred million in interest 
payments — 200 million in interest payments are being 
budgeted for. 
 
And just a small item, but I think it is indicative — I invite 
members to look at page 47, and they will see that the fees and 
commissions which we have to pay to borrow money has gone 
up from $4 million to $9.5 million — and extra $5 million in 
fees and commissions to the bankers and the bond dealers 
simply to gather in the money that is needed to finance this 
government’s programs which they’re unwilling to finance 
other than by borrowing. 
 
Here we get a government which, when it has to pay an extra 5 
million in fees — this doesn’t deal with interest, just the extra 
commissions — is a government which is unwilling to manage 
its affairs in any appropriate way. 
 
Well those then are the winners. Those then are the winners. 
There are some who have lost by this budget, some who have 
lost out because of the PC government’s policies. The Minister 
of Finance has clearly indicated that senior citizens aren’t doing 
too well. He has cut the Saskatchewan income plan, the money 
for that, which provides the supplement for incomes to some of 
our poorer seniors. He has cut the funding for the senior 
  



 
March 27, 1986 

246 
 
 

citizens’ home repair program. The number of dollars in the 
budget is less for that. 
 
And the young people and students, they are not doing too well. 
There’s been a sharp cut in the Access youth employment 
program. The students in industry program has been eliminated 
altogether. There’s cuts in both staff and funding for the 
technical institutes at Kelsey, Wascana, and STI. 
 
I see members looking puzzled. Look at the budget. Look at the 
numbers in the budget for Advanced Education, and you will 
see that there are fewer dollars and fewer staff for STI, for 
Kelsey, for Wascana Institute. 
 
Big business is a big winner, but seniors and young people 
haven’t done so well. And what about those who need special 
education services? Surely a caring and compassionate society 
must give particular attention to their needs. But this is not a 
compassionate government, and it’s not a compassionate 
budget. 
 
There were cuts for special education. I invite anyone to look at 
the book. The minister and his colleagues can boast all they like 
about health care, but the nurses don’t believe it; they aren’t 
convinced. And the public don’t believe; they’re not convinced. 
And when they see this budget with large cuts in the 
Department of Health, they’ll be even less convinced. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What cuts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Let me tell you. The member opposite 
asks: what cuts? Well, there are staff and funding cuts for the 
children’s dental plan. There are staff and funding cuts for 
mental health services — and deep cuts — 35 less people in 
mental health. There are staff and funding cuts for the drug plan 
and for northern health services. 
 
With respect to the Department of Health, sure, there are cuts 
for children’s dental plan and mental health services and the 
drug plan and northern health services, but there are not cuts 
everywhere. I noted there were extra staff for the Lakeside 
Home at Wolseley. I thought it was, shall we say, a strategic 
increase in the budget in the face of sharp cuts for other 
portions of the Health budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, across Saskatchewan today, as across all of 
Canada as a whole, more and more people are realizing the 
fragility of our natural environment and the need to protect it. 
For while we have inherited the world from our parents, we 
only borrow it from our children. And I was therefore surprised 
and disappointed to see that this budget cut the amount of 
money available to deal with water pollution, cut the amount of 
money available to deal with air pollution. 
 
I noted in the Department of Labour that there was a cut in 
safety services. And I recalled the death of Polly Redhot, and I 
recalled the coroner’s inquest saying there should be more staff 
to deal with safety problems in the Department of Labour; and I 
see this budget has cut that budget. 
 
I was surprised and shocked when I saw the budget’s 

approach to the needy and to the justice system. Because of the 
PCs’ policy failures, the social assistance case-load continues to 
climb. There are more and more people on welfare — 60,000 
people and more in this province dependent upon welfare — 
and yet the budget provides less money for social assistance this 
year than last. That’s either unbelievable or unbelievably 
callous. I suspect it’s yet one other item in this budget where the 
figures are not to be relied upon. 
 
And in the Department of Justice we have cuts for law reform, 
cuts for human rights, cuts for money to compensate victims of 
crime, but there are many aspects of the Department of Justice 
where there are not cuts. There are increases for the P.A. 
Correctional Centre, increases for Pine Grove Correctional 
Centre, increases for the Regina Correctional Centre, increases 
for the Saskatoon Correctional Centre, increases for the RCMP. 
That’s the PC policy in a nutshell — jails, not justice; and jail, 
not jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not the 
policy the people of Saskatchewan want the government to 
follow. The people of Saskatchewan are compassionate; they 
want justice; they want people to have jobs; they don’t want to 
pay to support them in correctional institutions. They want 
these people to have an opportunity to work and pay their own 
way. 
 
I return, Mr. Speaker, to highways. It’s very, very clear from 
this budget that anyone who drives on a highway is a loser. The 
total highway construction budget, which is $10 million less 
than it was two years ago, two years of wear and tear, two years 
of pot-holes, two years of continuing need to construct new 
highways, two years of inflation, and we have less money for 
highway construction than we had two years ago. 
 
I begin to understand why the minister is being contested for the 
nomination in his seat — the Minister of Finance is — by a 
rural resident who says he is contesting the seat of the member 
for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden because the government is doing too 
little for highways. 
 
This budget provides —and I want to underline this, Mr. 
Speaker — that the Department of Highways will have 100 less 
employees — 100 less employees. Well, the member for 
Wilkie, Jim Garner, lives on. More people are to be transferred 
to the private sector, and there are going to be more pot-holes 
and more problems. I heard the highway system in this province 
described two or three weeks ago as like a golf course, 18 holes 
to the mile and a red flag at every hole. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there are other 
winners in this budget. The Deputy Premier is also the 
Provincial Secretary, heretofore a tiny department. But he has 
increased his administration staff by 57 per cent and his 
administration budget by 200 per cent. The increase is 
presumably to finance his extensive travels about the world. I 
don’t know whether the initial staff is to process 
  



 
March 27, 1986 

247 
 
 

the travel vouchers or what other purpose they may be 
performing for the Deputy Premier. But he is certainly another 
winner. 
 
And so this budget clearly shows who wins with this PC 
government and who loses. And by that standard, by that test, 
this budget stands condemned by the people of Saskatchewan; 
this budget stands condemned by every thinking person who 
has had an opportunity to study it and to see what impact it will 
have on Saskatchewan society. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the government has outlined its program in 
the budget. It’s a big disappointment, just as this PC 
government has been a big disappointment for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1100) 
 
This government raised hopes; dashed hopes. It raised 
expectations; those expectations were unfulfilled. It made 
promises; it broke promises. For too many farm families, for 
too many working men and women, for too many people in too 
many communities right across this province, the Saskatchewan 
dream has turned into a PC nightmare. 
 
And that’s why Saskatchewan people have concluded that they 
simply can’t afford four more years of this PC Devine 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Saskatchewan people know they have 
a first-rate province, but they have a third-rate government. 
They know we have seen tough times before, but they’re 
optimistic about the future of this province. They know that by 
working together we can get Saskatchewan working again. By 
working together we can do it ourselves. We don’t have to 
spend our tax money on the Peter Pocklingtons of this world. 
We can do it ourselves. By working together we can make the 
Saskatchewan dream a reality; make the future of Saskatchewan 
a better, brighter future for the people of this province. 
 
What it takes is a government with courage and compassion and 
determination, the determination to implement policies for 
people — not PC policies by polling, not PC policies for the 
privileged — but policies for people. New Democrats know that 
by working together the people of Saskatchewan can get 
Saskatchewan working again, working for farm families and 
working for rural communities; working for ordinary men and 
women, for young people, our most valuable resource; working 
for small business right across Saskatchewan. And they’re a 
dynamic and creative part of our economic sector. When 
Saskatchewan small business prospers, Saskatchewan prospers. 
They did before, and we believe that the circumstances by 
which Saskatchewan small business prospered in the past can 
be re-created. They can have a good looking bottom line again, 
and when that happens, they will expand. They will hire more 
people, and more and more Saskatchewan people will join in 
the Saskatchewan dream. 

Mr. Speaker, the PC view of the future is a narrow one, 
cramped. There’s only room in their vision for the successful, 
for those at the top. But the Saskatchewan dream is broad, a 
vision of a better, brighter future for all Saskatchewan people; 
and a New Democratic government will get Saskatchewan 
working again. We will get Saskatchewan working again by 
implementing policies for people, by fair taxation. There will be 
a refund of the unfair PC sales tax on used cars and trucks, a 
repeal of the unfair PC flat tax. There will be a restoration of 
property tax relief. We will work with local governments to 
eliminate the burdensome municipal business tax. We will 
provide jobs and opportunities. 
 
A New Democratic government will make jobs and 
opportunities for all the people of Saskatchewan the top priority 
of this government. And we will do it. And we will do it, Mr. 
Speaker, not by moving massive millions to those who already 
have, in the hope and expectation that they will provide jobs for 
those who do not have jobs; we will do it by moving money to 
people who do not have the money, who will spend that money 
and who will thereby generate economic activity which will be 
enjoyed by all of the people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Our philosophy is very different from 
that of members opposite. I ask people in this House: how many 
times have you known it when people at the top of the 
economic ladder were wealthy and people down below were in 
real trouble? Do you know any time like that? Do you know a 
time when unemployment was rising rapidly but major 
companies were making record profits? Sure you know a time 
like, because it’s now. 
 
And do you know, conversely, do you know a time when 
working people and farmers had good incomes and major 
corporations were not making money? You don’t know, 
because that is not the way it works. When working people and 
farmers have money, everybody has money. So the way to get 
the economy rolling is to see that working people and farmers 
have money. They will then see that everybody has money. 
 
Members opposite believe in the trickle-down theory; give 
money to those who have, and somehow there will be 
something left for those who have not. I think John Kenneth 
Galbraith dealt with that most effectively. He says, (it’s not the 
trickle-down theory, but the horse and sparrow theory), “Feed 
enough oats to the horse and there’s bound to be something left 
for those at the bottom of the scale.” That’s Galbraith’s story. 
And I think it graphically illustrates, graphically illustrates the 
approach to government of members opposite. 
 
They have announced, yet again, another multimillion-dollar 
assist to this or that major business without dealing with the 
problems of ordinary people, without restoring property tax 
relief, without even refunding the unfair tax on used cars and 
trucks which they collected. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, a New Democratic government will create 
jobs for ordinary people. We will, for the 
  



 
March 27, 1986 

248 
 
 

small-business sector, offer long-term guarantees of stable 
interest rates for Saskatchewan small business. There will be a 
Saskatchewan-first policy — contracts for Saskatchewan 
business, jobs for Saskatchewan people — when tax money is 
spent. There will be fairness and honesty in the awarding of 
government contracts. There will be jobs from a planned 
building boom, jobs for today by building the assets we need 
for tomorrow — hospitals and nursing homes and highways and 
the things we all know we need. 
 
There will be jobs through a vigorous housing program, and I’ll 
return to that in a moment, Mr. Speaker. Meaningful jobs and 
career opportunities for young people. Jobs by developing our 
resources, not for the benefit of big corporations, but for the 
benefit of all Saskatchewan people. Resources like potash and 
forestry. 
 
But a New Democratic government will be committed to 
protecting and strengthening farm families and the family farm. 
Farm families and the family farm have been the basis of our 
economy, the basis of the unique Saskatchewan way of life, by 
providing real long-term protection from the pressures of input 
costs, a provincial government can do something. And we will 
do that. Our government will do that as we have done in the 
past, by providing property tax relief. We will reduce the cost of 
farm fuel by a minimum of 32 cents a gallon; we will reduce the 
cost of fertilizer and chemicals. 
 
Farmers are telling us that their two biggest problems are these: 
input costs and commodity prices. They don’t want more debt. 
They don’t want more debt. They don’t need it. They need real 
concrete assistance from the Government of Saskatchewan with 
input costs, and a New Democratic government will deliver. 
They need concrete assistance from the Government of Canada 
to ensure fair grain prices, like a deficiency payment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is happening to our farmers? I will tell you. 
The European governments are offering massive subsidies to 
their farmers. The U.S. government is now offering, through the 
farm Bill, a massive subsidy to their farmers. They are ensuring 
wheat at a price of $6 Canadian. And our government at Ottawa 
has not said a word about whether our farmers are to get any 
protection, or whether they’re to be sent out there unprotected 
to compete with the treasury of the United States of America or 
the countries of the European Economic Community. It is 
grossly unreasonable for the federal government of Brian 
Mulroney to say, you go out there and fight the U.S. treasury 
and the European treasuries all by yourself. It’s time the 
Mulroney government in Ottawa went to bat for Canadian 
farmers, too. 
 
A New Democratic government will take that message to 
Ottawa. We will fight hard for the interests of Saskatchewan 
farmers and when we have a government which is not saying a 
word in the protection of our farmers, we will not be saying, 
keep up the good work, Brian. 
 
Now let me turn to another element of the Saskatchewan dream, 
a dream of a better and brighter future, a concern expressed to 
me and my colleagues by families all across 

Saskatchewan. They are concerned about those in our society 
who are near 65 years of age who have little means, little 
income, and little hope. 
 
Many are women without support, without a fair chance in a 
tough job market, without the means to live a life of dignity and 
modest comfort that their contribution has entitled them to. In 
many ways they are the forgotten of our society. They’re not 
senior citizens. They don’t have the benefits of the programs we 
have put in place for people 65 years of age and over. And for 
many, they’re no longer able to work and compete in the tough 
job market of today. Too many of them live below the poverty 
line. 
 
In a just and compassionate society we would recognize their 
special need and act to meet it. And the people of Saskatchewan 
are telling us they do recognize that need and ask their 
government to act to meet it. And the Saskatchewan New 
Democrats recognize this and a New Democratic government 
will act. We will provide a guaranteed minimum income to all 
seniors age 60 and over. Please understand what I am saying. I 
am saying that there will be a supplement to bring up incomes 
of people age 60 and over to a level that they would be were 
they entitled to receive the old age security pension and the 
guaranteed income supplement. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s already being done by the federal 
government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Members opposite suggest that it’s 
already being done by the federal government. There is 
obviously a spouse’s allowance which picks up some of these, 
but not all of them. If members opposite think that it’s already 
being done, they are not out there talking to the people of 
Saskatchewan. It’s yet one further indication that they don’t 
know what’s happening out there in Saskatchewan. They have 
lost contact. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, this is not a theoretical 
scheme which may pay benefits for 20 to 25 years from now, 
and I’m not decrying any scheme that will pay benefits 20 or 25 
years from now. But I am saying that the need is not 20 or 25 
years from now — the need is now. And a New Democratic 
government will act to fill it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me turn for a 
moment to another major element in that Saskatchewan dream, 
the dream that every family can own their own home, the dream 
that we can get Saskatchewan working again. And across 
Saskatchewan, young families and working people and small 
business have said to us, we can get Saskatchewan working 
again; we can provide homes for our families, jobs for people, 
and economic activity throughout this whole province. And we 
can do it with a bold and vigorous housing program. 
 
And that’s exactly what the people of Saskatchewan have been 
telling us. And that’s exactly what a New Democratic 
government will do — a sound, positive plan to get the housing 
sector rolling again; a sound, positive job creation plan. 
  



 
March 27, 1986 

249 
 
 

We have therefore committed a New Democratic government to 
an exciting approach to housing. We will substantially increase 
the number of new housing starts in Saskatchewan. You will 
know, Mr. Speaker, that in 1984 they were lower than in any 
year since 1970. And in 1985 they were up to an abysmal 5,300, 
compared with records in the past of 13,000, 11,000, 10,000. 
Fifty-three hundred! We believe we could target for at least 
8,000. That proposal will create 18,000 new jobs over the next 
five years, will generate $1.3 billion in new economic activity 
over the next five years. For first-time home buyers, young 
families just starting out, a New Democratic government will 
provide direct financial assistance for their down payment of 
$7,000. 
 
(1115) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — A program that will last at least three 
years and not just an on-again, off-again, nine-month program 
announced in the budget last night. A solid program to help 
young families get a house and build for the future, invest in 
their future, and help Saskatchewan get working again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — There will be a family home protection 
plan which will guarantee home mortgage interest rates of 7 per 
cent for seven years on the first $70,000 of a mortgage. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — There will be a major new program for 
the rehabilitation of older homes, a New Democratic 
government will provide direct financial assistance of up to 
$7,000 for people who undertake the major renovations of older 
homes. And this will create jobs and economic opportunity and 
improve the quality of housing in Saskatchewan. And a New 
Democratic government will have a real commitment to the 
construction of social housing for those with special needs — 
low-income families, native people, Northerners, the disabled. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is a sound and positive housing program, a 
comprehensive and exciting housing program, a housing 
program that will work and that will help to get Saskatchewan 
working again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, during the election 
campaign ahead, PC candidates will be talking about this 
budget. But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, if they’re talking about this 
budget, they will be the only one who’s talking about this 
budget, because there’s not much to talk about. 
 
As a business-like statement of the province’s position, it’s a 
sham. As a blueprint for the Tory future, it’s a muddle. As a 
plan of action to help get Saskatchewan working again, it’s a 
disappointment. And as an election budget, it’s a flop. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — This election will be decided on two 
central issues — two central issues facing the people of 
Saskatchewan and these are these. One, can Saskatchewan 
people afford four more years of Devine government? Can they 
afford unfair tax increases, massive deficits, mismanagement, 
the so-called open-for-big-business policies, and the weak sense 
of direction and leadership that this government has? Can 
Saskatchewan afford four more years of Devine PC 
government? And if my recording of what the people are telling 
me is right, the answer is a resounding no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And the second issue is 
forward-looking: how can we bet work together to get 
Saskatchewan working again? We have got to do something 
about unemployment, which has doubled in the last four years. 
We have got to do something about the extra 20 to 25,000 
people who are on welfare in the last four years. These 
problems have got to be faced. How can we best get 
Saskatchewan working again? 
 
Well the people of Saskatchewan say they want an election. The 
people of Saskatchewan say they want an election, and I say the 
people of Saskatchewan are ready for an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — New Democrats are ready, and, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, after last night’s budget, we are even more 
ready and even more eager for an election. After this budget we 
are confident that when Saskatchewan people assess this they 
will reach two conclusions: one, they can’t afford four more 
years of the government opposite . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And two, this budget offers no 
blueprint for getting Saskatchewan working again. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s time for the Premier to make up 
his mind, finally, to screw up his courage, to do what cannot 
long be delayed. It’s time for the Premier to call an election. We 
will welcome it. The people of Saskatchewan will welcome it. 
They deserve it. Call an election! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I will oppose the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today, and 
it’s a great pleasure to rise in support . . . I think I’ll just take 
my seat, Mr. Deputy Speaker, until the parrots on the far side 
decide it is time for quiet. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Can I have order. 
  



 
March 27, 1986 

250 
 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. The first thing that I would like to do on behalf of my 
constituents is to say thank you very much and congratulations 
to my colleague, the member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, the 
Minister of Finance, for the way in which he delivered the 
budget, and for the budget which he delivered on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan last night. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, that budget 
continues. It is a continuation of the economic plan which this 
government has put in place since our election in 1982. That 
economic development plan has three major components, as the 
Minister of Finance mentioned last night. First of all, first of all, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the creation of a climate, the climate for 
growth, the climate for development, the climate for investment 
in this province, and this budget and the measures in it will 
continue that. 
 
The second component is that we, in this province, have been 
building on our strengths since 1982, building on the strengths 
of this province, on the strengths of the people of this province, 
and this particular budget continues in that way as well. 
 
And the third component of our plan, which has been in place 
since 1982, is our emphasis on encouraging our people of this 
province for public participation, for the public of this province 
to participate in the economy of this province and in the 
investment in our Crown corporations. And there are various 
measures of that in our prior budgets, and similar measures 
included in this budget. 
 
This budget, as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, maintains our 
priorities of protection for Saskatchewan families, 
Saskatchewan farmers, Saskatchewan small-business people, 
people all across this province, right across the spectrum. 
Protection: a most important element of our plan since 1982, 
and a continuation of that is contained in this budget, and I’m 
proud to be a part of a government that had produced that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — It maintains our priority, as I’ve said, 
for creating opportunity, and that opportunity under our 
measures in this budget which will show that as well. And it 
maintains our priority which we have emphasized since 1982, 
and that is in the good management of government, the 
management of government, cutting the costs of government 
itself while providing the protection that I mention for the 
families of our province, and this budget also provides for that. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget keeps our Progressive 
Conservative government and our province on track. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s always a pleasure for me . . . I’ve been 
in this House for now, nearly eight years. It’s always a pleasure 
to stand in this House and speak on behalf of the constituents of 
the Meadow Lake constituency in north-western Saskatchewan. 

I’m pleased to have had the opportunity in this term of office to 
serve in the cabinet of Premier Grant Devine, in several 
portfolios. There is no . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . For the 
member from Quill Lakes, I will be pleased to continue to serve 
in the cabinet of Premier Grant Devine for several years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — But in any case, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
what I was about to say, the one introduction which I can say 
frankly pleases me most anywhere in the province or here in 
this House, is when I’m addressed as MLA for Meadow Lake. 
Because that has something to it for one whose roots lie in that 
constituency, and that is that the term “MLA for Meadow Lake” 
associates me with a geographical region of the province that I 
hold very, very dear, and the people who live there. And I am 
very, very honoured, as always, to represent them here. I will 
attempt, and continue to attempt, to represent them here to the 
best of my ability. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to give you a 
few examples of the kinds of things that my constituents say 
and that I hear all across this province, which will be indicators 
of the kind of things that people are saying about this budget 
and about the directions that this government has taken for the 
last four years, and the way in which this government is 
keeping on track. 
 
Let’s go to agriculture just for a minute, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
The people of my constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe 
and I know, this morning after hearing the budget are not 
talking about the specific measures in agriculture. They’re not 
talking particularly about the specific measures in agriculture: 
the farm purchase plan; the livestock investment tax credit, the 
extension of that; about the cash advance system; about the 
incentive facilities programs — all of these things, which build 
on the kinds of things we’ve done in the past months and years. 
Six per cent money for farmers, 21 cents a gallon — I could go 
on and on — rural development, private lines, rural gas, power 
lines to be — in other words, our commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
They’re not talking about those specifics, because the sincere 
and important thing that’s happened across rural Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that this budget reinforces what they 
already widely believe, and that is that Grant Devine and the 
Progressive Conservative government of the province of 
Saskatchewan understand and respond to agriculture. They 
widely know that, and this budget reinforces that, and they 
don’t need the particular specifics to know that that’s taking 
place. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the families in my constituency and the 
families across this province are not talking today about the 
specifics, and they will be on certain of those specifics as they 
become more widely known. But it’s not the specifics of the 
protection measures for families that they’re speaking of today. 
What they’re pleased about today is that this budget stayed on 
course, that this budget reinforces what they already widely 
know and believe, 
  



 
March 27, 1986 

251 
 
 

and that is that Grant Devine and the Progressive Conservative 
government of this province of Saskatchewan understands 
families and responds to the needs of families, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The small-business people in my 
constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the small-business 
people on Main Street in every community in this province, 
they’re not talking about the specifics of all the various 
measures in here: the tax reduction for a new small-business 
corporation; the new livestock facilities tax credit; revised small 
business interest reduction; the extension of the industrial 
incentive program; the expansion of venture capital programs; 
labour-sponsored venture capital tax credits; a continuation of 
small-business manufacturing and processing tax reduction; the 
stock savings tax credit; community development corporations, 
all of those things are specifics in this particular budget 
responding to small business. 
 
But that’s not what the people in small business are saying 
today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What they’re saying today is those 
specifics build on the measures which have already been taken 
by this government, which have already convinced people on 
Main Street Saskatchewan that Grant Devine and the PC 
Government of Saskatchewan understand and respond to the 
needs of small business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people in the 
northern part of this province, in the forested area of 
Saskatchewan, the forested belt, were very, very pleased earlier 
this week at the announcement of a new integrated pulp and 
paper mill in the city of Prince Albert. There’s no question 
about that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would submit to you and to all members 
of this House that forestry workers in this province, forestry 
workers at the Meadow Lake saw-mill that I know very well, 
forestry workers in Prince Albert, forestry workers in Big River 
and in Hudson Bay, forestry workers across the northern belt, 
will say this budget and this announcement — more specifically 
the announcement of earlier this week — responds, and it 
reinforces the view that they already have that it must be Grant 
Devine and the Progressive Conservative Government of 
Saskatchewan which understands. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — I’m afraid I must call the member for 
Meadow Lake to order. This is the second time he’s done it. 
Please refrain from calling members by their name. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker. And you’re 
right, I do know very well that that shouldn’t have been done, 
and I apologize to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But in any case, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the forestry workers in 
the northern part of this province, across the forested belt of 
Saskatchewan, understand very well that our Premier, the 
member for Estevan, and all members of his Progressive 
Conservative caucus respond and 

understand the needs of workers in the forest industry. They 
know that. This budget and this announcement only reinforces 
what they’ve already been convinced of. 
 
(1130) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I want to spend a couple of minutes, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, to talk about this project — the integrated 
paper and pulp mill in Prince Albert, the need for it, and the 
reason for it. 
 
People who understand the industry will know that a 
stand-alone paper-mill cannot, and will not, nor would it ever 
make it. A stand-alone saw-mill, the money-losing saw-mill 
which is presently part of the Sask Forest Products Corporation, 
which I’m responsible for in Big River, could not, and would 
not be a profitable enterprise as a stand-alone enterprise. 
 
People who understand the business know that the use of 
hardwoods, in other words the use of poplar, is an extremely 
important measure as it relates to the forest management in this 
province. What this project does is integrates that saw-mill with 
the pulp-mill that is there, both money losers, with the 
expansion to a paper-mill, which is one more process. 
 
How many times in this province, regardless of what the sector, 
have we talked about processing our goods in our province for 
jobs for our people. That’s what this paper-mill will provide, a 
final product built right here in our province by our people. 
 
And what it does, the last thing and the most important thing in 
all of this, and the reason that Weyerhaeuser and other 
companies — but Weyerhaeuser is now the company that will 
be doing this — the reason companies look to our forests is 
because of the forest mix that we have in the Prince Albert area, 
because of the mix of hardwood and softwood that is there. And 
that’s why it was attractive, and that’s why it’s an excellent 
opportunity for the citizens of Saskatchewan to build. And what 
more can we ask than to be able to build products and to have 
jobs here in our own province by a very profitable company. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve spoken of the 
need for integration. There’s no question about that. Those who 
understand the industry across northern Saskatchewan know 
how important this project is. The political folly that I hear 
coming from the opposition benches as they oppose this project 
is something that’s really, really amazing to me. 
 
They talk about election. I heard the Leader of the Opposition 
calling for an election. What’s the Leader of the Opposition 
saying about an election? He says, call an election, where two 
days before, one day before, and on this very day, they’re 
saying to the people of Prince Albert, we do not agree with the 
biggest project that has ever come to your city. They’re saying 
to the people of Big River, now that there’s a viability for the 
mill, a major 
  



 
March 27, 1986 

252 
 
 

employer in the Big River area, they’re saying to the people of 
Big River, we do not agree with a project which is so important 
to your community. 
 
They’re saying as a matter of fact, just to go into another sector 
of our economy, to the people of North Battleford, we do not 
agree with the bacon plant which is proposed for the 
community. We do not agree with it. Their candidate in The 
Battlefords agrees with it. Doug Anguish says, please bring this 
project in; we in The Battlefords want it. But the Leader of the 
Opposition, the leader of the New Democratic Party says, we do 
not agree with it. 
 
What I say to the NDP, whether they be in North Battleford, or 
whether they be in the House in the legislature in Regina, get 
your act together and say the same thing in town as you say in 
the country, as the Premier said earlier this morning. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s one other 
point that should be made, and I’m really sorry that the one 
member is not here today. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’ll take it to him. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’m sure you will. You were a part of it 
as well, Mr. Member from Shauvavon. 
 
The other day, two days ago I believe it was, when the Premier 
introduced the executive members and the board members of 
the Weyerhaeuser group, business people from Kamloops who 
were in our province to sign the agreement for the major project 
— people, I might add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who were very, 
very well received by the citizens of the Prince Albert area, the 
citizens of the forested belt, the citizens of northern 
Saskatchewan, extremely well received, and I was there to see 
it. There’s no question about it — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this 
House, when they were introduced by the Premier, members of 
that opposition, the member from Quill Lakes, the member 
from Shaunavon, the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg — 
not all members on that side — those three . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I didn’t say you did. I said not all members on 
that side, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I named the three. Those 
members took ignorance to new lows, ignorance to new lows, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. Those people do not represent the people 
of this province and the way in which the people of this 
province will welcome guests to our province. They do not 
represent that. 
 
All I can say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is this. I’ll defend their right 
to argue the points of the agreement, to argue with the points of 
view of the guests who were in the gallery any time. They have 
a right to do that. They have a right to argue that, and I will 
continue, and always will, to defend their right to argue those 
points. Never, Mr. Deputy Speaker, should we allow members 
of this House who purport to be representatives of citizens of 
this province to act in such a despicable manner. It needs to be 
brought to the attention of this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to 
turn now for a few moments to my responsibilities as Minister 
of Advanced Education and Manpower. But before I do, I just 
want to say one thing which I sincerely believe. I want to pay 
tribute to a good friend of mine, a former coach, my former 
coach, whom I’ve known for a long time, who was my 
predecessor in this Department of Advanced Education and 
Manpower. What I have said to the client groups and to the 
people that we are dealing with in this department is that we 
will do everything possible to continue with the initiatives 
brought to that department by Gordon Currie — I’m sorry, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, by the member for Regina Wascana — who 
brought a good number of important initiatives to that 
department. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — What we are attempting to do in the 
department, and the budget last night will reflect this, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — the budget will reflect that we are being 
somewhat successful in continuing his legacy in this 
department. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, my department has the overall 
responsibility for the provincial government’s role in all 
education and training that occurs outside the K to 12 system. 
The creation of this department was part of our government’s 
emphasis on the importance of education, in ensuring that 
Saskatchewan people have the vocational skills to find 
productive employment and the general skills to lead full and 
rewarding lives. 
 
Our initiatives in this area in the first three years of our 
government are something we are very proud of. In the past 
year we have continued to build on these initiatives in pursuit of 
two goals: first, excellence, and secondly, accessibility. We 
believe that our educational institutions must strive for, and 
achieve excellence, and that this excellence must be accessible 
to as wide a cross-section of the Saskatchewan people as 
possible. As I detail some of the particular achievements of 
Advanced Education and Manpower over the past year, it will 
be clear that the themes of excellence and accessibility are 
always present. 
 
The delivery of education outside the K to 12 system in 
Saskatchewan rests on three pillars: the universities, the 
technical institutes, and the community colleges. 
 
Let us look at our achievements in each of these areas over the 
past year. Last April we announced, as part of our overall 
Partnership for Progress initiative, a commitment of $125 
million over five years to a university renewal and development 
fund. These are moneys over and above what would have 
normally flowed to the universities during those five years, and 
are intended to get the process of revitalizing and modernizing 
Saskatchewan’s two universities under way. 
 
The former government, the NDP party, flush with cash, could 
never see its way to beginning this long overdue process. Our 
government feels that it is crucial to the long-term health of 
Saskatchewan society, and we’re willing to back that up with 
real significant commitment. Already the effects of the 
university renewal and 
  



 
March 27, 1986 

253 
 
 

development fund are apparent to all concerned with the 
universities and the communities around the university. 
 
The government and the two universities are involved in a 
constructive dialogue about the future direction of the 
university sector, and together we have made a start on some 
long delayed construction projects, such as the $1.7 million 
restoration of Darke Hall at the University of Regina; the new 
$6.6 million administration building at the University of 
Saskatchewan; a $5.5 million animal resources centre; and a 
$78 million college of agriculture at the University of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And while I’m mentioning the University of Saskatchewan and 
the college of agriculture building, I would like to quote for a 
second, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from an article from the 
Star-Phoenix. The headline reads as follows: “Blakeney says 
education given high priority by NDP.” That’s his headline. 
And down here as it relates to the agriculture college building, 
and I’m quoting, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

When asked about an NDP promise of an agriculture 
building during its last term as a government, Blakeney 
said it was on the low end of a list of new buildings. 

 
“On a low end of a list,” says the Leader of the Opposition, as it 
relates to agriculture, the most important industry in the 
province. This government, this Premier, the member for 
Estevan, has been to the University of Saskatchewan and 
announced a $78 million agriculture building. I would say to 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s been very, very well received, not 
only by the university community, but by the community at 
large all across this province. 
 
One other example, Mr. Deputy Speaker — major new 
computer systems on both campuses total $19 million. 
 
These projects are not only important to the two universities but 
also to the economic and cultural life of our whole province. 
And in the budget brought down last night, funding for capital 
and operating purposes will total $172 million, an 8.1 per cent 
increase over 1985-86. To put that total into perspective, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, what that means is that we will be giving our 
universities something like 45 per cent more per student than 
does the Government of Manitoba, an NDP government. 
 
In 1983 we set out to dramatically increase the capacity of our 
technical institutes to equip Saskatchewan people with the skills 
needed in an increasingly sophisticated work place. And there is 
nobody who can deny that we have accomplished what we set 
out to do. No one can deny that fact. From 1982 through to last 
year we increased training spaces available at the three existing 
technical institutes by 40 per cent. 
 
And in this year the northern institute of technology in Prince 
Albert will come on stream with the capacity to teach another 
1,000 learners at any one time. This new institute will make 
widely accessible to people of northern Saskatchewan the types 
of programs that have been long available to the people of 
central and southern Saskatchewan. With this new institute we 
will have 

increased total training capacity in our technical institutes by 
close to 50 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. — a very major 
accomplishment in anybody’s books, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But it is not just quantity that we have added: we have 
dramatically improved the quality also. The most outstanding 
example here is the competency-based learning approach 
pioneered at the Wascana Institute of Applied Arts and Sciences 
here in Regina. This approach makes the institute’s training 
programs accessible to a much larger share of the population 
than would the conventional approach. 
 
And talk about excellence, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Excellence. 
Two independent studies — one for the British Columbia 
ministry of education and the other by experts at the University 
of Central Florida — have concluded that Wascana is a world 
leader in the area of competency-based learning. And just one 
addition to that. The new northern institute of technology, when 
it opens this fall, will offer its programs based on the 
competency-based learning concept. 
 
Our community college system is all about accessibility — 
accessibility for those who do not live in the urban areas served 
by the universities and the institutes; accessibility for those who 
do not have the level of formal education required by the 
universities and institutes; accessibility for those who might feel 
that the universities and institutes are not meant for them. 
 
We estimate 10 per cent of the adult population enrols each year 
in some program through the community college system. This 
is an indication of how important people think the accessibility 
afforded by the community colleges is. 
 
In 1984 cabinet approved a new mandate for the community 
colleges with an increased emphasis on adult basic education, 
skill training, and career services. Let’s look at some of the 
programs we deliver within that new mandate. Adult basic 
education and the general education development testing 
services help those who miss some or all of the K to 12 system. 
 
The Saskatchewan skills development program provides 
academic and skill training for social assistance recipients — a 
part of our welfare reform strategy which has been successful 
by this government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And an independent 
report recently concluded that this program is meeting its 
objectives and recommends its continuation. 
 
(1145) 
 
The Saskatchewan skills extension program brings to people in 
rural and northern Saskatchewan many of our programs 
available to urban Saskatchewan through our technical 
institutes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have given a brief summary of what we have 
developed in terms of accessibility and excellence within the 
three pillars. But the universities, institutes, and community 
colleges are ultimately about serving students. Accessibility for 
students means not just 
  



 
March 27, 1986 

254 
 
 

geographical proximity, but also financial affordability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this current year this government expects to 
provide two and a half times as much in student aid as did the 
previous government in the last year of its administration. And 
the budget introduced last night indicates that we are not 
content to stop there. 
 
In the days to come I’ll be giving details of the new initiatives 
in this area that will provide: one, additional assistance at less 
cost; two, additional assistance to farm families; and three, 
additional assistance to single parents — all areas in which the 
people and the students of this province have been asking for 
some support and some understanding. The details will be 
coming within days, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government is proud of its record in 
providing more money to more students and creating more 
opportunities for Saskatchewan citizens to better their 
well-being. Mr. Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the constituents 
of the Meadow Lake constituency in north-western 
Saskatchewan, it’s my pleasure to support this budget 
whole-heartedly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sandberg: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure for me as member for Saskatoon Centre to speak on 
behalf of my constituents in this budget debate delivered most 
capably and most brilliantly by my colleague for 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden yesterday. 
 
When this government was elected to office, it was elected with 
a broad and sweeping mandate to rejuvenate the province’s 
economy. In 1982 the oil industry in Saskatchewan was all but 
dead. Industrial expansion was non-existent and business 
activity was low. Without a vibrant and growing economy, not 
only are there few new jobs being created, especially for 
younger residents, but the lack of business activity means fewer 
tax dollars for government. 
 
Hence, in 1982, the health system, the educational system, and 
government services were deteriorating at a rapid rate. That was 
what we inherited from the NDP administration. 
 
In a nutshell, my Premier’s administration took over the reins of 
office at a time of both despair and chaos. This government, 
through budget initiatives and policy thrusts, immediately set 
out not only to halt the decline but to stimulate the 
Saskatchewan economy to such an extent that the province, 
both economically and socially, would be the most robust in 
Canada. 
 
Without a doubt, previous budget measures and policy moves 
have succeeded, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Indeed they have 
succeeded to such an extent that other provincial governments 
in Canada are now using the Saskatchewan experience to guide 
them in their own quest for economic and social renewal. 
 
Saskatchewan’s oil industry now breaks record after record in 
drilling and exploration and investment. Our employment rate 
— and I want to emphasize that — the 

employment rate on a year-by-year basis is the highest in the 
nation. Small-business creation is the best in almost two 
decades. Home owners have been protected from wild swings 
in mortgage rates. Farmers have been protected from drought 
by a half a billion emergency package. Health and education 
funding are the highest in our province’s entire history. 
 
The new budget seeks to continue and promote this 
revitalization of our province’s economy, and to do it in 
imaginative and innovative ways that will again be the envy of 
the nation. 
 
The Devine government has already encouraged swift creation 
and expansion of small businesses with a nine and five-eighths 
interest loan program. Now the budget will provide loans of 8 
per cent to small businesses. The maximum loan limit will be 
increased to $100,000 and the program will be expanded to 
include implement and automotive dealers. So that is great 
news for small business in Saskatchewan — $100,000 at 8 per 
cent. 
 
Knowing that Saskatchewan entrepreneurs by their very spirit 
and tenacity have already created thousands of new businesses 
and hundreds and thousands of new jobs, the government of 
Premier Devine has also put into place many other programs 
and policy changes to aid that growth. Now the new budget will 
introduce a two-year corporate tax holiday for new, small 
businesses created after this measure was announced on April 
26th. This measure will provide much needed assistance during 
the critical start-up stage. At the same time, the small-business 
corporate tax holiday and manufacturing and processing income 
will be continued. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, experience has shown that such tax 
holidays benefit every resident, either directly or indirectly. Our 
oil industry recovery program actually created so much activity 
that the industry now funds fully one-quarter or more of all 
provincial government revenue. Indirectly, because of all the 
jobs its resurgence has created, and the revenue such jobs and 
services provide, the figure is even higher. 
 
On a new topic, the venture capital program under which tax 
credits are provided for those who invest in venture capital 
projects in Saskatchewan has been a substantial success, both in 
creating new ventures and in creating new jobs. Now this new 
budget proposes that the venture capital program be expanded 
to include agricultural enterprises. And the lifting of the 
restriction limiting investment to communities of 5,000 or less 
has been raised to communities with a population of 20,000 or 
less. 
 
Our government, the PC government, believes that labour 
organizations have a vital role to pay in Saskatchewan’s 
economic development, and that union members, with their 
knowledge of the work-place and their tradition for being 
industrious, can do much to help our economy grow. 
Co-operation between labour, management, and government in 
the past four years has met an unequalled period of labour peace 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the new budget proposes the 
  



 
March 27, 1986 

255 
 
 

setting up of labour venture capital corporations to encourage 
trade unions to create jobs and build added security and 
prosperity for their members by channelling investments from 
organized labour to small and medium-sized businesses in 
Saskatchewan. Individual union members will receive 
provincial tax credits equal to 20 per cent — that’s 20 per cent 
of the cost of their investment. 
 
During the past four years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan government has taken a number of initiatives to 
encourage greater investment within Saskatchewan by 
Saskatchewan residents. If residents have vehicles that enable 
them to invest their savings within our province rather than 
elsewhere in Canada, North America, or the world, we will all 
benefit. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the new budget institutes a stocks 
savings plan, a stocks savings plan to provide income tax 
credits to Saskatchewan investors. Individual investors will be 
able to save a maximum of $3,000 in tax credits each year 
under this scheme. This plan will create substantial business 
expansion in our province. 
 
Concentrating on creating new jobs by every realistic means 
possible, the government instituted the industrial expansion 
program which provided one-time payments of $7,500 for each 
new job created by manufacturing and processing companies. 
This initial investment in employment opportunities for 
Saskatchewan residents have been a resounding success. Now, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the new budget extends the industrial 
expansion program and its $7,500 payment for an additional 
year. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all know that rural Saskatchewan is 
still the economic and social backbone of our province. It is 
vital that our rural communities not only stay alive, but actually 
flourish. Our urban centres depend on rural strength for their 
own economic muscle. We have done much to keep our rural 
communities viable and growing. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the new budget promises financial 
assistance to municipalities interested in establishing 
community development corporations which would spur 
opportunities for increased economic development, especially 
in smaller communities. Because Saskatchewan residents 
throughout our province’s history have exhibited an 
entrepreneurial spirit and gone out with bold and imaginative 
ideas to build our province, the ingenuity of our people is 
known the world over. 
 
And now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to give added encouragement to 
individuals who want to create their own small businesses but 
need help in developing their skills to do so, the new budget 
proposes an entrepreneur training program — that’s an 
entrepreneur training program. 
 
Our farmers, of course, are the life-blood of our province. 
Agriculture, both directly and indirectly, is and will always be 
our major industry. By matching and even meshing our 
agricultural muscle with that of other economic sectors, we can 
maintain agriculture’s traditional strength, while building up 
new resources and 

industries. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the new budget will initiate a 
Saskatchewan agriculture and commercial equity corporation to 
provide our residents with an opportunity to make diversified 
investments in the future — in the future growth of our 
province. The corporation will make investments in various 
sectors of the province’s economy and will participate on a joint 
venture basis in major capital projects. 
 
Saskatchewan’s traditional reliance on grain exports has served 
it well. But in the past four years substantial moves have been 
made to diversify our farm economy, so that by broadening our 
agricultural base we can seek out new markets and bring more 
stability to our farm income. 
 
So now to help protect farmers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
livestock investment tax program, a major innovation that 
provides tax credits for livestock finished to slaughter, will be 
extended for three years. Yet this is not our only renewed 
commitment to our province’s livestock farmers. 
 
Now to encourage and expand livestock facilities, especially for 
hog production, the new budget introduces an income tax credit 
equal to 15 per cent of the capital cost of eligible facilities 
purchased by individuals or corporations. The tax credit will 
apply to the construction of new facilities or the major 
expansion of existing facilities started after January 1, 1986, 
and where the principal use is raising livestock. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, construction is a major economic activity 
in all areas of Canada, and home construction is one of the most 
labour-intensive activities. Grants aimed at enabling residents to 
buy their own homes always create down-line economic 
activity. Saskatchewan’s home ownership incentives have been 
praised across this nation. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the new 
budget will offer $3,000 — that’s $3,000 grants — to first-time 
home buyers. This program is expected to stimulate an 
additional 2,000 new housing starts and create almost 1,800 
new jobs. 
 
This government believes it is wrong to tax residents for 
essential purchases, and that taxation generally hinders 
economic expansion by cutting down the disposable income in 
residents’ pockets. Abolition of the provincial gas tax in 1982 
freed up some $600 million in disposable income over four 
years for residents to spend as they wished. 
 
The provincial tax on children’s clothes was also abolished. 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the new budget abolishes the tax on 
all clothing, footwear, and yard goods valued at less than $300. 
This should provide another $23 million in tax savings to 
individual Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sandberg: — This, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is good news for 
my constituents in Saskatoon Centre and, indeed, in all of 
Saskatoon and Saskatchewan. 
  



 
March 27, 1986 

256 
 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP are critical of our government’s 
taxation policy. This appears hypocritical — it’s very 
hypocritical — when examining the record of the previous NDP 
administration. In 1972, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP 
introduced a gift tax and a succession duty. It was removed in 
1977. This gift tax cost the people of Saskatchewan $875,000, 
and the cost of the succession duty was a whopping $26 million 
— $26 million. 
 
(1200) 
 
In 1973 the corporate income tax rate applicable to 
small-business corporations was increased by the NDP from 11 
per cent to 12 per cent. The rate was reduced in 1978. The 
small-business corporations’ tax increase cost Saskatchewan 
taxpayers $12.3 million. The total cost of these NDP taxes, 
before being removed, was a hefty $39 million, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — $39 million. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it goes without saying that I am very 
proud of my city of Saskatoon and I indicated as much in 
previous speeches, and particularly on the debate on the throne 
speech. Saskatoon is a city on the grow, a city on the grow, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, as illustrated by many projects that are 
proposed or under way for Saskatoon in 1986. And I just want 
to highlight some of them here, because it’s worth while that 
everyone in the province know just what they are. 
 
Of course, the hospitals in Saskatoon are undergoing major 
expansions. And City Hospital will be built anew at a cost of 
some 102 or $104 million. The expansion to St. Paul’s Hospital, 
under way now and well in progress, some $50 million plus. 
The University Hospital expansion now under way — and the 
cranes are visible right across the city of Saskatoon — the 
expansion of the University Hospital is some $30 million or 
more. 
 
The city of Saskatoon has indicated, Mr. Speaker, that it’s going 
to build two new recreation complexes, one in Silverwood and 
one in Lakeview, and they’re going to amount to some $6.4 
million. And of course, as I indicated before, I’m hopeful that 
the city of Saskatoon will be positive and pass this new 
multi-purpose arena complex. It will be up for a vote on April 
23rd, I believe it is. And I know that despite the protestations of 
some of the folks in Saskatoon, engineered on their political 
agenda of the NDP, that the new arena complex proposal will 
be passed, and passed by a substantial margin. It will be worth 
some $25 million and mean many jobs to the people of 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Canada has indicated it’s 
building a hydrology institute at a cost of $12.4 million. The 
province of Saskatchewan special care home out in Fairhaven, 
238 beds at the cost of some $21 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker; 
and presently under construction, an alteration at Kilburn Hall 
by the province of Saskatchewan amounting to $1.6 million. 
The University of Saskatchewan is putting up a new 
administration building, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at 5 million. 
 
And there are many, many others. Some of them I’d like to 
mention. The agricultural college announced by our Premier the 
other day — $78 million, and acclaimed by 

all people interested in agriculture in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and of course much, much wanted by the people 
at the University of Saskatchewan. Intercontinental Packers has 
indicated that they will be expanding to the tune of some $24 
million. A new cancer clinic announced recently coming up 
adjacent to the University Hospital, worth some $17 million, 
and the list goes on and on. 
 
Sed Systems, a new plant, worth some $10 million; Canada 
Packers, a new plant, $5.5 million; Saskatoon Fresh Pack, 
manufacturing expansion, at some $2 million. A new Circle 
Park Mall addition, $17 million; a new Grand Centre Mall, a 
new retail complex, at some $9 million; and I can go on and on. 
Parkview Place, new office parkade, at some $9 million. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatoon is a city on the grow, a city of 
building, a city with a great future, a city that will be creating 
jobs in the thousands. 
 
Boychuk, an additional office complex at $3 million; and so on. 
These projects, Mr. Speaker, add up to over $400 million in 
capital costs in the year 1986. That means jobs, that means 
activity, that means spin-off jobs for the city of Saskatoon. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m also proud of what has gone on 
in Saskatoon since 1982. We have an enviable record of 
building Saskatchewan, of building Saskatoon, of working 
together with the private sector. 
 
Just some of them that I want to list here today, because I know 
that my constituents and the people of Saskatchewan are excited 
about these projects. For example, Canpotex, the international 
marketing agency for Saskatchewan potash, moved its head 
office from Toronto to Saskatoon in the last four years. And just 
recently in the budget speech it was announced that the 
Department of Science and Technology will be moving to 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a $7 million refurbishment of the Western 
Development Museum was very much welcomed. Eight new 
child-care incorporations in Saskatoon alone have provided 
pre-school and day-care services to approximately 300 families 
in Saskatoon. The new geological sciences building at the 
university at a cost of $18.6 million. A science research unit is 
being built at the College of Medicine at a cost of $1.6 million. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we were pleased to see the completion of 
the College of Engineering building at 31 million. Twenty-eight 
new advanced technology firms have located in Saskatoon since 
1982, and we are, indeed, the capital of high tech in western 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 1982 over $41.2 million worth of school 
construction and renovations has taken place. Four hundred 
thirty-three special care home beds are being constructed under 
the five-year, special care home construction program in 
Saskatoon; $2.7 million for new Kinsmen children’s centre. 
And I want to say right here and now that all Saskatchewan and 
all Saskatoon are proud of the building and the construction and 
the community service provided by the Kinsmen clubs of 
  



 
March 27, 1986 

257 
 
 

Saskatoon and Canada. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, over 40 million in science research 
allocated to 12 research infrastructure facilities in Saskatoon. 
And 1,230 new jobs were created through the Saskatchewan 
employment development program of Social Services — and 
I’ll have more to say about that later. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, over 354,000 in grants to seniors’ 
organizations in Saskatoon since 1982. Over $11 million in 
grants to organizations in support of the handicapped in 
Saskatoon since 1982. Nearly $20 million of urban assistance 
from Department of Highways to Saskatoon since 1982, and 
over $2 million in highways in the Saskatoon area. 
 
Over 10,390 Saskatoon families — that’s 10,390 Saskatoon 
families — were protected by the thirteen and a quarter per cent 
mortgage interest reduction program. Over 17.9 million has 
been paid out to protect Saskatoon families — that’s almost 18 
million was paid to Saskatoon families by the mortgage interest 
reduction program. In addition, 1,381 Saskatoon families 
received a total of 4.143 million under our build-a-home 
program. That’s action; that’s progress; that’s progress by the 
Progressive Conservative Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
And of course we’re very proud in Saskatoon also, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that the 1989 Canada Summer Games will be held in 
Saskatoon, in 1989. And we bragged a little bit because we won 
out over Regina, but Regina is getting the Western Canada 
Games, and they’re also getting a new field house, I understand, 
worth some $6 million. So I think we’re all happy with what’s 
happening in our two major cities. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, since the first day that my government 
took office it has pursued three central thrusts as it has moved 
to build a province in which all residents can create for 
themselves a type of life-styles they desire and deserve. 
 
The latest budget initiatives build on the foundation already set 
in place and adds strength and potential to the direction already 
set. The three thrusts are: number one, opportunity, opportunity 
for residents to achieve personal security and prosperity. This 
includes opportunities for jobs, for a first-rate education, to 
build small businesses, and to take part in other self-determined 
challenges. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sandberg: — The second thrust, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
participation — participation for residents to take part in both 
the day-to-day governing of their province and in the economic 
prosperity of Saskatchewan, whether that prosperity has been 
achieved in private industry or in the government sector. And 
my constituents tell me, many of them tell me, they are happy 
that at last they have a say in what the Government of 
Saskatchewan does. It isn’t a centralized, marble palace in 
Regina any more. It’s a group of 55 MLAs getting out into their 
constituencies and talking to their people, getting their input 
and suggestions as to what they want done. 

The third thrust, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is protection, protection 
for all residents against mishaps beyond their control. The 
thrust here is wide-ranging. It includes health care and 
protection against wild swings in mortgage rates for home 
owners or interest rates that have to be paid by farmers. 
 
Our government believes that all these are interrelated. Without 
good health, for instance, one can’t work in a productive job. 
Without good educational opportunities, one can’t pursue a 
rewarding career. Without employment opportunities, families 
can’t build homes. 
 
Seen in this interrelated perspective, it is easy to see why the 
Saskatchewan government instituted the first home mortgage 
rebate program in Canada to protect families against 
sky-rocketing interest rates; why the Saskatchewan government 
decided to spend more funds on health care and education than 
any other government in our province’s history; and why we 
established a $600 million employment development fund in an 
all-out campaign to create jobs province-wide. It’s also why we 
set up far-sighted programs to make it easier for residents to 
create and expand small businesses, for small businesses in turn 
to create jobs. 
 
I see the member from Regina North East has left his place in 
the Assembly. He likes to make a lot of noise, but what did he 
do as Finance minister when interest rates were 22 per cent? 
What did he do? Nothing. Zip. Nothing. And he sits over there 
in his hypocritical manner and criticizes this government’s 
programs to help the home owners of Saskatchewan. 
 
I see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have awakened the sleeping beasts. 
 
The member from Athabasca . . . I know and I respect the 
member for Athabasca. I know he knows better than what those 
cohorts of his over there are saying. He’s an honourable man, 
and I know that he believes in what we’re doing. But he’s got 
himself caught up in a situation over there, and I invite him to 
come over at any time that he wants. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our successes have been outstanding as a 
government and have been praised coast-to-coast. We have the 
highest employment rate — that’s the highest employment rate 
— in the nation in the past four years, and our health care 
system and educational system has been brought up to 
world-class standards. 
 
Our oil industry is funding, through royalties and taxes, 
one-quarter of all government expenditures. And our farmers 
have seen their dedication repaid with some $500 million in 
drought aid programs. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we must move on. We must move 
on to new achievements and to new horizons. And the budget 
initiatives will help us move on — the budget initiatives as 
announced by my colleague from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. 
 
This government, the Devine government and all 
  



 
March 27, 1986 

258 
 
 

Progressive Conservative MLAs, believe that the family is the 
corner-stone of the strength of our province. It always has been 
and it always will be. Mr. Deputy Speaker, big union bosses are 
not the corner-stone of this province; families are. That’s why 
so many of our policies and programs have been aimed at 
strengthening the family and keeping Saskatchewan families 
together. 
 
We have done this in many ways. Some 44,000 home owners 
received mortgage rebates and were protected against the 
horrors of runaway interest rates. When runaway inflation 
threatened every resident, our government abolished the 
provincial tax on gasoline. This has saved Saskatchewan drivers 
some $600 million in four years. 
 
These programs either directly or indirectly assist every 
resident. If Saskatchewan families had lost their homes, there 
would have been economic turmoil and social crisis. By 
abolishing the tax on gasoline, virtually every product and 
service was more economical to produce and offer. Again, all 
are interrelated. Our government is very much opposed to 
taxing the so-called essentials in life. And our members were 
shocked in 1982 to see just how heavily taxes had been placed 
on residents; hence, the abolition of the $600 million gas tax. 
 
(1215) 
 
Mr. Speaker, with so many family units today having both 
parents working, or with single mothers having to work, day 
care centres have become a part of Canadian life. I know 
they’ve been a part of the life of my wife, Dee, and I. We were 
very pleased to have our children so well taken care of in a 
co-operative day care centre in Saskatoon for about three years, 
the Spadina Child Care Centre. And I would like to commend 
them here and now for the excellent care that they provided to 
our children at that time when we needed it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, for the first time in Saskatchewan, direct 
operating grants to day care centres will be available under a 
day care budget of more than $13 million. The budget total 
itself is an increase of 9 per cent over last year — double the 
rate of inflation. 
 
It has often been said that our children are the foundation and 
the hope for our future. It is more demanding in today’s society 
to achieve that future than ever before. The opportunity for 
educational excellence must be available to all Saskatchewan 
children and students, which is why, aside from our general 
education budget being higher than ever before in our 
province’s history, we established a $400 million education 
endowment fund to upgrade educational facilities 
province-wide. University funding is also at an all-time high in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the new budget will make changes to the 
student assistance program to remove unfair restrictions, 
increase loan limits, and reduce the interest rate on student 
loans to 6 per cent. And that’s good news for students across the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Devine government over the past four years 
has made a determined effort to reward senior 

citizens for the contributions they have made to our province 
and for the solid foundation they have built for us. So many of 
the opportunities and freedoms we now enjoy were provided for 
by the hard work and the initiative of our senior citizens. 
 
Little wonder then, that grants to senior citizens have been 
increased by as much as 100 per cent. Nursing home 
construction has been undertaken at a pace never seen before in 
this province, and all programs related to senior citizens 
upgraded and expanded. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the new 
budget will increase the seniors’ non-profit housing program by 
$4.5 million, and will continue providing funding for the 
five-year, $25 million senior citizens’ home repair program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of the new seniors heritage grants 
that have been brought in by this government just recently. 
They will provide benefits well-deserved by senior citizens of 
up to $700 per couple. It has been well accepted by the seniors 
in Saskatoon Centre, and I know it’s been well accepted by the 
seniors right across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although an increasing number of improvements 
have been made in both government, company, and private 
pension plans over recent years, many approaching retirement 
are still left without adequate financial means. This government 
finds this situation intolerable. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the budget promises to develop a 
Saskatchewan pension plan for home-makers, for 
small-business people, and the self-employed. There will be 
matching contributions from the government, and the pension 
plan will be voluntary. It’s a first; it’s a milestone for the 
province of Saskatchewan, and this government, the Devine 
government has done it. 
 
Our government has found it disgraceful that so many people 
have been forced to live out their lives on welfare, with no hope 
of getting off social assistance, finding productive jobs, and 
building an enjoyable life for themselves. Welfare recipients 
deserve the same opportunities as other residents, and our 
government has already instituted successful job-training 
schemes in this endeavour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the previous administration was only interested in 
handing them a cheque and keeping them on the welfare rolls 
forever so they could keep them making the X for the NDP. 
Well we’re giving them more hope and more future and more 
opportunity than that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, a comprehensive employment opportunities 
strategy for employable social assistance recipients will be 
established during the current year. The program will insure 
that welfare recipients do not merely receive a cheque from the 
government, which, while all such cheques add up to a large 
sum, individual amounts have been little more than 
conscience-quelling pittances, but also have opportunities to 
learn job skills, job responsibilities and perform public service. 
 
Our government want to give welfare recipients more than a 
subsistence living; we want to give them hope and 
  



 
March 27, 1986 

259 
 
 

determination to succeed on their own. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, with your indulgence I would like to read a letter from 
one of my constituents on the Saskatchewan skills development 
program that has been developed and fostered by this 
government, and it’s from a young lady who lives on 5th 
Avenue North, right in the heart of Saskatoon Centre. 
 
And she says: 
 

Dear Premier: I am a student from the Saskatchewan 
skills development program. (And I know the Minister of 
Social Services is proud of this.) I am a student attending 
City Park Collegiate. My name is (such and such). I 
started my classes through Saskatchewan skills 
development program June 17, 1985. I am requesting that 
the funding of the Saskatchewan skills development 
program will be continued. 
 
The Saskatchewan skills development program is not just 
beneficial to those of us on social services but to the 
society in which we live. Many students who have gained 
their required entrances through SSDP are attending or 
registered at Kelsey and other learning institutes to 
further their occupational goals. (I can see, Mr. Speaker, 
that the member from Shaunavon doesn’t want to hear 
this because it really hurts, but I’m sure he’ll be 
interested.) You may feel that continuing the SSDP 
would be too great an expense, but your involvement 
could only benefit provincial and federal stability. 
 
The skills development program was first set up because 
the government recognized most social services 
recipients did not have their complete education. (And 
when she says government recognized, she means this 
government.) We recognize the importance of this 
program and have expectations of completing our grade 
12 or required entrances. 
 
The community of people receiving assistance has been 
asking the government for years to offer education and 
employment training to improve their lives. At that time, 
jobs were plentiful. (You know of when she was 
speaking.) We were refused and viewed as unworthy to 
consider such an option. (And it’s obvious she’s referring 
to the NDP administration.) Now jobs are scarce and 
training is vital for any member of society to find a 
career. 
 
Without this program and others like it, more and more 
people will be turning to the government for financial 
support without any way to coalesce with society in a 
productive and financial way. The success rate of this 
program is directly due to the fact that we have a separate 
building to learn in and give each other the support we 
need to attain our goals. 

 
And she finally says: 
 

I plan on taking the CADCAM program at Kelsey 

in the fall of 1987. I started my grade 11 on December 9, 
1985, which will be the last semester I can take if this 
program is not continued. I feel an extreme amount of 
stress not knowing where my future lies. Even if only 
one-third of the people in this program find careers and 
secure positions, that is one-third more than if the program 
is discontinued. I have full intentions of being a part of 
that one-third. I request to you again that you continue this 
program, and I also ask that you respond and tell me what 
you plan on doing with us if this program is discontinued. 

 
Well, I give you my commitment and this government’s 
commitment that this very fine program will be carried on, 
because we’re a government that cares about fostering and 
getting people out of the welfare rut. We will continue this 
program, and that is our commitment, the commitment from me 
and my colleagues and Premier Devine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a government we are extremely concerned that 
tax rates for every resident should be as low as possible and that 
government must be run as lean and as efficiently as possible. 
Much has been achieved in the past four years in this campaign. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the new budget will establish a property 
management corporation to ensure that government land and 
buildings is acquired at the most economical cost to the 
taxpayer and managed at the most economical cost to the 
taxpayer and managed at the most efficient level. We expect 
this move will provide substantial savings. 
 
I just want to take a moment, Mr. Speaker, to comment on that 
great, colossal, white ark that sits in the middle of the city of 
Saskatoon, down town on 3rd Avenue — the Sturdy Stone 
Building. That was a colossal monument created by that former 
NDP administration. It must weigh a gillion tonnes in concrete. 
It provides a whole bunch of parking spaces that are there for 
the use of the civil servants of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, as the people of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers, are we here 
to provide parking spaces for the public service of 
Saskatchewan? I mean, we have to have places to park — 
there’s no question about that — but to build a 
multimillion-dollar edifice to provide parking spaces for civil 
servants in the city of Saskatoon is to me ridiculous and just 
completely highlights what that government stands for: big 
government, big bureaucracy, inefficiency. There’s no question 
about that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re proud of the partnership we have with the 
residents of Saskatchewan. The new initiatives are being funded 
basically by a tax increase on large corporations — not on little 
people, but on large corporations — and by an increase on the 
tobacco tax. On cigarettes the tax works out to 25 cents a 
package, or a 1-cent increase per cigarette. We think both these 
are common sense moves, particularly in view of the current 
needs, attitudes, and trends. 
 
In a nutshell, here are some of the main expenditures. Health 
care will take the largest slice out of the budget. Spending is set 
at 1.2 billion for the 1986-87 fiscal year in Health, with an 
average of $1,200, Mr. Speaker, for every resident. Health care 
spending will increase by $126 
  



 
March 27, 1986 

260 
 
 

million — the largest single health care budget increase ever. 
 
Educational grants, Mr. Speaker. Educational grants to 
elementary and secondary schools will be up by about $41 
million, or more than 10 per cent. That’s more than double the 
rate of inflation. Aside from regular university funding 
programs, operating grants to universities will increase by more 
than 3 per cent to $144 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture, of course, is still the economic 
foundation of Saskatchewan, and its health will determine our 
future. Our commitment to our farmers is seen in the agriculture 
budget rising from 64 million to $118 million — almost double 
the previous year. The figures do not include such expenditures 
as emergency drought and grasshopper assistance that put half a 
billion into our farmers’ pockets in recent months. 
 
The new budget, Mr. Speaker, calls for expenditures of 3.7 
billion and an income of roughly 3.3 billion. The deficit, we 
feel, is acceptable and responsible considering the current 
situation. Renewed economic activity and future government 
programs will eventually eradicate it by a natural process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I and my colleagues take pride in this budget. It’s 
responsible. It’s visionary. It looks ahead. It doesn’t look back 
like the previous administration would have done. It’s what 
Saskatchewan residents have been telling us and it’s what we 
should be doing. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I now ask leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, before I ask to adjourn 
the House today, I just remind all members — and I know I 
don’t have to but I want to — that this is Easter weekend and a 
long weekend, and we will not be, of course, sitting tomorrow, 
Good Friday. We come back Tuesday at 2 o’clock. 
 
So I just want to wish everyone a happy Easter and best wishes 
for a long weekend at home visiting with your constituents and 
your families and, of course, telling the world how great our 
budget is. 
 
I now, Mr. Speaker, move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:28 p.m. 
 
 


