


















































December 18, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 December 18, 1986 
 
 

327 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Sale of Shares in SED Systems 
 

Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister 
for Science and Technology. My question concerns SED 
Systems, a company started at the University of Saskatchewan 
that has always been Saskatchewan controlled and has grown 
into the biggest high-tech company in the province. 
 
A few weeks ago Fleet Aerospace of Ontario announced that it 
had purchased 30 per cent control of SED Systems, and now 
Fleet Aerospace is trying to exchange or purchase the SED 
System shares that are owned by the provincial government, the 
University of Saskatchewan, company shareholders, and private 
individuals. If those purchases are concluded, Saskatchewan 
will clearly lose control of SED Systems to Ontario. 
 
Will the minister give his assurance that the Government of 
Saskatchewan will not sell its control in SED Systems by way 
of a share exchange? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would thank 
the member opposite for his question. I’m not sure if he’s 
totally aware of the history of Fleet Aerospace as it relates to 
SED Systems. They have, of course, for some time had an 
interest in SED, and I think it was the latter part of March that 
they acquired some of the control that they presently have 
which is about 33 per cent. That was acquired through the 
purchase of debentures that became available at that time. We 
have been given assurance that this industry is going to remain 
in Saskatoon and in Saskatchewan. 
 
In so far as any proposed offers for the outstanding shares, and 
there are, as you indicated, several shareholders involved, we, at 
this point, do not have any written confirmation of this in so far 
as the government shares are concerned, nor do we have any 
ideas as to what the other shareholders will do if such an offer 
should be made to them. So I think it would be unlikely that we 
would respond at this point in time, not knowing what others 
are going to do. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Supplementary. I’m not asking what others 
are going to do; I’m asking what the Government of 
Saskatchewan is going to be doing. And I ask the minister: can 
he tell us what your intentions are to do with the 12 per cent 
government ownership in the SED company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, I would simply 
respond to the question in this way: that until such time as the 
Government of Saskatchewan receives the offer and knows 
what it is . . . The only indication that we have to  

date as to what offer might be made is what has been seen in the 
newspapers. But until such time as a formal offer is made, 
there’s no way that the government is going to respond. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Supplementary. Given the fact that the 
provincial government has just earlier this year invested $8 
million worth of public money – taxpayers’ money – in term 
financing and interest-free loans to SED Systems to move into a 
new complex at the University of Saskatchewan, Innovation 
Place, is the minister prepared to surrender this public equity in 
SED Systems in the new complex to control of an 
Ontario-owned company? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, I would simply point 
out to the member opposite that the Government of 
Saskatchewan is certainly interested in any investment that is 
going to be made in this province, and we understand that there 
have been some shortages of cash flow within SED. 
 
Fleet Aerospace, of course, is in the position that they are going 
to be investing a fairly large amount of money in that company. 
I don’t think that at this point in time that we would have any 
concerns in view of the fact that this particular company has a 
very sound record in this province, and they have something in 
the neighbourhood of 40 to $50 million worth of orders on the 
books which they will be doing over the next four years. They 
will be moving into their new complex north of the university 
campus some time in February or March, where in the 
neighbourhood of 350 people will be employed, and that will be 
expanded to 400 people in the very near future. So I don’t think 
at this point in time, when we consider diversification as being 
an answer to this province to overcoming some of the problems, 
that we should be overly concerned with what’s happening to 
SED. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is also 
to the Minister of Science and Technology. The minister will 
know the details of the offer, Mr. Speaker. The minister will 
know that Fleet Aerospace is contacting your government and is 
going to be offering for you to take one non-voting share of 
Fleet Aerospace at approximately $11 a share in exchange for 
$2.75 worth of SED Systems shares – four shares. One 
non-voting share for four voting shares. 
 
My question to the minister is . . . The minister will know that 
the SED shares at $2.75 are very much undervalued. My 
question is: why would your government be giving any 
consideration at all to taking one non-voting share of an Ontario 
company for four voting shares of a very valuable 
Saskatchewan company? Will you give us your assurance that 
you’re not prepared to accept such a ridiculous exchange, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The hon. members should be aware that 
the ownership of SED is housed in CICIII of which I happen to 
have responsibility. The hon. member, the Minister of Science 
and Technology, indicated to a  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

328 
 
 

previous question from the member from Saskatoon Sutherland 
that no offer had yet been received. The reality is that CICIII 
(Crown Investments Corporation Industrial Investments 
Incorporated) has not received an offer from Fleet Aerospace. 
That’s the reality of the situation. 
 
Now I can advise the hon. member, as did the Minister of 
Science and Technology, that the Government of Saskatchewan 
is primarily interested in the survival and the health of SED 
Systems, that it stay: (a) in Saskatchewan, and it will prosper in 
Saskatchewan. And we would entertain any negotiations or 
entertain any offer that would come. But that’s far to say that 
we going to accept any offer just because it’s been printed in 
the Toronto Globe and Mail. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, the minister will realize that the 
central issue here is that the 12 per cent of the shares that the 
Government of Saskatchewan owns is the key to Fleet 
Aerospace obtaining majority control of SED Systems. If you 
sell your shares, then clearly Fleet Aerospace has majority 
control of SED. 
 
Now my question to the minister is: the minister will be aware 
that within a matter of two or three days you will have the offer. 
Fleet Aerospace will want you to reply to that offer during the 
Christmas recess. And I want your guarantee, Mr. Minister, that 
you will not be prepared to enter into a share exchange with 
Fleet Aerospace and give up control of the people of 
Saskatchewan’s shares of SED Systems during the Christmas 
recess; that you won’t try to sneak in that kind of a deal during 
the Christmas holidays. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can give the hon. 
member the following undertaking: is that (a) the Government 
of Saskatchewan is interested in seeing SED Systems (a) stay in 
Saskatchewan. We are interested in seeing SED Systems further 
expand and become a healthier and healthier corporation in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I can further indicate to you that it is our intention to use this as 
a corporation by which we can expand employment in the city 
of Saskatoon and in the province of Saskatchewan. And I can 
also give the undertaking that we will deal with the offer, if it is 
forthcoming, in the normal way. 
 
As you should know, any offer that would be coming would be 
dealt with by the board of directors of CICIII, a process put in 
place by the previous government, a process that we have 
followed in the last four years and intend to follow in the future. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
will know that SED Systems’ shares are highly undervalued 
right now, a fact that would make any kind of a share exchange 
with Fleet Aerospace very detrimental to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Will the minister admit that SED Systems has approximately 
$43 million of contracts that it will be filling in the months 
ahead; that Saskatchewan Power  

Corporation and SED Systems are negotiating on a $15 million 
contract for a repeater system in Saskatchewan; that between 
the $43 million guarantee of contract and the likely $15 million 
contract, that SED Systems shares would rise very substantially 
over the 275. 
 
Therefore, in light of that, Mr. Minister, would you 
acknowledge that it would be much to the benefit of Fleet 
Aerospace and much to the disadvantage of Saskatchewan 
taxpayers if you were to sell your shares in SED Systems at the 
present time. And therefore will you give this House your 
guarantee that you will not do that, not jeopardize 
Saskatchewan control of SED Systems . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The hon. member from Saskatoon 
University is standing there advising as to what the proper value 
of the shares of SED Systems is. I would perhaps take issue 
whether or not you are the most knowledgeable person of which 
to take knowledge of that particular piece of information. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please! Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — It seems to me the fundamental question 
is, and the fundamental question I’ve answered is this: (1) we 
wish to have SED Systems remain in Saskatchewan (stated 
principle); (2) we wish to have SED Systems expand and to 
grow and to be more prosperous and not lose money like it has 
over a period of time; and (3) we hope that it would create more 
jobs and become a better company and a better corporate citizen 
in the province of Saskatchewan. However we can get to that 
point, that’s the type of options we’ll be pursuing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 
Minister of Economic Development and Trade, the minister in 
charge of CIC Industrial Investments Incorporated. Do you see 
any danger in the ownership and control of a company like SED 
Systems passing from Saskatchewan hands and it becoming a 
ranch plant of a company headquartered in Toronto. Will you 
concede that the history of Saskatchewan, and indeed of 
Canada, has been that research and development and much of 
central planning has been done at head offices, wherever they 
are, and it has not been done at branch plant locations? Do you 
not see that as the likely pattern of development of SED 
Systems if it becomes a branch plant? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, to the hon. member, we 
are in this province very interested in trying to diversify the 
economy of the province of Saskatchewan. As we indicated in 
the throne speech, and as the Premier has indicated on many 
occasions, if we’re going to look at expanding or diversifying 
the economy, one of the areas by which you have to diversify 
the economy is the so-called knowledge industries. Now either 
we are afraid in this province to say: no, we cannot do that, or 
we must  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

329 
 
 

attempt to do what we can to expand research and development, 
whether it’s in this particular industry, whether it’s in heavy oil 
technology, whether it’s in further refinement of paper, whether 
it’s in a whole series of things, pharmaceuticals – whatever it 
might be. And we believe that the capacity of the province of 
Saskatchewan is that we can do that. 
 
I believe that the world is changing in the sense that if one puts 
policies in place that can attract that kind of attention and 
interest, that we can, in fact, do that here. Now the member 
opposite would have us believe that any corporation, whether 
it’s outside of Saskatchewan or outside of Canada, would have 
no interest and no intention of doing any kind of research and 
development in the province of Saskatchewan. I don’t agree 
with that. 
 
I believe that this company, as I indicated to the hon. member 
from Saskatoon University and the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland, is that we believe this company will (a) stay in 
Saskatchewan; (b) that this company will continue to expand 
and prosper. I think it’s important, and I think the hon. member 
would appreciate that it must prosper, and that we will create 
more jobs, and we will create more new high-tech jobs in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. 
Accepting your premise that Saskatchewan people should not 
be afraid, why, Mr. Minister, are you supporting a policy of 
being afraid, of selling out control of this company and not 
supporting a policy of back in our own highly successful 
researchers and entrepreneurs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would indicate to you 
that in fact we have, over the past four years, backed SED 
Systems to the tune of a fairly significant amount of money – a 
fairly significant amount of money; that we hold the view that 
SED Systems is something that Saskatchewan should be proud 
of; that we will continue with SED Systems, and that we are 
comfortable as we approach any type of negotiations that we 
will preserve that fundamental principle. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the 
issue is not whether Fleet Aerospace’s investment in SED 
Systems is welcome. The 30 per cent is not a problem The issue 
is the question of majority control. Your government’s shares in 
SED Systems are the key to Fleet’s majority control. 
 
And my question to you is: you will realize that if in the long 
term things get going that the situation in the high-tech industry 
is difficult, that Fleet Aerospace could easily decide to move 
part of the SED Systems to Ontario. Will you not admit, Mr. 
Minister, that that’s a very real risk if majority control in SED 
Systems is lost? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated first of all that 
(a) before you get too heated up, that we haven’t even received 
an offer from Fleet Aerospace other than to hear  

it in the Toronto Globe and Mail. No formal offer has been 
advanced. Once that offer has been advanced, the Government 
of Saskatchewan will look at it, we will make a decision on it, 
and the decision that we should make on it we would certainly 
be prepared to share with the public. 
 

Financial Situation of Supercart International 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
direct a question to the Minister of Economic Development and 
Trade, and it deals with the status of Supercart International 
which recently laid off most of its 35 staff in the city of Regain. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you confirm that this troubled company has 
received a great deal of money from Saskatchewan taxpayers, 
specifically a $213,000 grant from the Department of Science 
and Technology for research and development, a $400,000 loan 
from Sedco, and wage subsidies from the Social Services 
department’s employment development program. 
 
Can you provide, Mr. Minister, a full accounting of how much 
money you have sunk into this company? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I can indicate, first of all, that 
Supercart . . . If one was to listen to the member from Regina 
North East, he wishes to write the obituary to Supercart, and 
I’m not prepared to give up on Supercart yet. Supercart, we 
believe, is a good idea, Mr. Speaker. At this point in time . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Would 
you please allow the minister to make the answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — At this point in time Supercart is 
obviously experiencing some management problems, and those 
management problems we hope will be able to be resolved, 
because I think it’s in the interest of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
With regard to Supercart, there was a payment that Supercart 
earned which is a joint provincial-federal funding on research 
and development, which I assume that you’re not against that. 
That’s a joint sharing program. They were able to bridge that 
and use that to develop. I think that was somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of $250,000. 
 
I understand as well, Mr. Speaker, that while they have a bulk 
of their mortgage and their financing arranged with one of the 
local banks in the province, Sedco is in for a small amount, and 
I’m not responsible for the details of Sedco loan. 
 
The member opposite, each time he stands up, would have us 
believe that every time Sedco make a loan to a company in the 
province of Saskatchewan, somehow you’re giving them the 
money. And one never, ever thought, Mr. Speaker, that when 
you make a loan from Sedco, somehow it’s a give-away 
program. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier has been 
quoted as saying that Supercart manufacturing plant in Regina 
is the perfect example of how the government’s  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

330 
 
 

open-for-business attitude since 1982 is succeeding in 
diversifying our economy. If this is an example of 
diversification, Mr. Speaker, then I think Saskatchewan’s 
economy may very well be in some great serious difficulty. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, can you answer the following question. Has 
the provincial government been asked and have you agreed to 
provide any additional financial assistance to this company? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — No. For the hon. member, a company 
like this would earn, or has qualified for and registered for a – 
what we call our industrial incentives program, which is $7,500 
per job with the proviso that those jobs are full-time jobs and in 
place for a full period of one year. If the company does not 
proceed forward, keep those people employed for at least a full 
one-year period, they would not be entitled to earn any money 
from the industrial incentives program. 
 
As far as I know, at this point in time Supercart has not 
addressed or requested any further assistance from the 
Government of Saskatchewan. As I understand, their 
negotiations at this point in time are being done between 
Supercart and the bank in question. Perhaps they’ve made some 
overtures to the minister responsible for Sedco that I’m not 
familiar with or aware of, and I would not be able to answer 
that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, when the Premier officially opened the Supercart 
plant last April 18th, he issued a press release which called 
Supercart, and I quote to you, “the perfect example of how the 
government’s open-for-business attitude is succeeding,” as I 
said earlier. But he also said, and I quote, “part of a whole team 
of new industries, weaving into our economic future.” 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, Supercart is in trouble. The Regina fertilizer 
plant is on hold. The Husky upgrader is no longer even 
mentioned. I ask you: how many more of these projects 
announced with such fanfare before the election are about to 
blow up in your face? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I have somewhat of a 
concern when the member opposite on the one hand speaks 
about how we should try to create jobs in the province, and then 
on the other hand takes great delight if some business starts in 
the province of Saskatchewan, maybe has some problems as to 
whether it can get it going, or up off the ground, and takes 
delight in that type of thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell the members opposite that this 
government is proceeding forward with many projects and 
we’re very proud of that diversification, and we look forward to 
many more in the future. 
 

Financing of School Construction Costs 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Education, Mr. Speaker. It deals with proposals 
now being circulated by his department,  

circulated to the school boards across the province. These 
proposals would require local school boards to pay a higher 
portion of school construction costs from local property taxes. 
Mr. Minister, at a time when local property taxes are already a 
severe burden for many people in Saskatchewan, why are you at 
this time proposing a shift, a shift of school construction costs 
to local school boards and off the provincial government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of any 
such proposal, but I will take notice of the question and confer 
with my departmental officials to see if, in fact, (a) these 
proposals exist and, if they do, what the discussions have been. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I’m quite 
surprised that the minister is unaware of his department’s 
proposal. I have here a document entitled “School Facilities 
consultation,” which has been given to school boards at this 
time around the province . . . school boards across the province 
at this time. One of the stated purposes of these meetings, and I 
quote, says: “. . . potential changes to the financing of the 
school construction program.” 
 
Now could the Minister find out for me please, if – and 
confirm—if one of the proposals being proposed would see the 
local boards’ share of a $3 million construction project in a 
rural, high assessment division jump from $226,000 to more 
than $746,000? That’s a jump of from 5.2 per cent to 17 per 
cent of the total costs. Could you get me that information too, 
please, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I would, as I said, I took 
notice earlier, and I’ll take notice of this further question to get 
any details relative to the consultations that the hon. member 
was talking about. I was aware of consultations relative to 
putting in place mechanisms. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please, Order, please. Order. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Weyerhaeuser Awards Contract to Canadian Firm 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, a ministerial statement in 
my capacity as the minister responsible for Sask Forest 
Products and formerly responsible for the negotiations with 
Weyerhaeuser (Canada Ltd.). 
 
In keeping with the agreement reached between this 
government and Weyerhaeuser when the company bought the 
Prince Albert pulp mill earlier this year, I’m proud to announce 
that Weyerhaeuser (Canada Ltd.) has awarded the first major 
contract for a $40 million machine for its new paper-mill due to 
start production in late 1988. 
 
The contract was awarded to a Canadian firm, Valmet 
Dominion Inc., and I’m pleased to announce that Valmet will 
build 75 per cent of the machine in Canada. I’m also pleased to 
note, Mr. Speaker, that Valmet Dominion Ltd.  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

331 
 
 

will be sourcing Saskatchewan suppliers for the machinery 
components that they will be contracting out – an excellent 
opportunity for bidders in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Valmet machine will produce a continuous sheet of paper, 
318 inches wide, running at a designed speed of 3,000 feet per 
minute. The paper, destined for markets in the United States 
and Canada, will be shipped in 450 to 900 kilogram rolls. Its 
primary end uses will include business forms, photocopy paper, 
and printer stock. 
 
Construction of the paper-mill will begin on schedule in April, 
and delivery of the machine components will begin in the fall of 
1987. The new paper-mill will produce a net increase of 215 
new jobs within the Saskatchewan forest operations, Mr. 
Speaker – another fine example of this government’s 
commitment to job creation through economic diversification. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I will not spend a great 
deal of time on this statement. This is yet another 
announcement of an industrial venture by the government 
opposite. We have had a number of those. We dealt with some 
of them in question period. 
 
I think the proof of the pudding will be in the eating. And we 
will see when this paper-mill is constructed, and who pays for 
it, and who gets the profit from it. I venture to think – I venture 
to think that when all of the facts are known – and they’re not 
all known yet with respect to Weyerhaeuser – that the financing 
will once again prove to be primarily at the expense of the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan, and the profits will once again be 
primarily for the benefit of some out-of-province, and probably 
out-of-country corporation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, if I might, just before 
orders of the day, I have three motions which I’d like to move, 
which are regular motions to be moved near the beginning of a 
new session. 
 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Before that, if you don’t mind, I would like to 
present my ruling regarding yesterday’s point of order. 
 
Yesterday the Leader of the Opposition raised the point of order 
regarding an answer by the Minister of Health in the oral 
question period. I deferred my ruling at that time. 
 
I reviewed the verbatim record and find that the minister did 
stray from the direct question that was asked in such a way as to 
promote debate. I ask all members to adhere to the guide-lines 
of question period in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, all 
ministers will make every attempt to adhere to your ruling. 

MOTIONS 
 

Continuing Select Committee 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I have three motions 
which are normally moved near the beginning of a new session, 
and I would proceed to do those now. 
 
I move, seconded by seat mate, the hon. member from 
Kindersley, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

that members Sauder, Duncan, Gardner, Gerich, McLaren, 
McLeod be constituted a continuing select committee with 
the power to call for persons, papers, and records, and to 
examine witnesses under oath, and whose duty it shall be to 
establish from time to time select committees with the 
power to call for persons. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve just checked with the Table, and I’m 
informed that, and as I indicated in my initial remarks, that 
these are normal motions moved at the beginning of a new 
legislature. I’ve just checked with the Table and I find that there 
was an error in the typing in the Clerk’s office, so that will be 
rectified and that motion is clearly not proper, and I apologize 
to the members there. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the other two motions that I have, if 
we could carry on with those – or I’ll leave it in your hands 
whether we carry on with the other two motions and come back 
to that one, which I would suggest. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, may I make a suggestion to 
the government House Leader. We have not seen these 
resolutions. They may very well be proper and order and 
routine. May I suggest to him that, rather than moving them at 
the present time, he give us the courtesy to inform us as to what 
they intend to do, and if there’s no problem we’ll give leave by 
consent of the House to bring it on later this day. 
 
But to ask us to give leave in the absence of even a copy of the 
resolutions, I think, with the greatest of respect, is a little 
unusual and out of order and improper. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, there is nothing that has 
been done here which is not in the normal process in the way in 
which these particular three motions are presented. I would 
make that point. 
 
But I do agree, Mr. Speaker, given the circumstances of the one 
motion which I have explained, I do agree, and I would ask the 
House that we will return to this late this day. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No 4 – An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan Act 

  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

332 
 
 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second reading 
of an Act to amend The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act. The 
plan was unveiled earlier this year and is now fully operational. 
 
The plan is the first of its kind in the world, affording unique 
opportunities for retirement planning to thousands of 
Saskatchewan residents, especially home-makers, 
self-employed, part-time and casual workers. 
 
The Saskatchewan Pension Plan builds upon many features of 
the Canada Pension Plan. The Canada Pension Plan is changing, 
effective January 1, 1987, to permit early retirement. We have 
therefore made a change to bring our Act in line with the early 
retirement option under the Canada Pension Plan. 
 
The Bill before this Assembly contains a provision which will 
significantly enhance accountability to plan members. The 
change authorizes the making of regulations which would 
separate the existing fund into two or more investment funds. 
This will facilitate the development of different investment 
strategies for the various components of the fund and will 
permit a more equitable distribution of the earnings of the fund 
to plan members. 
 
Finally, we have included a few housekeeping amendments, the 
most significant of which is the change of the fiscal year of the 
plan from the government fiscal year to the calendar year. This 
is required because of the length between the plan and the 
taxation year. There is also a change to the residency 
requirement in the year of retirement. Currently a person must 
be a Saskatchewan resident on December 31 of any year in 
order to be eligible to contribute for that particular year. The 
Bill before the Assembly makes an exception to that rule so that 
a person who is a resident when he makes his last contribution 
to the plan before retirement is deemed to have satisfied the 
requirement for that year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m please to move second reading of The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 1986. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with 
respect to these amendments to the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, 
there’s a number of comments that I would like to make with 
respect to problems pertaining to the Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan that I understand have been brought up in this House 
before but have not yet been addressed by the government. So I 
would like to go through those this afternoon. 
 
The first thing that came to my attention, Mr. Speaker, and I 
don’t believe that this has been rectified by the amendments, is 
that citizens with lower incomes who receive old age security 
and are also entitled to the guaranteed income supplement, for 
example, would not be able to take pension benefits under this 
plan in addition to the guaranteed income supplement, but in 
effect it would be deducted from the guaranteed income 
supplement, Mr. Speaker, that means in effect that 
Saskatchewan taxpayers are paying this money instead of it 
being paid by the federal government. In effect it means  

that Saskatchewan taxpayers are paying federal taxes and not 
getting the benefits. Therefore we would recommend, Mr. 
Speaker, that arrangements be made so that this would top off 
the guaranteed income supplement for example, as opposed to 
the province putting forth the money. 
 
There’s another aspect with respect to the pension that causes 
us some concern and that is the lack of portability in the 
pension, Mr. Speaker. If a person contributes to this plan and 
moves to another province, for example, where there isn’t a 
corresponding plan, the Saskatchewan plan would cease, in 
effect. Given the fact we have such a mobile society today, Mr. 
Speaker, that is a very serious failing of the Saskatchewan 
Pension Plan. 
 
Another aspect that causes us concern is the voluntary nature of 
the plan. In other words, because it is voluntary it is not going 
to be taken up by the people who need it the most. 
 
The NDP, Mr. Speaker, have long said that we need a pension 
plan for home-makers and small-business people, as well as 
people who don’t have pensions through their employers. But 
we meant all home-makers, Mr. Speaker, and all small-business 
people, not just those who can afford to make the monthly 
contribution. And I’m asking myself what this government is 
going to do for those people. 
 
To put it mildly, or politely, Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s a 
deception for the government to say that we’re going to make 
$300 available, in taxpayers’ money, to you if you come up 
with $300. It’s a deception to these people because this 
government knows full well that many of those people are not 
going to be able to make that $300 payment. 
 
On the other hand, the government takes away their property 
improvement grant and institutes instead a home improvement 
grant, which they cannot take advantage of also because they 
can’t afford it. 
 
There will be a substantial take-up by some people, Mr. 
Speaker, because it’s a good deal. There’s no question it’s a 
good deal. You put in your 300 and you get interest on that, and 
the province puts in another 300 and you got interest on that, 
and it is a good deal for those people who can afford it. But it’s 
nothing for those who can’t. and that, Mr. Speaker, is a very 
serious failing with this legislation. 
 
Most importantly, Mr. Speaker, it does nothing for people aged 
60 to 65 or, if you like, 55 to 65, who do not have retirement 
income now and because of ill health or because of one reason 
or another they’re unable to work but they don’t qualify for 
pensions. This Bill doesn’t do anything for them, Mr. Speaker, 
for this immediate problem that these people are facing. And we 
think that it’s time this government took some action to make 
sure that these people were looked after. They should be our 
first priority. 
 
We should also be looking to phasing this plan in with the CPP 
and including our target groups in a universally portable and 
federally subsidized plan. A provincially  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

333 
 
 

based plan is a poor second-best to a federal subsidized plan, 
Mr. Speaker. And it has even been suggested to me that it 
substantially decreases the likelihood of an effective, federally 
administered plan in the near future. And I find that very 
disturbing. 
 
Family income, Mr. Speaker, should be used as a criteria, rather 
than an individual income in determining eligibility for 
matching. And it’s my understanding what they do now is use 
an individual income for the purposes of determining eligibility 
for matching. 
 
And let me just explain to you what the problem may be. For 
example, if we have a small-business person who’s earning 
$26,000 a year, there is no matching contribution for that 
small-business person. And if his or her spouse is earning 
$15,000 a year but has a pension with his or her employer, there 
isn’t any matching contribution on the part of the government, 
yet the combined earnings are in the vicinity of 41,000 a year. 
On the other hand, if you have a spouse who’s earning 80,000 
and the other spouse is not working, the government will match 
that pension. And I say that’s unfair, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — I understand that the Saskatchewan income 
plan was amended to provide additional benefits of some $15 a 
month, but I must point out to this House, Mr. Speaker, that the 
increase in inadequate because those with no retirement income 
other than old age security and GIS are living $1,000 below the 
poverty line. And a $15 a month increase hardly bridges that 
gap. 
 
To be effective in providing adequate retirement income for all 
Canadians, Mr. Speaker, a pension plan needs to be mandatory, 
and where necessary the contributions should be made from 
public funds. 
 
The Saskatchewan Pension Plan therefore does not 
acknowledge the root causes of women’s continuing poverty, 
which is another criticism I have of the plan. It doesn’t deal, nor 
purport to deal, in this legislation or anywhere else, with job 
ghettos, low minimum wage, and lack of employment and pay 
equities, and with a pay equity program. It doesn’t deal with the 
lack of effective training programs and inadequate support 
services for women in the work-force, such as day care, for 
example, to name only a few. The plan is inadequate because it 
does not provide for those who need it the most – for the poor, 
single-parent family. 
 
(1445) 
 
There is no question, Mr. Speaker, that we feel that 
home-makers should be entitled to a pension. There is no 
contribution in society that we’ve failed to recognize as much 
as the contribution of a home-maker. There’s no question that 
the contribution of a home-maker has been underestimated in 
society throughout the years, and we are pleased to se that it is 
being given recognition in this Bill. No question that the 
contribution of a home-maker is one of the most difficult 
contributions that a person has to make to this society. And I 
know, having some experience in that area, and as well in the 
working force, Mr. Speaker. 

 
But what it doesn’t do is it doesn’t recognize the contribution 
by our home-makers who are in the low-income brackets or 
who are on unemployment or who are on welfare, and it doesn’t 
purport to solve their problems for them or to include them in 
the plan. And that is a serious and grievous failing with respect 
to this plan. And I would like to see this government take some 
positive steps towards including those individuals in this plan, 
and I hope that this will be forthcoming in the near future. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to say in the beginning, time ran out before I got an opportunity 
to speak in the throne speech. So I missed an opportunity which 
would have been relevant to this debate to describe the sort of 
people who live in my riding. And it is relevant to this. 
 
About two-thirds of the people who live in my riding rent their 
accommodation. That contains a very large number of single 
women. There are, Mr. Speaker, a large number of single 
women in my riding who live below the poverty line. I never 
cease to be shocked at the way our society treats older people. 
And among those who are in the most difficult straits are the 
distaff side of that generation. They have usually enjoyed lower 
incomes during their lifetimes, often worked at unskilled jobs 
where there was no pensions, often jobs which were not the 
subject of a collective agreement. Pensions on the job are 
almost always found where there’s a collective agreement and 
rarely otherwise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill does nothing to address the poverty of old 
women. This Bill is what I describe as socialism for the rich. 
There are . . . Well, I see the member from Kelvington-Wadena 
turning up his nose. I tell you that this will do nothing for those 
who need it most. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the best investment in town. I would readily 
admit that. If you’re looking for an investment and you’re 
eligible, this is the best investment in town, but it’s not one 
that’s available to women who spend their lives at or below the 
poverty line, as an embarrassingly large number of women do. 
 
Our society is such today that women who don’t work live at 
either ends of the economic spectrum. Either they’re rich or 
they’re poor. Most of the ones in between do, and will therefore 
not be eligible for the government subsidy. The group of 
women who live in the middle class will, by and large, not be 
eligible. The majority of those people work. The majority of 
those women work. The sort who don’t are at the bottom of the 
spectrum – they’re on welfare; or they’re at the top of the 
spectrum – they’re of the sort whose family income is sufficient 
that they don’t need to work. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Speaker, and I ask the members opposite to ask 
themselves: who do you think will be investing, and who do 
you think will be coming up with the $300 to invest in the 
program? Do you think it will be those on welfare who cannot 
feed their families? Or do you think it will be those wives of 
professional people who don’t  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

334 
 
 

need to work, for whom the income would be superfluous and 
would rather have the time at home with their families? The 
answer is obvious. The type of women who are going to be 
investing in this and who will be getting the government 
subsidy will be, by and large, women whose family income is 
quite high – high enough that they can enjoy the luxury of not 
going into the work place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there will be a number of other comments that I 
want to make, and I’m therefore in a moment going to beg leave 
to adjourn this matter. Before doing, I will admit that there’s 
some change that this matter may pass on second reading and 
that we will get to Committee of the Whole. I would ask the 
minister to be prepared when the matter does come before 
Committee of the Whole to be prepared to table the forms that 
are used and be prepared to table any information the 
government may have with respect to the family income of 
those women who are eligible for the subsidy. I’m not sure to 
what extent that information would be available to the 
government, but I’m going to be asking those questions in 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
With that, Mr. Minister, I would beg leave of the Assembly to 
adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 6 – An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical 
Care Insurance Act 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to explain the 
purpose of these amendments to The Saskatchewan Medical 
Care Insurance Act. There are two specific amendments. Both 
are of a straightforward and fairly technical in nature, but they 
are necessary in order for the Medical Care Insurance 
Commission to carry out certain responsibilities properly and 
with full legal authority. 
 
The Act provides authority for the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council to make regulations respecting certain deductions by 
the commission from payments it makes to physicians. 
Specifically, these deductions apply to fee-for-service 
physicians who are not members of the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association and represent a payment to the SMA in recognition 
of the costs incurred by the association in acting as a 
negotiating agent for Saskatchewan physicians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as part of the overall agreement negotiated 
between the government and the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association last summer, the government agreed to pass the 
necessary regulations to implement a check-off system 
beginning with the 1986 calendar year. However, it was noted 
that in order for this to happen it would be necessary for the 
regulations to be retroactive in effect, and at present he Act 
provides no authority for such retroactivity. The proposed 
amendment will simply provide the necessary authority. 
 
The second amendment, Mr. Speaker, is of a similar nature. As 
hon. members will appreciate, agreements between two parties 
with respect to amounts in terms of payment of ten include a 
clause providing for the agreement to be applied retroactively to 
a specified date. 

This situation sometimes occurs with respect to agreements for 
payments to physicians by the Medical Care Insurance 
Commission. However the legislature’s Special Committee on 
Regulations has pointed out that the Act provides no authority 
for regulations defining payment schedules to be made 
retroactive in effect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment will authorize the retroactive 
application of these regulations for a period not to exceed one 
year. 
 
As I indicated at the beginning of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, the 
proposed amendments are intended simply to ensure that full 
and proper legal authority exists for the Medical Care Insurance 
Commission to carry out these aspects of its responsibilities in 
an appropriate way. 
 
I am therefore pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 6, An 
Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to 
respond to some of the minister’s remarks. As people in this 
Assembly will know, we, on this side of the legislature, have 
long been supporters of medicare in Saskatchewan. And as Mr. 
Speaker, will know, it was the leadership of Tommy Douglas 
and Woodrow Lloyd that first implemented the first medical 
care system in North America, here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I do, however, want to pose a few questions to the minister that 
he may wish to consider when we go into committee of the 
Whole in third reading. 
 
In particular, Mr. Minister, I’m not quite clear why this Bill is 
before the Legislative Assembly. I’ve had an opportunity to 
review the sections in The Medical Care Insurance 
(commission) Act, and it appears to me that the cabinet would, 
by regulation, be mandated to make these amendments that we 
have in the Bill retroactively. So I’d like some clarification on 
that. 
 
In addition, Mr. Minister, I’ve had an opportunity to review the 
Saskatoon Agreement II. The Saskatoon Agreement II does talk 
about legislative amendments, but nowhere in the agreement do 
we have any reference to a compulsory check-off by the SMA 
on doctors in Saskatchewan. 
 
The minister is probably aware that only 80 per cent of the 
doctors in Saskatchewan are members of the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association, and I have had some concerns raised with 
me by individual doctors what protection they will have from 
the association. And when I think of protection, Mr. Minister, 
I’m interested in knowing what assurances do you have that the 
SMA does represent a majority of doctors in this province when 
it comes to the Saskatchewan Medical Association acting as the 
sole bargaining agent for doctors. 
 
I would ask the minister to indicate to the House in third 
reading: what assurances does he have that doctors are prepared 
to have a compulsory check-off go through the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association? I’d also be interested in knowing what 
individual protections there are legislatively for doctors when it 
comes to their dealings  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

335 
 
 

with the Saskatchewan Medical Association. 
 
When I review The Trade Union Act, there are individual 
protections for employees when it comes to employees dealing 
with their trade union. I’m thinking of, in particular, what rights 
do individual doctors have when it comes to the principle of 
natural justice when there is a dispute between the doctor and 
the Saskatchewan Medical Association? 
 
I’m wondering whether doctors have any individual protection 
when it comes to matters of grievances or arbitrations that the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association may want to act on behalf 
of doctors. I’m wondering if there’s reasonable notice given by 
the Saskatchewan Medical Association to individual doctors. 
 
In addition, if there were to be a dispute with the Medical Care 
Insurance Commission – and I’m thinking of a dispute between 
the Saskatchewan Medical Association and the Medical Care 
Insurance Commission – is there any protection for doctors 
when it comes to voting on a final offer by the Medical Care 
Insurance Commission? Would the SMA have to call a vote on 
that final offer? 
 
I guess I see, Mr. Minister, a move here that would bring the 
SMA close to acting as a trade union because we’re looking at a 
compulsory check-off system. I’m interested in knowing 
whether individual doctors have protections that individual 
employees do when it comes to dealing with their trade union. 
 
I would ask you to consider those questions tomorrow in 
committee of the Whole. And, Mr. Speaker, I would beg leave 
to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 7 – An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I will give the second 
reading speech for Bill No. 7. And I would just inform the 
House and all members of the House that Bill No. 7, An Act to 
amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act is 
an Act which is purely consequential – purely consequential to 
Bill No. 5 which is the Act respecting Organization of the 
Executive Government of Saskatchewan. So it’s a 
consequential amendment, and that is it in a nutshell, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I move second reading of Bill No. 7, An Act to amend The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in 
opposition to this bill. The minister calls the Bill consequential. 
That would be my reading as well, that the Bill is very integral 
to the government’s plans as were laid out in Bill No. 5, which 
has been before the Assembly. This particular Bill seems 
innocuous enough, but it is not innocuous. 
 
This Bill paves the way for the government to proceed with the 
reorganization of the Executive Council and the  

reorganization of government. And as I read Bill No. 7 and the 
consequential Bill, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that what the 
government is doing is seeking to accrue unto itself more power 
than we have ever given before in the history of this province to 
the Executive Council. What we are proposing to do, Mr. 
Speaker, is to take power away from this Assembly and to 
entrust it to the cabinet, to the Executive Council. As has been 
suggested, it’s a power grab, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m no constitutional expert, and I would think 
that others on our side and perhaps on the government side will 
have more to say about that . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder, on a point of 
order, if I might just point out to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the 
hon. member, that the Bill is merely consequential to Bill No. 5, 
and the debate on Bill No. 5 is something different than the 
debate on the consequential legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I was going to say I don’t believe it’s a 
point of order, but I am sure you will rule that. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — He was making a point of order so much as an 
explanation, but I believe the member can continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, just by way of 
explanation, even if the two Bills are different, the intent of the 
two combined is the same. And that is to take away power from 
this Legislative Assembly, to take away power from the people 
of the province and to give it to the cabinet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — As Bill 7, the Bill before us, proposes to 
take away, through some minor amendments, Bill 5 proposes to 
replace, proposes to replace with more power for the cabinet. I 
think the remarks that I was making, Mr. Speaker, are very 
much in order. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I way saying, I’m no constitutional expert, and 
I’ve got that right, but there are a few simple rules that I’ve 
learned about the exercise of democracy, Mr. Speaker. And if 
the Assembly will bear with me, I’d like to run through a few of 
those rules. It’s not the rules of a constitutional expert, Mr. 
Speaker, not the rules of a learned political scientist, Mr. 
Speaker, but the rules of one member who has some six years 
experience dealing in a democratic institution. And I’d just like 
to share those with the members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my first rule is: the longer the leash, the greater 
are the chances that your dog will get into trouble. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — What I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, is that 
the greater the distance between the electorate and the servants 
of the public, the greater the chances these servants will end up 
delving into matters that harm the  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

336 
 
 

electorate and, under our system, require and deserve debate. 
 
The greater distance that you put between those who make 
decisions – that is the electorate and those who elect 
representatives – the greater the distance between that exercise 
and the absolute exercise of power, the greater are the chances 
that some of that power which ends up being exercised, will end 
up being exercised, which is contrary to the interests of the 
electorate, contrary to the interests of the people of this proven. 
 
And that is a very simple rule, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t come 
from any constitutional experts, but that’s one rule that I’ve 
learned from observing democratic institutions. The greater the 
distance between the people and those who exercise power, the 
greater are the chances that power is going to be exercised in 
such a way that it ends up being to the detriment of the people 
themselves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill does 
not extend the leash, but this particular Bill sets the stage for 
extending the leash, to giving more power to the uncountable, 
faceless, political bureaucrats and the power-hungry cabinet 
ministers, Mr. Speaker, for them to decide what’s right – not for 
the people through their elected representatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second rule that I’ve developed is that you 
shouldn’t confuse gophers for mice. Mr. Speaker, that great 
Saskatchewan politician, Tommy Douglas, delivered a fable 
once and it’s called “The Mouse That Roared,” and the 
members on this side of the House are all familiar with the fable 
of The Mouse That Roared. But now that Tommy Douglas is a 
hero, not only to this side of the House but also to that side of 
the House, I would expect that members would also be familiar 
with that particular story of Mouseland; perhaps they’re not. 
 
Just to make sure, Mr. Speaker, because it’s very integral to the 
remarks that I want to make about this rule of politics which I 
sense is being violated by this Bill, I’d like to just, for a bit of 
history, to go into this Mouseland story, The Mouse That 
Roared. And this is delivered by Tommy Douglas, Mr. Speaker, 
some years ago and it goes: 
 
Mouseland was a place where all the little mice lived and 
played, were born and died, and they lived much the same way 
as you and I do. They even had a parliament, Mr. Speaker, and 
every four years they had an election, used to walk to the polls 
and cast their ballots. Some of them even got a ride to the polls 
and got a ride for four years afterwards (just like you and me, 
Mr. Speaker). And every time on election day all the little mice 
used to go to the ballot box and they used to elect a government 
– a government made up of big, fat, black cats. Now if you 
think it’s strange that mice should elect a government made up 
of cats, just look at the history of Canada for the last 90 years, 
and you’ll see that they weren’t any stupider than we are. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I sense the perplexion on the government 
side about this fable, but again I want to reiterate that this 
particular story is integral to the points  

that I want to make about gophers and mice, to the points that I 
want to make in relation to this particular Bill. 
 
And Tommy Douglas went on: 
 
Now I’m not saying anything against the cats; they were nice 
fellows. They conducted their government with dignity; they 
passed good laws – that is laws that were good for the cats. But 
the laws that were good for the cats weren’t very good for mice. 
One of the laws said that mouse holes had to be big enough so 
that a cat could get his paw in. Another law said that mice could 
only travel at certain speeds so that a cat could get his breakfast 
without too much effort. All the laws were good laws – for cats. 
But, oh, they were hard on the mice, and life was getting harder 
and harder. And when the mice couldn’t put up with it any 
more, they decided something had to be done with them so they 
were en masse to polls. They voted the black cats out; they put 
in the white cats. 
 
Now the white cats had put up a terrific campaign. They said 
that all that Mouseland needs is more vision. They said the 
trouble with Mouseland is those round mouse holes we got. If 
you put us in, we’ll establish square mouse holes. And they did. 
And the square mouse holes were twice as big as the round 
mouse holes, and now the cat could get both paws in, and life 
was tougher than ever. And when they couldn’t take that any 
more, they voted the white cats out and put the black ones in 
again. Then they went back to the white cats, then to the black 
cats. They even tried half black cats and half white cats, and 
they called that a coalition. They even got one government 
made up of cats with spots on them. They were cats that tried to 
make a noise like a mouse, but ate like a cat. You see, my 
friends, the trouble wasn’t with a colour of the cat; the trouble 
was that they were cats. And because they were cats, they 
naturally looked after cats instead of mice. 
 
Presently, there came along one little mouse who had an idea. 
My friends, watch out for the little fellow with an idea. And he 
said to the other mice: look fellows, why do we keep electing a 
government made up of cats? Why don’t we elect a government 
made up of mice? Oh, they said, he’s a Bolshevik; lock him up. 
So they put him in jail. But I want to remind you that you can 
lock up a mouse or a man, but you can’t lock up an idea. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, that’s Mouseland and 
Mouseland is a bit of political folklore in this province. It’s very 
important folklore and history for the members on this side. 
And I know that, given the Premier’s comment in the preceding 
months about the place that Tommy Douglas has in our 
province, Mouseland is now also, I would hope, required 
reading for the members on the government side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what Tommy Douglas did was essentially tell a 
story of a society of mice – went through their process of 
learning that it was in their best interests to elect a government 
made up of mice. What happened, of course, in our society is 
that the mice went on to elect a government. They elected a 
government made up of mice, and the mice passed laws, Mr. 
Speaker, that  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

337 
 
 

benefited them. They reduced the size of mouse holes, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. The member has 
just read the fable. Now he’s going over it again. Please relate 
the fable to the Bill being discussed. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, if I can just continue the 
fable for just a few minutes to point out that one of the things 
the mice had to do in running a government was to employ 
people to help them. What they did, they employed gophers to 
help them. And they employed gophers because gophers were 
very well organized and very industrious people, much the 
same as a government employs civil servants to help it, Mr. 
Speaker, to run its government. And I just want to touch on that. 
 
One of the problems that happened with the mice, Mr. Speaker, 
carrying on with the fable, is that the gophers became 
indispensable. Their word became the plan for government. 
And it seems to me in this particular situation that the 
back-benchers opposite are letting the gophers tell them what to 
think, what to do, what to say – and in this case, say very little, 
Mr. Speaker, about government reorganization. And they’re 
trusting the gophers, Mr. Speaker, that are to be employed by a 
government of mice, run for mice, to tell them what to do. 
They’re allowing their government to get away by taking even 
more power unto themselves. 
 
And I think the members opposite know who they are – that 
group of faceless bureaucrats, political bureaucrats, anonymous 
bureaucrats. They’re so indispensable; they’re so bright; they’re 
so full of great ideas. You know who they are. You see them in 
your caucus meetings, and you see them in your ministers’ 
offices, and you see them in the Premier’s office. And it seems 
to me that what the government opposite wants to do is to give 
these people even more power in the running of the affairs of 
this province. 
 
And I ask the members opposite whether it’s in the best 
interests of their constituents to take power from this 
Legislative Assembly to give that power to a group of faceless, 
anonymous people who are not elected, but simply appointed. 
And the question is: are their interests your interests, and are 
their interests the interests of your constituents? 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Speaker, if all of the advice, if all of the machinations of 
those appointed people were in fact in the best interests of 
government members and of the people of this province, then I 
ask you, Mr. Speaker, how did the used vehicle tax get through? 
 
Mr. Speaker, just to illustrate a point. Every year the senior 
bureaucrats would come to the Minister of Finance, would 
come to the Premier and say, we have a great idea for a new tax, 
Mr. Speaker. And we’ll call this tax a used vehicle tax. And it’s 
a very good tax because they do it in every other province and 
nobody could possibly argue against it. No one could possibly 
be upset by something that’s done everywhere else. And this tax 
will raise you so many millions of dollars. 

 
Now some governments are wiser than others, and some 
governments will say, well, we don’t want this kind of tax 
because in the process of collecting what, in retrospect, is 
simply a limited number of dollars, you’ll have to process more 
paper, you’ll have to hire more people – all those kinds of 
things, so we won’t be any further ahead. We’ll collect a few 
more dollars; we’ll have to spend more, but in the process 
you’ve created a tremendous nuisance to the people of this 
province. 
 
But the bureaucrats persist. Every year they would come back. 
Every year, Mr. Speaker, they would come back to the 
government and say, Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, we have this 
wonderful idea how you can get more revenue. And that’s the 
advice from the bright boys, the wise boys in the political back 
rooms, the boys in the government finance offices who are 
charged with coming up with ideas. 
 
And there is one instance of where you finally give them their 
head. And you let them get away with it, and in the process you 
put in one of the most politically unpopular taxes in this 
province. And you’ve done away with it because its so 
politically unpopular. 
 
We’ve only seen . . . Another example of this very recently, Mr. 
Speaker, of where a number of bureaucrats, and supposedly at 
no one’s direction, coming forward with an idea for toll roads. 
Now again this is a collective wisdom of all those bright boys in 
the back rooms, not the people who were elected, but the people 
who have been appointed. And those are some of their ideas 
about how this province should be run: used vehicle taxes, toll 
roads, and I shudder to think what else they might have been 
discussing and looking at that hasn’t yet seen the light of day. 
 
And I ask the members opposite, and especially those that are 
not in the Executive Council, I ask you: do you really want to 
give more power to those people? Do you really want to give 
those people a greater say in the running of the affairs of this 
province? Do you really want to take responsibilities that you 
have now and to turn them over to those people? Is this what 
you really want to do? 
 
Mr. Speaker, my sense is that the back-benchers and those that 
are not in the Executive Council would say no to that because 
they recognize that the interests of those people are not the 
interests necessarily, at all times, of their constituents – are not 
the interests that they would have a selected members. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is, on occasion, a difference between 
bureaucratic logic and what is in the best interests of ordinary 
people. There is a difference between the mental machinations 
of the appointed and unelected and those that are elected to 
serve, Mr. Speaker. And I ask you again, by giving those people 
more power, how does it improve the interests of your 
constituents? 
 
You know seven times out of ten they might be right. Seven 
times out of ten their ideas might make sense. Seven times out 
of ten the ideas that they come up with flush out the ideas that 
you have about how this province  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

338 
 
 

should be run. But I tell you my friends, when I look at the used 
vehicle tax, and when I look at the proposal for toll roads, and I 
look, you know, at the three out of the 10 that don’t make sense, 
what kind of trouble are you getting into by giving these people 
even more power in the overall scheme of things. 
 
And I really wonder, Mr. Speaker, how the position of all 
elected representatives in this House is enhanced, and how the 
people’s interests are enhanced by this particular Bill. And just 
closing on rule number two, Mr. Speaker, I would say: be 
careful. Be careful. Don’t confuse the interests of the back room 
boys with those of your constituents. Don’t confuse gophers for 
mice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a third rule that I’ve developed, and again it’s 
based on observation of democratic institutions. As an indirect 
observer of this House, and working at one period of time for a 
member of parliament, and direct participation in another level 
of government, namely municipal government, the third rule 
that I’ve developed is, that closing the barn door after the cows 
are gone won’t get the cows back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our democratic rights are previous. Our rich 
heritage has entrusted us with a society that is based on 
ensuring fundamental rights for all. Freedom and opportunity to 
exercise our political and other rights, and the rule of law to 
ensure none is above the law, that is what a rich heritage has 
entrusted us with, Mr. Speaker. And we’re the envy of many 
people throughout the world who would wish for such freedom, 
who would wish for such rights, who would wish for such 
liberty. 
 
And I think that no matter what our beliefs might be on issues 
of the day, I think we’re united as one to fend off attacks on our 
fundamental rights, on our fundamental freedoms. And essential 
to our exercise of democracy is our system of parliamentary 
representation. The people of this country and of this province 
place their trust in their elected representatives to govern, and to 
govern wisely. As elected representatives, we are accountable to 
those who elect us. It becomes increasingly difficult to be 
accountable when, as elected representatives, we entrust 
increasingly our responsibilities to those who are not directly 
accountable, to those who have not been elected, to those who 
are simply appointed. There is a big difference, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would say that it is next to impossible that once you have 
given it way, it’s next to impossible to take back what was once 
your responsibility. And that’s what I say, Mr. Speaker, that 
once the cows are gone, closing the barn door won’t bring those 
cows back. 
 
And in that respect, I would ask the members opposite if they’re 
aware, Mr. Speaker, of aspects of government operations, 
which used to be the responsibility of the Assembly, have over 
the years been entrusted to the Executive Council or to other 
boards and commissions, and which have now been turned back 
to the Assembly. That is to say, has the power sharing, Mr. 
Speaker, gone the other way? I ask him to think of one 
example, one good example of some aspect of government 
operations that we used to control in this House, has been 
delegated out – whether it’s to Executive Council, some board 
or  

commission or other – but has come back. I can’t think of one 
example, Mr. Speaker, and neither can they. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, is not about, let’s try to see how it 
works. The point is, even if it does not work in the best interests 
of those you represent and serve, the system is such you are not 
likely to turn that around. If you find in a year’s time that the 
decisions that you make today with respect to this Bill are not in 
the best interests of your people, you won’t get that power back. 
You won’t get it back. 
 
And just by way of example, Mr. Speaker, I ask the members 
opposite. I ask them how turning over the responsibility for 
something like utility rate increases to an appointed body has 
always been in the best interests of their constituents. 
 
You know, that responsibility used to rest with this House. It 
used to be up to the members here to say, well, we favour this 
increase, or we’re opposed to this increase. And it used to be in 
this House where members had some influence that we used to 
make those kinds of decisions. Now of course we’ve given it to 
something called the Public Utilities Review Commission, 
PURC, and it’s that board, that body, that basically decides – 
based on legislation, again, which set it up – that you could 
make the decisions about what the utility rate increases can be. 
 
And even when the government opposite disagrees with some 
of the rulings because it’s not in the best interests of the people 
of this province, Mr. Speaker, the only alternative they have is 
to come back to the House to change the legislation and 
accomplishing in a very roundabout way something that we 
used to be able to do very directly, Mr. Speaker – very directly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the system used to be that if you weren’t happy, if 
you weren’t satisfied with the proposed rate increases of Sask 
Power, if you weren’t satisfied with the proposed rate increases 
of SaskTel, if you weren’t satisfied with the rate increases of 
any public utility owned by the province, you could talk about it 
in this legislature. Well, I qualify that; you could talk about it in 
your caucus. You could sit in those caucus meetings and say to 
the minister responsible: Mr. Minister, I know that the 
corporation that you’re looking after wants to make those kinds 
of increases but, you know, the feedback I get from the boys 
back on the farm is that they don’t want that increase at this 
point in time, or at least it should be lowered. It shouldn’t be 
that high. It’s politically unpopular; it’s not a wise thing to do; 
it’s something that should be stopped. And I ask you – I ask 
you, who do you make those arguments to now? Where do you 
exert that influence now? 
 
The point that I’m making, Mr. Speaker, is that there is a case 
of where the government opposite thought it was in the best 
interests of the people of this province to pass power from this 
body onto an appointed board commission, and that board is in 
a position to make rulings that may or may not be in the best 
interests of the people of this province. And when they make 
rulings that are not in the best interests of the people of this 
province, we’ve got very little to say about it – very little to say 
about it, whether we’re on the opposition side, whether 
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

339 
 
 

we’re on the government side. 
 
And I think that’s wrong, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s very 
wrong. I think that the more decisions that are made by this 
House, the more decisions that are made by the elected 
representatives, the greater are the chances that those decisions 
will in fact be in the best interests of the people of this province. 
 
Governments say, well if you give the House too much power, 
they’ll end up making decisions like the United States 
Congress, which is simply in the interests of their constituents 
and doesn’t deal with the broader questions, doesn’t deal with 
the really tough questions that we have to face. I don’t think 
that the political experience, political history in this province 
will show that, Mr. Speaker. It’ll show that governments and 
oppositions are prepared to take the tough, hard decisions, to 
take the tough, hard stands to get the job done on a range of 
issues. 
 
We don’t have to delegate out the powers that we have to 
someone else. I mean, that’s what we’re elected to do. We’re 
elected to make the tough, hard decisions. We’re not elected to 
sit here and to vote for Bill after Bill which would divest us of 
power, which would divest us of responsibility. We’re not here 
to get elected or to sit in the House and then to go back to a 
constituent with a concern or problem and say, well we don’t 
have control over that any more, you know, so you’re talking to 
the wrong guy. 
 
(1530) 
 
What you should be able to say in every instance is, you are 
talking to the right guy; you are talking to the right 
representative. I am responsible, and I am listening to your 
point of view, and I do plan to raise it; I do plan to make a 
decision on that. Not to say that, well, we’ve given it to 
someone else here. We’ve given it to a PURC (Public Utilities 
Review Commission) and, golly, I know that you don’t think 
that that particular agency should be in that department, but I 
don’t have any control over that any more. We used to, you 
know. We used to have control over those things but, you 
know, over the years these things have just slipped away from 
us. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, once the cows are gone, closing the barn 
door won’t bring them back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, elected representatives especially have to vigilant 
about the people’s business. The more they entrust this business 
to others who are not directly accountable to the pope, the more 
they rob the people of their democratic rights. We should be 
mindful of a strong heritage which over time increased people’s 
rights and abilities to have a say in the events that affect their 
lives. Our objectives should always be to make our democratic 
system stronger, to give the electorate a greater say in how they 
are governed. 
 
We should be leaving our children and their children with a 
democratic system that is stronger than the one we have now. 
How ironic it is, Mr. Speaker, that in the centuries since the 
Magna Carta, and throughout history, our forefathers in 
generations past have fought hard through tradition, through the 
passage of wise laws, to establish a democratic system that is 
the envy of the  

world. And they even went to wars to defend against attacks on 
that system, Mr. Speaker, or what they perceived to be attacks. 
 
And we have, I think, the epitome of that joint labour, joint 
effort, and joint love for democracy. We have the epitome of 
those cumulative efforts, Mr. Speaker. How ironic it is that we 
now see a government -–and not just with this Bill, Mr. Speaker 
– that we now see a government that is intent on turning things 
around, and that is to say to take power away from the people, 
to take power away from the elected representatives and to turn 
it over in this case to something called the Executive Council. 
 
Now the Executive Council indirectly is responsible to the 
people of this province. But it certainly is not as responsible, or 
as directly responsible, as the elected representatives of this 
House. The closest relationship, Mr. Speaker, between people 
and government is their elected representative. 
 
I think those are the principles that underlie our democratic 
traditions. That’s the principle, Mr. Speaker, that had led us to 
the system we have today. People, their representative – a close, 
direct relationship. Yet what we see now, by virtue of this Bill, 
what we see is taking that relationship and breaking it up. It’s to 
take the business of the people and the interests of the people 
and concerns of the people and to say to the elected 
representatives: you will have less power, less influence in 
dealing with those, but trust us. Trust us in the Executive 
Council, in this instance, to make the right decision to do the 
right thing. We’ll look after your affairs for you. And I ask the 
back-benchers, and I ask the members opposite if this is what 
you really want to do? 
 
Again, there used to be a time . . . For example, there’s some 
farmer looking at the power rate increases, could call you up 
and say, I don’t really agree with that power rate increase. 
Here’s what it’s going to do to my farming operations for the 
year. Here’s the kind of impact it’ll have on my profit and loss 
statements. Here’s the kind of impact it’ll have on our family 
farm. And I want you to take those concerns to Regina, and I 
want you to raise hell about them. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask the member 
to retract that statement. It’s unparliamentary language. I find 
that language unparliamentary. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly will apologize 
and withdraw that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no longer are those constituents able to call their 
member and say, I want you to go to Regina and raise heck 
about that. I want you to talk to that cabinet minister, and I want 
you to do something about that. Can’t do that any more. 
 
Now the only opportunity you’ve got is to go before the Public 
Utilities Review Commission. Have you ever heard of anything 
more silly in your life? Here you are, you are elected by the 
people to look after their interests. One of their interests is 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. In order to influence what 
Sask Power does,  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

340 
 
 

you can’t do it in the House any more. You’ve got to go before 
some appointed board, people who weren’t elected, but 
appointed. And you’ve got to explain to them why these power 
rate increases are too high. You know, you used to be able to 
say to those constituents, I’m going to fight for you. Can’t do 
that any more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again our objectives should always be to make our 
democratic system stronger, to give the electorate a greater say 
in the running of this province. We shouldn’t be looking for 
ways to take power from this Assembly and to give it to 
appointed boards of commissions or, in this case, to give it to 
the Executive Council. What we should be doing is looking for 
ways to take the power that we have in this Assembly and 
giving it back to people so that they have a more direct say in 
the running of their own affairs, so that they have a greater 
opportunity to say something about the events that impact on 
their daily lives. 
 
You know one of the ways we do that, Mr. Speaker, one of the 
ways we’ve done that in this province is that we give 
responsibilities through law, through municipalities – urban 
municipalities, rural municipalities. And we have a law that 
enables local administrative units, which are municipal 
councils, both rural and urban, we give them enabling 
legislations to do a number of things. But that’s one example of 
how power, affairs of government which needs to be handled 
. . . And rather than entrust those affairs, as they do in a number 
of other jurisdictions, to appointed people, we say no, people 
can run those things themselves. We’ll set up some enabling 
legislation to allow them to do that. We’ll set up structures and 
so on to enable them to do that. And we’ll make sure that they 
even have a say in how those services are delivered and how 
those programs are delivered. 
 
And we do that through The Urban Municipalities Act and 
other Acts, Mr. Minister. We say to local people: these are 
things that you can do for yourselves; here is an Act; here is 
enabling legislation; go to it. We have certain requirements. We 
want you to elect a democratic government – city council, rural 
council, or whatever it might be – to make sure that the services 
and programs and how those are delivered will, in fact, be 
accountable to the people that they are intended to be delivered 
to. That’s, Mr. Speaker, how this legislature has in the past 
taken power which resides with the province, which resides 
with the Legislative Assembly, and have given that back to 
people. 
 
My feeling, Mr. Speaker, and I think the feeling of many 
people, is that we should be looking for greater opportunities to 
do that, unlike the Bill before us, Mr. Speaker, which goes in 
the opposite direction. We need to be looking for more ways to 
take the services and programs that government has, and which 
are the mandate and responsibility of the provincial 
government, to turn those over to the people of this province 
and to say to them: these are the services and programs that 
affect you; these are the services and programs that are intended 
to meet your needs; here is some enabling legislation to allow 
you and to enable you and to encourage you to become more 
involved in running those services and programs so that you 
have a greater say in those services and programs, because we 
believe, as  

elected representatives, that the closer that people are to the 
affairs of government, the greater are the chances that the 
affairs of government will be well run and well handled. 
 
But the greater distance that you put between the people and the 
affairs of government and how power is exercised, the greater 
are the chances, Mr. Speaker, that power is going to be 
exercised, power is going to be brokerage, services and 
programs will be run in such a way that it might be antithetical 
to what it is that the people want. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I really urge the members opposite, especially 
those who are not in the Executive Council, and I think who 
have a strong love of democracy, and they have a strong love of 
freedom, and have a very strong sense that the people of this 
province the ordinary people of this province — and I don’t use 
that term in any political sense at all – but that the everyday 
people, the people on the street, the people on main street, I 
think that they have a very strong sense that those people should 
be more involved in governing our own affairs. And I ask them 
to think about that and how we might achieve that particular 
objective; how we might take the heritage that has been given to 
us by previous generations, a heritage that has left us with a 
very strong parliamentary tradition; how we might add to that to 
make that stronger to pass on to our children and our 
grandchildren an even stronger system of democracy that 
provides for even more involvement on the part of people in 
running their own affairs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Surely you can see that the Bill before 
us paves the way for something that goes in a complete opposite 
direction. It’s a wrong-headed Bill. It’s not the kind of Bill that 
your constituents would want you to pass. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said before that I’m not a constitutional expert or 
a political scientists, but I am a passionate believer in our 
system of democracy, and know the need to protect that. But I 
recognize that others are better versed and more knowledgeable 
and can put words or can deal with these questions in a much 
more articulate form than I can. And I think it’s instructive, Mr. 
Speaker, to recognize our own limitations and to turn to the 
words of others, and to read what others might have to say 
about questions such as the one that we are posed with. 
 
And the question that we are posed with, Mr. Speaker, is very 
clearly a question of to what extent should power, legislative 
power, be in fact limited and turned over to the Executive 
Council so that the Executive Council has greater 
responsibilities and greater power. That, very simply put, is the 
question before us. Should the decisions be made here? Should 
they be made by Executive Council? And I think that it’s 
illustrative to turn to the words of others, Mr. Speaker, in this 
context. 
 
(1545) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I just want to read to the members of the 
House, a very brief passage from a book entitled The  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

341 
 
 

Revised Canadian Constitution: Politics as Law by R.I. 
Cheffins and P.A. Johnson. These are noted authorities, 
political scientists and lawyers, Mr. Speaker, on our system of 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on page 88 of their book, The Revised Canadian 
Constitution, Cheffins and Johnson say that  
 

It is important, however, to recognize that another major 
source of cabinet authority is the delegation of rule-making 
power from parliament to the Governor in Council. This, in 
effect, means that power is delegated to a small group of 
ministers whose decisions are then approved by the governor 
general, as most orders in council are not discussed by the 
cabinet as a whole. No order in council can be passed unless 
the authority has been delegated by parliament. However, this 
authority is so wide, and often so vague, that it allows 
tremendous scope for law-making by the Governor in 
Council. It must be remembered that an order in council has 
the same legal effect as if it was contained in the statute 
itself. Thus, not only do the cabinet and Prime Minister 
control the legislative process, but they also can decide 
whether parliament itself delegates power back to the 
Governor in Council, thereby, to all intents and purposes, 
bypassing parliament in the making of law. Since provincial 
constitutional systems are in essence identical to the federal 
system, the same points apply. 

 
Surely in the review of Canada’s constitutional structure, 
nothing calls out more for reform than the excessive dominance 
of the system by the cabinet. Mr. Speaker, Cheffins & Johnson 
illustrate their point, I think, in a very clear way by relating this 
following text. 
 

A very high proportion of federal and provincial statutes 
delegate authority to the Governor in Council or the 
lieutenant governor in council. The troublesome aspect of 
this delegation is that, as already indicated, it forces 
parliament to deal with what is often virtually skeletal 
legislation and then to let the details be filled in by the 
executive. 

 
I might just pause, Mr. Minister, and ask if this sounds familiar. 
 

What is particularly alarming is the fact that, at the federal 
level, an order in council requires the signature of only four 
cabinet ministers and later the signature of the Governor 
General. There is, accordingly, no requirement for extensive 
debate with respect to the merit of the order in council under 
consideration. 

 
The Hon. Perrin Beatty states: 
 

But it often happened, when I was in the cabinet, that a 
messenger would come from the Privy Council and say, ‘We 
need your signature on this. We need signatures from four 
ministers.’ ‘What’s it about?’ you would ask, and the 
messenger would say, ‘Don’t ask me.’ 
 

So you would find ministers being asked to sign orders in 
council, creating law without the benefit of any full 
discussion or briefing. And the minister assumes that his 
colleagues know what he is doing, so he goes ahead and signs 
it. 
 
The belief that cabinet gives adequate scrutiny to delegated 
legislation is false. The extent to which a bureaucrat is able to 
write law is very great. 
 
For example, in July of 1981 by order in council, the cabinet 
ordered cuts in railway service to large parts of the country, 
affecting 1,200,000 passengers. All of this was done without 
public debate, reference to parliament, or to the Canadian 
Transport Commission. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those are not my words and those are the words of 
learned constitutional experts and political scientists. And those 
are also the words of the Hon. Perrin Beatty, minister of the 
federal government. 
 
And again I would ask the members opposite to reflect on those 
words and to reflect on examples such as the case with Via Rail 
where, by order in council, decisions are made which affect 
many people but yet are made without any recourse to debate, 
and in this case without any debate in cabinet, but certainly 
there was no debate in federal parliament. 
 
And I ask you again: is that the kind of system that you want? Is 
that the kind of system that we’re headed towards? Because 
we’ve seen examples now, not just with this particular Bill, but 
in the past, of that’s the direction that we’re taking. And I ask 
you to reflect upon the fact: is that a wise course of events? 
Does that put power in the hands of the people? Or does that put 
power in the hands of bureaucrats, and does that put power in 
the hands of cabinet ministers? Reflect upon those things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Cheffins and Johnson go on to state, and I quote: 
 

Provincial cabinets have benefited similarly from the 
technique of delegation, as provincial statutes are replete with 
examples of widespread powers delegated to the lieutenant 
governor in council of the province. Each of these provincial 
operations is considerably smaller than that of the federal 
government. There is more likelihood that orders in council 
will be considered and debated by the appropriate provincial 
cabinet. Nevertheless, at least in British Columbia, the 
discussion of orders in council takes place after the general 
consideration of cabinet business and is, like all other cabinet 
business, conducted in private and protected by the oath of 
secrecy. 

 
And if I might just stop right there with the quote, Mr. Minister. 
And I ask you again now, on the government side, that this 
particular Bill paves the way for cabinet, Executive Council, to 
make decisions about government departments and how those 
government departments should be restructured etc., etc. Yet 
cabinet and Executive Council is bounded by oaths of secrecy 
not to divulge. And I ask you, if some constituent or another is  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

342 
 
 

not satisfied that the husbandry branch of the Department of 
Agriculture or some other branch was in fact shifted to a 
different department – who knows, Social Services, family 
planning, what have you – and a constituent asked you to check 
into that because they weren’t happy about that; they found it 
much more convenient to deal through the other department, 
just how are you going to deal with that? Cabinet minister can’t 
tell you anything – he’s bound by an oath of secrecy. Well, 
we’re sorry about that, Bob. We can’t tell you about those 
things. You know, you’ve got to trust us here in cabinet to make 
the right decisions. 
 
And again, Mr. Minister, I’d ask the back-benchers, and 
especially the new ones . . . And you might get some advice 
from those that have been around for a while about how 
forthcoming your colleagues in the cabinet will be about any 
and all government business; whether or not it affects you, and 
how that might affect your constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve indicated before that this particular Bill is not 
the only example of where power as vested in the elected 
representatives of the people ends up being turned over to those 
who are appointed or to those who do not have a direct 
relationship with the people. 
 
And again in this context, in the context of this Bill, I think it’s 
important to look at other examples of how we divest ourselves 
of our joint power and of the people’s joint power as 
represented in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
And I’d like to in that context, Mr. Speaker, just highlight that 
with further brief quotations from Cheffins and Johnson in The 
Revised Canadian Constitution. And they say: 
 

Other important recipients of delegated authority are boards, 
commissions and Crown corporations. These bodies exist at 
the federal and provincial level and have all been established 
by legislation, and are invariably recipients of delegated 
legislative authority. Sometimes the delegation involves 
merely the discharge of responsibilities assigned by statutes, 
but usually there is delegation of rule-making power. The 
rules made by these bodies are usually referred to as 
regulations, and once made by the boards or commission s 
have the same authority as if enacted by the legislature. It is 
perhaps important to note that the nomenclature for various 
rules passed by delegates varies: orders in council, 
regulations, or in the case of cities, bylaws; nevertheless, 
from a legal perspective the nomenclature merely describes 
the source of the rule rather than the nature of its legal 
impact. Irrespective of how the rule is named, the effect is 
identical. Namely the delegate acting on authority from the 
delegating legislature has the power to pass rules having the 
same effect as if those rules were contained in the statute 
itself. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not a major source of concern when 
one looks at municipal government in this province. And the 
Minister of Urban Affairs and the Minister of Rural 
Development I think will attest to what I  

say – that municipalities have basically conducted themselves 
excellently throughout the years in discharging their 
responsibilities. And of course we make a very important 
distinction. We also give those delegates the power and the 
responsibility. In fact we demand that they set up democratic 
structures themselves so that people are involved in the 
discharge of those powers that have been vested in them. And 
that’s not a bad system. 
 
But in this particular case, Mr. Speaker, or it was the case in . . . 
or at least in the case of the Public Utilities Review 
Commission, we give that to an appointed board and they start 
to make their own rule and regulations about what should or 
shouldn’t happen, and we give that to other boards and 
commissions in this province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in this particular case the Bill before us 
would make an amendment to Bill which paves the way for 
more of those rules and regulations and governing to be done by 
the Executive Council. And again, that’s a group that’s bounded 
by the oaths of secrecy and therefore not directly accountable to 
the people of this province, unlike the elected representatives, 
Mr. Speaker, the members of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again, I’m not a constitutional expert. And I 
think there may well be members on this side of the House who 
can make that claim and make it rightfully, and there may well 
be members on that side of the House who can make that claim 
and make it rightfully. But again my own sense, and that’s very 
much based on experience, is that we’re moving in the wrong 
direction. 
 
And certainly it would seem from the quotes that I’ve provided 
from Cheffins and Johnson who are learned people in this area, 
learned people, Mr. Speaker, that we also have something to be 
concerned about in that one of the troublesome aspects of the 
Canadian constitution and the way we run ourselves is the 
inordinate amount of power that cabinets have accrued unto 
themselves over the years. And they’re speaking generally of 
the federal system and other provincial legislatures, and not of 
this one particularly. But certainly there are plenty of examples 
to back up the claim that they make, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can understand power-hungry cabinet ministers 
moving in the direction of more power for themselves and less 
for the Legislative Assembly, because the more that they can do 
outside those doors, Mr. Speaker, the less accountable they 
have to be to the opposition members or to any of the members 
in the House, and the more they can conduct their business 
without any regard for the people of the province. 
 
But I don’t understand why others on the government side 
would stand for this, Mr. Speaker. I have great difficulty in 
figuring out why the government is moving in this direction. 
Why is it seeking to widen the gap between those who legislate 
and those who have executive responsibilities? Why is it 
proposing to give greater responsibilities to the executive 
branch of government as opposed to ensuring that that power, in 
the interim at least, resides here with the legislative branch? 
And if that power is to go anywhere, it goes more directly back 
to  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

343 
 
 

people as it might in the case of municipalities or as it might in 
the case of school boards, Mr. Speaker, or as it might in the 
case of hospital boards. 
 
Surely if we’re to pass on power from this particular Assembly 
to anyone, Mr. Speaker, we should give it to the people 
themselves. We should not be giving it to appointed bodies. We 
should not be giving it to those people who are protected by the 
oath of secrecy. It seems to me again that is a wrong approach; 
it’s a wrong-headed approach. It is not in the best interests of 
constituents that you represent. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the more I look at the legislation and the basic 
theory that’s behind this Bill, and that is to give more power to 
the executive branch and to take it away from the legislative 
branch, the more I’m reminded of the American system of 
government, Mr. Speaker. I almost think, Mr. Speaker, that 
perhaps there was more to a trip to the United States by the 
Premier’s people, Mr. Tkachuk in particular, in December of 
’84 in a simple discussion about free trade. Perhaps these 
people, Mr. Speaker, were also down there to learn more about 
how the American government works and how an executive 
branch can get more power for itself and to limit the amount of 
power and to limit the amount of debate that might go on in the 
Legislative Assembly as is the case in the Congress of the 
United States, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Creeping Republicanism. You can see it. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — And one member says that this is an 
example of creeping Republicanism. I’m not sure it’s that, Mr. 
Speaker, but I’m disturbed at what I see as essentially a step in 
the direction of the American system of how we govern 
ourselves. And we’re very different, Mr. Speaker, quite 
different than the Americans. And I would refer members of the 
House to an article or a book, Mr. Speaker, by Peter W. Hogg, 
Q.C., LL.B., LL.M, Ph.D., Professor of Law, Osgoode Hall 
Law School, York University, Toronto, a very eminent, 
qualified member of the bar and a legal person, to comment on 
these matters in his book, the second edition of Constitutional 
Law of Canada. And Dr. Hogg, Mr. Speaker, points out that: 
 

The difference between the Canadian and American systems 
resides not only in the different language of the two 
constitutional instruments, but in Canada’s retention of the 
British system of responsible government. The close link 
between the executive and legislative branches which is 
entailed by the British system is utterly inconsistent with any 
separation of the executive and legislative functions. 

 
Utterly consistent, Mr. Speaker, is what that learned authority 
has to say on this particular subject – utterly inconsistent. He 
also states on page 203 of his book, Mr. Speaker, that: 
 

It will now be obvious that in a system of responsible 
government there is no “separation of powers” between the 
executive and legislative  

branches of government. 
 

And again I want the members opposite to reflect on those 
words – there is no “separation of powers” between the 
executive and legislative branches of government in a system of 
responsible government. 
 
And I think that what he’s getting at, what Dr. Hogg is getting 
at is that if government is responsible – and surely it is 
responsible to the people that elect a government; is responsible 
to those that it purports to govern – it is responsible to all the 
men and women and children that make up our society; that if 
we have a responsible government we will not separate the 
powers between the legislative and executive functions. Those 
powers should in fact reside in the Legislative Assembly. Those 
powers should reside in the legislative branch of government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s one quotation, Mr. Speaker, from a learned 
authority. But it’s again interesting to point out that we have 
completely different systems than the American system. 
 
In the American system, Mr. Speaker — and it seems to me that 
the Bill is moving in this direction – the American system, Mr. 
Speaker, provides for very clear distinctions between the 
legislative branches and executive branches. And the legislative 
branches are found in the Congress, in the Senate, and the 
House of Representatives. And those legislative branches have 
certain kinds of authority, as outlined in the American 
Constitution. 
 
But there’s also an executive branch of government headed by 
the President, Mr. Speaker. Now the President is directly 
elected, but all those others in the executive branch are not. His 
cabinet are not elected members. His cabinets are not at some 
point directly responsible to people who elect them, but his 
cabinet ministers are appointed – or cabinet secretaries, if you 
want – are appointed by him to discharge their duties. 
 
There’s a very clear difference between the two systems, Mr. 
Speaker. Yet again I wonder if the trip in 1984 by Mr. Tkachuk 
to Washington was in fact perhaps the first attempt by this 
government to understand more about the American form of 
government so that they could put into place changes to 
government here that more closely resembles the American 
system, to move us in the direction of the American form of 
government. 
 
Because surely this Bill is intended in that direction, because 
this Bill proposes to take power from the legislature, to take 
power from those who are directly responsible to the people, 
and to place it in the hands of the Executive Council, to place it 
in the hands of the executive branch, just like the American 
system, Mr. Speaker, — just like the American system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I spoke of a Mr. Tkachuk, who is no longer, I 
understand, employed by the government, and is employed by 
private industry. But anyway, at that point Mr. Tkachuk was in 
the employ of the government. And Mr. Tkachuk . . . I refer to 
the proceedings and debates from June 4th of ’85, and the 
Premier’s own words, Mr.  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

344 
 
 

Speaker: 
 

The next day, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Tkachuk left Ottawa for 
Washington, that evening. Mr. Tkachuk met with Mr. John 
Zagame, former New York Assembly man, presently 
employed by Deputy White House Liaison. 

 
Now what’s he doing at the White House if it wasn’t to learn 
more about how the executive functions, to learn more about 
the executive branch of government? 
 
And I’m wondering if this perhaps too, Mr. Speaker, might not 
be one of those unwritten agenda items in the free trade 
discussions. I can appreciate how our American friends south of 
the border don’t understand our form of government, and 
perhaps through asking through the free trade negotiations, that 
can’t you make some sort of changes to your system here so 
that we can understand how it works a little bit better, because 
then we can co-operate much more fully in free trade and other 
items. I wonder, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But it certainly appears that Mr. Tkachuk . . . that one of the 
things on the agenda at the White House that day in Washington 
might well have been a discussion on how we govern ourselves, 
the various successes of the executive branch, not having to rely 
on the legislative branch to do what it wants to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I worry about that – that we would be moving in 
the direction of the American model and that cabinet ministers 
opposite would emulate the American model. I’m very 
concerned about that. Because surely it’s an American system, 
the executive branch system, which allows for secretive arms 
deals to be made. Surely it’s the American system in executive 
branch that allows for decisions to be made which subsidize 
wheat in the United States and undercut our Saskatchewan 
farmers. And yet there are cabinet ministers who see to be taken 
by the American example and want to go in that direction. 
 
It’s no accident, Mr. Speaker, that we see in the United States 
today a great deal of debate and discussion and committees and 
so on, dealing with actions of the executive branch. And in this 
case the action of the executive branch had to do with secret 
arms deals. 
 
And it’s no secret or it’s no mystery to me that these things 
come up. Because their system of government, Mr. Speaker, 
depends on an executive branch, and executive branch that 
discharges its responsibilities, goes ahead and does things, but 
in the process they make many mistakes and they do things 
away from the eyes of the people. They do them, not in some 
open session in a congress or in a Legislative Assembly, but 
they’re done behind closed doors, just the same as this Bill 
would allow the cabinet here to do – to conduct more of the 
business of this province behind closed doors. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I worry about that – that we’re moving in 
that direction. And again, it’s no mystery that the Americans 
from time to time had their Watergates, had their secret arms 
deals, and have no end of messes coming from the executive 
branch. Because again, that  

branch doesn’t have to deal with public scrutiny. They can do 
all their business behind closed doors. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, and I know, that the more we take 
the affairs of government away from the direct eyes of the 
people, the greater are the chances that there be corruption; the 
greater are the chances that there’ll be mistakes made, which 
they’ll then try to cover up; the greater are the chances that 
decision will be made which aren’t in the interests of the 
people. 
 
You know that and I know that – that the more things are 
removed from people’s eyesight, the greater are the chances that 
somebody’s going to try and hide something. And certainly 
that’s one of the weaknesses, that’s one of the very strong 
failings in the American system. And I shudder to think that the 
members opposite, through sending their people to the States to 
look at their form of government, through actions such as this 
Bill before us, would have us move in that direction. I’m very 
concerned about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s not to say that I’m against everything and 
anything that the Americans might do. I think that the 
Americans have their own system. It’s a worthy system; it’s a 
good system. But it’s not the system that we’ve developed over 
the years, Mr. Speaker. And it may be the system that’s right for 
them, but it’s not the system for us. 
 
We like to deal with things in a more open way; we like to deal 
with things in a more open fashion. I think that made for a 
stronger system of government; it made for a better system of 
government. And I think, in a very real way, the reason that it’s 
a better system of government, the reason that it’s more 
responsive, and the reason that it works better, is because far 
more power in our system of government resides in the 
legislative branch – resides with the direct representatives of the 
people. 
 
And those people that are elected are accountable to those that 
elect them. And they’re not want, especially in an open setting, 
in a setting like we have today, and we’ve made advances on 
that . . . There used to be a time, you know, Mr. Speaker, when 
a House might not have a record of debates and proceedings 
that people could read up on. There used to be a time, Mr. 
Speaker, when we didn’t necessarily have a free press to report 
on the proceedings of the elected representatives. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, not only do we have a record of debates 
and proceedings that people can read up on to find out what it is 
their members are saying, but I think, very importantly, we have 
a free press that is able to describe to the population every day, 
continuously – and I think sometimes we feel a little bit too 
much, especially if you’re a cabinet minister who’s getting heat 
– but nevertheless they’re able to describe every day to the 
people what’s happening in this House and what are the 
important items for consideration. So therefore people are 
informed. 
 
We’ve even gone a step beyond that, Mr. Speaker. We now 
broadcast live into the homes of the people in this province that 
have a cable television system, so that people directly can see 
what is happening in the elected . . . you know, what their 
elected representatives are doing  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

345 
 
 

and what it is that they’re saying. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, the point that I’m making is that we’ve made 
great strides in the workings of legislative assemblies to get to a 
point where there’s complete openness, and that is the very 
thing that’s made for a strong form of government in our 
country. That’s made for a very strong form of government in 
this province. Anything that would threaten that, as this Bill 
does, is not a step in the direction of the interests of the people; 
it’s not a step in the direction of sound democracy, but surely is 
a step in the wrong direction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Speaker, in summing up, I would again caution members to 
give some second thought to the Bill before us and to ask 
themselves some very simple questions, questions such as: does 
this Bill benefit the people that I represent; does this Bill take 
away any of the power that’s vested in me as a result of the 
relationship that we have; does the Bill make it more difficult 
for me to do my job in the Assembly; does it make it more 
difficult for me to act on behalf of the interests of my 
constituents? 
 
And they should be asking themselves all those question, and if 
they’re not satisfied with the answers – as they see it in this Bill 
– I would strongly encourage them, in caucus or in other ways, 
to talk to the sponsors of the Bill and to draw to their attention 
their concerns; to draw to their attention concerns such as 
moves in the past, in this Assembly, to divest the Assembly of 
some of its joint power, such as the Public Utilities Review 
Commission, which makes it more difficult for the elected 
representatives to have some . . . to bring some influence to bear 
on the events in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think at this point I would not make any further 
contribution. I would want to, when the opportunity arises when 
we deal with Bill 5, to take the opportunity at that time to make 
some comments and to really speak at length, Mr. Speaker, on 
this important topic. But at this point, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave 
to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 5 – An Act 
respecting the Organization of the Executive Government of 
Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to make 
several comments in respect to this Bill, and as our learned 
House Leader the other night, when the Bill was first presented 
to the House without our knowledge of it being presented . . . I 
think indeed he defeated their purpose of trying to get headlines 
in respect to the Bill and that we were unable to analyze it. But 
let there be no  

mistake, that the former attorney general, the House Leader on 
this side, said the other day, I think I’m going to not only agree 
with, but further enhance the reasons that he gave and some of 
the further implications. 
 
I want to say in respect to this Bill No. 5 which is, I may say . . . 
the Act may be cited as the government organizational Act. And 
we want to take a look first of all and clearly set out what has 
been the precedent before. How did we get reorganization of 
government previously? How did we create departments? How 
did we get their objects, their purposes, in the past? 
 
And I’ll tell you that if you look in the Bills that have been 
passed in this House, you will find legislation which enacted the 
various departments – the Department of Health, Department of 
Education, and on it goes. But each and every time when a 
reorganization took place, the government of the day had to 
bring before this legislature, the Act. And within that legislation 
there are certain provisions and many of my colleague swill be 
talking about it. In those legislation establishing departments 
there are certainly provisions which give significant protection 
to the general public. 
 
Now what they are contemplating here in the reorganization, 
done under the disguise of efficiency, may I say, is to change 
that. And what they want to do now, Mr. Speaker, is not to 
bring in a Bill for this House so that the opposition can examine 
it. For the opposition can look at the objects and purposes of 
that Bill or of that department in order that the public can in fact 
see what is being structured. They’re deciding that that is too 
cumbersome – too cumbersome for this government. This 
government which said it was going to consult with people; this 
government who said they would not be secretive, is now 
grabbing power and pulling it into the back rooms to make the 
major decisions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — How are we to know who will be in the back 
rooms? Will it be George Hill? Or will it be Sid Dutchak who 
was defeated and turned out by the voters of Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
I say to you here, they have an obligation to bring it before this 
legislature. And I say, as an opposition, that we have an 
obligation to examine it, review it, and to add constructive 
amendments if it’s deemed necessary. And we can’t do it in the 
back rooms of some cabinet office . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . They don’t do it, that’s how ill-informed. . . The member 
from Kelsey-Tisdale, imagine him starting to talk about 
constitutional law. He couldn’t even talk about post offices 
yesterday. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, getting back to my synopsis here, 
and I’m going to be on point. And I’ll tell you, you birds better 
listen, because right here I’m saying they’re changing a 
fundamental practice of this House – a very fundamental 
practice of this House. And I’ll tell you, we’re not prepared to 
stand by and allow you to do it. And we’ll be here, Mr. Speaker, 
debating this – debating it until the government comes to its 
senses. 
 
And the member from . . . the Deputy House Leader is  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

346 
 
 

chirping. With his record of performance in this House and 
running it, I think he should be quiet. He should hang his head 
in shame, I may say. I want to say that there are . . . so that’s 
how departments were formed before, Mr. Speaker. Legislation 
was brought into this House. The legislature, the opposition, 
had an opportunity to review it. That is not going to be the case 
in the future. In the case, it’s going to be decided by the cabinet 
– not here, reviewed by the members of the legislature. 
 
And if you take a look at what they’re doing in the Bill 5, it has 
basically three aspects to it, and I want to go through this. It’s 
somewhat technical, but go through it, and then I want to show 
the overall implication so what it’s doing to this legislature and 
indeed how it’s a grab for power, and how it’s taking away the 
duties that we should be performing here in this legislature. 
 
Bill 5, if it’s passed, will first of all transfer powers, duties or 
functions from one minister or department to another minister 
or department. That’s amendment legislation. 
 
The second purpose what it can do in respect set out in this 
legislation, is to disestablish departments without transferring 
powers, duties or functions of the department to another 
minister or department, and this is really essentially the 
amendment or the obliteration legislation. 
 
In other words, what I’ve said there, Mr. Speaker, is that they 
can disestablish departments without transferring the powers, 
duties or functions which this legislature, with care, prescribed 
for various departments of government. And that is a 
tremendous transfer of power over into the hands of cabinet, to 
the Premier and to the Tory henchmen that may be lurking in 
the back rooms, drawing up the reorganization to suit their 
needs but not the needs of the people of this province. 
 
And I say to you that when you take a look at the Bill, by the 
combined operations of section 5 and 22, the cabinet is 
authorized to transfer some powers, duties and functions from 
the minister or department designated in existing legislation to 
some other minister. In a sense, 5 and 22 taken together does 
not change, really, the powers, the duties or the functions which 
are existing in legislation. It simply means that what the 
legislature has said can be amended to change the names in 
actual legislation. What happens now is, in effect, that those 
powers can be transferred over to the executive council. 
 
But when you get into the substantive clause in the Bill, and I’m 
not going into the particular details of it on second reading, but 
what really is the general scope of what they intend to do within 
the purview of the principle of this Bill, cabinet has given 
power to, as I said, to disestablish a department with no 
corresponding obligation on the part of cabinet to transfer 
various powers, duties and functions of the disestablished 
department to another minister or department. Now that is 
significant because as I’ve said, you know, the purposes, the 
powers, the duties, the functions of a department that were 
carefully analysed and in fact some of those powers include, as 
I said before, protection to the general public, will be 
emasculated if this Bill goes through. 

I want also to say that a very significant other principle that is 
established here is that nowhere does Bill 5 say that in 
determining the objects – the purposes of a department – that 
cabinet is limited in assigning objects and purposes to picking 
them out of the objects and purposes that exist within the range 
presently set by the existing departmental legislation, and so 
they can change completely—reorganize. And they can destroy 
all the various objects and purposes that were established under 
the legislation. 
 
In this regard I want to essentially say that if we pass this 
legislation, it seems in the analysis of it that cabinet thereby 
appears free to set its own agenda. One, to obliterate existing 
departments; two, neglect to transfer mandates of obliterated 
departments elsewhere; create new departments with objects 
and purposes as defined by cabinet; and approve ministerial 
delegation of powers and ministerial spending. 
 
If one takes a look at what I have said, this is a tremendous 
departure from what has been practised in the past. And the 
minister comes in here under the disguise of efficiency and he 
says, we have to have this. Well I’ll tell you, democracy is not 
always efficient. But I’ll tell you, good debate that is the 
foundation of democracy, is essential. And I’ll tell you, the 
review of what the government is doing is the duty of the 
opposition, and what you’re doing is taking it out of this 
legislature into the back rooms to make the decisions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — As I said, Mr. Speaker, when the Deputy 
Premier, their constitutional expert on the other side, introduced 
the Bill last Monday night, he claimed weakly – the weakest 
argument I’ve ever seen – he claimed it was to permit efficiency 
within government. 
 
(1630) 
 
And no one is saying that seeking greater efficiency within the 
government operation is not a noble goal and one which all 
governments seek. But I want to say that this government 
should not talk about efficiency, because I’ll tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, as I’ve said in this House for four and a half years – 
this province has been the victim of the greatest amount of 
mismanagement and waste in the history of Canada, of a 
provincial government. I’ll tell you it was scandalous, the 
amount of waste and patronage and hand-outs during the last 
four and a half years. 
 
And what they have given to this province, the legacy that they 
have given, is a $3 billion deficit to pass on to our children and 
their children. And now these same people, these hypocrites, 
come into this House and have the audacity to start preaching 
efficiency. 
 
I want to say . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member on his feet is calling the 
members on this side of the House hypocrites. That’s not 
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

347 
 
 

parliamentary language and I ask that the comment be 
withdrawn. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’ve heard the point of order, and I have noted 
in the past that that term, unfortunately, has been used in this 
Assembly from time to time. And while I wouldn’t necessarily 
say it is unparliamentary at this time, I think in the total context 
of the Legislative Assembly, I think all members who resort to 
the use of that term are speaking in a manner which is not in 
keeping with the decorum of this Assembly. And that applies to 
all who use that terminology. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — All I want to say, any government that would 
have the degree of waste and mismanagement of the 
government opposite and who would come in here and start to 
disclose that they’re talking about efficiency, I’ll tell you, you 
don’t have a right to do it because you’ve left to the people of 
this province and their children billions of dollars of debt 
because of your waste and mismanagement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You like that any better? I’ll give it to you And 
I’ll tell the hon. member from Rosetown-Elrose, you can’t wear 
a halo around your head any more because the facts are getting 
out to the public. They know where you’re going – that you’re 
misrepresenting them with facts; that you’ve driven this 
province into debt and now your try to start to talk about 
efficiency. In fact, they’re afraid to come before this legislature 
because we have a large and powerful opposition here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — They want to go into the back rooms and try to 
slip it through. That’s their problem; you must agree with that. 
 
I want to say that this Bill now before us is not indeed about 
efficiency at all. It is not even about government reorganization. 
No, this Bill has only one purpose. It will have only one effect – 
one purpose, one effect. Its sole purpose is to erode the 
authority of this legislature and to increase the power of cabinet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — To undermine the Legislative Assembly; to 
increase beyond all reason, Mr. Speaker, or proportion, the 
arbitrary powers of the PC cabinet to act in arbitrary ways. That 
is its purpose. And I’ll tell you, that will be the effect. 
Unfortunately this is a pattern, I may say, Mr. Speaker, that has 
been followed by this government from its early election in 
1982. And I think it’s relevant to the debate to show that this is 
in fact a power grab and that all previous actions indicate that 
direction. I’m going to set forth some of the previous forms of 
power grabbing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Within weeks of being elected in the summer 
of 1982, Mr. Speaker, and you will well remember, one of the 
things that they did was to bring in a real notorious Bill 16 
shortly after they were elected. I  

believe it was some time around July 5, 1982, when we stood in 
this legislature to debate further infringement of the rights that 
were set out in the statutes. 
 
And that Bill 16, Mr. Speaker, had this effect when they 
brought it in. It gave total and absolute control to cabinet, and 
term appointments to the various boards and commissions 
where the term appointment had been properly made pursuant 
to legislation. 
 
And when they came in, they brought in Bill 16, and they wiped 
out every appointment to any board or any commission, be it 
Crown corporation or government or otherwise. And you will 
recall that, I remember with the massive number of government 
members, and after a regrettable result in 1982, eight of us 
stood in this legislature, stood up bravely to fight for a 
democratic cause. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And I’ll tell you that if the eight of us could 
stand up here and expose the government with respect to Bill 16 
– and I’ll tell you, many people were aware of the power-grab 
then – I’ll tell you that with 25 members on this side of the New 
Democratic Party in our caucus, that we’ll put up a fight the like 
of which you have never seen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — So that was the first power-grab, Bill 16. Take 
away . . . cancel all the boards appointed. And some of them 
were appointed through legislation; and appointed, say from the 
legal society – from the bar would appoint. They just wiped 
them out. And what they did it for was for political patronage. 
Disrespect for the very legislation that set up those boards and 
how they’re going to be appointed and which they had voted for 
in opposition. They came into this House and they destroyed it 
as soon as they got into government. And I’ll tell you, that was 
the start of the power grab and the political patronage game that 
they’re playing. 
 
The second thing that I want to relate, Mr. Speaker – then in the 
spring of 1983 they had their Bill 33 regarding the Department 
of Revenue and Financial Services. And here again they moved 
to remove their cabinet actions from scrutiny by . . . from the 
legislature and from the public. 
 
The same was true with Bill 47 in the same session – The 
Department of Finance Act. There again they moved to 
undermine the legislature and to give more unilateral control 
and arbitrary power to the cabinet and to weaken this 
legislature. We saw something similar last June when the 
government refused to table in the legislatures, in respect to the 
Weyerhaeuser agreements – held them back until after the 
election. 
 
And just two weeks ago, you know, we saw yet another 
example of this sort of power grab – the PC government’s 
improper attempt to change unilaterally, without even having it 
in the scope of their power, rules in respect to quorums. 
 
The pattern is clear, long-standing, and it’s consistent. And I 
want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that there’s more in  
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

348 
 
 

this here package that they’re bringing forth in this session. 
Quorum for committees. Now what they’re doing here is giving 
unilateral control of the appointments and the reorganization of 
departments to the cabinet. 
 
And as has been said in this House before, they’re going to 
electoral boundaries. We have legislation set up which they 
approved in the past, when they were on this side of the House, 
but it’s not good enough. The victory was too narrow. So what 
does it matter about fairness with this outfit across the way? 
 
We had it in the independent Electoral Boundary Commission, 
and it was independent. And they say they need a new Act. And 
I’ll tell you what they need a new Act for. It’s to continue to try 
to hold on to electoral power by a gerrymander and I’ll tell you 
the Minister of Justice will know well how to do it because he 
worked for the last gerrymander government, the late Ross 
Thatcher’s government, during that period when they brought in 
the most vicious gerrymander legislation in the history of this 
province. 
 
And that’s what I’m saying here. That is another area in which I 
say, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to be manipulating this House. 
The very legislation which they adopted, the very legislation 
which they agreed who would be the composition are not good 
enough. They’re running scared, my friends. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And I’ll tell you, there’s one other area that 
we’ll be looking at. That’s the rules committee. It’s been 
structured and suddenly they want to change the rules of the 
legislature. Now they have to be upgraded from time to time, I 
grant that. But I’ll tell you that I think I know what they’re 
going for. They want to change the ours, sittings of this 
legislature, so that there will be less review, less opportunity by 
the public to see us in the evening sittings. That’s what they’ll 
do – less scrutiny. Keep the public from being able to watch 
their dismal performance. 
 
There’ll be other changes. They may even want to do away with 
television. Oh, they wanted television when they were in 
opposition. Yes, going to extent it to Crown corporations and 
other committees. Look what they have done with it when they 
got into power. But I’ll tell you, there will be many other 
changes in respect to the rules committee that these people will 
want to get through. But I’ll say that just as the grab for power 
is being taken over here in Bill No. 5, we’ll fight it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You might in the end win the battle, but I’ll tell 
you the people of Saskatchewan want a government that they 
can trust. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And they want a government that’s not afraid 
of the democratic process. Indeed, they want a  

government that will enhance democracy, not destroy it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that what we have here, what the 
public wants – what the public wants – is open government, not 
secretive government. The public wants their rights protected, 
not wiped out by the stroke of a pen by the Premier or the 
George Hills of the world. 
 
The public voted a strong opposition in during this last 
campaign. And in fact, just for public interest, we received 
more votes from the people of Saskatchewan than the members 
sitting opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — As I say, the public voted in a strong 
opposition. And I say we have an obligation to review and to 
examine the actions of the government. And I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that this Bill goes a long ways to abrogating all of 
those rights. 
 
I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, what does it do to the 
opposition? I think it makes this legislature less effective. They 
say it’s for efficiency, but I want to reiterate again, I say it’s a 
power grab by the Premier. You know, he said just before this 
session opened that he was going to centralize – and I’m 
paraphrasing – centralize the control, take charge of this 
government. Well we’ve seen some of the ideas that he has. To 
circumvent this legislature is his idea of taking control of the 
government. Well I’ll tell you, and I agree with him that he 
needs to take charge – take charge and give some leadership to 
this province which he lacked so dismally in the last four and 
one-half years – but I’ll tell him he may be Premier temporarily, 
but the one thing that we won’t allow him to be is a dictator in 
this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — We in this legislature, as I say, have an 
obligation to review the actions of the government. And what 
you’re attempting to do is to prevent that opportunity being 
given to us. I don’t think that it’s good for this legislature. I 
don’t think it’s in the interests of the people of this province to 
have that happen. 
 
And I say to all of the back-benchers who are sitting on the 
edge of their chairs listening to this, that I urge them – I urge 
them to get a copy of the remarks that I’ve made today and read 
them, and then decide to support us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — There is one other fundamental problem that I 
see in respect to giving this power over to the cabinet. If in fact 
they go forward and reorganize the complete department, or in 
fact wipe out a department, I ask you: is there a sinister purpose 
behind this? 
 
Wipe out a department. And when we get into the clause by 
clause in committee, I’m going to ask the Deputy Premier to 
guarantee that in fact what it is, is to ravage the public 
employees. 
 
Wipe out a department. Are they able to say then: no 
department, no jobs? And then do they have the power to  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

349 
 
 

take those employees, either let them go because the new 
department doesn’t need that many, and besides we’re going to 
give it to the private enterprise? I ask you, Mr. Speaker, and I 
ask all members: is this their sinister reason for moving? 
 
The Deputy Premier, the other day he said, and I was reading 
from the Leader-Post of December 18 by the eminent reporter, 
Dale Eisler. And right down at the bottom here he says: 
“Naturally the Tories say there is nothing sinister about the 
reorganization.” 
 
Well did he expect them to come forward? I mean, did he really 
expect him to come forward and say, yes, I’ve got sinister 
reasons? Now that’s a remarkable statement. 
 
But it gets even more remarkable as you read on. He says: 
“Romanow give us too much credit. I wish we had that kind of 
cunning.” 
 
Just listen. This farm boy from Souris-Cannington – the Deputy 
Premier. Imagine. And he goes on and he says: “this will only 
change structures, and mandates will all remain the same.” 
That’s what he says. 
 
Read the Bill, my friend, before you introduce it, because in this 
legislation, I’ll tell you, it goes beyond that. And so I ask you, 
Mr. Deputy Premier, I was surprised when I saw you bring this 
legislation forward, because of your lack of . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Cunning. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Cunning. I thought that they would find a 
different minister with more cunning. But I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that in all seriousness this is a sinister, a possible 
sinister reason for this legislation. I am going to ask the Deputy 
Premier, and I’m going to give him a chance to inform himself, 
and that may take another day or so, but I’ll give you that length 
of time. 
 
But what I’m going to say is when we get into the specifics, I 
want his guarantees that if there is a wipe-out of a department 
completely and as a consequence, wipe-out of all the objectives 
and purposes of that, and a wipe-out of all the jobs because 
there’s no department left, I’m going to ask what is going to 
happen to government employees? Are they going to have the 
opportunity to go to the private sector perhaps, again? That has 
to be addressed. And I would have thought when he came in 
here he would have carefully and properly come into this House 
and outlined the specifics and the details of what they are trying 
to achieve. But look at the report that he gave on that Bill in 
second reading, and about all you can pick out is “efficiency.” 
 
Well I’ll tell you, when you have a group of people like that, I’ll 
tell you that is not the reason. And I think we’re going to be 
here for some time, Mr. Speaker, because that deputy Premier is 
going to be drilled on this Bill. And I’ll tell you, he better know 
the reasons for doing and the implications of it. And he better 
be able to explain to this House why he wants to abrogate the 
rights of this House to debate change in departments, in the 
powers and the duties. 

I want to refer also to the – what was referred to this afternoon, 
The Revised Canadian Constitution: Politics as Law R.I. 
Cheffins, P.A. Johnson. 
 
And just a couple of passages that I want to put before this 
legislature. I’ll read it again, and I don’t need your interference 
because you probably won’t even get into the debate because 
you couldn’t understand it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Content in source of parliamentary procedure, 
the principles of parliamentary law: 
 

The principles that lie at the basis of English parliamentary 
law has always been kept steadily in view by the Canadian 
parliament. These are, to protect a minority and restrain the 
improvidence or tyranny of a majority. 

 
“To protect a minority and restrain the improvidence or tyranny 
of a majority.” 
 

To secure the transaction of public business in an orderly 
manner; to enable every member to express his opinions 
within the limits necessary to preserve decorum and prevent 
an unnecessary waste of time to give abundant opportunity 
for the consideration of every measure, and to prevent any 
legislative action being taken upon sudden impulse. 

 
Those are the premises under which we operate, Mr. Speaker. 
And I want just to read one other passage from this article: 
 

Surely (it says), in the review of Canada’s constitutional 
structure nothing calls out more for the reform than the 
excessive dominance of a system by cabinet. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — “Nothing calls out more for reform than the 
excessive dominance of a system by cabinet.” And that’s what 
we’re talking about here, is not giving to cabinet more and more 
power. 
 
And as I’ve said to you, Mr. Speaker, we have an obligation as 
an opposition. Certainly if we did not see the dangers, as some 
of them which I have outlined – and there are others – but if we 
didn’t, then we would be allowing the legislation to proceed. 
 
But in view of the facts of the power being taken on by the 
cabinet, by the powers that we are losing as opposition 
members to review the legislation and the direction of the 
government, and in view of the fact that, Mr. Speaker, I think 
there is a sinister aspect to moving this Bill . . . 
 
I think it’s the privatization of some departments, and I think it 
will not bring efficiency. All it will do is transfer it in a 
patronage manner to some of their friends, and what will 
happen is possibly many of the public servants will be cut 
adrift. 
  



 
December 18, 1986 

 

350 
 
 

But even if they destroy the structure of a department, they 
wipe out a department, and then they set up say another 
department – they’re talking about one about human resources – 
does that mean that those in Labour that are employees, and 
those in Social Services, those departments are no longer 
functional. What happens to the employees in going over to the 
new department? Do they have the opportunity then to say, well 
that job’s wiped out; those classifications that you had as a 
director are wiped out. 
 
Now you can come forward, and George Hill and company, or 
whoever is on that Tory patronage . . . I’ll tell you that’s the 
question that’s going to be asked. Are you going to take away 
some of the rights and privileges that some of the government 
employees have developed throughout the years. And I’ll tell 
you, you didn’t come forward and explain that because you 
have no sympathy for the working people of this province. 
You’ve demonstrated that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I have a considerable amount 
more that I want to say and therefore, being close to 5, I would 
beg leave to adjourn debate . . . to call it 5 o’clock. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


	ORAL QUESTIONS

