


















































December 23, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 December 23, 1986 
 

455 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order, I wish to advise the Assembly 
that I have examined the following petition with regard to a 
private Bill under Rule 11(7), find it to be in order. I hereby lay 
it on the Table. The petition: 
 

Of Briercrest Bible College of Caronport, in the province 
of Saskatchewan, praying for an Act of Incorporation. 

 
ORAL QUESTIONS 

 
Potential Location of Dam in South-west Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today, 
Mr. Speaker, is to the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation, and it deals with the corporation’s study of 
potential irrigation projects in south-west Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you confirm that the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation is proposing to build a $2.6 million irrigation dam 
and reservoir along the Swiftcurrent Creek on land owned by 
your Legislative Secretary, the member for Morse? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I confirm to the hon. member that the 
subject has been under discussion and under review for some 
time. No commitments are made at this point to build a dam 
anywhere. 
 
If I were to go just a little further and advise the hon. member 
that if there is to be a dam on the Swiftcurrent Creek, there is no 
other suitable area on the creek than the land that is controlled 
by my Legislative Secretary. So the decision is rather narrow as 
far as the water corporation is concerned. If there is to be a dam, 
there is no place else to put it. But the decision to build one has 
not been made. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, just to get this correct. Are 
you saying that the only site . . . Are you saying that the only 
site in which that dam can be built has been identified by your 
officials as the land owned by the member for Morse. Are you 
saying that that is the only site? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m saying that the information that I have 
received . . . And the study I don’t believe is done by my 
officials but rather by PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 
Administration). And in their studies, that is the only site. 
There’s two sites, and both of them would be on that land. 
 
If you take a look at the Swiftcurrent Creek some time, the 
member will understand why, because it’s a very shallow creek. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
despite the shallowness of the creek, it doesn’t anywhere near 
match the shallowness of your answer in terms of  

this report done for your department, by Keith consulting 
engineers, which identifies 16 — not one, but 16 — potential 
sites. Sixteen potential sites for the dam. 
 
Would you please explain to the legislature why it was that out 
of these 16 potential sites, only one — only one — was 
identified for study, was identified for study, and that one site 
was on the land owned by the member for Morse? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I have advised the hon. member that the 
creek was looked at and that the decision was made that there 
was only one area that was suitable for a dam. That’s the 
answer that I gave you; that’s the answer that I will stay with. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister, you’re telling us 
— and I want this perfectly clear — you are telling us that no 
other site, no other site is available to build a dam in the 
immediate area except that on land owned by the minister for 
Morse. 
 
Could you please tell the legislature why that site was chosen, 
particularly in regards to the fact that the vast majorities in the 
area, of farmers in the area, are opposed in fact to the building 
of that dam site or in fact are opposed to the irrigation projects 
in total? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’d just like to tell the hon. member that 
PFRA has been involved in the study. They are looking at the 
area that’s suitable for a dam. They are looking at the area that 
is suitable for irrigation. And that is the decision that they are 
putting forward. Now a decision to go ahead and build has not 
been taken — to build anywhere. So these are things that are 
proposals at this time. They may at some time become 
decisions, but they’re not at this point. 
 

Water Reservoir Right of Way 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question also is 
to the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation. The fact that he has just confirmed that the 
majority of the right of way would be purchased from Martens 
Ranch Limited, the province will have to shell out — and it 
showed in the study — $125,000 for a reservoir right of way. In 
light of that . . . Another point is the $625 per hectare, or $250 
per acre for this land, much of which is native grassland. Mr. 
Minister, would you not agree that $250 an acre for native 
grassland is a very premium price considering today’s slumping 
farm prices? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think the hon. member is getting a little 
bit far down the trail. There’s been no decision at this point to 
build. There is no one that has fixed a final price on anybody’s 
land. So the supposition that it’s $250 or 550, or whatever it 
may be, is strictly just a guess at this time and there really is 
nothing that you can go on. If the time comes when we will be 
even considering building that dam, then the price that would be 
structured for the land will be done by a fair appraisal by a 
person skilled in that business, not just by a guess such as the 
member is throwing out. 
 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

456 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary. I might say these are . . . I’m 
quoting from the consultant’s report, Mr. Minister. These are 
not guesses. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you not agree that what we have here is a 
double standard? On one hand we have a proposed project 
which will benefit the member from Morse — basically one 
member of this House — with people opposing it in the rural 
area. On the other hand we have just recently seen a demand 
surcharge placed on farmers irrigating with motors over 60 
horsepower. 
 
On one hand we have benefit to those people, direct benefit to 
those people involved on your side of the House, and on the 
other hand we have a surcharge placed on other people. Is this 
not a double standard, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think the hon. member is trying to mix 
two or three different things together, and sometimes that’s 
most difficult. When you talk about a demand surcharge, that 
has been put on by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, 
handled by an entirely different minister, and if you’d like to 
talk to him about it, then go to the minister responsible. 
 
When you come to the issue of the dam that’s proposed, it’s not 
built yet. There’s been no authority to go ahead. So you can’t 
charge a member with receiving government funds until 
somebody says, yes, we’re going to do it. I think it has been a 
problem to the water corporation since the date that that study 
was done, that this particular land was selected as the most 
favourable spot for a dam. And for that reason I have not been 
willing to go ahead with it, and the water corporation has not 
been willing, and the member has not been willing. So nothing 
has happened. It’s sitting and waiting for a decision. And 
whether it will be made in the near future, I wouldn’t even 
hazard a guess, but I doubt it. 
 

Camera Crew on Nut Lake Reserve 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — My question is to the minister responsible for 
the Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat, and it deals with your 
relationship to chiefs and band councils on Saskatchewan 
reserves and attempts by a government member to undermine 
the authority of a chief and band council. 
 
I refer to an incident involving the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena who, a few weeks ago, took a camera crew 
on to the Nut Lake Reserve, without the knowledge of the chief 
and the band council, and recorded a number of interviews 
attacking the chief and the band council about housing 
conditions on the reserve. The videotape, as I understand it, was 
given to a local newspaper and sent to the federal Minister of 
Indian Affairs in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Excuse me. Are you getting to your question? 
Please put it. Please put it. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Is the minister aware of this incident, and  

does he condone this kind of conduct, and are these the tactics 
that chiefs and band councils across Saskatchewan are to expect 
from your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I can advise the members opposite that 
the question has nothing to do with government or tactics. And 
I can advise the member opposite that I discussed this with the 
chief of the Saskatchewan Federation of Indians and I told him 
thus: that Indian reserves are a part of Canada; the public is 
entitled to travel there; they’re not an exclusive domain; that the 
Indians who live there have their residences there, and the 
residents are entitled to have, as their guests, whoever they 
wish, and the residents of the reserve do not have to ask the 
chief if they can bring their friends or politicians or anyone else 
to their residence. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, am I clear then from the 
minister that you condone this type of action on the part of 
government members? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I’m advised that the government 
member to which you refer was invited on to that reserve as a 
guest of a resident. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Further supplementary. Has the material that 
the government member accumulated on his trip to the reserve 
been supplied to you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — No. 
 

Policy Concerning Department of Agriculture Leases 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I took notice 
on a question from the member from Humboldt which seemed 
to imply that this government would be forcing some 750 
lessees off the land before Christmas. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
inform you and the members of the legislature today that in fact 
nothing could be farther from the truth. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the practice of billing lessees at this time 
of the year has been in existence since the mid-'60s under 
administrations of every political stripe. This government’s 
lease collection and the fee policy has been very compassionate 
and recognizes the difficult period our farmers have been 
through the last few years. For example, lease rates have been 
frozen since 1964. Our policy also recognizes, Mr. Speaker, 
that, as the government, we must be responsible for the public 
purse. 
 
An Hon. Member: — 1984. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Sorry. I used ’64 rather than ’84. I’ll 
repeat that, Mr. Speaker. For example, lease rates have been 
frozen since 1984, and our policy also recognizes that, as 
government, we must be responsible trustees of the public 
purse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition yesterday suggested that we were 
only giving lessees 30 days to pay or they would be forced off 
the land. In reality, Mr. Speaker, the 750 cases in question have 
arrears of greater than one year, and some are in arrears three or 
four or five years. Those individuals have therefore known that 
their rent was due for more than one year and have had previous  
  



 
December 23, 1986 

457 
 

communication with the Department of Agriculture. 
 
Moreover, Mr. Speaker, the department has established a 
three-part process which is initiated by the letter referred to 
yesterday. If arrears are not paid by December 331st, then a 
notice of intention to cancel lease will go out in January, which 
provides a further 31 days for the lessee to make his payments. 
 
But more than all of this, Mr. Speaker, lessees are invited to 
apply to the counselling and assistance for farmers program 
with a view towards getting assistance on how to make their 
payments. And all of this, Mr. Speaker, is on top of the 
production loans, cash advances, stabilization payments, and 
deficiency payments — all tools to help all farmers through the 
downturn that the agriculture sector has faced. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as you can see, lessees have had in the past, 
and will continue to have in the future, many options on how to 
deal with the problem. I believe it is a credit to the rest of our 
12,000 lessees that they have made their rent payments, and I 
trust that the opposition would not advocate that any 
government should not attempt to deal with this problem in a 
fair and reasonable manner as administrators of a large public 
asset. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would ask the 
minister . . . We have a situation now where the farm debt is 
roughly $6 billion in Saskatchewan. In Canada rather, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We have Farm Credit Corporation with large outstanding debts. 
We have financial institutions who have been stopped from 
collecting debts. We have a government promoting the . . . 
supposedly promoting the family farm security. And why now, 
at this time, are you suddenly taking a reversal in your policy 
and saying that we’re going to be the leaders and foreclosing 
upon these people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, this is not a reversal. In 
fact, I would argue that if one checks the legislation, this policy 
provides more protection for the lessees than did the original 
legislation which, as I understand, only provided for a notice of 
intent to cancel. We have in fact beefed that up through a 
provision of things like the counselling and assistance for 
farmer program, where not only can they get counselling, but as 
well, Mr. Speaker, they can get guarantees to take out operating 
loans and see them through. 
 
I would remind the hon. member that, as was pointed out in my 
remarks in answer to the original question, these lessees are not 
. . . this is not a new situation. This policy recognizes that we’ve 
been through a difficult time; that in fact these leaseholders are 
two and three and four and five years in arrears, Mr. Speaker. 
And after a while, I suppose, the question becomes one of 
fairness to the other 11,250 out there who have in fact made 
their payments, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Financing of School Construction Costs 
 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is also to the Minister 
of Education. Mr. Minister, last week Wednesday or Thursday 
you took notice of a question from my colleague from Prince 
Albert, and you also took notice of a question from me. I 
wonder if the minister would be so kind as to give us his answer 
today on the changes proposed on the school financing formula 
on capital construction. Would the minister be so kind as to 
give us the answer today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, I would, Mr. Speaker. The 
question was originally posed on December 18th by the hon. 
member from Prince Albert and ended with the question: why 
are you at this time proposing a shift of school construction 
costs to local school boards and off the provincial government? 
 
I took notice, Mr. Speaker, on the question because I was 
unaware of such a proposal, the reason being because there is 
no such proposal. In fact, what is happening is the departmental 
officials are consulting with school boards across Saskatchewan 
on three points: long-term planning for the educational 
development fund, and I might add that of the one-day meeting 
this took the majority of the morning out of the meeting time, 
Mr. Speaker, and I can honestly say as well that that educational 
development fund has been met with extremely enthusiastic 
response across the province. 
 
The second major point of the consultations — and I don’t 
apologize for this either, Mr. Speaker — was to discuss with 
school trustees and school boards our Buy Saskatchewan 
program, a program that creates and maintains jobs across 
Saskatchewan, and the role that school boards can play in 
buying Saskatchewan products and maintaining those jobs. 
 
The third point was to discuss capital construction. And on 
capital construction there has been no government policy 
change. The department is continuing a well-established 
practice of consulting before developing policy. 
 
In fact the board has asked us to sit down and discuss many 
aspects of capital funding, and my officials spent considerable 
time doing just that so that we could iron out any problems 
boards were having at a local level, including things like school 
rules, Mr. Speaker. Any proposals discussed were merely as 
examples for discussion. Nothing in any of those proposals 
would result in greater local costs overall. In fact, for most 
projects the examples would see local costs decrease 
significantly . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I repeat again, Mr. 
Speaker: in fact, for most projects the examples would see local 
costs decrease significantly. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Are you denying then, Mr. Minister, that 
you do not have any proposal that will increase the cost on the 
local taxpayer for capital costs on schools in the vicinity of two 
or $3 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I have already indicated 
that there were consultations held on three major points relative 
to capital cos. There were some examples tossed out. The one 
that the member has seized upon as an example was in fact an 
extreme one and an  
  



 
December 23, 1986 

458 
 

attempt to over-simplify a relatively complex issue. In fact in 
the same piece of paper, the same weak document, Mr. Speaker, 
that he had access to, I think he also could have found examples 
where for some local school boards the share would have gone 
down from 33.7 per cent to 13.2 per cent at the local level; and 
having said all of that, Mr. Speaker, these were merely 
examples. And I might add, Mr. Speaker, it was local school 
boards that, in fact, requested that some of these concerns be 
laid on the table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Would the Minister of Education not admit that 
that letter was sent out by a superintendent of his and the 
meeting was to be chaired by his deputy minister, and one of 
the aims of that meeting was a proposal to be put to the local 
representatives on changing the financing formula on capital 
construction. We could have given you another two or three or 
a half-a-dozen examples of where you were going to increase 
the burden on local people and increasing their property taxes. 
 
Is it not true that the purpose of that meeting was to change the 
formula structure as set out before? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, absolutely not. In fact, 
nothing could be further from the truth, and that kind of rhetoric 
is irresponsible. It creates fear and paranoia amongst a lot of 
very good, ordinary school trustees who are trying to do a 
decent job and give better education in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, and it does a disservice to the entire school board 
system out there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The examples that the member 
referred . . . the examples that he referred to is as if that’s some 
kind of generalization, and he says I could find many more 
examples. Well, I’ll tell you what examples he’d find — a 
down-shifting of the cost from 28.3 to 16.9. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I think you answered the question. 
 

Allegations re Pioneer Village Directors 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Minister of Finance and it deals with his rather bizarre public 
statements of a few weeks ago concerning Regina’s Pioneer 
Village. 
 
In early November, the minister made a number of serious 
allegations respecting the Pioneer Village board of directors but 
failed to supply any proof to back up those allegations, and, Mr. 
Speaker, even a senior cabinet minister is required to tell the 
truth once in a while. Can the minister table in this Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker, any written proof of his wild accusations about 
Pioneer Village and if not, will he now do the honourable thing, 
stand up in his place and apologize for misleading the people of 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — The truth was self-evident to every 
fair-minded person in Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. That’s the 
kind of double-talk and bafflegab that the people are 
accustomed to. Is it any wonder that the minister has so little 
credibility with the people of this province? He won’t table any 
documents because he doesn’t have any documents. Mr. 
Minister, aren’t your accusations, aren’t your statements 
concerning Pioneer Village just another example of you playing 
fast and loose with the truth in order to score a few partisan 
political points? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The answer is no, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the minister 
will now admit that the real reason for his outburst was that a 
few weeks prior to the election the PC MLA for the area, one 
Gordon Dirks, promised a $6.3 million renovation to Pioneer 
Village. Mr. Dirks got beat badly in the October election; now 
your government is looking for a way out of that campaign 
promise. And isn’t that what’s behind this whole escapade, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The answer for the third time is no, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Tabling of Wakabayashi Report 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
directed to the Minister of Economic Development and Trade in 
the absence of the Premier, and it has to do with the 
announcement by the Premier in June, I believe, of 1986, in 
establishing a Wakabayashi committee on free trade. I believe 
the objectives were to listen to selected groups of Saskatchewan 
people about free trade and that there was to be a report tabled 
publicly by September in order to assist our Premier in his 
negotiations, or should I say discussions, with the Prime 
Minister later that month. 
 
My question to the minister is this: has that report by Mr. 
Wakabayashi been prepared, and if so, will the minister 
undertake to table a copy of that report before this current 
sitting of the session adjourns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I received information 
from Mr. Wakabayashi yesterday, the day before, that that 
interim report would be ready probably between Christmas and 
New Year’s, and would be published and made public in early 
January, early 1987. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary if I may. 
Does not the minister find it somewhat unusual that some 
several months after the negotiations on free trade have begun, 
indeed while the negotiations are ongoing now between Mr. 
Reisman as the Canadian representative, and Mr. Murphy the 
American representative, that Saskatchewan is still struggling to 
find out what its position is — that Saskatchewan is still trying 
to determine what it is that the people of this province want? Is 
that not a bit unusual? And if the minister will acknowledge to 
me that it is, as I think most fair-minded people would say it is, 
when that report is tabled, will he  
  



 
December 23, 1986 

459 
 

undertake to mail copies to all of the members of the 
Legislative Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, I’ll make two observations. One, I 
will send to the hon. member from Saskatoon Riversdale a copy 
personalized to him. I can also send you 23 copies or 24, 
however many there are and you can distribute those to the rest 
of your folks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with regards to the trade negotiations that are 
going on presently between Canada and the United States, those 
are indeed very critical and very historic trade negotiations that 
are going on. Saskatchewan will certainly be there as it relates 
to the interest that we have in those particular trade talks, 
whether they be agriculture or resources — to a lesser degree 
the manufacturing sector. 
 
I think it is well for all members of this Assembly, regardless of 
their political stripe, to bear in mind that 50 per cent of 
everything that we export from this province is exported to the 
United States of America. Now it’s nice at some point in time 
for people to get their jollies off attacking the Americans, but 
quite frankly if we lose that market, Mr. Speaker, or even part 
of that market, we lose a great deal of economic clout; we lose a 
great deal of market for the product that we produce. 
 
So I think it’s imperative that we all attempt what we can do to 
make sure that those markets are preserved for potash, or for 
beef, or for uranium, or for whatever we so rely on to produce 
jobs in this province. And I believe in 1987 that we will move 
forward to get some type of a deal with the Americans. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 8 — An Act to provide for the Postponement of the 
Tabling of Certain Documents 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to provide for the Postponement of the Tabling of Certain 
Documents. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT 
 

Minister’s Correction of Answer 
 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of 
privilege, or whatever the technical term you may wish to use. 
When I make a mistake, I intend to make a correction, and 
that’s what I intend to do. The question raised by the member 
for Saskatoon Fairview — did I have a copy or did my office 
have a copy of the tape he referred to? I did not know that I do 
have a copy. I am advised by my staff that there is a copy 
awaiting my screening at my television set, and I haven’t had a 
chance to look at it yet. So I do have a copy. 
 
When I’ve seen it, I will consider a request from yourself to 
view it with me, and a request from the media, but I  

have to protect anybody that may be endangered. I haven’t seen 
the tape as yet. So I’m prepared to entertain that question at a 
later date. 
 
Mr. Speaker: —.Since the minister has been allowed to make 
the statement I will at this time permit the original questioner, if 
he wishes, to . . . 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I appreciate the minister telling the House this 
information, and I’ll look forward to hearing from him after 
he’s had an opportunity of reviewing the tape. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — As we enter orders of the day, I would 
ask for leave of the Assembly to move down the order paper 
and in effect waive the private members’ business and move to 
government orders. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, just before we respond to that 
side, I wonder if I might direct a comment, or perhaps a 
question, to the hon. government House Leader in this regard. 
 
On page 5 of supplement 5 of the blues, of course, is listed item 
no. 1, which is the report of the special committee appointed to 
prepare lists of members to compose the standing committees of 
the Assembly, and that was moved by the hon. member from 
Yorkton. 
 
You’ll recall, Mr. Speaker, sir, that that was the subject of a 
ruling by yourself a few days ago on the question of quorums. 
And that ruling, as we know, in effect eliminated the aspect of 
an attempt to change a quorum. That being the case, I would 
ask the government House Leader why it is that we ought not to 
proceed to enact that report, minus the quorum provision. 
 
As members will know, Mr. Speaker, there are a variety of 
committees that await establishment pending that particular 
adoption — Agriculture Committee, Communication 
Committee, Education Committee, municipal law, Public 
Accounts Committee, private members’ committee, which may 
deal with petitions of the public. None of us, I think, would 
want to have the public inconvenienced if there is no committee 
established. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, my respectful submission to the 
member opposite and to the government is, we’d be prepared to 
deal with this motion so that no one is inconvenienced or 
damaged by its non-implementation in the light of the quorum 
decision. And I’d invite the government House Leader to say 
that we will vote this afternoon and then get these committees 
formally established. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I recognize the arguments 
raised by the opposition House Leader. However, I would point 
out to you, sir, and to all members of the House, that the 
committees will normally sit during the sessional period when 
the House is in session. The House will be back in session . . . 
this particular session will continue at some point in 1987. And 
at that time, when the House reconvenes, there will  
  



 
December 23, 1986 

460 
 

be a report, an interim report perhaps, at least, but a report from 
the rules committee, whom I’m sure will be studying the whole 
question of quorum, along with many other things. 
 
So I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that we leave this motion and 
let it come up as a matter of normal course at that time. And at 
that time we’ll have certainly a clarification of the House as it 
relates to the quorum issue. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McLeod that Bill No. 7 — An Act to 
amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 
be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to say 
a few words about Bill 7 in this second reading. Bill 7 is an Act 
which is consequential to Bill No. 5, and I think it’s very 
important that I outline a few items which are relevant in both 
cases. 
 
It’s my view, Mr. Speaker, that both Bill 5 and Bill 7 basically 
enslave as opposed to liberate. What Bill 7 does in short, along 
with Bill 5, is to enable the cabinet, the Executive Council — a 
small band of Conservative hold-overs from an archaic era — 
to change existing legislation by order in council. The cabinet in 
private seclusion will be able to make decisions to suit their 
own purposes, which up to now have been made in the open 
public forum of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
This tight knot of Conservative cabinet members will now be 
able to make private, censored decisions in law which will not 
have to bear up to the public scrutiny. They will in effect be 
able to change how government operates without a forum for 
public input. 
 
What this Bill means to the people of Saskatchewan is that the 
Government of Saskatchewan, the Conservative government, is 
basically centralizing power, focussing more power and control 
into the cabinet. Rather than creating a more open approach 
toward government, the Conservatives are making lawmaking 
more exclusive to cabinet. They are closing off, in essence, 
decision-making input from this Legislative Assembly and 
tightening and basically shrinking the circle of people who will 
be making important decisions which will be affecting all 
people in this province. 
 
Decisions cabinet will be able to make under this new authority 
will be more secretive. Decisions cabinet will be able to make 
under this new authority will be unaccountable to the elected 
representatives in this legislature. Decisions affecting the 
delivery of services, whether they are amended or deleted, the 
elimination of programs, departments and agencies without 
proper and adequate debate in discussion, will now be 
undertaken without public scrutiny or public accountability. 
 

What we will see, Mr. Speaker, if Bill 5 and 7 pass, is a 
centralized, more secretive government — from a Conservative 
party that preached for years in Ottawa, and in this Assembly 
when they were in opposition, the need for less secrecy. What 
we will see if Bill 5 and 7 pass unamended is an undemocratic 
Conservative Executive Council style of government from a 
Conservative Party that preached for years in opposition the 
need for greater democracy in Executive Council decisions. 
 
What we will see if this Bill passes, Mr. Speaker, is a PC 
government which is unaccountable and restricts access to 
government information — from a PC Party in opposition 
which preached for greater access to information. 
 
When the Conservatives were in opposition, Mr. Speaker, they 
cried for more open government. They shrieked for greater 
public access to information. And they even whined for more 
public involvement in government decision making. They even 
made a commitment in writing to introducing freedom of 
information legislation. 
 
And I refer members opposite to the blue bible that they have 
put out themselves under their own handwriting — the pocket 
politics, the quick reference to PC policy for candidates in their 
Conservative band. And on page 13 they say in writing, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Responsible government. Is it true that Saskatchewan has 
no freedom of information legislation? 

 
And they respond: 
 

That’s correct. A PC government will be committed to 
freedom of information legislation. 

 
This from a party, Mr. Speaker, that is now doing away with 
freedom of information. They have turned full circle, calling for 
more information, more democratic input to decision making in 
this government, to a point now where they want to centralize 
and censor any decisions that are made into a few. 
 
When they are in opposition, the PCs are committed to reform. 
They are committed to freedom of information. But when in 
power, simply put, they impose censorship unparalleled in any 
modern democracy. 
 
The member from Arm River, in 1980 in this Legislative 
Assembly, spoke at length about the need for greater input and 
greater freedom and greater access for information, and I quote 
an excerpt from that, Mr. Speaker. December 8, 1980, page 295 
of Hansard. This is the member from Arm River speaking: 
 

The Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan is based on 
the principle that on the one hand we have a 
democratically elected government to provide leadership, 
policies and effective administration, and on the other 
hand we have the opposition MLAs to hold the 
government accountable for these policies and actions. 
That is what we’re here for (and the press had better 
understand what we’re here for). 

 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

461 
 

And that’s the end of the quote, Mr. Speaker. But he goes on to 
say in another paragraph: 
 

Here in Saskatchewan the power of the Premier, the 
cabinet and the Crown corporation has grown at a most 
incredible rate. Their power has been at the expense of the 
legislature and out of the public domain. This growth is 
dangerous and gives the cabinet too much power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, take a look at the volumes of regulations and 
orders in council, that for all intents and purposes are 
outside the scope of this legislature. Crown corporations 
controlled by the cabinet are not really accountable to the 
taxpayers. The legislature should be able to scrutinize the 
Crown corporations (and other departments), but this 
government, which deals in secrecy, will not allow that. 

 
These are exactly the same charges that the member from Arm 
River made in this Assembly of a former government when we 
had more open access to cabinet decisions, where we had 
complete opposite viewpoint that this government is now 
putting forward in Bill 7 and Bill 5. That they are centralizing 
power, they are closing out any further input in eliminating 
public access to decision making that has been the right of 
members in this legislature since its inception. 
 
The member from Arm River had made those comments, Mr. 
Speaker, and I want to remind members opposite, and the 
member from Kindersley knows what I’m going to say next. He 
knows that I’m going to raise the fact that when he sat in 
opposition he spoke at length about freedom of information. I 
have a Hansard again here, April 21, 1981, and I’d like to quote 
exactly what the member from Kindersley had said: 
 

Number one, and I think perhaps the most important area 
of political or parliamentary development that we need, 
not only in this province but in this entire country, is in the 
area of freedom of information. I know the Attorney 
General has expressed his views on that on several 
occasions. But, without that information flow from 
government through to the legislature and out to the 
people, parliamentary reform is very difficult. You need 
the information first before anything else can take place. 

 
And he goes on further in his remarks April 21, ’81, page 2323: 
 

What has happened is that the growth of the executive 
branch of government has increased dramatically and there 
has been no corresponding increase in the balance of it for 
the legislature. So what we are having, as some have 
described, is a presidential system without the checks and 
balances of the United States. I don’t think that is quite 
right, but I think everybody agrees that the massive growth 
of the executive branch of government has been without 
any offsetting control the other way. 

 

These kinds of comments, Mr. Speaker, from a member of the 
government who is now saying: to heck with freedom of 
information. Not only to heck with that, we are going to tighten 
up the circle of decision makers in this province so that we have 
absolutely no input from the opposition and tot hat end he is 
flip-flopping from his position of 1981. 
 
He goes on to say a number of other things, Mr. Speaker. As a 
matter of fact, he put forward Bill No. 53, An Act Respecting 
the Right of the Public to Government Information, and talks 
about access to government information by the public in this 
province. And he went on in second reading of that Bill, and I 
happen to have a copy of that, Mr. Speaker, May 27, 1980, 
when he moved second reading, where he spoke about more 
power to private members as opposed to the cabinet, which in 
my view is really incredible because what these Bills now do is 
actually lessen the power of the private member. I quote the 
member from Kindersley, 1980: 
 

I think there is a point to be made that changes could be 
made in our rules so private members are able to introduce 
legislation which has money implications to it, with 
certain restrictions. 

 
(1445) 
 
He was saying, one step beyond access to information, he was 
suggesting that we even have some ability in terms of money 
Bills. 
 
He went on further in his remarks, Mr. Speaker, to quote James 
Madison, the former president of the United States, and what he 
had to say about the whole concept of freedom. And I’ll enter 
that quote for the record as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 

A popular government, without popular information or the 
means of acquiring it, is but a prologue to a farce or a 
tragedy or perhaps both. Knowledge will for ever govern 
ignorance, and the people who mean to be their own 
governors must arm themselves with the power that 
knowledge gives. 

 
He goes on to quote more . . . other politicians of Canadian 
nature, one Pierre Elliott Trudeau in 1964. And Mr. Trudeau 
said, and I quote: 
 

Democratic process requires the ready availability of true 
and complete information. In this way people can 
objectively evaluate the government policies. To act 
otherwise is to give way to despotic secrecy. 

 
He went on to quote the Canadian Bar Association. He even 
quoted, Mr. Speaker (surprise, surprise!) Mr. Joe Clark, the 
former prime minister of this country, who was speaking at that 
time in the House of Commons with a motion that Ged 
Baldwin, a former Conservative member from Alberta had put 
forward on freedom of information. 
 
He as well, Mr. Speaker, quoted Andrew Brewin, an NDP 
member at that time in the House of Commons, and I want to 
add this from the record as well, and I quote: 
 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

462 
 

It may have been said that well-informed citizens are the 
lifeblood of democracy. I believe that to be true. We 
cannot have truly effective democracy unless we have at 
the same time a well-informed group of citizens. They can 
only be well-informed if they have access to information. 
For that reason our party (the NDP federally) will support 
this freedom of information act. 

 
He quoted the Ombudsman, he quoted all kinds of people at 
length, but what he basically tried to put forward in his debate, 
Mr. Speaker, at that time, was to outline the main elements of 
the opposition’s access to information and the opposition’s 
input to decision making in this legislature. 
 
I quote from page 3598, May 27, 1980 where the member from 
Kindersley says: 
 

Requirement number one is a clear preamble, a clear 
statement that says all government information should be 
released unless the government can prove it is to be kept 
secret. That preamble sets the spirit of open government. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that this example that I’ve introduced 
today in this debate shows very clearly that the Conservatives, 
the member from Kindersley in particular, spoke of reform in 
government when he was in opposition. But we all know, Mr. 
Speaker, that reform must come from within, not with from 
without. You can’t legislate virtue. But through Bill 5 and 7 it’s 
my contention, Mr. Speaker, that we are legislating sedition. 
 
Bill 7 does not reform government for the better but legislates 
changes and power for the few. Ambrose Bierce once said, and 
I quote: 
 

A Conservative is a politician who is enamoured of 
existing evils, as distinguished from the Liberal who 
wishes to replace them with others. 

 
What this Bill does, and Bill 5 as well, is put the Conservatives 
in an advanced Liberal mind-set, not just replacing but 
increasing censorship and secrecy of government, and 
centralizing both under Executive Council. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our caucus and our party believe in government 
serving the people. We also believe that government has to be 
streamlined or changed from time to time. We even believe that 
government has to be reorganized and changed to meet the 
changing needs of people. That may come as a surprise to 
members opposite, but that is in effect the truth. 
 
But when we look at this government — and they are not 
accurately polling the changing needs of Saskatchewan people, 
in my view, but only the changing censorship and secrecy needs 
of the cabinet. They are trying to privatize government. That’s 
what they’re trying to do, Mr. Speaker, through these 
Bills - concentrating power into the hands of a few. 
 
They are trying to run government like a business man  

runs his business, and that’s not so bad if you cover off all 
bases, but they are focusing on the arbitrary nature and the 
sharing of information with as few as possible, which are two 
elements of many in the business area, Mr. Speaker. And you 
can’t run government like business — identical to business. It 
can’t be done. I’ve been in business and I’ve been in 
government, and there’s just too many differences in order to do 
that. 
 
And the major reasons, Mr. Speaker, primarily: one, a 
government has to have a heart, has to consider other people’s 
views, had to consider the welfare of people in our society, and 
because government provides programs and services which cost 
money as opposed to providing services which make money for 
the Crown. 
 
In business, decisions are made in the boardroom under very 
little or no public scrutiny. Government, by definition, must be 
open to public scrutiny. In government, decisions must be 
debatable in public and accountable to the public. 
 
A government, Mr. Speaker, must be accountable for three 
reasons, in my view. One, because they’re elected and defeated 
by the voters. Number two, that elected representatives are 
merely custodians of the public wealth and assets, and in the 
case of Saskatchewan it seems, more and more, custodians of 
the massive growing debt. And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, because 
decisions governments make affect the public directly, and they 
have a right to know how decisions which affect their lives are 
made, so they know who is responsible or accountable. 
 
But there is a lesson to be learned in all of this discussion, Mr. 
Speaker, less than this debate on Bill 5 and Bill 7. The lesson 
that we’ve talked about in terms of the flip-flop nature of the 
Conservatives opposite, but the lesson very simply is that a 
Conservative is like quicksilver. If you try to put your finger on 
them, you will find nothing under it. 
 
My final comments, Mr. Speaker, very quickly are that few 
governments have good enough sight to see their own faults. 
And with these Bills the PC government exposes for public 
review their basic faults. Their basic faults: one, that their 
record is disgustingly poor when open to public scrutiny; two, 
that they have no plan or no vision other than for the 
multinationals, the oil companies, banks, Peter Pocklingtons, 
and the Weyerhaeusers of this world. And the plan they reveal 
for the taxpayers is that more of the taxpayers’ money will be 
going to the rich and powerful corporate friends of this party. 
But if the conservatives are able to hide from public scrutiny, 
through passing these Bills, their decisions in the future, one 
can only speculate on their reasons. 
 
The ultimate result of Bill 5 and Bill 7, if they are passed, I 
predict will be the demise of this government, Mr. Speaker. 
Cover-up and secrecy will defeat this government. 
 
I oppose Bill 7, Mr. Speaker, and I ask all members, including 
the private members on the government side, to think very 
carefully about some of the things that I have said today and 
that my colleagues have said before me. Thank you for your 
time. 
 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

463 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to stand and add a few 
remarks to this second reading debate of Bill 7 which serves as 
the consequential legislation for Bill 5. And I intend my 
remarks to be fairly brief. 
 
As with all Bills, I approach them first by asking: what is the 
effect of this Bill on the average person in Saskatchewan? 
What’s the net effect on the senior citizen, and the young 
person, the young family, working person, the unemployed 
person? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if people in your constituency are anything 
like people in my constituency, they don’t wake up in the 
morning asking themselves, I wonder what the Premier and the 
cabinet are going to do today. It’s a good thing they don’t do 
that; it would send them crazy. Even we don’t know. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where the average citizen in Saskatchewan relates 
to government, it’s not with the Legislative arm, it’s with 
departments of government where government serves them. 
 
So if a senior in Saskatchewan needs a prescription drug, or a 
young person breaks his ankle playing hockey, very soon 
they’re going to have a relationship with the Department of 
Health. If we send our kids off to school in the morning, we’re 
having a relationship there with the Department of Education. If 
we get in our car and drive from Tuxford to Craik, we have a 
relationship and relate there to the Department of Highways. 
 
Where the average person relates to government is where 
government serves them, and that’s the department level. And 
not a day goes by in our lives, Mr. Speaker, that we are not 
touched in one way or another by provincial government. 
 
And because this Bill, in relation to Bill 5, gives the Executive 
Council power, ultimate power, over all the departments of 
government, then it has . . . these two Bills have a real effect in 
the lives of Saskatchewan people. These pieces of legislation 
are not simply a matter of shuffling responsibilities. They’re not 
simply a matter of switching the deck chairs. 
 
It’s a fundamental shift in power over every government 
department, a shift of power from the legislature as a whole into 
the hands of a few, as it stands now, into the hands of 16 people 
— the Premier and 15 of his friends who will have ultimate 
deciding power over all of the departments of government — 
over the Department of Health and the Department of 
Education, Department of Highways, Labour, Social Services, 
and so on, to do with those departments what they wish, without 
public scrutiny, without the input of all elected members. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, Bill 7 and Bill 5 together have an effect 
on every citizen of Saskatchewan. It handicaps 48 out of their 
64 representatives. It makes their legislature — and this is their 
legislature, Mr. Speaker — it makes their legislature even less 
effective. And it places the decision-making power over those 
departments which serve the people of this province in the 
hands of a very  

few. And, Mr. Speaker, in my mind that makes this Bill, and the 
Bill it enables, plain wrong — both plain wrong. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to build on an argument today 
that was raised in this House last night by the Leader of the 
Opposition. Mr. Speaker, these Bills may not be so bad — these 
Bills which give to the Premier and his cabinet this ultimate 
power — these Bills may not be so bad if these people had our 
trust. If they have this ultimate power, it might not be so bad if 
they had our ultimate trust. 
 
But I ask members present: can we trust them? Can we trust 
them? And certainly we cannot, Mr. Speaker. And 55 per cent 
of the people of Saskatchewan said, we can’t trust them either 
and we want them opposed. And so, Mr. Speaker, I refer these 
remarks to members opposite. 
 
And I make this argument based on a quote from T.C. 
Haliburton who, writing as Sam Slick in the early 19th century, 
said: 
 

A power imprudently given to the executive or to the 
people is seldom or never given back. 

 
A power imprudently given to the executive is seldom or never 
given back. And so I ask members on that side of the House to 
imagine themselves on this side of the House — and they 
should do that fairly often because this is where they’ll be in 
four years — imagine yourselves on this side of the House and 
say to yourselves, can you trust us — can you trust us? Would 
you want, members opposite, a cabinet of ours to have the 
powers which are enabled by this Bill 7 and given in Bill 5? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t want the cabinet of the government to have 
those powers; I don’t want a cabinet of our party to have those 
powers; I don’t want any cabinet to share those powers. If we 
are imprudently giving powers — if we are imprudently giving 
powers — then let us not give them to the few but let us give 
them to the many. Let us not given them to the executive but let 
us give them to the people; let us given them to the legislature. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, let me conclude these brief remarks with 
one other quote about power, this one, I think, more 
appropriate. This one, I think, presents a saner and a safer 
vision for democracy than what’s been presented in these two 
Bills; this from F.R. Scott: 
 

Till power is brought to pooling 
And masses share in ruling, 
There will not be an ending 
Nor any peace for spending. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I stand to oppose Bill 7 as the consequential 
legislation to Bill 5. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 33 
 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

464 
 

Muller Pickering 
Duncan Martineau 
McLeod Sauder 
Andrew Johnson 
Berntson Hopfner 
Lane Petersen 
Taylor Swenson 
Swan Martens 
Muirhead Baker 
Maxwell Toth 
Schmidt Gleim 
Hodgins Neudorf 
Gerich Gardner 
Hepworth Kopelchuk 
Hardy Saxinger 
Klein Britton 
Meiklejohn  
  

 
Nays — 19 

 
Prebble Solomon 
Brockelbank Kowalsky 
Shillington Atkinson 
Koskie Anguish 
Romanow Calvert 
Tchorzewski Lautermilch 
Rolfes Trew 
Mitchell Van Mulligen 
Upshall Goodale 
Simard  
  
 
The Bill read a second time and, by leave of the Assembly, 
referred to a Committee of the Whole later this day. 
 

MESSAGE FROM THE LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR 
 

Membership of Board of Internal Economy 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I have a message from His Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor. Please rise. 
 

Dear Mr. Speaker: Pursuant to Section 68.7 of The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, I hereby 
inform the Assembly of the membership of the Board of 
Internal Economy effective December 22, 1986: 
 
The Hon. A. Tusa, Speaker; The Hon. G. Hodgins; The 
Hon. H. J. Swan; L.A. McLaren, MLA; J.E. Gerich, MLA; 
M.J. Koskie, MLA; and E.F. Lautermilch, MLA. 
 
Yours sincerely, F. W. Johnson, Lieutenant Governor, 
Province of Saskatchewan. 

 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 
Bill No. 5 — An Act respecting the Organization of the 

Executive Government of Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. On my right is  

Dr. Norman Riddell, deputy minister to the Premier, and 
cabinet secretary; on my left is Ron Hewitt, clerk of Executive 
Council; behind me is Doug Moen, co-ordinator of legislative 
services, Department of Justice; and to his left, Bob Richards, 
director of constitutional law, Department of Justice. 
 
As we go through clause by clause, I’ll be more than pleased 
with the able assistance of these four gentlemen to deal with the 
questions that you raise. But I admit at the outset to some of my 
shortcomings, that is, when you get into questions of 
constitutionality, since I’m not broadly versed on those 
lawyering-type words, I may be calling my colleague, the 
Minister of Justice, to respond to them. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the minister for 
introducing his officials. I’m sure they will be of assistance to 
him in answering some of the questions which we will want to 
direct to him and to the government. 
 
In my remarks on clause 1, Mr. Chairman, what I really want to 
try to focus the attention of the committee is to the question 
which can be simply put and asked, and in my judgement not 
yet answered by the government, and that is: why this Bill? 
Why is it necessary to introduce this Bill? 
 
We will be doing, in the course of the afternoon, a number of 
amendments, or proposing a number of amendments, and 
making some arguments which will try to reinforce the question 
of the necessity of this Bill, to satisfy our own minds as to its 
purpose, but also to highlight some of the difficulties which we 
think the Bill presents not only for the government but for the 
people of Saskatchewan. But fundamentally as I see it, the 
question that has to be answered is, why this Bill? The 
government has to make its case out, in my respectful 
submission, to the necessity of introducing a piece of legislation 
which by any fair-minded assessment is a quantum leap up in 
the acquisition of power that the provincial cabinet has. 
 
Now to give you an example of what I’m getting at when I ask, 
why this Bill, I wish to refer the hon. minister and the members 
of the committee to the developments very recently in the 
establishment of — purportedly the establishment — of a new 
purported new department by the provincial government. This 
is, as the -Leader of the Opposition pointed out in his remarks 
last night in second reading, the department which deals with 
the hon. member from Melville, the Saskatchewan human 
resources, labour and employment department, heretofore a 
combination of two or three separate departments. 
 
Prior to November 12 of this year, Mr. Chairman, we saw a 
number of things take place with respect to the development of 
this department. We saw by orders in councils which have been 
identified — I don’t intend to take the time of the committee to 
again detail them — but signed by the Premier — we saw a 
number of things happen. First of all, we saw the transfer of 
responsibilities and staff from the current Department of Labour 
— or as I thought it to be the current Department of Labour — 
over to Environment. We saw orders in council transferring to  
  



 
December 23, 1986 

465 
 

Labour the responsibilities, the staffing, the funding for other 
functions of government such as the Women’s Secretariat, 
Indian and Native Affairs, Employment Development Agency, 
and Seniors’ Bureau in Social Services. We have seen either 
subsequently or before — chronologically it doesn’t much 
matter for the purposes of my argument today — 
documentation which refers to this new department which is 
known as human resources, labour and employment. 
 
I have here, Mr. Chairman, a photocopy of the report from the 
Department of Labour, and this is the first page, table of 
contents. And on the bottom of this publication — the 
publication is called Labour Report — the following is written: 
 

Readers of the Labour Report will notice that the title of 
the department has changed from Saskatchewan Labour to 
Saskatchewan Human Resources, Labour and 
Employment. 

 
By the way, that’s the first time that I noted that. 
 

This new department is being created by integrating the 
Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat, Women’s 
Secretariat, Seniors’ Bureau, Employment Development 
Agency and Labour under the Hon. Grant Schmidt. 
Readers should watch for further changes to the Labour 
Report as the development of this department and its 
mandate proceeds. 

 
(1515) 
 
I might just stop there and say, parenthetically speaking, that 
that itself I think is rather unusual, perhaps even sloppy in terms 
of government organization to have the statement, made at the 
very bottom, that readers should watch for the development of 
this department, should watch for the development of this 
department, Mr. Chairman, and its mandate as it proceeds, 
implying that there is either no clearly thought-out form and 
shape and objectives and purposes of this new department 
which will evolve in some sort of evolutionary manner. Or in 
the alternative, if there is a clearly thought-out pattern for this 
department, the writer of this report says: we ain’t telling what 
it’s going to be until we decide to tell to the people of 
Saskatchewan. But I leave that as aside for the moment. 
 
But you will see what I am trying to say to you, Mr. Chairman, 
and to members of this committee. We have seen the gazetting, 
we’ve seen the orders in council, we’ve seen the advertising, if 
you put it that way. Certainly we’ve seen official 
documentation be released from the appropriate government 
officials. We’ve seen a new title to a new government 
department. 
 
My question, therefore, to the Deputy Premier and the persons 
piloting this legislation through this House is this: does the 
legislation, as it currently exists in the province of 
Saskatchewan, now provide sufficient authority to set up this 
new department, as these documents have indicated it has been 
established? Does it so provide that statutory authority? And if 
it does, why then is Bill 5 necessary? 
 

But I’ll put another side to that question on the other side of the 
coin. If the legislation does not now provide sufficient authority 
to establish the new department, using it as an example, will the 
Deputy Premier tell this House and the committee that officials 
in his government have improperly, perhaps even unlawfully, 
set up a new department prior to the passage of an appropriate 
Bill 5? Now those are my specific questions. 
 
But they all are germane to the key issue, and the key question 
that I ask again: why this unprecedented power-grab? Why is it 
that all of a sudden, now, after 75, 80 years of legislative history 
in the province of Saskatchewan, we find it so necessary to 
conglomerate in the hands of the cabinet this authority and this 
power? It certainly hasn’t prevented them with respect to the 
current department of labour . . . human resources. 
 
But why is it generally necessary in a larger philosophical 
basis? Has this government’s bureaucracy become so bloated, 
are there so many agencies and secretariats that one does not 
know where the other exists, that such radical legislation as this 
is required in order to put it into some form of order? 
 
Is it, after four and a half years now, such that the size of the 
civil service and the multiplicity of cabinet committees and the 
inability to interchange and to interact as between the cabinet 
ministers necessitates this rather Draconian measure to put 
things into order? Are things so inefficient now in the operation 
of this government over four and a half years, nearly five years, 
that that justifies this virtually unprecedented piece of 
legislation? 
 
What is it? Why do we need this? I mean, Mr. Chairman, you 
hear -e I’ve had the pleasure of being in the private sector for 
four and a half years. I’ve had the pleasure of being employed 
privately in the private sector for four and a half years. And I 
tell you, it was a very refreshing thing to be there, because I had 
the opportunity of listening to the people in the business 
community telling me about the confusion which reigns in their 
relationships with this government. They say the government is 
inefficient, there are too many departments, too many 
bureaucrats. One arm doesn’t talk to the other arm, doesn’t deal 
with the other arm. One person doesn’t talk to the other person. 
There is a certain sense of lack of purpose and direction. 
 
So maybe that is . . . and the question is: did you ever hear that 
before? No, I never did hear that before. I never heard that 
complaints that are existing out there. I tell this: it sounds like a 
partisan comment; I suppose it is a partisan comment. I tell you, 
Mr. Chairman,, and the members of the government opposite, 
that is there. And I’m giving them the piece of political advice, 
if they don’t recognize that it’s there, the outcome of the next 
provincial election will be foregone, it’ll be a definite outcome, 
without any doubt at all. It’s there. 
 
So my question really is, Mr. Chairman, why does the 
government feel now so necessitous of bringing in this kind of 
all-powerful legislation? What is it that motivates this 
conglomeration of authority? 
 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

466 
 

I want to ask the member, the Deputy Premier specifically, if 
he’ll put it in some general philosophical terms. And by the 
way, if he will admit that the government has been running a 
very sloppy ship, and it’s not been very tight and not very 
efficient, and they’ve got to take some drastic remedy, okay fair 
enough. That’s at least a justification. I want him to try to put it 
in general terms, but I want to also have him answer this 
specific question if he will: does the legislation not now provide 
for the authority to set up a new department as has been done 
here by the department of human resources? And if it doesn’t so 
provide, then does the Deputy Premier say that the 
establishments and the publications and the orders in councils 
are unlawful? Under what authority have these been made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member has 
touched on just how little this Bill does in fact do. Existing law 
does permit reassignment of duties as we have done with the 
Minister of Labour and the assignment of those secretariats and 
Social Services, etc., to his particular area of responsibility. It 
shows how little this Act really adds, and does, in fact, provide 
for the name change. I think that the suggestion that that 
department or that title, if you like, of human resources and 
labour does not yet exist . . . There may have been a few people 
in the department who have in their enthusiasm taken a little 
licence and say they belong to that particular department, but it 
doesn’t exist, and it can’t exist until this Bill has passed. 
 
I see that the member as well during his four years in the private 
sector was listening to some of the same people that we were, 
because a large number of people out there over the last six, 
seven, eight years have been telling us that government, in fact, 
is not efficient, and it provides for a great deal of confusion, and 
even wasteful in some respects, and in some areas shows a lack 
of purpose and direction. And again those are some of the 
things that we’re trying to correct, Mr. Chairman, with this 
legislation. 
 
I want to quote from you briefly something that will, I think, 
generally tell you the purpose and the direction of what we’re 
trying to do here. And it says: 
 
I want to quote from you briefly something that will, I think, 
generally tell you the purpose and the direction of what we’re 
trying to do here. And it says: 
 

The main effect of this legislation is to formalize a number 
of practices already in use and to provide, generally 
speaking, to provide for greater flexibility in the executive 
branch of government. The greater flexibility proposed 
here would empower the Lieutenant Governor in Council 
to determine with greater ease the organization of the 
executive arm of government. Rather than have 
departmental Acts for each and every department, it would 
empower the Lieutenant Governor in council to rearrange 
the executive arm as is found most expeditious and most 
efficient in the judgement of the members of Executive 
Council. 

 
And that, Mr. Speaker, comes from the Manitoba Hansard in 
April of 1970 of Mr., or at that time premier, Ed Schreyer, 
when he was passing similar legislation in Manitoba. 
 

And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that it was a Walter Weir, Mr. 
Chairman, a Walter Weir, when he was premier of Manitoba, 
that first proposed this streamlining, if you like. I don’t know 
. . . I doubt very much if it was because he proposed it that he 
wasn’t successful electorally shortly thereafter. 
 
But the premier, Ed Schreyer, who followed him, very quickly 
moved to put this in place with the full support of Walter 
Weir’s opposition. And it has since survived the government of 
Sterling Lyon and now Premier Pawley. And they’ve all, from 
my understanding, all have found it to be a very efficient and 
effective use of the time of government in handling the 
streamlining of government in this way. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman,, I thank the Deputy Premier 
for his answer. Let me make a couple of observations, if I may, 
in rebuttal and further explanation of what we’re trying to get at 
in Committee of the Whole. 
 
First of all the greatest of respect to the former premier of 
Manitoba, Ed Schreyer, or the Government of Manitoba. This 
argument does not carry very much weight with me, sir, not 
because of Mr. Schreyer or because of Mr. Bennett in British 
Columbia or anybody else. 
 
I think it’s important that we can look to other jurisdictions, but 
I think it’s also equally important, if not more important, that 
we tailor legislation to suit our jurisdiction. And I’m arguing to 
you that, while you can point to Manitoba, that doesn’t cut very 
much ice because that’s not the way we’ve done business in the 
province of Saskatchewan, by introducing that form of 
Manitoba-style legislation which is before us now in this 
committee. 
 
The second observation I’d made with respect to Manitoba is 
that the legislation is not identical. You very properly use the 
word “similar” to the legislation that you propose, but it is not 
identical, and it’s not identical in some very material respects. 
Some of those respects may be amended or corrected by some 
subsequent actions proposed by government, but that doesn’t 
take away from the overall direction of this Bill, which is an 
assumption of power in cabinet in the name of efficiency. 
 
So the first point that I wish to make and stress to the Deputy 
Premier and the government opposite, that whether it’s an NDP 
government in Manitoba or a Social Credit government in 
British Columbia or a Liberal government in Ottawa, that 
argument by itself, per se, will not cut much ice unless you can 
overcome a valid reason to change the history and the tradition 
of this province. Point number one. 
 
Second point I want to make, Mr. Deputy Premier, is to put this 
issue clearly behind us. Nobody on this side of the House, and I 
dare say no one in this House, argues against the need to 
become more efficient. I know it’s a struggle in government; 
it’s a struggle all the time whether it’s in Saskatchewan or 
Ottawa or elsewhere. We’re not opposed to any attempt by this 
government to streamline its operations. 
 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

467 
 

Indeed I would say, Mr. Chairman, if I may slightly wander into 
a more partisan area, if there is any government in Canada that 
needs to streamline its operations, goodness knows it’s this 
government and this cabinet, because it is indeed one which is, 
certainly by every outside observance, confused as to its lines of 
responsibility and authority, confused as to the decision-making 
process. You don’t have to go searching out civil servants who 
will tell you that, sir; they’ll volunteer it. You don’t have to 
search out business men or farmers or other people; they will 
tell you that. 
 
And as I say, it sounds as a partisan comment. I suppose it is a 
partisan comment, but I tell you as well that it is an objective 
fact. There is some basic problems of inefficiency and lack of 
communication and crispness of decision-making authority 
which has put your government in an administrative twilight 
zone. So we’re not going to argue against the necessity to have 
better efficiency and more efficiency operation in terms of 
government. That, you will get the members of this side to 
agree. That’s not the issue either. 
 
So we’re not going to be appeased by Manitoba, and we’re not 
going to be appeased by any form of suggestion that we’re not 
for efficiency. We are. We recognize that we may not achieve 
it. We didn’t achieve it; you people haven’t totally achieved it. 
But the necessity and the demand to make this government 
more efficient is indeed very high on the list of priorities. That’s 
the second point I make. 
 
But the third point that I make deals with the question that I 
asked at the beginning, Mr. Chairman, which I shall put back 
again to the minister in charge. Why is it that we need this 
legislation? Because the minister in his answer to the question 
that I directed to him pointed me, as he did to other members of 
the committee, to the existing legislation. He would have bus 
believe that all that this new Bill 5 does, apparently, is 
somehow bring in all the loose piece and ends and strings and 
ties them together, but doesn’t really add anything new to the 
powers and the provisions of the province of Saskatchewan in 
its administrative capacity. I say, Mr. Chairman, that is 
absolutely and totally false. That’s wrong. 
 
(1530) 
 
Just take a look at this order in council which prompted my first 
question dealing with the new department of human resources, 
labour and social services — whatever it’s called — the new 
super ministry that the member from Melville’s in charge of. 
This order in council itself, dated November 12, 1986, points to 
the current legislation, section 71, subparagraph 2. In that order 
in council, if you look at it, it empowers cabinet — and this is 
the way it’s always been or at least done for a long time in 
Saskatchewan — it empowers cabinet to transfer what? I 
underline the word, sir — the administration of the Act, the 
administration of portions of the Act and the assignment of 
various administrative responsibilities currently given to 
various ministers to other individuals in the cabinet. 
 
That is the current law. If it’s thought desirable by this 
government to become more efficient and to rearrange  

the administrative functions of various ministers, this 
government has the authority to do it under the current law, 
section 71, subparagraph 2. In fact, it did so. The minister 
would say, in his answer to me, that all that they did on 
November 12 was rearrange the functions. 
 
He slightly admitted that there may have been no legal basis for 
the title — the new title of the department. Let’s leave the title 
aside for the moment; it’s important, but that I don’t think is as 
important as the functions. 
 
They’ve achieved their goals by this order in council, 
readministration, reorganization, which we see here. That’s 
obvious. That’s the answer that he gave to me. I ask the 
question: if they can accomplish this with the new department 
of human resources, as they’ve done so, where is the need for 
this new power-grabbing Bill? Why do we have to have 
legislation — which we’ll deal with in specifics when we come 
to the other sections — which talks about objects and purposes 
and the provisions in section 5 and the provisions in section 17 
and 22 and laced throughout. Where is the urgency? 
 
I say this to the member opposite, the Deputy Premier: is he 
telling us that we was legislators are so busy here in the four or 
five months that we’re sitting that we can’t take an extra couple 
of days to deal with a Bill that the government might want to 
introduce for the name of efficiency and more speed? 
 
Are the members opposite telling us that we cannot take the 
time to publicly debate any mandate that ministers may be 
given in department responsibilities, publicly and openly in 
front of television cameras? 
 
Is the minister telling us that he is so busy and that the 
objectives of efficiency so outweigh the openness of 
government — so outweigh him coming to this legislature and 
to the people of Saskatchewan to tell us what’s intended by way 
of administration and by way of efficiency — that we cannot 
afford the time to consider that, Mr. Chairman? Surely, the 
Deputy Premier isn’t telling this to us. 
 
We’re not a body which sits 12 months of the year. We’re not 
so yet burdened down that we’re not able to consider the 
detailed purposes of a mandate that a minister must fulfil. By 
this legislation, Mr. Chairman, if there is an order in council 
rearrangement, or if you will, I’ll even give you a better 
example . . . If there is an order in council disestablishment, to 
use that euphemistic term and rather disingenuous word, as the 
Leader of the Opposition described it last night, but 
disestablishment of a department — if there’s an order in 
council doing that, how in the word do we as members of the 
Legislative Assembly know whether or not the minister’s new 
functions and mandates are being performed by that individual? 
You have to have a statute, sir. You have to have a Bill by 
which you can judge the performance of have a Bill by which 
you can judge the performance of that minister. You have to 
have a mandate in black and white writing which will tell the 
opposition — let alone the opposition, tell the entire people of 
Saskatchewan — whether or not that minister or that minister is 
doing the correct job. 
 
No, not here. The proposal is that in the name of some  
  



 
December 23, 1986 

468 
 

form of efficiency they’re going to disestablish. I say, Mr. 
Chairman, let’s be very careful and precise with the language 
that we’re using here. When we talk about efficiency, whose 
efficiency? Are we talking about efficiency in the delivery of 
the services of government? That’s an objective that I support. 
Or are we talking about the efficiency in the delivery of 
bureaucracy and the cabinet of government in their goals and 
desires to achieve their objectives? That’s a different kind of 
efficiency. 
 
You can’t assume that the efficiency of administrative or 
bureaucratic objectives equals efficiency of the delivery of 
service to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. Whose 
efficiency are we talking about here? Are we so busy, Mr. 
Chairman, I ask? Are we so busy as legislators in a province of 
a million people only that a government of the day can’t come 
forward and say: we’re gong to amend this Bill to do this 
function or that function in order for us to have an open debate 
in front of the television cameras and so the people of 
Saskatchewan can see us. Are we that busy? I don’t think we 
are. 
 
Whose efficiency are we talking about? I say, Mr. Chairman, 
that since the Deputy Premier either is unable or unwilling to 
answer those questions in general terms — and I think he has an 
obligation to answer why the policy behind this Bill — why it is 
that it found its way through cabinet, presumably through 
caucus. In the absence of an explanation by the Deputy Premier, 
what are we to conclude? What are we to conclude on this side, 
Mr. Chairman? Is it too far-fetched to conclude that indeed 
there is another agenda involved in this political move by the 
government for the reorganization of departments, that agenda 
being, as I say, that this government is either too sloppy or too 
lazy to come forward with legislation in order to see the light of 
day — and it’s their efficiency — or in the alternative they’re 
going to so scramble the departments in the weeks and the 
months ahead, disestablish, vary and amend those departments, 
that not only will the press, not only will the MLAs, but more 
importantly the public of Saskatchewan won’t see what their 
hidden agenda is. Or is that the purpose that’s behind this Bill? 
 
Now there has to be some explanation as to what this 
government is going to do. So I say to the Deputy Premier, Mr. 
Chairman, I’ll ask again a question — obviously he’ll want to 
respond to my remarks — you, by your own remarks, sir, have 
said that all that this new department of human resources is 
doing, or how it was established, is a realization of existing 
power. You’ve achieved all of your objectives, Mr. Deputy 
Premier. You’ve reorganized several agencies into one new 
super ministry. You may have one small problem with respect 
name, but you have achieved your objectives under the current 
legislation. You would have us believe that that’s all this Bill 
wants to do, purely administration. You’ve achieved that 
objective. My question to you, sir, is this: since you have 
admitted that you have accomplished that goal under the current 
Bill — I come back to the key question which is instrumental to 
getting this Bill through the Committee of the Whole quickly — 
why this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, to answer your 
second-last question first. The example you use, what we  

have with the Minister of Labour is five or six separate entities 
under one minister. The administrative efficiencies that come 
from reorganization simply don’t exist until this Bill is passed. 
 
I want to comment briefly on your earlier remarks about, don’t 
point to Manitoba, your earlier remarks about not pointing to 
Manitoba — don’t point to Manitoba. Manitoba has its own 
uniqueness, as we have ours, and we ought to do those things 
that reflect our uniqueness as opposed to Manitoba’s. And I 
suppose that’s fair. I also suppose that a good idea from 
wherever is . . . ought not to be rejected just because it comes 
from some place else. 
 
And I remember as well, in second reading debate, when 
several of your members said, well you know this Manitoba 
legislation is not bad. If your legislation was more in line with 
the Manitoba legislation, I could even support it. That was the 
line they were taking. And they were saying things like, objects 
and purposes. We have a great deal of difficulty with this 
phrase — objects and purposes. And if you would bring in the 
Manitoba wording, likes duties and functions, we could 
probably support this legislation. 
 
That was the kind of talk that was coming from that side of the 
House. I said, yes, sure, we’ll gladly move to that kind of 
phrasing — duties and functions — if that will satisfy members 
opposite. We think that objects and purposes is far more safer. 
We believe that the word duties comes perilously close to 
powers, and we’ve been trying stay away from that, quite 
frankly. 
 
And you talked about, you won’t appease us with this or you 
won’t appease us with that. I, quite frankly, don’t think you’re 
going to be appeased. I think you don’t want to be appeased. I 
think you just want to get up and make your point. And you do 
it very eloquently, I might add. 
 
And the point that you made about existing legislation gives us 
the power to do the kinds of things we want to do — what 
existing legislation does, is prescribes powers to certain 
ministers responsible for that particular statute. What section 5 
in the new legislation or in this Bill before us does, is assign 
powers, which is something different from prescribing powers. 
 
And section 12 in this legislation before us now, deals with 
administrative framework only, objects and purposes for 
administrative in the administrative framework. These five or 
six different entities that we’re talking about under one minister 
can be brought together in one administrative body. 
 
But the duties and powers of those separate statutes that exist 
will not be changed. They can’t be changed without coming to 
this House, either alter or repeal or otherwise deal with them. 
So I guess the point I make is: this is not anything sinister or 
dark or evil. It’s really, I suppose, a mega-housekeeping sort of 
Bill. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all I say to the 
Deputy Premier, flattery won’t get you anywhere. I want to say 
that the other members of this House will decide when and if 
they want to enter into this debate to explain what their remarks 
were about. But as far as I  
  



 
December 23, 1986 

469 
 

heard those remarks in second reading debate . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
Yes, they’re in Hansard. And certainly my remarks, I 
remember that evening very well. I took the position then, and 
so do my colleagues, that Manitoba is not a model that we want 
to adopt. We do say that if it was Manitoba, it would be a Bill a 
little more closer to what you say you want to do. But that does 
not mean that we should go the next leap in logic, namely to 
adopt Manitoba. 
 
We can point out, as we have pointed out, Mr. Deputy Premier, 
that Manitoba is in at least, I think, a more responsible position 
by this legislation. But you ought not to conclude from there 
that the next step is going to be, from our point of view, that we 
should therefore adopt the Manitoba position, especially if, 
when I come back to my central theme — and I say this with 
the greatest of respect for the Deputy Premier; he’s not 
answered it yet — especially when the central issue is: why this 
Bill, in policy terms, why this Bill? 
 
So I don’t agree with you when you say that the members on 
this side of the House are urging you to adopt a Manitoba-style 
piece of legislation. That’s not true. 
 
A second observation I want to make in the context of your 
remarks is this business of Bill No. 5 being merely some form 
of, as I say again conglomerate Bill which ties up all the loose 
strings and does not change any of the existing powers or 
authorities of the legislation involved. You undoubtedly will be 
asked questions later this afternoon about specific department 
organizational responsibilities, the way this Bill is worded. But 
I tell you, Mr. Chairman, and Deputy Premier, that I, for one, 
on the wording of section 12 and section 5, and 22 and 17 of 
this Bill, am not so sanguine about the judgement that you make 
that there’s going to have to be some form of legislation to 
change ministerial responsibilities or mandates of departments. 
 
My former responsibilities dealt with the Department of the 
Attorney General. I don’t have the Bill of the Department of the 
Attorney General in front of me, but if my memory serves me 
correctly, somewhere in that Bill, that departmental Bill, Mr. 
Chairman,, is the responsibility for the minister for the 
administration of justice in the province of Saskatchewan. 
That’s in that Bill. That’s a departmental mandate Bill. 
 
I know that the current Minister of Justice, if he doesn’t fulfil 
that responsibility for the administration of justice — because 
it’s there on black and white in a legislative enactment — I 
know as a citizen of the province, and I know as a member of 
this House, that I can then criticize. I have a yardstick; I have a 
bench-mark, something by which we can assess performance, 
make motions of confidence or non-confidence. 
 
(1545) 
 
The way this Bill is currently worded, Mr. Chairman, I invite 
you, sir, to take a careful look at it. The way this Bill is 
currently worded, this cabinet can disestablish the department. 
Let’s forget about disestablishing the department. It can 
certainly take out that particular object  

and purpose of the responsibility of the administration of 
justice. 
 
My automatic reaction to the members opposite will be, well 
that’s a far-fetched example; we’re not going to do that. But 
we’re not debating it on what intentions are. I say to the Deputy 
Premier . . . I know he’s a good guy, but I’m not so sure that the 
political people who are advising this cabinet are so honourable 
in their intentions and their motivations. 
 
I don’t think that we can be passing legislation on the assurance 
of members of the government or the treasury benches that they 
should somehow trust us — that they should say to the people 
of Saskatchewan, trust me. 
 
The department of Continuing Education Act has a provision 
which obligates — and it’s a departmental Bill assigned to the 
minister — obligates this government and this minister to 
honour the question of academic freedom. In question period or 
one of the earlier debates, yesterday I guess it was, the Deputy 
Premier got up and he said, well it shouldn’t be there; it should 
be somewhere else. Well that’s no answer. Maybe it should be 
somewhere else, but the fact of the matter is that in the 
combination and several Bills which tie up the responsibility of 
the department of continuing education and the ministry and the 
minister, there is an obligation to maintain the highest 
principles of academic independence, just like with the 
administration of justice. 
 
Now they’re telling us, Mr. Chairman,, they’re asking us to buy 
a pig in the poke. They’re asking us to say that we should 
enable them by legislation, by order in council after the Bill is 
enacted, to theoretically, if not practically, some day, 
somewhere, somehow, do away with one or two of those 
functions. We should trust them that they’re not going to do 
that. That’s what they’re saying. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Chairman, I ask the members of this House: is 
this the way we do our legislative and political business in the 
Saskatchewan? That’s why I come back to Manitoba. If 
someone says, well they do it elsewhere, I frankly don’t care if 
they do it elsewhere. I think that in Saskatchewan what I want 
seen to be done, is I want legislation that sets out departmental 
objects and purposes by that legislation. I don’t want that 
lawmaking power being assigned to an order in council in a 
cabinet. 
 
And I want to repeat one other argument which in my 
judgement is telling, Mr. Chairman — telling. It was raised by 
the Leader of the Opposition last night. I don’t know whether 
the Deputy Premier will answer this question. I don’t know if 
any other of the people in the back benches are going to take 
part in this debate, but I’ll put it to them. 
 
What would you say if we were on the treasury benches and we 
came forward with this Bill in this form? What would you do? 
What would you, Mr. Chairman . . . I won’t say you, because 
you’re impartial in the Chair now. I ask the hon. member from 
Eastview who I know by his ideological commitment believes 
in less government, believes in open government, who does not 
believe in what our party stands for, who fears what he says — 
I 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

470 
 

 think wrongly so — is a proliferation of government activity on 
our part. 
 
How would you react, to the member of Eastview I say, if we 
had this power, and we were in government, and we had the 
right by order in council to create departments and disestablish 
departments and amend departments and vary departments and 
transfer departments and gazette them but not necessarily take 
them to the Regulations Committee — we’ll argue that; my 
colleague from Lakeview will explain that legal argument — 
how would you, member from Lakeview, like that? I don’t 
think you’d like it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Eastview. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Eastview. I’m sorry. I said Lakeview, but I 
meant Eastview. Two views but from two different 
perspectives, Mr. Chairman. 
 
How does the member from Eastview like this? I don’t know 
whether or not the member from Arm River sitting in his chair 
over there, but he was formerly in cabinet . . . How would he 
like it if it was my friend, the leader of the Liberal Party, in 
power with this bill? He says he’s just waiting for it. Well, to be 
honest with you, although I think he’s a good guy too, I can tell 
him that I’m not waiting for it. I don’t think that this Bill in the 
hands of any political party, of any group of men and women, 
no matter how well intentioned, is the way that we ought to be 
organizing our political and administrative affairs in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You see, Mr. Chairman, these people opposite are making one 
big, fatal mistake. They think that they’re going to be in office 
for ever. I want to tell you, sir, from personal experience, it 
ain’t necessarily so. It won’t happen. And when you fall, as fall 
you will sooner or later, although I predict, I say to the member 
from Regina, a lot sooner than they would want, that Bill will 
be there. 
 
And then I ask the member from Eastview, from Saskatoon 
Eastview, who is a fellow Saskatonian, or anybody else in the 
back bench: how would you like us to be in charge of that 
legislation? I don’t want to be in charge of that legislation. I’m 
telling you that right now. That’s the test surely that must be 
applied, as the Leader of the Opposition has stated. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I say to the Deputy Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan who has very able advisers around him — all 
dedicated to the improvement of the public administration of 
Saskatchewan — why is it on philosophical terms this Bill is 
being advanced? What is the major policy and philosophical 
basis, especially coming from a Conservative party, especially 
from a group of men and women who believe in the traditional 
rights of parliamentary democracy and accountability — at least 
they say they do — and that long history of going back to 
parliamentary accountability, especially from that group of men 
and women; why is it — will somebody please tell me there — 
that this Bill needs to be introduced on a philosophical or policy 
basis? We haven’t heard that answer. 
 
The member says that I am not about to be persuaded.  

Well I’ve got a surprise in store for him. I am about to be 
persuaded if you can persuade me. But please, what I want you 
to do is to start by telling me and telling the members of this 
House: what is the policy purpose behind this? Don’t tell me 
efficiency, because you haven’t answered the question of 
efficiency for whom. Is it efficiency for your people advising 
you, or is it efficiency outside? 
 
And tell us more than efficiency. Tell us how this Bill meshes 
with the concept of responsible parliamentary democracy, 
because that’s what we’re tinkering with right here. We’re 
monkeying with that principle. 
 
And so I say to the Hon. Deputy Premier: is there any other 
reason that you advocate, other than this ubiquitous word that 
you throw out, of efficiency? Efficiency for whom? For whom 
is this Bill designed? Who out there in the public is doing to 
benefit by the capability of this cabinet to act in secrecy in the 
back rooms to reorganize departments and ministers? Will the 
Deputy Premier please tell us that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The hon. member talks about secrecy 
in back rooms and efficiencies, or lack thereof, and I’ve pointed 
out one or two examples. If we’re talking about administrative 
frameworks — and we have with the Minister of Social 
Services, Minister of Labour, etc. — where we have six or five 
or whatever separate entities responsible to one minister, and if 
we can bring that together administratively so that we can bring 
those kinds of efficiencies to the administrative side of 
government, I don’t see how that can ill serve either 
government or the people that government represents. And for 
the life of me I don’t understand why members opposite are 
arguing against bringing those kinds of efficiencies to 
government. 
 
On the question of public accountability, it’s been put before 
the House before on more than one occasion that this Bill 
provides no more power, as it relates to the expenditure of 
money, than already exists under existing legislation. Every 
expenditure has to be brought before this House in estimates 
and approved here before it can legitimately be spent. 
 
On the question of establishment or disestablishment by order 
in council, all of those regulations re put before the Regulations 
Committee of the legislature. The Regulations Committee of the 
legislature can argue that that can come before the House, etc.; 
it can be debated in that way. 
 
And so, you know, I think that the member from Riversdale, the 
opposition House Leader, is far overstating the case that he tries 
to make. And very eloquently overstating his case, I might add. 
The press may catch your line. I suppose the press may catch 
your line. But nobody else in the province will, because the rest 
of the province, all the taxpaying citizens of the province, are 
looking for administrative efficiency to come to government. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re quite anxious to provide them with 
that. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I’d just ask a couple more questions, if I 
can, of the Deputy Premier. I will be very specific and  
  



 
December 23, 1986 

471 
 

shorten this one. Is it the position of the Deputy Premier that the 
Government of Saskatchewan does not have the legislative 
capacity at present to bring administrative efficiency in the 
organization of departments by virtue of section 71(2) of the 
current Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — By virtue of section what? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well let me rephrase it. You have 
reorganized the Department of Labour and Social Services to 
have this new super ministry, as it’s been described, of human 
resources, labour, and social services, Mr. Chairman. That’s 
been accomplished without this Bill. My question to you is this: 
is it your position that you do not have the legislative authority 
to achieve administrative efficiency now? And if the answer is 
no, you do not, then how is it at law that the government can 
justify the establishment of this current department of human 
resources? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay, the point should be made, Mr. 
Speaker, that that department is not yet established. What we 
have is five or six or three or two, or whatever it is, separate 
entities responsible to one minister. That department cannot be 
established, in our view, until this legislation is passed. 
 
This legislation will then bring that administrative function 
together, and I’ve already admitted that there may have been 
some people in this proposed department who have taken a little 
licence and called themselves members of whatever this new 
thing is going to be called. But technically and legally, we 
believe that that department doesn’t exist. It can’t exist, except 
as separate entities assigned as responsibilities to this minister, 
until this legislation is passed. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, let’s assume for the moment 
that the answer by the Deputy Premier is correct. My question 
to you is: in the context of Bill 5, what would have prevented 
. . . what prevents the government from coming forward to this 
House at this session with a department Bill, setting up the 
department of human resources, social services, in the full title 
of the Bill? Why could you not have done that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I suppose we could have; I suppose we 
could have. We chose not to because, quite frankly, the 
reorganization will not stop at the efficiencies, the 
administrative efficiencies, that will come to that one 
department. We’re going to be looking throughout government 
for efficiencies and, as such, want to be able to have the 
flexibility to bring those efficiencies into play as they are 
recognized and as we talked about earlier. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, you see, I say with respect to 
the Deputy Premier, that is an answer which does not satisfy 
me. And I’ll tell you why it does not satisfy me. First of all, it 
does not satisfy me because the implication, in fact the explicit 
words behind that answer, is that the government does not know 
where the mandate of this new department of human resources 
and social services is about to start or, more importantly, to end. 
And I find that a very strange commentary in the way this 
government is conducting business. 
 

Surely to goodness, even if you wanted to move under Bill 5 to 
reorganize departments, you would have had in mind by now 
how those departments are going to be organized; where the 
departments are going to exist; what they’re going to do; from 
where are their functions coming; what new functions are going 
to be adopted. Surely the Deputy Premier is not saying that the 
reason why they need this Bill in order to implement this 
department of human resources, the new department of human 
resources is, as he has told us, because there needs to be some 
evolutionary, long-drawn-out process for the establishment of a 
new department. My goodness, don’t you know what you want 
out of that new department of human resources, for example? 
 
(1600) 
 
Do we not know what is going to be of a Department of 
Labour? Have we started this process of taking one brick away 
from some departments and from other departments and then 
put together a half-built house; and because we don’t know 
what that house or those houses are going to look like, we need 
to give you people, at the expense of democracy and 
accountability, a carte blanche. That house may end up looking 
like an elephant or some other unseemly creation. 
 
Is that the position of the Deputy Premier and the government, 
that they have no firm idea of how government organization is 
going to take place? That they’re going to organize because 
somehow that’s the buzz-word. Or is it, Mr. Deputy Premier — 
and forgive me if I sound a little bit paranoiac about this — or 
is it because you do have a game plan, but you don’t want to 
meet this legislature, using this Bill as an example, to defend 
what you’re trying to do. 
 
Is it really, Mr. Deputy Premier, the purpose behind this Bill 
No. 5 that you people on the treasury benches indeed know 
exactly what you’re going to do with the government’s 
department. You know which of those departments will be 
eliminated. You know what the consequences are going to be in 
civil service staff complement and negotiations. Is it because, 
using this example of human resources, you’re really going to 
batten down the hatches and sock it to all of those people who 
have now been suffering for four and a half years under your 
administration, and you’re afraid that by coming with a 
full-fledged departmental Bill to set it up, you’re going to run 
into tremendous political flak from us and from the press. Is 
that the real reason behind Bill 5? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — It’s got to be one or the other. It can only be 
one of two objectives, Mr. Deputy Premier. You either don’t 
know where you’re going and you need the flexibility when the 
House is not around to put together this concoction, whatever 
it’s going to be, which is a damning indictment of the 
incompetence of this government, Mr. Chairman. Or in the 
alternative, you do have a game plan but you do not want to 
come to this House to tell us what it is. You don’t want to 
explain — I use this department as an example — what it is, the 
mission and the mandate of that department is, and what  
  



 
December 23, 1986 

472 
 

other departments are likely to be affected. Which of those two 
really accounts for this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, I’m sorry that the hon. 
member misunderstood what I said, because what I said was 
that while those responsibilities under the Minister of Labour 
would come together as one administrative function, one 
administrative operation as opposed to the several separate 
entities that he has now, and clearly we know where that one is 
going to take us — and you’ve asked us why we couldn’t bring 
legislation in to deal with that particular reorganization at this 
time. And I say, I suppose we could have. 
 
But I’ll give you another example. We have, in the Department 
of Environment, we have moved into some public safety 
aspects of government. And that may require, when all of our 
analysis is completed, that may require a similar bringing 
together of administrative functions rather than having separate 
entities responsible to the same minister. And as regards your 
paranoia, however ill-founded, I want to set at ease by telling 
you this, that the public servants in the province have and will 
continue to be looked after under the collective agreements and 
The Public Service Act. They continue to stay in place. 
 
So quite frankly, Mr. Chairman, and member for Riversdale, I 
apologize for not making myself clear in the previous answer. 
But secondly, I think that your case is being considerably 
overstated. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I only wish I could say the 
same of the Deputy Premier’s. I don’t think it’s being 
overstated or understated. I’m not sure that it’s being, with the 
greatest of respect, even stated. 
 
Because I tell the Deputy Premier, the position that we take, the 
position that I take, is this: when we establish departments of 
government, the theory of parliamentary democracy in the sense 
of ministerial accountability is to be able to ensure that the 
opposition and the public knows what the mandate of that 
minister is to be, as measured by the Bill, and whether or not he 
or she is fulfilling that mandate. 
 
If you weren’t ready with respect to the new human resources 
department, if you’re still not ready with all the other 
departments which you’re going to establish, I say to you, sir 
that it’s incumbent upon the government to delay the 
introduction of such reorganization in the name of efficiency or 
for whatever purpose, even ideological objective. It is 
incumbent upon you not to do that until you are ready to come 
to this House. 
 
You can’t expect us . . . I don’t mean to be sounding in a 
lecturing way, but I don’t think you can expect an opposition to 
buy a pig in a poke, as I’ve said. You have an obligation to lay 
out via the legislation what it is that you’re trying to achieve by 
way of departmental organization. We have a duty to say 
whether or not you’ve accomplished that goal. The public and 
the press have got the right, the ultimate right, Mr. Chairman, to 
judge this government, at election time, whether they achieved 
that goal of efficiency. 
 

You can’t do it on some surreptitious, some ill-thought-out, 
concocted, half-baked idea in this Bill, and then plead with us 
that we should tolerate a period of uncertainty and a period of 
lack of direction. You cannot do that. You can do it, but don’t 
expect us to accept it. 
 
People say the member said that the public may not be paying 
much attention to this. I don’t agree with him. I think the public 
is paying attention to this Bill. I think that there is a concerned 
group of people out there and it’s growing. It’s growing because 
at issue are two fundamental principles. One is something 
which the Conservative Party heretofore said it believed in, the 
principle of parliamentary democracy, but in power here they 
are eroding. In fact they’ve attacked it. That, I think, people are 
interested in because it tells you where they’re going. But 
people are interested on a day-to-day basis. You can’t fool 
around with men and women who have built careers and 
livelihoods, working honourably and honestly in a civil service, 
and have a great big question mark hanging over their heads. 
 
That’s what this efficiency and this whole objective of 
slimming down government has resulted in. 
 
It’s resulted in thousands of civil servants, Mr. Chairman — 
loyal civil servants, people who know what their duties are, 
people who want to fulfil those obligations to the betterment of 
all of society — having a great big question mark over their 
future while the government makes up its mind as to what its 
objectives are and then asks the opposition to trust it in the 
implementation and the reorganization of the departments of 
government. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Chairman, is that a logical way to proceed? I say 
to the Deputy Premier that not only is it illogical . . . I don’t 
want to overstate it by saying that I think it undermines the 
principle of parliamentary democracy. I think it does not help it, 
that’s for sure. 
 
Not only is it illogical and it’s an attack on democracy, but I 
think it is indeed a part of an overall game plan by this 
government which is going to spell big trouble for the ordinary 
people of Saskatchewan very soon, Mr. Chairman — this Bill 
is. Anybody who acquires unto himself or herself the kind of 
authority that this cabinet does in this Bill, I tell you, is going to 
be bad trouble for the people of Saskatchewan down the road 
very soon. 
 
If you can’t defend and explain publicly why you can’t come 
forward with legislation; if you don’t reorganize your efficiency 
by bringing in your Bills and explaining to the public the 
rationale and the objectives behind it, I tell you, Mr. Deputy 
Premier, you will never be able to explain it, no matter how 
much money you spend on government advertising to try to 
justify that objective. You’ll never be able to explain it. 
 
It’s counter-productive from your purposes. You must be able 
to convince the average person in Saskatchewan what you’re 
doing is right and proper. And that means not only the civil 
servants but from the civil servants right on up to the masters of 
us all, the ordinary people, the men and women and the voters 
of this province. 
 
I say, Mr. Chairman, the failure of this government to do  
  



 
December 23, 1986 

473 
 

this is a betrayal of the traditions and the history of this House. 
And I say, moreover, it is an Act which is bound to have this 
government defeated sooner than later — and soon enough 
can’t be too soon for me. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the only 
thing brought into this debate that was new there was the 
question mark that the hon. member put over the heads of the 
public service. And I just point out to the member that I don’t 
think it’s a legitimate argument by virtue of the collective 
agreements and The Public Service Act in existence. 
 
And if you compare that, if you compare that to the . . . and take 
that same argument and apply it to the powers and duties given 
to the cabinet under the — I believe it’s called The Crown 
Corporations Act of 1945 or ’46 or whenever it was — under 
the CCF and re-enacted in 1978 when that particular member 
was sitting on this side of the House, and my guess is that a lot 
of the people in the Crown sector, or at least some of the people 
in the Crown sector, don’t enjoy the protection of either 
collective agreement or The Public Service Act. 
 
You know, I just don’t understand how he can act in one way 
and argue strenuously in quite another. I guess, you know, the 
points have been made. Obviously we are in disagreement and 
that’s unlikely to change, that’s my guess. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to make a 
couple of points and just ask a couple of questions, basically. 
The Deputy Premier will know that this is not the first effort at 
reorganization, not the first announcement that here was going 
to be a pursuit of efficiency. And I call to the attention of the 
House another one, and I will quote it again: 
 

I’m happy today to announce a major reorganization of 
government departments and agencies. It is designed to 
meet three key objectives: (1) to improve government 
productivity, overall effectiveness, efficiency and 
economy by co-ordinating similar programs; (2) to 
consolidate related functions under single departments to 
insure greater accountability, and: (3) to improve public 
access to government by simplifying communication and 
reducing confusion. 

 
That, as you will know, Mr. Deputy Premier, were the words of 
the Premier in March of 1983. Now were they achieved? And if 
they were, why do we need this Bill; and if they weren’t, why 
did it take you three and one-half years to find out that you 
needed this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The short answer is that I suppose in 
some measure some of those objectives were achieved, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Government of the day, as with a large part of the rest of the 
world, is a rather dynamic situation and thus the reason for this 
Bill. Every time we find some way to bring  

new efficiencies to the administration of government, should we 
come back here with a reorganization Bill and debate it and 
debate it and debate it, or should we have this executive 
flexibility that is not any sort of a power-grab where we can, 
through Executive Council, through regulation that can come to 
this House, or a committee of the House — Regulations 
Committee — and be referred to the House, have the 
streamlining that several other jurisdictions have found to be 
efficient and bring those kinds of efficiencies that we talked 
about in earlier reorganizations; and we’re talking about in this 
reorganization. So, yes, to answer your question, I guess that in 
some measure some of those earlier objectives have been met. I 
freely admit, not all of them, and we’re looking for more 
efficiencies now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, you 
have referred to regulations and the Regulations Committee. Do 
you concede that no order in council passed pursuant to the Bill 
we’re now debating will ever come to this House for debate 
without the consent of the majority of that committee sitting on 
the government side of the House? Don’t you agree that the 
Regulations committee is controlled by the government, as are 
virtually all other committees, and that no regulation passed 
under the Bill we’re now debating can ever get to this House 
without the consent of that majority sitting on the government 
benches? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — My understanding, Mr. Chairman, is 
that that is true of all committees. All committees are a 
reflection of the House. If that committee recommends that that 
regulation should come to this House for debate, that’s what 
happens. If that committee recommends that it doesn’t, and that 
it’s passed at the committee, that’s what happens. That’s also 
true of Crown Corporations Committee, Public Accounts 
Committee. Any committee, as a reflection of the House is, I 
suppose, democracy in action, and it can be debated in the 
committee. 
 
And I suppose, not off the top of my head, but other 
jurisdictions can be cited where all kinds of things far more 
weighty than this never come to the House but are dealt with in 
committees. So I don’t . . . while I accept what the member has 
said, I don’t see that it carries the kind of weight that he implies 
that it does. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Minister, obviously we 
haven’t made our point. It is our view that when you are going 
to change major powers in Acts setting up departments — and 
they are major powers, major rights of citizens — that those 
changes ought to be made in the House. That’s our point. 
 
Now you’re going to say that you weren’t going to make 
changes that way. We simply don’t believe you. We don’t 
believe you if you say you can’t do it. If you say you can do it, 
but won’t, we say that that’s bad law. 
 
When you can vary a department, we believe you will be able to 
change substantive rights. This is our reading. We don’t believe 
that those rights are sufficiently protected by being debated in a 
committee which is not set up for that  
  



 
December 23, 1986 

474 
 

purpose. 
 
One look at the terms of reference of the Regulations 
Committee will indicate that it is a committee designed to check 
abuse of power by finding out whether regulations exceed the 
authority contained in the statute under which they’re made. 
Now that’s what the Regulations Committee is all about. And 
our problem is that we are hard-pressed to find any regulations 
which could exceed the powers given by this Bill, because the 
Bill is so sweeping. And I again refer you to section 12, which 
talks about, notwithstanding any Act or any other law, you can 
do major, major things. 
 
Do you believe, do you believe, Mr. Minister, that the rights of 
the citizens, many of them entrusted to the departmental Acts 
which are before us and which are about to be changed by order 
in council, do you believe those rights are sufficiently protected 
by having them perused by a committee whose job it is not to 
examine those rights but to see whether or not legislative power 
has been exceeded. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, one of the advantages 
that I have in this debate is I am unencumbered with any 
knowledge of the law and so I depend on those who have some 
significant knowledge and have been advising people for some 
time, and I’m told that there is nothing in this legislation that 
can provide for, as the member opposite says or suggests, major 
changes in power by this legislation. 
 
What this legislation provides for is that we can change 
administrative objects and purposes, if you like. For instance we 
can say that the Department of Labour no longer exists. Okay. 
But The Labour Act continues to exist and all of those powers 
and duties that are in The Labour Act are assigned to whoever it 
is that this new administrative body, whether it’s human 
resources and labour or whatever. So if there’s any cleaning up 
to do in The Labour Act that will cause amendments or 
repealing of the Act or whatever to take place, and that has to 
come back to this House to be dealt with. So when you’re 
talking about sweeping changes in power, we believe that that’s 
simply not possible under this legislation or this proposed Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I want you to take me through a 
change then. I want you to consider the Department of Energy 
and Mines. And I tell you that the Act setting up the 
Department of Energy and Mines being chapter D-13.1 starts 
out by saying: 
 

A Department of the Government of Saskatchewan to be 
called the Department of Energy and Mines, is established. 

 
Now I take it you don’t deny that under this Bill under section 
12 that department can be disestablished and the department 
will be gone. And so will the minister be gone — the minister 
in this case, he will not be gone except that he will be the 
member of the Executive Council to who it’s assigned, but he 
will not be the minister of Energy and Mines. 
 
All right. Now, I want you to look at say, section 5: 
 

5(1) The staff of the department is to consist of a deputy 
minister, etc. . . . 
(2) No employee of the department shall: 
(a) disclose any information that is obtained by him 
through his employment with the department; or 

 
. . . recommend the worth of any mineral lands, I paraphrase. 
 
Now that is an obligation imposed upon employees of the 
Department of Energy and Mines. And that’s an obligation 
which protects the public — that the employees of the 
Department of Energy and Mines aren’t out there wheeling and 
dealing with information on whether or not there’s a hot piece 
of gold property. 
 
I want you to tell me, once you have disestablished this 
department, why any employee is still bound by that provision. 
Isn’t that gone? Isn’t it gone? And if not, why not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, I suppose, if I 
understand the question, the answer is as follows. You say that 
we move under this Bill or this proposed legislation to 
disestablish the Department of Energy. And we do that so there 
is no more Department of Energy and Mines. That is not to say 
that that legislation or that statute is gone, because it’s not. It’s 
still there because it hasn’t been repealed or amended or 
otherwise adjusted. 
 
And I suppose you can argue that there now is no longer a 
Minister of Energy and Mines, if the department doesn’t exist. 
But I suppose that Executive Council can have a minister of 
whatever — it might be the Minister of Labour, it might be the 
minister of miscellaneous — who has responsibility for this 
statute. Section 22(b) of the proposed legislation, if you look at 
that, is what my people are telling me in relation to the exercise 
of the respective powers, duties, and functions shall in any Act, 
regulation, order, or document be substituted for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Did you say 22(b) does it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes. And I hope that answers the 
question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I don’t follow that, Mr. Minister. Let’s 
just take me through it slowly then. On or after the date, the 
minister to which the function is transferred in relation to the 
exercise of the respective powers and duties shall be the 
minister from which . . . Sorry, I don’t see how that in any way 
addresses my section 5 problem. And I want someone to look at 
section 5 and note that it does not impose any obligations on the 
minister but only on — or duties — but only on employees of 
the department. 
 
And I say that once the department is gone it doesn’t have any 
employees. And the fact that the functions may be transferred to 
the minister doesn’t make those employees employees of the 
department which is gone. And I say that this is just one of the 
many provisions in these departmental Acts which is gong to be 
effectively repealed. 
 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

475 
 

And we are in, I suppose, a fairly narrow little bit of law. And I 
admit that where it says “the minister shall,” those duties 
transfer to another department. I concede that because I concede 
that to be the effective section 5 where the Executive Council 
may transfer or confer any power imposed upon law on any 
department to any minister or other department. 
 
And if I were talking about a power of the minister or a power 
of the department, you can do it. But this section 5 is neither . . . 
got nothing to do with ministers as such or departments as such. 
It is a duty imposed on a particular group of employees, and I 
say it’s gone. 
 
And I say these are the sorts of things which are going to keep 
popping up. I want to . . . And that, I think, is a straight . . . I’d 
be interested if anyone had an answer to my energy and Mines, 
section 5(2) problem. 
 
Let me take another one. And I think that you have an answer to 
this one, but I just want to know what your answer is. The 
Department of Finance says that the minister shall be the 
Minister of Finance. And then later on it says, the minister shall 
prepare accounts and lay them before the legislature. It’s a duty 
on the Minister of Finance. 
 
Now what I want to say is this. If you had disestablished the 
Department of Finance, made yourself a department of financial 
services so there is no longer any Minister of Finance, on whom 
is this statutory duty? On whom is the statutory duty contained 
in section 31(1) of the Act, of The Department of Finance Act? 
 
(1630) 
 
No, it’s perhaps not 31(1). It doesn’t matter where it is, but I 
will find it in a moment. It’s 30(1). Section 30(1), and I say I 
think you have an answer to it; I just want to know what the 
answer is. 
 

The minister shall prepare the estimates of revenue and 
expenditures in any form that the board may direct, and 
shall present the estimates to the Legislative Assembly. 

 
Now there is a specific statutory duty imposed upon the 
Minister of Finance. Can you avoid that? That is there for the 
protection of the legislature. Can you avoid that by doing away 
with the Department of Finance and having yourself a 
department of financial services? 
 
Is it then true that no minister has that obligation? Have you not 
done away with the statutory obligation to present estimates to 
the Legislative Assembly? And this one is a “shall.” You can go 
through these Acts and you will find almost all of them say that 
the minister “may.” This one is not; this one says the minister 
“shall.” 
 
Here the legislature is saying, we are not giving you permission 
to do something; we are ordering you to do it. Now do you not 
feel that you can defeat that order by in effect disestablishing 
this department and setting up another department? It can do all 
the same things but with a different name. 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Your question is: can the obligation to 
table estimates in the House be avoided if this legislation goes 
through? The answer is no. The responsibilities, or the duties 
and functions, are transferred to a minister — maybe the 
minister of estimates; I don’t know — under section 5. And 
then section 22 applies, that obligates him to do those things 
that exist in that Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I hear exactly what you’re saying. And 
under section 30, the legislature said you shall — you shall 
prepare estimates and present them to the legislature. And you 
say, I don’t like that idea; I don’t like this whole idea of 
presenting estimates to the legislature. 
 
So you do away with that department, and then you say the 
lieutenant in council “may” assign that duty to somebody else, 
but then again, they “may” not. There is no obligation on 
anybody, and I say that you are simply doing way with that 
statutory obligation to present estimates to the legislature. And 
as I say, the statutes are full of these, I’m not just picking out 
one’s or two’s around here, but I am trying to point out the sort 
of thing you’re doing and the sort of thing which is open to you. 
And I don’t think you should be able to avoid such a 
fundamental statutory obligation on the executive in its duties to 
the legislature as to prepare estimates of revenue and 
expenditures and present the estimates to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
I think that is a fundamental statutory obligation that any 
executive owes to any legislature. The legislature has put it in 
the uncharacteristic command terms of “the minister shall.” 
And you say, no, I don’t like that; I’m going to do away with 
that department; I’m going to do away with that minister; I’m 
gong to transfer some of those obligations in this department to 
another minister, but I’m not going to transfer that one because 
I don’t like it and I have no obligation to transfer it. And while 
this still sits on the statutes books, the only minister who has an 
obligation is the Minister of Finance, and there is no such 
animal. And I think that you ought not to be able to end-run the 
legislature that way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay, Mr. Chairman. My 
understanding is that the current Act, the Legislative Assembly 
and the Executive Council Act says the same thing — that the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council may from time to time 
prescribe duties of officers appointed under section 70 of the 
several departments over which, etc., may . . . 
 
And that exists now. Now I don’t know how, if we disestablish 
some administrative function, how that would allow this statute 
to sit around there floating without someone to have 
responsibility for that and all of the powers and duties and 
obligations that exist in that particular Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I just say that’s exactly what you’re 
doing. You can have powers in departmental Acts which will be 
nobody’s responsibility — and here’s one. “The minister shall 
. . .,” and if you don’t have a Minister of  
  



 
December 23, 1986 

476 
 

Finance, then there is no statutory obligation. We’ve got 
another one, I see, in the Energy and Mines department where 
“No employee of the department shall . . .,” and you’re going to 
disestablish the department so there won’t be any employees. 
The people who are doing the same work will not be bound by 
the same statutory rule. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I don’t intend to go 
through six or eight or 10 departmental statutes. We pointed out 
some. I’m just pointing out two more. But I say that when you 
can disestablish a department — and I say the fair inference 
when you disestablish a department is that you do not have a 
minister called with that name, and there is no obligation in The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act to which you 
referred — the Lieutenant Governor may appoint a Minister of 
Finance, and I concede that. I just say that . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I’d ask the member to make 
his comments on his feet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — The member says that the Executive 
Council may give this responsibility to another minister. All I 
say is, then again they may not. Then again they may not. And I 
say where it says, “the minister shall prepares estimates. . .” and 
you don’t like that, you just very conveniently get rid of both 
the minister and the department. Well I make that point; you 
can accept it or not. I have heard no argument — no argument 
which meets the one I’m putting forward, none whatever, 
except you say that you might transfer the obligations to 
somebody else. There’s no obligation whatever to “must 
transfer,” and that’s my point. 
 
I want to change the subject, because I have made the point or 
not made the point, depending on one’s perception. 
 
Would you consider, and if you don’t do it now, consider at 
some point making a provision which said that any order under 
this Act, any order transferring powers under this Act, any order 
in council or, if you want it more limited, disestablishing a 
department or establishing a department, would have, let us say, 
a life of 12 months or 18 months so that you would then bring 
in legislation regularizing what you have done, or at least 
putting into statutory form what you have done. 
 
My case is this, that the public really does not have full access 
to orders in council and regulations. I know they’re out there. I 
know they’re published, but they certainly are not readily 
available to people in the way that the statutes are. People 
simply don’t look in orders in council, except lawyers, for 
major reorganizational changes in government. 
 
You want flexibility; I understand what you’re saying. Whether 
I agree with it or not, let me concede your point that you want 
to be able to rearrange and reorder departments without having 
to come to the legislature. I would put it to you that you ought 
to consider the fact that when you have done that you might 
bring in legislation in the next session, and I say 18 months 
because that ought to — even if an opposition were ragging you 
— if I may put it that way, you would have an opportunity to 
bring it  

in in 18 months. 
 
And this would mean that the public, when they were trying to 
figure out what department may be in charge of anything, 
would need only to go to the statutes, plus regulations back 18 
months. Because I fear that if we work on this system for year 
after year after year after year, we are going to get cross-piled 
regulations that will make it very difficult to figure out who’s in 
charge of what. 
 
I wish I could say that any government of our political stamp 
always cleaned up all the regulations. But it wasn’t true under 
our administration, although major efforts were made to do so, 
and they were continued under your administration. And I 
compliment you, as I’m sure you’d compliment us. Our 
regulations are probably in as good shape in Saskatchewan as 
they are in most provinces, so we have nothing to apologize for. 
 
But anyone who has ever tackled that process knows that it’s 
just complex, complex, complex. And I just happen to have one 
that set up this new department, or didn’t set up this new 
department, whatever you care to say. But it has a couple of 
cross-references in it, and this is what happens. You’ve got to 
have a large table when you start tackling them. 
 
I ask you to consider the possibility of “sunsetting” those 
regulations so that they would all be brought in in statutory 
form at some point. And as I say, the public, including the legal 
profession, would then be able to go to the statutes, plus 
regulations back 18 months or . . . That’s what I have 
suggested. And I suggest that that may be worthy of 
consideration. If you don’t want to think of it now, perhaps 
another time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — You know, I have some degree of 
sympathy for the arguments advanced by the member, and I 
will give it some consideration. I’m not sure that we would 
want it in this Act. 
 
There is, I think, in every instance where a regulation or an OC 
were passed under this legislation, there would be a 
requirement, in any event, to come to this House with 
consequential amendments to various pieces of legislation that 
would provide, I think, opportunity for debate on all of those 
things. And the real reason for this legislation is to give the kind 
of flexibility that the executive — not only here but in other 
jurisdictions — has wanted and used to provide for the 
efficiencies in the organization and administration of 
government. 
 
So while I have some sympathy for your argument, I’m not 
entirely sure that we should have it in this legislation. But it 
should be clear that . . . I can’t think of one instance where there 
wouldn’t be a requirement for some kind of legislative clean-up 
consequentially. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, there has been a great deal of 
discussion this afternoon on this Bill, and I just want to reiterate 
some of the points that I agree with that have been made, and 
some of the questions that should be asked again, and that is 
that it was stated here earlier this afternoon that the purpose of 
the Bill is to rearrange government. If that’s the case, why do 
we need this Bill? Why does this Bill do that we can’t already 
do other than  
  



 
December 23, 1986 

477 
 

change the name of a department? That question has to be asked 
by the members opposite. They have to ask themselves that 
question. 
 
(1645) 
 
The member from Souris-Cannington had indicated just a few 
seconds ago that there was a requirement to come back to this 
House to deal with the legislation that is left dangling when a 
department is disestablished, for example. I would like to know, 
Mr. Chairman, where that requirement is. That requirement is 
not in this Act. There is no requirement to clean up the left-over 
legislation. In fact, if they’re given the power to disestablish a 
department, does that carry with it, by implication, the power to 
repeal sections that are left hanging in the departmental Act? I 
ask them that question: whether by implication the rest of the 
Act is also repealed? 
 
I also wish to comment on the Manitoba and B.C. legislation, as 
well as the federal and British legislation, which I did when I 
spoke on second reading speech . . . in the second reading 
debate, rather. The Manitoba legislation, as far as I respectfully 
submit, does not go as far as this legislation. I am not saying, 
and I did not say, that the Manitoba legislation was acceptable 
to the opposition, but it does not go as far as this legislation 
does in that it speaks to duties and functions. And there is some 
suggestion and some concern on this side of the House that 
objects and purposes — because duties and functions flow from 
objects and purposes — that objects and purposes are broader. 
 
So we have to ask ourself whether or not this also, when you 
can establish the objects of a department, does that imply the 
power to also establish the powers of the department? Are the 
objects the powers? Where do we have the dividing line 
between objects and powers? And does it not leave this Bill 
open to the possible interpretation that objects and purposes 
means that the government can also establish powers and, 
therefore, some of the more substantive legislation that we’ve 
been discussing over the last few days? 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Chairman, in my respectful opinion, this 
Bill goes further . . . that’s one of the reasons why it goes 
further than the Manitoba legislation, for example. But I’m not 
saying that the Manitoba legislation, for example. But I’m not 
saying that the Manitoba legislation is perfect and that we 
should adopt the Manitoba legislation. Now I understand in 
Manitoba the system that they try to follow is very much like 
the one that the member from Souris-Cannington described he 
wishes to follow here. But, you know, I’m still not saying that 
that’s the acceptable approach. 
 
But we have to respect the fact that this Bill, in our opinion, 
goes further, even further than the Manitoba legislation, and 
also goes further than the federal legislation and the British 
legislation which was referred to on the second reading debate 
by the members opposite. 
 
As I understand the federal legislation, Mr. Chairman, it 
requires that the proclamation, regulation, whatever — I believe 
it’s considered a proclamation in Ottawa — the proclamation 
has to be brought back to the House and it  

provides for debate. And that, Mr. Chairman, I submit is the 
proper way to deal with those sorts of provisions. It should 
come back to the House; it should come to the Legislative 
Assembly for scrutiny and for review by all members of the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
There are a number of other problems, of course, with the Bill, 
but our major problem is with section 12. There are other 
problems. When you look at section 5 with section 12, it seems 
to imply that powers can be bestowed under section 12. When 
you review other sections like section 15 and 16, I believe, it 
also refers to “. . . powers . . . conferred or imposed by or 
pursuant to this Act or any other law . . .” Any other law in 
effect could be a regulation for example. So when you review 
all the other sections of the Act in conjunction with the section 
12, one legitimately asks oneself the question whether or not 
section 12 isn’t an enabling section, a section that allows the 
government by regulation to pass primary law, whether or not 
it’s a primary lawmaking section. 
 
And the members opposite can say that it’s not, but I suggest 
that’s open to debate. And if it’s open to debate, then the Bill 
goes too far, and that should either be amended or these 
regulations should be brought back to the House. And it’s the 
latter point that I am putting forward — that is that they should 
be bringing it back to the Legislative Assembly because this is 
where it should be dealt with. 
 
The point was made that this body of law is standing out there 
and we’re going to have to do something with it. But I want to 
say once more: where is the obligation to do that, other than the 
fact that it’s standing out there? Where is the obligation? Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I guess the answer is that I can’t 
imagine or conceive of anything else happening in such a firmly 
established convention and practice, particularly in 
Saskatchewan, that when legislation is passed, it is assigned to a 
minister. 
 
And you know, if for instance the legislation relative to, well, 
the Labour Act or The Labour Standards Act or whatever, is 
assigned to the Minister of Labour, now if the Minister of 
Labour no longer exists because we now have the minister of 
human resources and labour, or whatever it’s called, that 
legislation will then be assigned to that minister, or it could be 
assigned to some other minister, you know. 
 
But the short answer is that the long-standing and 
well-established convention and practice of Canada and 
Saskatchewan and probably the Commonwealth is that it is 
inconceivable that anything else would happen. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Except, Mr. Chairman, the law now, with 
respect to a departmental Act, says there shall be a department 
and there shall be a minister. If you disestablish the department 
and reassign that minister’s duties with no corresponding 
obligation to assign a minister to those sections, powers, 
function, whatever it is in the Act, where is the obligation? The 
obligation isn’t based on tradition now. It’s not based on 
custom. It’s based on legislation. 
 
  



 
December 23, 1986 

478 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — You see, I guess that’s the point. You 
can disestablish the department but you don’t disestablish that 
Act. That statute exists. Right? And the only way — the only 
way that it can be changed, amended, or repealed, or whatever, 
is to come back to this House with amendments or a Bill to 
repeal it. And so the provisions of that Act will still stand. I 
mean, it’s precisely as it is now. 
 
Ms. Simard: — I beg to differ. It isn’t precisely as it is now. 
 
First of all . . . There’s two points I want to make with respect 
to the comments from the member from Souris-Cannington. 
Perhaps by permitting you to disestablish a department and 
establish a new one with very similar powers you have been 
given implicitly the power to repeal the original department. 
Perhaps that’s the case. That’s arguable under this legislation. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We don’t accept that. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Well you may not accept it, but I’m suggesting 
to you it’s arguable. And if it’s arguable, then the legislation 
goes too far. 
 
Number two, that the case now is that you are required by 
legislation — there shall be a Department of Labour, and a 
minister shall be in charge of that department and its functions 
and powers and duties and responsibilities. But you are giving 
yourself the power to say: there shall not be a Department of 
Labour. There shall not be a Minister of Labour. We’re going to 
put him over here. And you haven’t said who or what body is 
going to take responsibility for those things in that legislation? 
There’s no corresponding obligation on your part. Would you 
not agree there’s no legal corresponding obligation on your part 
to ensure that those functions and duties and powers and 
sections in The Labour Act — if we’re using that as an example 
— would you agree that there’s no corresponding obligation on 
the statute books for you to make sure that those provision are 
followed through upon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the provision in the Bill 
before us as it relates to assigning . . . prescribing those duties 
from time to time is no different than it is in the current 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act. And that 
answers your second question; I’m not sure that it answers it 
satisfactorily. Your first question; we just don’t accept the 
argument, and that answers both your questions. 
 
Ms. Simard: — If I might just comment on that, Mr. Chairman. 
This section is a permissive section. It’s not a mandatory 
section to assign duties or powers — section 5. And it is very 
similar or identical to the section in the Legislative Assembly 
Act, but we still go back to the fact that we have over here an 
Act that says there shall be a department, there shall be a 
minister responsible for that department, and these are the 
minister’s duties and powers. Okay? 
 
So we have that Act there. You are not retaining the permissive 
section saying that the LG in C may assign duties, but you are 
deleting the mandatory aspect of the departmental Act. You’re 
taking away. You’re  

disestablishing the department. What you’re leaving hanging 
are the other provisions coming out of that department. 
Therefore, to say that the Legislative Assembly Act section, 
which is incorporated in section 5 of this Bill, requires that you 
assign the duties, is not accurate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Obviously, you know, we’re not going 
to agree. There is no requirement now statutorily to assign Acts 
to ministers, as I understand it. It’s long-standing practice and 
convention. And we have under section 71 of the old 
Legislative and Executive Council Act, the one that’s sitting on 
the books right now, a permissive section 71. That’s no 
different than I think our section 5 is in this Bill that we’ve got 
before the House today. 
 
So we obviously have some disagreement here. I take counsel 
from people who have been advising governments on this for 
some time, and that’s the position that we take, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — It being 5 o’clock I now leave the Chair 
until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


