


















































April 3, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 3, 1986 
 

337 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Non-Controversial Bills 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, as 
chairman of the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills, 
I present the 13th report of the said committee which is as 
follows: 
 

Bill No. 3 — An Act to amend The Change of Name Act 
 

Mr. Shillington: — As chairman of the Non-Controversial Bills 
Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 3, An Act to amend The 
Change of Name Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in committee of the whole on the said Bill be 
waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the said Bill now 
be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 7 — An Act to amend The Statute Law 
 

Mr. Shillington: — As chairman of the Non-Controversial Bills 
Committee, Mr. Speaker, I wish to report Bill No. 7, An Act to 
amend The Statute Law, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in committee of the whole on the said Bill be 
waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 9 — An Act to amend The Lloydminster Hospital 
Act, 1948 

 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the 
Non-Controversial Bills Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 9, 
An Act to amend The Lloydminster Hospital Act, 1948, as being 
non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in committee of whole on the said Bill be 
waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the said Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 10 — An Act to amend The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Act 

 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the 
Non-Controversial Bills Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 10, 
An Act to amend The Automobile Accident Insurance Act, as 
being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in committee of the whole on the said Bill be 
waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the said Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 11 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments resulting from the enactment of The 
Environmental Management and Protection Act 

 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the 
Non-Controversial Bills Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 11, 
An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments resulting 
from the enactment of The Environmental Management and 
Protection Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. 
member, I move that second reading and consideration in 
committee of the whole on the said Bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that said Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Gerich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 
to introduce to you, and through you to the Legislative Assembly, 
on behalf of my colleague, the Hon. Neal Hardy, the Minister of 
Rural Development and the member from Kelsey-Tisdale, a 
group of 24 air cadets seated in the Speaker’s gallery. The cadets 
are from grades 7 to 12, and belong to the Royal Canadian Air 
Cadet Squadron 45 from Porcupine Plain. They’re accompanied 
by Ed Tysowski, commanding officer; Mac Luke, administration 
officer; and Kay Green, supply officer. 
 
I hope that these students find their tour this afternoon an 
  



 
April 3, 1986 

338 
 

educational one, and I’m sure that they’ll find the question period 
enjoyable. I look forward to meeting after question period with 
them in Room 204 of Mr. Hardy’s office for refreshments and to 
answer any extra questions. And I ask the members of the 
Legislative Assembly to join with me in welcoming them this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like 
to extend greetings to the air cadets and Mr. Ed Tysowski. 
 
And also members will know that this week is Easter council 
week for teachers, councillors, throughout the province, at Easter 
council meeting. I would like to extend a welcome to a number 
of them who are here in the galleries this afternoon. I wish them 
well in their deliberations at their important Easter council 
meeting. Many of us were there last evening and had a chance to 
speak to many of them. I hope that they enjoy the question period 
and the debate that takes place in this Chamber, and wish them a 
safe trip home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Young: — Mr. Speaker, having had lunch today with Ed, 
I’d like to add my welcome to that group. And particularly, Mr. 
Speaker, seated on the floor of the Assembly with us this 
afternoon, through you and to this House, I would like to 
introduce a long-time friend and constituent of mine, Arthur 
Whitter, who is a second- or third-year student at the University 
of Saskatchewan. Arthur . . . I have noticed him from time to time 
on television as a very articulate spokesman on behalf of 
handicapped needs, particularly handicapped needs at the 
university. I would ask that all members of the Assembly join 
with me in welcoming him here to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Appointment of International Marketing Consultants 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to address my 
question to the Minister of Economic Development and Trade, 
the former minister of Finance. In February 1984, your 
department announced the appointment of what it called 
international marketing consultants in London, England, and 
Minot, North Dakota, and in Hong Kong. I’d ask the minister: 
can you tell us what kind of financial arrangements your 
department has with these marketing consultants? Are they paid 
as full-time employees of the Government of Saskatchewan; do 
they work on a personal services contract; or are they paid on a 
retainer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t have available for 
you today the precise answer to that question. I will take notice 
and return to the Assembly with a detailed answer of each of 
those particular positions. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A supplemental then, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
are you aware that the London marketing  

consultant, an Alexander Duffy, cost Saskatchewan taxpayers 
some $49,000 last year? What I’m asking you is: can you explain 
why the taxpayers needed to shell out extra money when we are 
already paying more than a quarter of a million dollars a year for 
the agent-general’s office in London? Is it a fact that the 
agent-general and his staff is incompetent? Why are we shelling 
out, over and above the quarter of a million dollars, an extra 
amount for this Mr. Duffy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, again, I will take notice of the exact 
amount of that particular individual, Mr. Speaker, as to how 
much he’s paid. The question as to why is that office needed? 
That office has four people in it versus 30 people in the Alberta 
office, versus several other people in various other offices. That 
office has been instrumental in trying to attract European 
investment into the province of Saskatchewan, and today, Mr. 
Speaker, with the announcement of the tremendous involvement 
of CdF Chimie in the project to build an ammonia plant in the 
city of Regina, I think the dollars spent in that London office are 
coming home and are being very well spent indeed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Marketing Consultant in Minot, North Dakota 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 
Minister of Economic Development. It has to do with the 
marketing consultant in Minot, North Dakota. The minister will 
be aware from the public accounts reports that Saskatchewan 
taxpayers paid out more than $110,000 last year to this North 
Dakota businessman. Can the minister tell us what type of 
projects this marketing consultant undertook on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan for that kind of payment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the . . . And again 
with regards to the details, I will check those and come back with 
them. The particular person in North Dakota does a lot of work 
with regard to Canadian manufacturers; particularly in the field 
of farm machinery manufacturers who look for markets, and in 
fact, have significant markets in the United States and 
particularly in the northern states where we have a transportation 
advantage that we could involve there. That particular individual 
spends a fair deal of his time dealing with that. 
 
The second dimension of his time is to try to attract some of the 
neighbours to the South into Saskatchewan by way of tourism. 
As you have seen over the last two years, the number of tourists 
visiting Saskatchewan has increased each of the last two and 
three years by upwards of 20 per cent, and this particular 
individual is involved in that type activity and, I think, activity 
that quite frankly, the province of Saskatchewan, like most other 
provinces . . . The province of Manitoba is going far more afield, 
the province of Alberta far more afield, the province of Ontario 
. . . I think all provinces are coming to the realization that Canada 
must start taking a more international dimension than perhaps we 
have over the last 50 years. 
 
I think that is a policy that is being supported, not only by our 
government, but by other governments of other 
  



 
April 3, 1986 

339 
 

political parties across this country, and I think an area that we 
must continue to pursue to: (a) help assist in marketing our 
products; (b) help in attracting investments into our province; and 
(c) looking at tourism coming into our province. And I think we 
have a good story to tell both in Saskatchewan but also to the 
world. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
ask the minister about his marketing consultant in Hong Kong, 
Mr. Kwok-Shing Loh. I understand from the Public Accounts 
that the Saskatchewan taxpayer has paid out just under $124,000 
to this person for what I take it is a part-time activity. Can the 
minister indicate what services this person would render that 
could not have been rendered by the 26 full-time staff of the 
Canadian High Commission in Hong Kong? Can he also advise 
whether this contract has been terminated now that we’re 
spending nearly half a million dollars a year on the Saskatchewan 
government’s new trade office in Hong Kong? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again if you look out 
to the world in Saskatchewan products perhaps the Pacific rim is 
the most attractive that we have seen. I believe the hon. member 
will be aware that when he was in government he had, I think, I 
believe, some people over there and stationed there for a period 
of time. 
 
What we have to do, Mr. Speaker, as a province, is as follows. 
We rely greatly on the Pacific rim for trade of Saskatchewan 
products, whether it’s our potash, whether it’s our wheat, whether 
it’s our variety of products, Mr. Speaker. The area that is being 
served, Mr. Speaker, by that office is China — the People’s 
Republic of China — which is a very, very important market to 
our province; the country of Japan, the country of Korea, and all 
those other Pacific rim countries, and I think that we are being 
rather frugal in any expenditures that we are doing into the 
Pacific rim relative to any other country, any other province, 
from this country, and I think that those results are starting to 
show. 
 

Travel Expenses 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Deputy 
Premier, and it has to do with the Public Accounts for 1984-1985. 
The documents in those Public Accounts show that the Premier 
and the cabinet spent more than $457,000 last year driving their 
government cars and flying on government aircraft inside the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now there isn’t a clear entry, I might add, for out-of-province 
travel costs, which could easily double those figures for the 
cabinet. According to the new accounting and numbering in the 
Public Accounts, those figures are hard to find, strangely enough, 
this year — $457,000 represents an increase of 59 per cent from 
1981-1982. 
 
I ask the Deputy Premier: when you are raising people’s taxes 
and asking them to practise restraint, how do you defend a 59 per 
cent jump in travel expenses for the cabinet and the Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes, I will take notice, Mr.  

Speaker, and the reason that I’ll take notice is, I don’t know how 
the accounting of ministerial travel is done, and I kind of suspect 
they don’t want to hear the answer anyway. But the question, if I 
were sitting over there — which is not likely to ever happen in 
your lifetime — but if I were sitting over there, and if I had the 
experience that that hon. member has as to the workings of 
government, I would ask the question to the Minister of Supply 
and Services, who is responsible for those figures. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I assumed that the 
Premier or the Deputy Premier might be able to refer the question 
or answer it. I have a supplementary. 
 
After the by-election in Regina North East, the Premier made it 
very clear to everyone that he would put a stop to this kind of 
extravagant travel. Last December he said that. Now I’m asking 
the Deputy Premier whether he can get the Premier to table the 
new travel guide-lines which the Premier claimed to have put into 
place in December, and which the public and this legislature is 
still waiting for. 
 
And later today, because I do not expect him to have them with 
him will he table documents to show how much money the 
government or the cabinet has spent on government car and travel 
in the fiscal year which ended 1985-1986. I simply say, if you 
want the people to believe you, Mr. Deputy Premier, you have to 
produce some documentation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — As I recall, Mr. Speaker, following the 
by-election in Regina North East the Premier talked about 
listening and consulting and staying in touch with the people of 
Saskatchewan. And there were, I expect, as a result of that 
directive, Mr. Speaker, all kinds of minister driving into all kinds 
of communities in Saskatchewan to stay in touch with the people 
of Saskatchewan. And I fully expect that that’s in part, at least, a 
part of the sensitivity that exists in members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, because as a result of that lesson that was learned in 
Regina North East, and as a result of the additional 
communicating and consulting with the people of Saskatchewan, 
those people are very, very nervous about the possibility of the 
people . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Not in any way, shape, or 
form, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the 
member from Quill Lakes will not be back, Mr. Speaker, and that 
will be a blessing for all of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
difficult for the Deputy Premier to say anything about 
communication when yesterday I mentioned where the Premier 
had said, I can’t go to every small town to defend our health 
policy. Obviously that’s not communicating very well. He was 
talking about Estevan which I never thought was a small town. 
 
My supplementary question to the Deputy Premier is — and he 
forgot in his remarks to answer it — will he undertake today to 
table the new travel guide-lines which the Premier promised that 
he would provide to his cabinet last December. Will he undertake 
to table those guide-lines? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I will undertake to  
  



 
April 3, 1986 

340 
 

take notice of the question and let the Premier do his own tabling 
in his own time. 
 

Purchases for Crop Insurance Office 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the acting 
Minister of Agriculture, the former minister of Agriculture, and 
the question is in regards to some purchases made in the office 
of the member for Arm River, the former minister in charge of 
crop insurance. In light of the fact that many people are saying 
that farmers are hard-pressed, and the crop insurance board 
doesn’t have enough money, I wonder how it is that the member 
for Arm River is charging the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
Corporation anywhere from 100 to $200 per month to supply his 
legislative office with jelly beans, mints and soup. I wonder, Mr. 
Acting Minister, who is approving this expenditure at a time 
when families are being told to pay more in taxes and that there 
isn’t enough money to go around? Who’s approving it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. You’ve asked a question. 
Now I would ask you to give the member an opportunity to 
answer. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, first, I, a long time ago 
learned not to take figures quoted by the member opposite as 
gospel, so I will firstly, Mr. Speaker, do my own research to see 
just how accurate they are. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the record of crop 
insurance and the record that this government has in defending 
the community of agriculture in this province, we will hold ours 
up to theirs any day of the week, any time of the day. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we are very proud — very proud — of the support that 
this government has given to agriculture in very tough times. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — A supplement to the minister, and I’ll refer 
to either one of the former ministers of Agriculture, because I 
have here a grocery list from Canada Safeway Limited, dated the 
28th day of January, 1986. This is a month or so after the member 
from Arm River was kicked out of cabinet. And on this grocery 
list, or this receipt from Canada Safeway, are humbugs, jelly 
beans, sour lemon drops, orange grape cocktail, and clamato 
juice. 
 
Now I say to you, Mr. Minister: how is it that this bill that is 
totalled up to be $137 — and this is being spent on a monthly 
basis for jelly beans and candy — how this is called for, that the 
taxpayers would be picking this bill up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, if the hon. 
member will give me the opportunity to do my own research — 
I’m just not prepared to take his numbers as gospel, number one, 
or even the suggestion that the event has taken place, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I have a follow-up question on that same line, and 
it is to the Deputy Premier. At a time when the provincial 
government is urging everyone to practise restraint, one would 
expect you would do the same. With this in mind, can you tell 
why the Saskatchewan Crop  

Insurance Corporation recently purchased four season tickets to 
the Saskatchewan Roughrider games, charged the $580 bill to the 
corporation administrative fund? Now I understand you started 
this practice, Mr. Minister. Are these tickets for you? Are they 
for the former minister of Agriculture? Are they for Devine? Or 
are they for the member from Arm River? Who are these tickets 
for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the suggestion that I started 
this practice is absolute lunacy. I have never been to a Roughrider 
football game in my entire life, and I’m not about to start now, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And further, Mr. Speaker, I can remember in 1982 sitting on 
Crown Management Board and going through, Crown by Crown 
by Crown, the number of Saskatchewan Roughrider tickets that 
were held by those birds, Mr. Speaker — those folks — when 
they were in government. And I think there’s some justification 
in the Crowns supporting the Roughriders. Heaven knows, they 
need it. But there is some justification in that. But for that 
member, Mr. Speaker, to suggest that that practice was started by 
this government, is absolute lunacy. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, crop insurance never bought tickets 
prior to 1982 — ever. And this year they bought tickets, and the 
question was: who’s using them? You said you’re not using, so 
that leaves three. Either my friend, the former minister in charge 
of crop insurance, is using them, or the Premier’s using them, or 
the former minister of Agriculture. Who were those four tickets 
bought for — $580 for season tickets, $50 for active membership, 
$40 for parking; total early payment, $670 — when I am told to 
pay more premium for crop insurance? 
 
Mr. Minister, if a Crown that’s making money out of resources 
buys a tickets, that’s another story. This Crown happens to be the 
farmers’ agency and the farmers’ money. Who’s using the 
tickets? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I mean, this line of questioning is . . . I 
mean, it’s an indication of the brilliance of the dude, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s right. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — That is exactly right. Because to take his 
same argument, under that government, when they were 
government, SGI, who lives on premiums paid for by the 
consumers of Saskatchewan, had Saskatchewan Roughrider 
tickets. Sask Power had Saskatchewan Roughrider tickets under 
that administration, Mr. Speaker. And the consumer of 
Saskatchewan, through the rates that they pay for their energy, I 
expect, paid for your football tickets. I’m not suggesting that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I never have. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I guess not, because I understand that 
you had to be in cabinet to be responsible for a Crown, and not 
even that leader would ever see you in cabinet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
April 3, 1986 

341 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — But, Mr. Speaker, to get back to the 
question as to who used the tickets. I think it was 1983, in the fall 
of 1983, that my Premier removed that responsibility from me, 
and I just don’t know who used the tickets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will find out. If that’s the most pressing issue of 
the day, if this is the most urgent and compelling thing that they 
can question this government on, Mr. Speaker, I will find out and, 
with all due haste, get that information for them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Lusney: —  Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker, I have a supplementary question to the Minister of 
Health. With all the spending that’s been going on here, with all 
the spending that this government has been doing, Mr. Minister, 
I have one here for you. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Lusney: —  Mr. Minister, the public accounts for ’84-85 
show that your department paid $37,500 to Tanka Research, or 
Tanka Resources Limited, the PC pollsters for your party. Can 
the minister . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The member is 
not indeed asking a supplementary, but asking a new question. 
I’ll take the member for Regina North West. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: —  Mr. Speaker, I think we’ve had it amply 
demonstrated that both sides of this House on this issue are 
corrupt. I would just like to ask the Deputy Premier what the 
policy is on football tickets with your government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m sure that there’s a stated policy that 
exists at Crown Management Board, as it related to the corporate 
citizenship of the Crown corporations in Saskatchewan. And 
again, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have it at my fingertips. But again, if 
this is the urgent and compelling issue of the day, I will find out, 
Mr. Speaker, exactly what the policy is and bring it to the hon. 
member. 
 

Government Use of Tanka Research 
 

Mr. Lusney: —  A question for the Minister of Health, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Minister, Public Accounts 1984-85 show that your 
department paid some $37,500 to Tanka resources, the PC’s 
pollster. Mr. Minister, can you tell the people of Saskatchewan, 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, what polling your department 
had Tanka Resources do for them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: —  Mr. Speaker, there are a number of issues 
that I look at, and I would have to take notice of that and report 
back. 
 
Mr. Lusney: —  Well, Mr. Minister, are you telling the people 
that Saskatchewan that you, the Minister of Health, don’t even 
know what polling your department has done, or if they have 
done any? 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: —  I am telling you, Mr. Speaker, that I’m 
responsible for $1.2 billion, about one-third of the budget of 
Saskatchewan. And rather than mislead the member in any way, 
I told him I’ll report back, and that’s what I intend to do. 
 
Mr. Lusney: —  Supplementary. Mr. Minister, since you took 
notice of my other question, will you, at the same time then, table 
in this House the results of that poll, the questions that were 
asked, the responses, and the analysis of that poll, since the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan paid for it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: —  Mr. Speaker, I told him I’d look into this. 
I’m not making any announcement that I’m tabling anything at 
this point in time. 
 
Mr. Lusney: —  Mr. Speaker, a new question for the Minister of 
Social Services. Mr. Minister, in Public Accounts your 
department shows that they paid some $12,000, again to Tanka 
Resources, the PC polling outfit that you have. Can you tell the 
taxpayers what polling was required for the Department of Social 
Services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: —  Mr. Speaker, I’ll take notice of the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Creation of Fertilizer Plant in Regina 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure today in 
announcing to this House that the government today has taken 
steps to create a $200 million fertilizer plant in the city of Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Last evening, Mr. Speaker, a 
memorandum of intent was signed by Crown Management 
Board, by Federated Co-operatives Ltd., by the Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool, and by CdF Chimie International. This 
memorandum sets the stage for North America’s first 
refinery-integrated fertilizer manufacturing plant. 
 
The projected plant will produce 250,000 tonnes of anhydrous 
ammonia fertilizer per year. It is expected to create, initially, 100 
new permanent jobs at the plant and an additional 100 jobs if the 
further products of fertilizer are being produced, as well as 600 
indirect spin-off jobs, as well as over 1,000 jobs in the 
construction phase of this project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that this is a giant leap forward for 
Saskatchewan agriculture as well as creating jobs. It is also going 
to be a tremendous shot in the arm for the heavy oil upgrade — 
the Co-op heavy oil upgrader that we helped to launch in the 
province of Saskatchewan. As well, it is going to be a tremendous 
boost for the sales of Saskatchewan-produced natural gas. 
 
The memorandum of intent that we signed today, or last night, 
calls the four participants, representing the  
  



 
April 3, 1986 

342 
 

government, co-operatives, private industry, and farmers, to form 
a joint venture and then to draw up detailed strategies for the 
project. When the strategy is in place later this year, the parties 
will make their final commitment to financing and the 
construction of this fertilizer plant. Developing that strategy will 
involve a series of studies on the plant size and cost, market and 
product mix, and technical and financial opportunities. 
 
This particular project has been under way for about 15 months 
now. The Government of Saskatchewan and the company CdF 
Chimie have come to an understanding to proceed with this 
particular project and have recently involved and included the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, who showed extreme interest in it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the plant will involve state of the art technology. It 
will be involved with some of the new technology being 
developed throughout the world by CdF Chimie International. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the impact of this project will be to have 
a significant reduction on the price of fertilizer to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. It will increase the demand for natural gas in the 
province of Saskatchewan by over 20 per cent, will create 200 
jobs, will breathe a great deal of new revenue stream into the 
upgrader. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this project is viable and will proceed for the 
following reason. A stand-alone ammonia plant would cost in the 
neighbourhood of $400 million. By being able to tack it in and 
tie it in with the upgrader, that capital cost has been cut in half. 
And that capital cost being cut in half, what it will do, Mr. 
Speaker, is allow this to proceed, allow us to create those jobs, 
and allow us to deliver fertilizer to the people of Saskatchewan 
at a reduced cost. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I want to make a few 
comments in respect to the minister’s announcement. And as all 
of us will know, and the people of Saskatchewan will know, that 
there is announcement after announcement after announcement, 
and for four years we have seen no economic results. And here 
what they are making is an announcement of tying yet another 
plant to an upgrader which isn’t even built. 
 
We have promise after promise. And I want to say that the people 
of Saskatchewan don’t believe this government. They have not 
been able to produce any results. And all that we have to date is 
press releases. And can you imagine that they have an upgrader 
which they had an official opening, and not one single step has 
been taken to start the construction — no construction has been 
taken. Now they’re announcing that they’re tying on to the 
non-existing upgrader yet another plant. 
 
Well I’ll tell you that the people of Saskatchewan don’t believe 
you. You go down into Prince Albert and you make an 
announcement of Weyerhaeuser coming in to buy . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order please. A member can only deal with the 
items that are on the announcement . . . Order!  

You’re not allowed to refer to other announcements that have 
been made at previous times when answering a ministerial 
statement. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — The point that I’m making, Mr. Speaker, is the 
credibility of that minister — getting up and making a statement 
of more economic development in this province when we find 
that the highest unemployment that this province has known — 
the highest number of people on welfare — and here we are 
saying that they’re going to bring yet another development. It’s 
all on paper.  
 
Every individual announcement that they have made there is no 
concrete evidence of any substantial development. All of it is 
press releases. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the people of 
Saskatchewan will not be fooled by the press releases in a 
desperate attempt to elect the PC party by fooling the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I wish to lay on the 
Table, pursuant to section 1 of section 30 of The Ombudsman 
Act, the report of the provincial Ombudsman. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 
 

At 2:44 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill. No. 01 — An Act respecting the Canadian Bible Society, 
Saskatchewan District. 
Bill No. 02 — An Act respecting Medical Services Incorporated 
Bill No. 3 — An Act to amend The Change of Name Act 
Bill No. 7 — An Act to amend The Statute Law 
Bill No. 9 — An Act to amend The Lloydminster Hospital Act, 
1948 
Bill No. 10 — An Act to amend The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Act 
Bill No. 11 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments 
resulting from the enactment of The Environmental Management 
and Protection Act 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:46 p.m. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself into 
the committee of finance. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I think 
when we left off last night I was scolding the Government Whip 
for what I thought was inappropriate  
  



 
April 3, 1986 

343 
 

behaviour. I see he’s leaving. I don’t intend to repeat those 
remarks and I suppose, Mr. Speaker, I’m not as angry as I was 
last night; however, I certainly don’t recant the remarks. That is 
no way to run a legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to begin by making some comments with 
respect to the local government commission. My colleagues and 
I have addressed many shortcomings of things that are in this 
budget. I’d like to begin by addressing something that is not in 
the budget. I was surprised and disappointed to find no reference 
in either the throne speech or the budget speech of the Devine’s 
government Local Government Finance Commission. I’m sure 
all members will recall, and  PC members will recall with some 
embarrassment, the great fanfare with which the Premier 
announced how the Local Government Finance Commission was 
going to solve so many problems. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that was two years ago, and those problems 
remain. But they don’t remain unchanged, Mr. Speaker; those 
problems have become worse. They’ve become worse because 
of PC policy. For in this case their policy is clear, simple, and 
bad. They have starved local governments for financing — a 3 
per cent increase in total revenue sharing for municipalities over 
the past two years, during which time there’s been about a 10 per 
cent inflation. And they’ve eliminated property tax rebates — an 
enormous shift to local government, an enormous tax shift onto 
local property taxpayers. And let there be no mistake, that Devine 
tax shift has been a very real tax increase for local property 
taxpayers. 
 
But when we turn to the budget speech for last week, do we see 
any reference at all to the Local Government Finance 
Commission? No. This is another classic example of this PC 
government’s record — bad planning, bad management, bad 
policy; hopes raised, and just as quickly, hopes dashed; promises 
made and promises broken. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the central issue in this campaign has been one 
which members opposite have approached, but in a negative 
fashion. Mr. Speaker, the central issue . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well the member from Saskatoon South may 
take some note of this issue. It deals with unemployment, 
something you may face in the very immediate future. 
 
The central issue in the next election campaign, Mr. Speaker, will 
be a simple one: how best can we get Saskatchewan working 
again. Who best can get Saskatchewan working again, is perhaps 
putting the question more precisely from the point of view of 
electors. And by the simple standard, that simple test, the PC 
budget has failed, and the Devine PC government has failed over 
the last four years. For it fundamentally fails to address basic 
problems: the need to create new jobs in the small-business 
activity throughout all Saskatchewan in every community in our 
province; the need to provide decent, affordable housing for all 
Saskatchewan people; the need to provide security for 
Saskatchewan families — security so families can plan, can 
build, can invest in the enormous potential for Saskatchewan. 
 
Because of the Devine government’s policy failures, we  

have seen over the past two years new housing starts at their 
lowest level in a dozen years; small businesses that are able, 
energetic, but whose receipts and income have dropped because 
of poor management of our economy by the PC government; 
young families in need of housing, unable to get into the housing 
market because of unemployment and insecurity; families under 
stress because they’re unable to plan and therefore unable to help 
invest in and build the growth of Saskatchewan. 
 
That is why, throughout my constituency and every community 
in Saskatchewan, people are excited about the New Democrats’ 
bold and positive housing program for the future — a positive 
and comprehensive housing program that will help get 
Saskatchewan working again; jobs for Saskatchewan people in 
every community; contracts and activities for Saskatchewan 
small business in every community; decent, affordable housing 
for Saskatchewan families in every community; and mortgage 
rate security for Saskatchewan families in every community. A 
truly great Saskatchewan megaproject, not just one big 
out-of-the-province corporation, but for all Saskatchewan 
communities, for all Saskatchewan businesses. 
 
For the people of Saskatchewan do not believe that we should be 
content with 42,000 people unemployed and 60,000 dependent 
on welfare. Nor are we content with that, nor do we believe that 
that’s at all socially acceptable. We pledge ourselves to establish 
the right of every person to a job, who is able to work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Nor do Saskatchewan people and 
Saskatchewan small businesses believe we should be content 
with only 5,300 new housing starts per year, the lowest level in 
many, many years. They know that working together, we can get 
Saskatchewan working again, and that the New Democrats’ 
positive housing program will do just that. These are our 
commitments. 
 
For first-time home buyers of new homes, a New Democratic 
government will provide direct financial assistance of $7,000. 
This program will be in place for a minimum of three years to 
provide some stability in the housing market and to avoid the 
boom and bust impact of the Devine government’s short-term 
crisis management. 
 
For those living in older homes in need of major repair and 
rehabilitation, New Democratic government will provide direct 
home rehab assistance of up to $7,000. This would include major 
projects to improve energy conservation. 
 
In order to provide interest rate security for Saskatchewan 
families with new and existing mortgages, a New Democratic 
government will provide a family home protection plan 
guaranteeing 7 per cent home mortgages for seven years on the 
first $70,000 of the mortgage. For low-income families and 
individuals, as well as senior citizens, a New Democratic 
government would make a major commitment to the construction 
of social housing. 
 
New Democrats are not satisfied with the PC level of only 5,300 
new housing starts per year. We have therefore set  
  



 
April 3, 1986 

344 
 

a target of 8,000 new starts a year, and a minimum of a further 
2,000 major rehabilitation projects per year. The impact will be 
enormous: 3,600 new jobs per year, or 18,000 jobs over five 
years, without counting the indirect spin-off effects in the 
provision of appliances, fencing, landscaping, and furnishings; 
250 million in increased economic activity per year, or 1.3 billion 
over the next five years. That’s an incremental 1.3 billion in 
economic activity throughout many sectors in the economy and 
throughout every community in Saskatchewan — a New 
Democratic housing program that will work and that will go a 
long way toward helping getting Saskatchewan working again. 
 
Over the past 10 days there have been two kinds of responses, 
Mr. Speaker, to this New Democratic housing program. The first 
has been the overwhelming, positive, and enthusiastic response 
from the public. Our phones have been literally rung off the wall, 
taxing the energy and patience of our staff with their encouraging 
and positive and excited calls. They know that this is a positive 
housing program that will work. They know it will help get 
Saskatchewan working again, and they want it. 
 
The second response has been the sour grapes criticism from PC 
members opposite. PC members try to say that since they are 
paying $100 million a year in welfare payments to fully 
employable people, they can’t afford a positive housing program 
that will cost a great deal less than that. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, members opposite are wrong. The people of 
Saskatchewan and New Democrats know it’s far better, far more 
production, to put people to work doing real jobs than to pay out 
welfare. And so I say this to members opposite: Saskatchewan 
can’t afford the PC policy of welfare instead of jobs. We can’t 
afford to continue spending 100 million on welfare payments to 
fully employable people when they want to work, there’s work 
to be done, and when we can spend less to put them to work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I therefore invite PC members opposite to explain 
to the contractors and the small businesses in their constituency; 
explain to the unemployed; explain to the young families getting 
into the housing market; and explain to seniors and others in 
older homes your lack of faith and courage. Explain why it’s the 
PC policy to pay people welfare who want to work, and why it’s 
the PC policy of members opposite to oppose a positive housing 
program that will get Saskatchewan working again. 
 
(1500) 
 
In a few short weeks, Mr. Speaker, the voters of Saskatchewan 
will be making a critical choice. They will be asking if 
Saskatchewan can afford four more years of a Devine 
government. They will be asking who can best govern 
Saskatchewan for a better, brighter future for all Saskatchewan 
people. They will be asking themselves who can best get 
Saskatchewan working again. The New Democrats are looking 
forward to that campaign, Mr. Speaker, genuinely look forward 
to the explanations, or lack of them, from members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make a comment, if I might, about  

the form in which the Public Accounts takes this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government which came into office four 
years ago on a promise of open government. Since that time, their 
behaviour has suggested that they don’t trust the public. They 
also don’t apparently have any confidence in their own ability to 
sell their ideas and their programs to the public, because their 
reference throughout those four years, Mr. Speaker, have been a 
denial of open government and an attempt to keep as much 
information from the opposition and from the public, 
consequently. 
 
Their behaviour, Mr. Speaker, with respect to an abnormal 
number of megaprojects — one can think of the Rafferty dam; 
one can think of the Weyerhaeuser project in Prince Albert; one 
can think of the ammonia plant today, and a number of other 
projects in which no details of financing was provided. Mr. 
Speaker, that is not heretofore the way these matters were 
handled. 
 
When the government of Ross Thatcher, some 17 years ago, set 
up the pulp-mill which is now the subject of the Weyerhaeuser 
sale, all of the financing documents, all of the documents with 
respect to the right to cut in new woods, with respect to the 
royalties to be paid, with respect to stumpage fees — all those, 
Mr. Speaker, were laid on the legislative Table when the 
announcement was made. Whether or not we agreed with 
Premier Thatcher, he at least had the courage to defend what he 
was doing and was prepared to do so. 
 
This government is too cowardly to defend what they’re doing. 
They provide us with no details and no facts, and I say, Mr. 
Speaker, what this government is afraid of is not the opposition, 
what this government is afraid of is the public. That’s why, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re not giving the opposition, and thus the public, 
any details of these agreements, and that’s why, Mr. Speaker, the 
public to date have been frustrated with respect to an election. 
The question I get asked most often is: when’s the next election, 
the electorate say, as they’re filing their teeth. 
 
Well I say, Mr. Speaker, the public are being frustrated with 
respect to the details of these contracts for the same reason 
they’re being frustrated with respect to the date of an election, 
because this government is afraid of the public, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I want to complain while I am 
on my feet about the form in which the Public Accounts take. 
There is more than one instance, Mr. Speaker, of the form being 
changed so that there will be less information available. And the 
obvious example which has been used is with respect to 
ministers’ travel. The figures which were heretofore available are 
no longer available with respect to ministers’ travel. It cannot be 
because there’s no interest in it. I think I detected, Mr. Speaker, 
some small trickling of interest when they heard how much the 
former minister of Highways had spent on travel. I don’t think, 
Mr. Speaker, that we don’t get that information because they 
think there’s no interest in it, or because they think it’s not 
relevant; I think, Mr.  
  



 
April 3, 1986 

345 
 

Speaker, this government is afraid of the public. They’re not 
going to give them the information, and they’re not tabling that 
in the Public Accounts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to the deficit if I might. Mr. Speaker, 
the management of this province’s affairs over the last four years 
is just simply frightening. That is in no way an exaggeration. It 
is just simply frightening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no huge difference between managing the 
affairs of a family or a business or a province. The same 
principles apply. If you run up huge debts and you don’t manage 
your affairs, you don’t pay your bills on time, eventually you 
impoverish yourself. A family which does not manage its 
finances, and which winds up with huge debts that they’re 
repaying, is a family that lowers its whole standard of living — 
it become impoverished. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the public debt in Saskatchewan is alarming. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Look at Manitoba. They have the highest 
per capita debt in Canada. Under the NDP, it’s gone up. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The member from North West, who was part 
of the Conservative caucus for some two budgets — and I 
thought I saw him voting in favour of at least two of those deficits 
of which he now displays with such righteous fever — I suggest 
to the member from Regina North West that in addition to having 
a forked tongue he has also mistaken the facts. 
 
I will venture to say that when we get the Public Accounts for the 
year ending March 31, 1986, our per capita debt will be higher 
than Manitoba’s. I think that is a fair assumption. Why? Because 
Manitoba’s, although it may be high, is honestly stated. I don’t 
know anyone outside the Conservative caucus who honestly 
believes that you birds have accurately stated your indebtedness. 
And why should we begin to believe in you now? You have yet 
to accurately state what this government’s debt is going to be. 
 
You stated during the election that you could accomplish all 
manner of things — the wildest, the most irresponsible promises, 
without any provincial debt, and of course you are astonished 
when you get into office that money doesn’t grow on trees; that 
when you make lavish promises, there must be lavish taxes to 
pay for it. 
 
In the first budget, Mr. Speaker, and in the second budget, for 
which the member from Regina North West voted in favour, 
there were alarmingly large deficits estimated, and inevitably 
when the Public Accounts came in, the actual deficit was vastly 
in excess of what had been predicted. I suggest to all members 
opposite that when the Public Accounts for the year ending 
March 31, 1986, are published, you will find that our per capita 
debt is the highest in Canada, west of the Maritimes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I say, the management of this province’s affairs 
is truly alarming. 
 
It’s worth looking at some of these figures in the Public  

Accounts which were tabled. I refer members to the table on page 
3, Province of Saskatchewan Combined Funds. I see in 1985, for 
the first year in this province’s affairs since probably sometime 
in the ’50s, Saskatchewan no longer . . . this province no longer 
has a net equity; it now has a net debt. And that is the first time 
in probably around 30 years that has been the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1984 this province had a net equity of 345 
million. And that’s down from . . . That is a small fraction of what 
it was, Mr. Speaker, when the former administration left office. 
That is a fraction of what it was. But in 1984 the net equity was 
$345 million. In 1985 that became a net debt of $65 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I tried to figure out what the province’s net debt 
would be after the series of announcements which have been 
made with respect to Rafferty, Weyerhaeuser, Gainers, and away 
and on and on you go. I tried to figure out what the province’s 
net debt position would be. I don’t what it will be, Mr. Speaker, 
but it will be many hundreds of millions of dollars, if it is not 
over a billion dollars. 
 
Twice in the last two years, Mr. Speaker, this province’s credit 
rating has been lowered by those who rate . . . who perform such 
services in New York. I fear, Mr. Speaker, that for the third time 
in three years this province is going to find its credit rating 
lowered again this year. And the public of Saskatchewan have to 
ask themselves how much longer they can afford that kind of 
management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not a gradual erosion of this province’s 
strength. This is a sudden collapse. It has happened very rapidly. 
I would venture to say, Mr. Speaker, that the erosion of this 
province’s equity into debt has occurred more quickly in this 
province than at any time in Canadian history. I defy any 
members to think of a four-year period in which the financial 
strength of a province eroded as quickly as it did in this province 
over the last four years. 
 
We have gone from having one of the strongest economies and 
one of the best-managed governments in Canada to one of the 
worst-managed — positively the worst-managed — in four short 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our family comprises a family of four. The debt 
which our family has accumulated in the last four years is $8,000. 
That’s $8,000. Well, there are four people. There are four people. 
Our two children, who are not old enough to contemplate what a 
thousand is, never mind to understand what public debt means to 
them, our two children have $2,000 each. That kind of 
management, Mr. Speaker, is truly alarming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this hasn’t occurred because the province has been 
shaving its expenditures. This province has gone on spending at 
a higher rate, and its increases in its spending have consistently, 
in each budget, been grater than the rate of inflation. That has 
occurred again this year. All the talk about restraint is just that — 
just talk. It’s the same as the talk about the municipal finance 
commission, same as the talk about the housing program, same 
as it is in so many areas. It’s just empty talk. 
  



 
April 3, 1986 

346 
 

This year, Mr. Speaker, total provincial taxes go up by about 7 
per cent. The receipt from government enterprises and elsewhere 
has gone up by 19 per cent. Total revenue from other sources is 
up 12 per cent. The total revenue is up 6 per cent. Mr. Speaker, 
total revenue this year is up 6 per cent. That is about 50 per cent 
more than the rate of inflation. 
 
With respect to expenditures, one item that ought to be of interest 
to members opposite, Mr. Speaker, is the interest paid on debt. In 
1984, we paid $56 million as interest on our debt. That figure 
doubled — Mr. Speaker, in 1985, the year ending March 31, 
1985, we paid 102 million. It is estimated that in the year ending 
March 31st, 1987, we will pay 200 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the figure doubled in 1984, doubled in 1985, and 
will double again before the next fiscal year is completed. That, 
Mr. Speaker, is what I mean by the impoverishment of the 
Saskatchewan public. 
 
I want to take a moment to go through some of the expenditures. 
But I say to members opposite and to you, Mr. Speaker, when 
you’re spending $200 million on interest, and there’s a whole lot 
of places you aren’t spending money — and I’m going to go 
through some of those before I sit down — this province faces 
some serious problems with public services. Some public 
services are near the point of collapse. When you ask why they’re 
near the point of collapse when revenues are up 6 per cent and 
expenditures are up 7 per cent, why essential public services 
cannot be maintained, Mr. Speaker, one of the main causes is the 
growth in the payments on interest. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a moment as well dealing with the 
estimates. I want to deal with some of the departments whose 
services that they are delivering are falling into serious disrepair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the grants to Saskatchewan universities in 
Advanced Education. The amount of the grants are going up by 
3 per cent. That is just simply not enough. That is going to result 
in: (a) a further deterioration in the universities; and (b) probably 
an increase in tuition at the same time. We’re probably going to 
get both. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was of school-going age during the ’60s. I 
remember our generation was angry and idealistic. And I 
remember watching fellows students protest, parade, and occupy 
the dean’s office. I say, Mr. Speaker, that we had little right to 
complain by comparison to young people now. If young people 
now aren’t angry about the way they’re being treated, then they 
ought to be. Whether or not one agrees with Senator Hébert’s 
protest, with his protest outside the Senate Chamber, there are a 
great many people who sympathize with his expression of 
concern about what is happening to young people. In so many 
ways, in so many ways, Mr. Speaker, we are short-changing the 
younger generation. And one of the most important ways we’re 
short-changing the younger generation comes on the opening 
pages of the Estimates with respect to education. 

Education, the universities . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
if the member from Saskatoon South doesn’t believe that the 
universities have deteriorated, I invite him to go out to the 
university campus and say that. The university campuses, both of 
them, have spent some time trying to get Conservative members 
out of their caucus to talk about funding, and no member opposite 
has had the nerve to go. 
 
If you think university funding is right down to the ground, then 
I invite any members opposite to go to the students and tell them 
that, because I’ll tell you it won’t be a pleasant experience when 
you try it. 
 
The universities, Mr. Speaker, have deteriorated and have 
deteriorated sharply. I say also, Mr. Speaker, that so have other 
educational institutes, although not quite as dramatically. Even 
the technical institutes — Kelsey in Saskatoon, STI in Moose 
Jaw — even those institutions which this government boasts 
about what it has done, even those institutions, Mr. Speaker, are 
overcrowded. Students cannot get into courses that they’re 
interested in. Mr. Speaker, the facilities — the lab facilities, the 
libraries — are not adequate to deal with the numbers they have. 
 
I say to member opposite, if you think that you’ve done a good 
job in the technical institutes and universities, then I invite you 
to accept one of those invitations which have never been taken 
up by members opposite, and go to the campuses and tell them 
what a grand job you’re doing. And I’ll tell you, it will be a while 
before you’ll go back a second time. You can’t tell those people 
— you cannot tell the students that you’ve done a good job with 
education any more than you have the courage to tell the nurses 
that you’ve done a good job in health. 
 
I notice how courageous members opposite are about going to 
the meetings called by SUN (Saskatchewan Unions of Nurses) 
and telling them what a great job they’re doing in health. Why? 
Because it doesn’t wash with those people who can cite you 
chapter and verse as to what you’re doing wrong. 
 
Well, you’re making the very same mistakes with respect to 
education. And I say to members opposite that your most serious 
failing has to deal with the way that you have treated young 
people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want as well to mention the Department of 
Consumer and Corporate Affairs. I know, Mr. Speaker, that 
members opposite believe that this department is no longer 
faddish. I say to members opposite that this department serves a 
very useful purpose in helping, often very ordinary people sort 
out what may appear in the scheme of things to be small 
problems. This is a department which . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well I’ll just be delighted to hear the member from Maple 
Creek tell us why she thinks she can get along on almost 4 per 
cent less in the Department of Consumer and Corporate Affairs. 
This department may not be faddish. In the estimate of members 
opposite it may not rate with announcing a $250 million 
give-away in Prince Albert. But I’ll tell you, to a lot of 
Saskatchewan people this department is important. 
 
People buy a car; they have a problem with it. It’s this 
  



 
April 3, 1986 

347 
 

department that sorts out problems which ordinary people have. 
This department, which complains of overwork every time I 
contact this department and I say you are late in dealing with the 
problem of my constituent X — the response I get: well, you 
know we’re terribly understaffed and we’ve got too much to do; 
you just have to understand, Mr. Shillington. And I say I do 
understand why the staff of your department cannot work 
miracles, but I don’t understand why members opposite would 
short-change this department which serves the ordinary person. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the single most important and unique feature of the 
Saskatchewan economy is the role played by co-operatives — 
apart from la Caisse Populaire in Quebec — this province has the 
vast majority of co-operatives in Canada. The government of 
Tommy Douglas about whom members think so much, the 
government of Tommy Douglas set up a department to service 
this large and unique Saskatchewan industry — this large and 
unique Saskatchewan phenomenon. Spending in the department 
of co-ops is down 3 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, very little was said about employment in the 
budget, and very little was said about the throne speech. There 
were the usual noises. I’m not going to dignify the language by 
describing . . . they’ve heard enough. There was the usual noises 
made with respect to the creation of jobs. The truth of matter, Mr. 
Speaker, is that this province’s job creation effort is woefully 
inadequate. 
 
Members opposite can say whatever they like about creating 
jobs. I simply say to them: you’re not believed. The public of 
Saskatchewan don’t believe you’ve done a good job. And indeed 
they’re right because as fast as you’ve been creating jobs, you’ve 
been destroying them. Most of the jobs this government has 
created have been short-term jobs lasting 20 or 22 weeks with 
really one function in mind: (a) to boost the statistics and, (b) to 
decrease the number of people on welfare. This province’s job 
creation efforts have not been intended to get people working. 
They have been designed with the purpose of getting people off 
welfare, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, spending in the Employment Development Agency 
in a year when this province undoubtedly faces the most difficult 
economic prospects that it has in a very long period of time, in a 
year when we are bound to have very serious pressure in the job 
market, spending in the Employment Development Agency is 
down by 20 per cent. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, and I ask members 
opposite whether or not you think that is in accordance with 
public expectations? 
 
And once again, Mr. Speaker, we are short-changing young 
people. It’s primarily young people who are the victims of this 
government’s insensitivity and this government’s lack of 
compassion. Young people whom I run into do not believe the 
world owes them a living. That was a belief, I suppose, of people 
of my generation. Young people no longer believe such 
nonsense. But most young people do believe that the world owes 
them a chance to develop a career. And for very many young 
people, Mr. Speaker, that’s being denied. 

Mr. Speaker, by way of introducing myself to young people, for 
years and years and years, after introducing myself as an elected 
member, I then used to ask people: what do you do? I found that 
almost everybody can talk about themselves, and thus they can 
carry on a conversation about what they do. Mr. Speaker, that 
device, which is by no means exclusive to myself and is by no 
means new, that simple trick can no longer be used in talking 
with young people. You don’t dare ask young people: what do 
you do? Because so many of them, after a silence I’m sure is 
more painful to me than it is to them — so many of them say, 
well I’m between jobs. Between jobs indeed! Some of them are 
years between jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, this government has failed the young 
people of this province. They are decreasing their efforts to 
provide work. They’re allowing universities to deteriorate so 
rapidly that it’s visible. You can visibly see them deteriorating. 
And they’re allowing technical schools as well to deteriorate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, among the groups which I think felt the most 
trepidation when this government was elected, was native 
people. As I looked over the electoral map after the election, if 
this government felt like being crass, it wasn’t obvious who 
would be neglected and who were the victims, because with eight 
exceptions, they represented the entire province. But one 
exception to that was the North — if they had won those seats in 
the North — and presumably had little expect to by way of 
electoral support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all I can say is that the worst fears of the people in 
northern Saskatchewan and the worst fears of native people have 
been realized. My colleague, whom I genuinely regret will not be 
with us in the next legislature, my seat-mate from Cumberland 
describes this much more eloquently and with much more feeling 
than I do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is noteworthy that again this government’s 
spending on Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat is down by 16 
per cent. This, Mr. Speaker, is the group of people who suffer the 
highest rate of unemployment; the highest rate of alcoholism, 
marital breakdown; these people who have what is by any 
measurement the most severe problems in our society — 
spending on the Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat is down by 
16 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other results of spending $200 million on 
interest. One of them is the Ombudsman. The Ombudsman has 
had some comments. I don’t know whether the Minister of 
Economic Development and Trade is going to describe this as a 
vicious comment. The last time that the Ombudsman complained 
that his staff was being cut, he was described as vicious by the 
member from Kindersley. I don’t know if he’ll adopt the same 
tack again. I expect at this time he’ll think better of it and 
probably make some new mistakes. The Ombudsman’s office, 
Mr. Speaker, the funding is down by 3 per cent, and that 
represents one less staff person. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in an era when the economic stresses are increasing, 
in an era when the public are demanding more of government as 
they seek to deal with a more desperate situation, the work-load 
in the office of the  
  



 
April 3, 1986 

348 
 

Ombudsman has increased quite dramatically, as people seek to 
struggle with a situation that they don’t understand, and with a 
government which doesn’t seem to be interested in working with 
them, and doesn’t seem to be interested in solving them. The 
work-load of the Ombudsman’s office has increased 
dramatically, and they’ve been cut one staff. 
 
The same is true of the Provincial Auditor’s report. I don’t want 
to get into the Provincial Auditor’s report. All I can say is, when 
I read it I didn’t know whether to laugh or cry — laugh because 
of the comments that he made about this government’s handling 
of its financial affairs. And we’ll spend . . . Depending on what 
happens over the weekend, we’ll get into that fairly shortly. But 
I say to members opposite that the report of the Provincial 
Auditor is a damning indictment of this government’s inability to 
manage its affairs, and if any member doubts that, spend the 
weekend reading that report. I have never read anything like it. 
Government is forever losing trifles — they’re out by 25 million, 
they’re out by 3 million. There doesn’t seem to be anyone who 
can add up a column of figures and get within 3 million bucks of 
the right amount. And it happens over and over again. The office 
of the Provincial Auditor, whose work-load has increased quite 
dramatically, has once again, Mr. Speaker, had his staff cut at a 
time when he needs greater staff, rather than less. 
 
(1530) 
 
The area, Mr. Speaker, that I find the most painful is the 
Department of Social Services. I find the work of this department 
to be the most appalling in human terms. This isn’t an area, Mr. 
Speaker, where the funding has been cut. Indeed the funding has 
increased very dramatically. They’re spending another $10 
million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reason why I find the work of this department 
so appalling is the human tragedy that it’s creating. I remember, 
Mr. Speaker, debating the so-called welfare reform in May of 
1984, if my memory serves me correct. I remember debating it 
as an academic question. They were cutting the rates to 
unemployed employables by 40 per cent. We said it wouldn’t 
work; they said it would. 
 
Later, when the session adjourned and I got back to my 
constituency, I began to understand what that meant in human 
terms. What it meant was hunger. I don’t know that any statistic 
measures that except the statistics of the food bank who have 
done yeoman service in standing between a great number of 
Saskatchewan families and utter disaster. The fact that . . . and I 
applaud those people involved in the food bank. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that they are doing their level best, but the 
fact that we have food banks in this country is a testimony to the 
callousness, the insensitivity, of Conservative governments in 
this land and how little Conservative governments understand the 
complexity of life in the latter part of the 20th century. I say to 
members opposite, we are not living in the 19th century. And the 
17th century, as much as you want to bring it back, is gone for 
ever. We live in the latter part of the 20th century. 

We live in a complex society. To promote simplistic solutions 
from the halls of a university as an academic proposition is every 
man’s right. If someone wants to be a crank in this country, it’s 
your right to be a crank, if you want. But to hold office and 
promote these crankish theories about making people work for 
welfare, to do that from elected office creates a disaster. 
Members opposite have created a disaster. 
 
What it has meant, Mr. Speaker, is within nine months of welfare 
reform, a doubling of property crimes in Saskatchewan. That was 
not an accident. That occurred because we have people in this 
province who are desperate. I remember, Mr. Speaker, an old 
police sergeant telling me, when a community in which I lived 
was going to close down their welfare and give no welfare to 
anybody, I remember an old policeman urging me to go to the 
town council and talk them out of it. His rationale was very 
simple. I’m the sergeant in town and, he said, I’ll tell you, a 
dangerous man’s a hungry man, and I don’t want dangerous 
people in this community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am also concerned about the inability of the staff 
in the Department of Social Services to deal with their workload. 
We have complaints, Mr. Speaker, that the social workers are 
callous. They don’t care, complaints that social workers are 
telling people to go and commit property crimes, engage in 
prostitution. I tell you, those comments are all absolute nonsense 
— all unadulterated nonsense. But the truth is that the social 
workers do not have the time to deal with the flood of 
applications. They don’t have time to adequately deal with the 
human tragedy which comes before them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to . . . And in case members opposite think 
this is a member who happens to represent a lot of social welfare 
recipients ranting, let me quote from an authority that members 
might find opposite. I’m beginning to understand why the 
Ombudsman had his staff cut. I want to quote from 
Ombudsman’s Report which was tabled today. It is item number 
six on page 50, and the heading says it all, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Continued Callousness in the Social Assistance System. 
 
I’m going to read this, Mr. Speaker, because it deserves to be read 
into the record. 
 

In my 1983 annual report I devoted several pages to 
problems in the social assistance field. Among other things, 
I expressed concern about the callous treatment of some 
social assistance persons and including actual cases 
involving youths, illiterate persons and those suffering from 
physical and mental disabilities to emphasize the point. 
 
My annual report for 1984 also touched on the same subject 
and did so in the following terms: While I was unable (in 
1984) to devote as many of our scarce resources to the 
investigation of this particular issue as I might have wished, 
we did investigate sufficient cases to enable me to conclude 
that if the situation has improved it has  

  



 
April 3, 1986 

349 
 

only improved in a marginal way. While it is difficult to 
segregate the effects of increased client pressure on the 
department, the changes in the social assistance system, 
(welfare reform) and staff attitudes, it is certainly my 
impression that the kind of problems in the social assistance 
system that I identified last year are still with us. For 
whatever reasons we have still regularly encountering an 
abundance of the “Catch-22” situations and a preoccupation 
with financial requirements rather than with providing the 
guidance and counselling that might permit some social 
assistance persons to limit or eliminate their dependence on 
the “welfare system”. 
 
While this year’s cases were of a less dramatic variety in 
that they did not involve the ill, the aged, the problems of 
illiterates, I believe they still illustrate the concerns I 
expressed last year regarding the department’s attitudes and 
policies towards persons on social assistance. I am more 
convinced than ever that stress is the source of the problem 
and that additional resources rather than training and public 
relations, is the answer. 
 
Unfortunately, there is a need to emphasize this point again 
this year. The following case summary is perhaps as good 
as any to illustrate our ongoing concern. 

 
The Ombudsman chose this as an illustration of what’s 
happening with this department, Mr. Speaker. I would expect that 
members opposite, particular those that profess Christian faith, 
and indeed some that don’t profess Christian faith, would take 
this to heart. The case is numbered 84-23000-40-243. 
 

In December of 1984 two sisters from northern 
Saskatchewan contacted my office regarding the treatment 
by the Department of Social Services in Saskatoon. 
 
The sisters are mothers of two severely handicapped 
children and two other children, all four years of age. They 
moved to Saskatoon so that their children could get the 
treatment they needed from the Children’s Rehabilitation 
Centre at the University Hospital. 
 
The complaint was that Social Services was delaying in 
provision of adequate assistance, and would not furnish 
them with a furniture allowance to buy the furniture they 
need for an unfurnished suite they had located. (This has a 
familiar ring to it). 
 
There had been no contact between the department and the 
Indian Affairs worker in the north, nor had there been any 
contact between Social Services and Children’s 
Rehabilitation Centre until the latter became aware of the 
problems the girls were having in obtaining financial 
assistance, and finding a suitable place to live. This was 
almost two months after they came from the north to bring 
their children to the Centre. 

The girls were not given adequate assistance (I know 
members don’t particularly like to listen to this), the girls 
were not given adequate assistance until there was an 
intervention by the Metis Society, the Children’s 
Rehabilitation Centre and my office. It was not until these 
agencies intervened . . . 

 
To check these . . . It was not until after the Children’s Aid 
Society intervened that this problem was resolved. 
 

I found the complaint to be substantiated, but for reasons 
that escape me yet, the department has not accepted this 
conclusion and continue to insist that their actions were fair 
and reasonable and that no undue hardship was caused by 
its actions and omissions. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, some members who canvassed in Regina 
North West will have their own horror stories. I recall meeting 
individuals . . . North East. I recall meeting individuals in the 
North East by-election who had no furniture — families, parent 
and children — with no way of sitting down at the table. There 
was no furniture. The one family in particular ate in shifts. Two 
ate and then the next two ate, because there were only two chairs 
and there was no way of getting them. 
 
Well, I see the incredulous look on the face of the Deputy 
Speaker. I say, if you think there’s a simple solution, other than 
going and getting the furniture for them, which is what we did — 
we simply went and got some furniture for them and gave it to 
them — if you think there’s another solution to that, I invite you 
to go out there and tell them. And I’ll give you the address in 
private. I’ll give you the address in private, and you can go out 
and see them and you can explain to him how he gets his furniture 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, you can use my car. You can 
use my car. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to read the next section because it 
goes directly to what I and members opposite have been saying 
about welfare reform over the last nearly two years — nearly two 
years since it was introduced. This, again, is from the 
Ombudsman’s Report. He is an officer of this Assembly. This is 
not one of these non-government organizations, NGOs, which 
you people believe are universally against you. This was an 
officer of this legislature describing a situation that he has dealt 
with, to the point where I’m sure it’s taxing his patience. 
 

Welfare reform — is it working? 
 
The answer to this question very much depends upon the 
test that one applies and an understanding of the “real” goals 
of the program. In our case, the test that we would apply 
may well not be that of the department of the minister 
because we expect the program to serve the clients fairly 
and to not, unnecessarily, add to their difficulties. When 
viewed from this perspective, the welfare reform program 
certainly does not pass the test. 

  



 
April 3, 1986 

350 
 

We are seeing a lot of “hurt” in the welfare reform program 
and this is being reflected in both our statistics and our 
investigations. For example, the first twenty months since 
the changes were introduced have seen a dramatic increase 
in social assistance complaints to my office. The increase is 
in the order of 77 per cent. In 1985, social assistance 
complaints totalled 317, or approximately one-fifth of all 
our complaints against the provincial government. This 
class of complaint totalled only 107 in 1982, 179 in 1983. 
By way of comparison, our overall increase in all 
complaints against the government for the same period was 
in the order of 39 per cent. 

 
My, there indeed is a bright achievement: complaints have only 
increased by 39 per cent overall. 
 

While many of our investigations are not yet concluded, 
there are also some early indications of serious problems. 
This is particularly true in the case of long-term recipients 
who have been categorized for the first time, as being 
“employable” or “partially employable”. An example in 
point involves a divorced woman in her fifties in a rural area 
who is expected to cease her assistance to her ailing parents 
and to use the “family” car to travel many miles to seek out 
employment opportunities. This woman had virtually no 
work experience before she became caught up in “welfare 
reform”. 

 
Yet this woman described in this fashion is deemed employable. 
 
(1545) 
 

We have also seen difficulties in the working conditions of 
persons who have been “required” to take employment with 
employers approved by the department. We have seen 
examples of employees who have had to work 10 hours a 
day seven days a week for 40 hours pay per week and other 
examples where employers have been unwilling to pay 
overtime of any kind for six or seven days of work per 
week, i.e. — only one day off every two or three weeks. 

 
Then the following — and it’s the last paragraph I’ll read — the 
following is in italics: 
 

For the above reasons, I sincerely hope that there will be a 
reassessment of the program, or at least of its hard edges, 
by an independent and qualified individual or by a group 
such as the School of Social Work. As the government’s . . . 

 
An Hon. Member: — How long have you had that document? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — About 10 minutes. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Is somebody sneaking on the floor? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — No, the page snuck me one. The page is very 
sneaky. He walks around in black clothing and  

occasionally slips things onto my desk, one of which was the 
report of the Ombudsman. 
 
An Hon. Member: — My you’re a fast reader, Ned. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, I’ll tell you, that’s virtually true. You 
could pick up this Ombudsman report, start reading virtually 
anywhere, and find a damning indictment of this government. 
But, Mr. Speaker, the most appalling is the Department of Social 
Services. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the following is in italics. It’s worth 
listening to: 
 

For the above reasons, I sincerely hope that there will be a 
reassessment of the program, or at least of its hard edges, 
by an independent and qualified individual or a group such 
as the School of Social Work. As the government’s welfare 
reform program will soon be two years old, this would be a 
logical time for a review to take place. 

 
Mr. Speaker, members opposite will no doubt pooh-pooh these. 
I say to members opposite, how many people are vicious, unfair 
. . . being vicious and unfair? I remember the member from 
Kindersley describe some women who came here peacefully 
asking for a change in government policy, were described as a 
bunch of NDP women. And some of them were annoyed. One of 
them who had been a Liberal candidate was a bit annoyed about 
the remark. 
 
The next group who, according the member from Kindersley 
were vicious, was the entire public service who submitted a 
report on social services, and it was described as a vicious report. 
Now we have an officer of the legislature saying in the boldest 
of terms that this program is every bit as bad as the clients of the 
Department of Social Services have said it is. What happens? 
Well I suppose the member from Kindersley and other members 
will no doubt describe this as a vicious report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on page 60 of this report . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Yes, I am. I commend to the member from Saskatoon South 
— although your days of glory never began . . . Eastview. I’m 
sorry. Your days of glory never began, I say to the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview, you want to try some reading. Try some of 
the . . . Try a couple of reports of the officers of this Assembly if 
you want to find some vicious anti-government propaganda. Try 
reading the comments of the Provincial Auditor. It is steeped in 
the language of an auditor and doesn’t read — doesn’t quite read 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well we’ll wait until we get the 
. . . 
 
Mr. Member, if you want to read some really vicious attacks, try 
the officers of this Assembly; try the Provincial Auditor who 
speaks in accounting language; try the Ombudsman, who to his 
credit can put his thoughts in the language which is easier for 
ordinary people to understand. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, it won’t help you to look 
at the rules. There’s nothing improper about me reading the 
reports tabled in this Assembly. You can put the book away. 
There is nothing I am doing which is out 
  



 
April 3, 1986 

351 
 

of order, and if you attempt to call me out of order, the Speaker 
is going to be back here to rule on it. And I say that to Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that on . . . Mr. Speaker, on page 60, 
the Ombudsman rates the quality of service to the public 
provided by the department, governments, and agencies. In every 
single case the rating is either static or down. There are some 
which are static, but the most of them are down. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, I can understand why members opposite are 
a bit nervous about going to the public. I can understand that, Mr. 
Speaker, because a little bit of knowledge, I might say, is a 
dangerous thing as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can understand why members opposite are 
so nervous about calling an election. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Table it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Table it? It’s already been tabled. If the 
member from Eastview had any interest in his work as a member 
for the Assembly, he might be running again. And if he had any 
interest in the affairs of this Assembly, he might well be prepared 
to read what the officers of this Assembly say about the conduct 
of this government’s affairs, because what those two officers say, 
who are officers of the Assembly . . . To protect their integrity, 
I’ll tell you, it’s a good thing they’re not hired by the Public 
Service Commission or they’d be gone. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They’re radicals. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Crazy and radicals. Both of them, Mr. 
Speaker, have a damning indictment of this government’s 
performance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to deal with two other parts of the estimates 
of Social Services. Mr. Speaker, talk about believing in the Easter 
bunny; there’s a whole new religion growing up of people who 
believe in the Easter bunny. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan assistance plan, the figures in the 
Saskatchewan assistance plan, Mr. Speaker, they have lowered 
the amount payable under the Saskatchewan assistance plan. If 
you can believe that, you can believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What is it? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well it is ludicrous — absolutely ludicrous, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the estimated figures for 1985-86 is 
192 million. 
 
I notice the member for Rosemont didn’t spend a large amount 
of time on his comments on the throne speech, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — I recall the member from Rosemont did not spend 
much time talking about the work of his department. You spent 
a great deal of time talking about what a bunch of devils the NDP 
were. You talked about the crazies; you talked about the radicals; 
you talked about the uranium mines. You talked about every 
conceivable sin under the sun. I swore he was going  

to use the phrase, Tucker or Tyranny. It’s the same mind-set. 
 
It’s funny how the member from Rosemont did not spend a long 
time, Mr. Speaker, talking about his department. I assume that 
the member from Rosemont couldn’t find anything that was very 
good to say about his department. I wonder if the minister, who 
may enter again . . . he spoke on the motion. 
 
At the conclusion of my remarks, Mr. Speaker — if I do conclude 
them — at the conclusion of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I intend 
to move an amendment. That will give the Minister of Social 
Services the opportunity to re-enter the debate. So I would ask 
the minister to carefully consider his department and perhaps 
answer some of the questions we have raised. It might be an 
opportunity for you to deal with some of the comments in the 
report of the Ombudsman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amount allocated for social assistance in 
1985-86, the year which was concluded on Monday of this week, 
there’s 192.895 million. The amount allocated this year is less. I 
wonder who in this Assembly honestly believes, with this 
government managing its affairs . . . That’s the most serious 
blight on the economy of the province. With this government 
managing the affairs of the province, I wonder who in this 
Assembly believes, with this government in harness, with wheat 
prices failing rapidly — something this government doesn’t seem 
to be aware of because we have not been able to bring it to your 
attention; I haven’t heard any position in this government with 
respect to that — in the light, Mr. Speaker . . . And potash prices 
softening; oil in a state of unimagined decline — I wonder, Mr. 
Speaker, how many people in this Assembly genuinely believe 
we’re going to spend $2 million less. I wonder if the member 
from Rosthern believes that. I see him looking at me intently. I 
wonder if the member from Rosthern believes that we’re going 
to spend $2 million less. 
 
I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say that when the accounts of this 
province are totalled . . . I say, Mr. Speaker, when the accounts 
of this province are totalled and when we get the public accounts 
for the year ending March 31, 1986, I say our debt per capita will 
be higher than Manitoba’s. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s worth digressing for a moment. Oh, you’re 
still looking for some way to call me to account. Well, I say, Mr. 
Speaker, if you can find it, use it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say to members opposite that there is no 
way that we, as opposition, can look at this document and make 
any sensible estimate as to how much the real debt is going to be. 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that the real debt is going to be a lot higher 
than the $600 million which you stated. They stated 360 million, 
but nobody believes that — 389 million, but nobody believes 
that. Members opposite don’t believe that. The reason why, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, they don’t believe it is because of figures such 
as this. You understate the amount you’re going to spend on 
social assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next figure in the Estimates about which I want 
to comment is the amount that’s allocated for the family income 
plan. Mr. Minister, the amount there is  
  



 
April 3, 1986 

352 
 

increased, but it’s only been increased by 4 per cent. I suggest 
that the number of people in this province who are taking less 
rather than more, the demands upon the family income plan are 
going to increase dramatically. It’s going to be a lot more than 4 
per cent. 
 
In addition, Mr. Minister, to overstating revenues, which I 
believe you have, Mr. Speaker, this government has also 
understated its expenditures. The Minister of Social Services, 
whom I no doubt will be delighted to get back into this debate — 
I have no doubt he’ll be delighted — perhaps the Minister of 
Social Services will explain to me how it can be that the 
Saskatchewan income plan . . . They’re going to drink the water, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that I took a drink of water while . . . just for 
a second time, while the Premier came in. And I’ve no doubt he’s 
wanting to listen to this, just as the member from Meadow Lake 
wanted to listen so badly to what the teachers had to say to him 
last night, and listening with such glee as the teachers groaned as 
he answered questions about Gainers. 
 
But the Minister of Social Services will no doubt want to rise in 
this debate and tell us how it can be that, with the number of 
senior citizens increasing, the Saskatchewan’s income plan, 
senior citizens’ benefits, is going down by 200,000. I ask you, 
Mr. Speaker, and I ask members opposite how that can be. 
 
(1600) 
 
I say this government has intentionally understated the amount it 
is spending on the senior citizens. That is of statutory benefit. It’s 
not something that’s in the discretion of this government. It’s not 
something they can niggle, squeeze away at. They must spend 
the money. Mr. Speaker, they are stating that they are decreasing 
the expenditures. I say that’s nuts. You’re increasing the 
expenditures. There are more senior citizens, and the expenditure 
for this section, Mr. Speaker, is bound to go up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to, as well, for a moment, deal with 
something that’s dear to my heart, and I know it will be to the 
member from Saskatoon Eastview, and that’s the Saskatchewan 
Legal Aid Commission. Mr. Speaker, the amount spent on the 
Legal Aid Commission is up by a modest $200,000. Mr. Speaker, 
once again this is treating the poorest in our society with the 
harshest treatment. 
 
Our office discovered the other day, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Saskatchewan Legal Aid Commission will no longer handle 
appeals in criminal cases. I say to members opposite that that is 
an unfortunate deterioration in the quality of service we provide 
to poor people. I know members opposite who are of the legal 
profession will understand when I say that power corrupts, and 
absolute power corrupts absolutely. A judge from which there is 
no appeal is a judge that many lawyers are hesitant to appear in 
front of. The Legal Aid Commission is now no longer handling 
appeals in criminal sentences. That means, I think, that there is 
no effective check on the trial  

judges. It is the first time in this province since the legal aid plan 
was set up that we have not had appeals in the case of a criminal 
sentence. 
 
I wonder if members opposite, all of whom have an opportunity 
to join the debate, I wonder if members opposite would like to — 
if I give you the opportunity to join the debate, that is — I wonder 
if members opposite would like to stand in this House and tell 
this House how you believe that abolishing appeals in criminal 
cases is in the best interests of Saskatchewan. I say it’s an 
unfortunate deterioration in the services which we have provided. 
 
This province has a rather proud history in that respect, Mr. 
Speaker. It was a former chief justice and distinguished citizen 
of this province, Mr. Justice Edward Culliton, who began the 
process of encouraging — I think that’s not too strong a term —
encouraging appeals against sentences in criminal cases. The 
man of immense compassion didn’t always agree with his 
decisions. I stated my public disagreement with a report he issued 
on the SGI affair, but no one would deny the man’s compassions. 
In a province with this kind of history, the government with not 
sense of what this province means, with no sense of what we’re 
about, Mr. Speaker. has abolished the appeals in criminal 
sentences. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that that is most unfortunate. 
 
I want to deal for a moment with the allowances for day care. Mr. 
Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh I know I’ve got the 
member from Saskatoon Westmount on the rampage now. 
Mention day care and you’ve got a wild animal on the loose. For 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that to deny the need for day care in this day 
and age is equivalent to King Knut sitting on the edge of the 
Atlantic Ocean and deny the tide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know — I don’t profess to be enough of a 
philosopher to be able to say whether or not we would all be 
better off if one parent worked, one stayed home with the 
children. That’s the life-style which our family chose. We did so 
voluntarily. We did so of our own free will. We happen to be at 
a stage in life and in a position when we can do that. Mr. Speaker, 
there are a great many families who do not have the option of 
having one parent at home. There are a great many families, some 
of whom have to get by on the pitifully inadequate minimum 
wage, who don’t have any option but to have both parents 
working. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a large number of single parent families. 
This government believes it is a crime for such people to be on 
welfare, and they continue to punish them as if they were 
criminals. I don’t think that’s necessarily true. Our society might 
be better served if we give single parents an adequate allowance 
so that they might stay home with children. But that certainly 
isn’t the attitude of this government, and a great many single 
parents do not want to spend their entire lives cooped up with 
small children. So day care is a fact of life. 
 
Day cares have the children during their most productive years 
and during a very formative period. Napoleon said, “Give me a 
child until he’s six, and you can have him thereafter.” 
  



 
April 3, 1986 

353 
 

An Hon. Member: — I thought that was the Jesuits who said 
that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I do not believe it was the Jesuits. The 
Minister from Social Services wants to enter the debate. I say to 
the member from Social Services, you will get the chance to enter 
the debate and defend our child care program in due course. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that day care . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
I see I’m getting all the members into the debate. You all have a 
chance to re-enter the debate. When I sit down, you all will have 
the chance to re-enter the debate . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well the member looks at the clock. I say, when I sit down. Until 
I sit down, you have no opportunity to enter the debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that day care has children during their most 
formative period, until they’re six. It’s an extremely important 
age. I think it behooves society to treat those years with the same 
care as we do the later years in which they’re in school. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, our schools are not all they might be, and they’re 
getting to be a great deal less than they have been under this 
administration. But, Mr. Speaker, the amount spent per child 
after the age of six is several times what it is when they’re in day 
care. 
 
I honestly wish members opposite would take a tour of all the 
day care facilities in your riding and then, those who are parents, 
I wish they would ask themselves: would I want my child 
spending eight hours a day in that facility? Because I’ll tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t leave a dog in some of the day care 
facilities. I honestly wouldn’t. Some of them are simply not 
adequate. And this is the next generation. This is one of the real 
influences we have on the future, is how we treat, how we nurture 
and nourish the young in our society. 
 
I say with respect to day care we’re doing an abominable job of 
it. Members opposite might ask themselves what can be done 
with respect to day care. I say that the former administration 
commissioned a report on day care and the report on day care set 
out a number of positive steps which, if implemented . . . 
 
The member from Saskatoon Riversdale lost a great opportunity, 
and I was sorry to see that. She might have seized the initiative; 
she might have shown some courage; she might have grappled 
with the problem; and if she had done that, she might have made 
a lasting mark on our society. Her courage failed her. No doubt 
the Minister of Social Services had her on a short leash, but her 
report really accomplished nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we were to do nothing more than to implement 
the recommendations of the 1981 committee on day care, most 
of the problems of day care would be solved, and they would be 
solved at a cost which is affordable. That report did not 
recommend anything outlandish. I don’t know whether it’s 
viewed that universal day care is outlandish. But at any rate, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s not recommended. What is recommended in the 
report is affordable. I have met with a number of day care groups 
across the province, and they have all said the same thing to me, 
and that is that the report, if  

implemented, will cure most of the problems and will probably 
give us the best day care system in Canada. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government makes a number of 
outlandish claims of being world-class. We are claimed to be 
world-class with respect to any number of things. I wonder, Mr. 
Speaker, if members opposite wouldn’t like to be Canada-class. 
Let’s just do something that’s the best in Canada. If we were to 
implement the 1981 report on day care I believe we would find 
ourselves with the best day care system in Canada. It is 
affordable. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that for those few of you 
— Deputy, Deputy, Deputy, Deputy Speaker — I say, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, with respect to those few of you who are going 
to be back after the next election, you may just get an opportunity 
to see something happen to day care. 
 
The next administration which follows yours is not going to 
neglect young people the way you have. The next administration, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, will be fully conscious of the fact that in 
young people we have in our hands the most precious resource. 
And it behooves us to behave like it and not neglect them. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a literal truth that on the average in Canada zoo 
keepers are paid almost exactly twice what we pay our day care 
workers. What that means is we pay people in our society twice 
as much to look after animals as we do after humans. I say that is 
a misplaced priority. 
 
One of the things that we have to do is pay day care workers a 
decent wage so that there is some stability, and so that they can 
attract the very best people for working with young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say, with respect to the allowances for day care, 
it’s up by seven-tenths of 1 per cent. That’s nowhere near 
adequate. There are any number of problems. There aren’t 
enough spaces The facilities which are available don’t have 
enough facilities. I recall subpoenaing — somewhat by chance 
— I recall subpoenaing one director of a day care to court one 
time. I won’t use the name of the day care; it would serve no 
purpose. Suffice it to say that the day care, the facilities . . . this 
was just purely a lack of money. The director knew full well that 
it wasn’t adequate. The facilities for the children consisted of a 
few stuffed animals and a television. 
 
I don’t know if members opposite think that’s what they want 
their kids doing for about eight hours a day. It isn’t what I want 
Ryan and Tara, our children, doing for eight hours a day. But that 
was the facilities available. There was no yard in which the 
children could go out and play. In any case, I had her there in 
winter, and it was too cold. But that was the facilities available 
in one day care — a day care which I think was as good as any. 
It certainly was physically located in one of the more affluent 
parts of the city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to spend, not a great deal more, but we 
need to spend more on day care. We need to improve and enhance 
this and, if we were to implement the 1981 report, we would have 
the best system in Canada. If you want to see it happen, stick 
around. Because one of the things that the NDP are pledged to 
do, in this area, as in a number of other areas, is to provide 
first-class facilities and services for young people. We are not 
going to  
  



 
April 3, 1986 

354 
 

neglect them as this government has. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the grants for senior citizens’ services. One would 
expect it’s not just the very young who are in for a rough ride; 
it’s also the very old. Mr. Speaker, I note that in item number 11, 
the grants for senior citizens’ service; the funding has remained 
static. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been a huge protest from the 
Saskatchewan public about the level of spending on health care. 
Well, I notice the members opposite doubt that comment. I notice 
they’ve been reticent in attending meetings which have been 
called by the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. They’ve been very 
reticent to go and explain their successes. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The Premier can’t go to every small town. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, that’s right. The Premier hasn’t got 
time to go to small trifling communities like Estevan, who 
elected him; nor apparently can the Minister of Health go. 
 
(1615) 
 
I say to members opposite that the level of funding in health care 
has become a matter of serious concern. The Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses — I suppose this is another group who are going 
to be labelled “vicious” because they dare to point out that the 
record of this government isn’t letter-perfect. Mr. Speaker, they 
point to a serious problem with hospitals. It is a problem that the 
next government is going to face, meet, and solve. It’s going to 
happen (a) because there’s going to be a change in 
administration; and (b) because I and my colleagues have 
invested a good amount of time talking to nurses individually, 
explaining our policy before groups which you have been afraid 
to attend. 
 
One of the things that has become apparent to my colleagues and 
I as we travel around the province is that there is a shortage of 
staff, but there’s also a shortage . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well I know members opposite who believe that there’s enough 
staff . . . Well the member from Saskatoon Mayfair is on the 
rampage. I say, you have an opportunity to get into the debate 
and I would be delighted to hear . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 
will I will be delighted to hear you explain how you think there’s 
enough staff in the hospitals. Because if you believe that, then 
you’re the only person in Saskatchewan that does. The Minister 
of Health knows better because he will not go to meetings and 
explain his policy. 
 
I say, if you think there’s enough staff in hospitals, then there’s a 
virtually endless number of meetings for you to attend, and you 
can go there, and you can explain to the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses and other interested people, Mr. Speaker . . . He’s 
deserting the ship too. 
 
I must say, I never, Mr. Speaker, underestimate the intelligence 
or the shrewdness of a banker. They’re always one step ahead of 
the maddening crowd. I guess they’ve got to be, being a banker 
— one step ahead of the maddening crowd. You had enough 
sense to quit. I give you credit for that. Mr. Speaker, you can 
always depend  

on the bankers to be on step ahead of the maddening crowd. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is apparent that one of the problems in the health 
system is that there is a large number of elderly people in the 
health system who don’t have any sudden, quick emergency. 
What they do have, Mr. Speaker, is a large number of senior 
citizens who are in hospitals. And the solution to getting some of 
the senior citizens out, some of whom require intensive care, 
there must be more nursing homes for them. Some of them don’t. 
Some of them could stay in their homes if there were a greater 
range of services available. Sometimes they need some rather 
simple things, needs some small assistance with health care and 
small assistance with putting on storm windows — assistance 
with small things, to stay in their own home. They may need one 
meal a day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note that grants for senior citizens’ services are 
static — that, at a time when the number of senior citizens is 
increasing, and that, at a time when the need is being made 
painfully apparent to the government by the Saskatchewan Union 
of Nurses. So I say to members opposite, I say to members 
opposite, that this is another area which should have been 
increased, and which is going to create some very severe 
pressures by holding it static. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is not obvious to me in the Estimates what is 
happening with respect to the number of day care workers. I 
believe, however, that the number of day care workers has 
increased by a grand total of seven. I see, Mr. Speaker, in the 
Estimates, regional operations were 701 last year. They are 708. 
So, Mr. Speaker, the number of welfare workers has increased by 
six and one-half — that in the entire province, in the light of what 
the Ombudsman’s report says. And I know Mr. Speaker was 
absent when I read that. He indicates with a certain sadness on 
his face that he heard it all downstairs on his television. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that we need to increase the number of social 
workers by a lot more than six and one-half. We’ve either got to 
get the number of social welfare recipients down, which we 
clearly have to do — we’ve got to get those people working again 
— and we’ve got to get the number of welfare workers up. And 
we clearly have to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to deal with another area before I sit down, 
before I take my chair. That has to do with urban affairs. Mr. 
Speaker, another area that the shortage of services is becoming 
painfully apparent in, is the area of urban affairs. Mr. Speaker, 
the expenditure on urban affairs is apparent to anyone who visits 
a community — who even visits a community. Mr. Speaker, you 
can travel down a road, any street or highway in Regina, and the 
result of inadequate funding in urban affairs is readily apparent. 
The roads are deteriorating. They are rough, Mr. Speaker, and 
there are pot-holes in them. 
 
I was talking to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I gather the 
member from — now the hopeful candidate from Regina South 
who hasn’t the courage to face the electorate in Regina North, 
who escapes to what he believes to be a safe Tory enclave in the 
southern part of  
  



 
April 3, 1986 

355 
 

the city. 
 
Well I got a message from the member from Regina North. The 
riding of Regina South is no safer than it is in Regina North. The 
people throughout this city — the people throughout this city — 
are fed up with this government. And they don’t have to go far to 
find out why they’re fed up. They don’t have to go far to find out 
why they’re fed up. 
 
One of the reasons they’re fed up has to do with inadequate 
funding to municipalities. As I said, that funding is painfully 
apparent with respect to roads. Drive down any street in Regina, 
Mr. Speaker, and the inadequate funding, and the effect of the 
inadequate funding, becomes readily apparent. Mr. Speaker, the 
amount by which the Urban Affairs has increased has gone up by 
about 3 per cent, the amount in the revenue-sharing pool, Mr. 
Speaker. That, Mr. Speaker, is just simply not adequate. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How are we making out, Ned? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’m rushing towards the conclusion of my 
remarks. I’m not rushing, Mr. Speaker; I’m absolutely 
stampeding towards the conclusion of these remarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 3 per cent, Mr. Speaker, we 
predicted 3 per cent in the revenue pool . . . (inaudible) . . . This 
is enough. There is so much more we can say. Mr. Speaker, that 
is just simply not enough. It is going to result in an increase in 
the urban mill rate and, I suspect, further deterioration in the 
services provided by urban municipalities as they struggle to try 
to deal with inadequate budgets. 
 
The vast majority, Mr. Speaker, of the amount of money which 
an urban municipality gets, comes from the provincial 
government. When the provincial government tries to pay and to 
find that 200 million it needs to pay interest, when it tries to find 
that 200 million and it does so by shaving and chiselling away at 
the amount they pay urban municipalities, Mr. Speaker, that is in 
effect a tax transfer. That in effect is a transfer, Mr. Speaker, of 
the tax burden from the province to the urban municipalities. 
 
Members opposite may disbelieve that. But I say to members 
opposite that they might have found canvassing a poll in Regina 
North East to be illustrative. I remember canvassing . . . I 
remember running into the member from Regina North and he 
was canvassing a poll . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, he’s not 
yet and he never will be. He’s the member from Regina North 
and that’s all he’ll ever be. But I remember running into the 
member from Regina North. He was canvassing a poll in Regina 
North East. And I recall, Mr. Speaker, the member didn’t find it 
a very pleasant experience. I’m not going to tell tales out of 
school, but suffice it to say that the then minister and now private 
member, did not find it a pleasant experience. 
 
One of the reasons why he didn’t find it a pleasant experience 
was because of taxes. And one of the taxes which they were 
concerned about was their property tax. They were not, Mr. 
Speaker, just concerned about the property improvement grants, 
though they were concerned about that; they were also 
concerned, Mr.  

Speaker, about the level of property taxes. Over the last two years 
inflation has increased by about 10 per cent, the amount of the 
grants to every municipality have increased by 6 per cent. That’s 
a 4 per cent shortfall that has fallen on . . . right there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 1984 — indeed, if you want to go back a little 
further, since 1982, Mr. Speaker, the increase in the grants given 
to urban municipalities has been about 16 per cent. That’s half 
the rate of inflation. And the burden, Mr. Speaker, has fallen on 
the urban . . . right there. 
 
So I say to members opposite: if you think you’re doing a grand 
job in urban municipalities, and if you think that all is right with 
the world, then call an election. I say to members opposite, I think 
I know one of the reasons why you’re in no hurry to call an 
election. I think I know one of the reasons why you are fleeing 
from the public — because I remember meeting the member from 
Regina North in the North East by-election, and I remember his 
experience. He wasn’t enjoying it. 
 
During that North East by-election members opposite had a small 
taste of what it’s going to be like . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
I am not. I ran into you in front of the mall. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. The member knows that we cannot use 
terms like that, whether we’re on our feet or sitting in the chair, 
and I would ask the member to refrain. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons why they 
are in no hurry to call an election., Mr. Speaker, one of the 
reasons is because they had a small taste of what the electorate 
have in store for them. And they got it during the North East 
by-election. 
 
Now members opposite may believe that there’s something 
unique about North East. They may believe there’s something 
unique about Regina. Well I say to members opposite, if you 
think there’s something unique about Regina, then you call an 
election — you call an election. And you can win in the rest of 
the province; Regina will go its own separate way. 
 
(1630) 
 
I say to members opposite, there is nothing unique about this city. 
There’s nothing unique about Regina — given the fact that there 
are a large number of public servants who work in Regina; given 
that fact, Mr. Speaker, trends may develop first in Regina. But it 
has been my experience that a trend which develop in Regina, 
spreads to the rest of the province. 
 
This province — unlike Alberta, which is, I suppose, three 
communities: Calgary, Alberta, and the rural areas; unlike 
Manitoba, which is two: Winnipeg and the rest of the province 
— this province is all one community. How the cities go, the 
countries go. The movements may start in one area and spread to 
others areas, but this province is small enough and enough people 
have rural roots and relatives in rural areas, the trends which 
develop in the cities spread to the country. 
 
So I say to members opposite, if you’ve got a problem in  
  



 
April 3, 1986 

356 
 

Regina, eventually you’re going to have a problem in Saskatoon, 
as you have. You’ve got to look long and hard to find somebody 
in Saskatoon who believes you people are going to win the 
election . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I wish you’d give 
us a chance to knock on some doors during an election. I wish 
members were something more than cheap bravado. 
 
I wish you would take an opportunity, I really wish you would 
take an opportunity to put your courage to the test. Put it in the 
fire. Call an election. Because I’ll tell you what’s going to happen 
— you’re going to get your feathers scalded off. You’re going to 
get your feathers scalded right off your back. You won’t just be 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I do feel something slipping; 
it’s the popularity of this government. I felt something slipping 
for about two years. And it has slipped markedly. 
 
I don’t what the pollsters that you people have got are saying. I 
know what independent pollsters are saying. I know what Maison 
said. I know what the University of Manitoba says. What those 
independent pollsters said is that there has been a slow but steady 
erosion of support in this government. It did not occur quickly. 
There was a time, Mr. Speaker, there was a time when the 
members opposite were 30 per cent ahead in the polls. For the 
member from Souris-Cannington we will acknowledge that fact 
to you; at one point in time you were 30 per cent ahead. There 
has been a slow and steady erosion in the polls to the point where 
we have a very modest lead, a very modest lead. 
 
I suppose the election can be won by anyone. I don’t think very 
many people, however, believe that you’re going to pull it out of 
the fire. I don’t think members opposite believe they’re going to 
pull it out of the fire, or they would have gone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note as well that there is a modest increase 
provided to the Wascana Centre Authority. I was hoping, Mr. 
Speaker, that we might see a correction in a policy which I 
thought was most unfortunate. Mr. Speaker, last year, I believe it 
was last year, there was a change in government policy, a change 
whereby the amount given to the Wascana Authority was no 
longer a statutory amount. Mr. Speaker, at one time the amount 
given to the Wascana Authority was a statutory amount; the 
amount was shared according to a predetermined authority 
between Regina, Ottawa, and the provincial government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were times when the government at Ottawa 
was hard pressed, and we were affluent, and they didn’t change 
the formula. Mr. Speaker, there were times when the city of 
Regina was hard pressed, but they didn’t change the formula. 
This government arbitrarily, with no forethought, with no 
understanding of what the Wascana Centre was about, how it had 
developed — and more important, no vision of what it might be 
— this government in the 1985 budget made a determination that 
they were going to change the formula, and they did so 
arbitrarily. 
 
I had hoped, Mr. Speaker, that this year would have seen a return 
to the formula which served Wascana Centre so well for so long. 
I had hoped you might recognize the  

error of your ways. That is no longer the case, Mr. Speaker. I say, 
Mr. Speaker, that this city has been done a real disservice by this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many ways in which the city of Regina 
has suffered at the hands of this administration. It is almost as if 
this administration came into office the day they were elected, 
said to themselves, all public servants hate Conservatives, the 
city is full of public servants, therefore we have no hope of 
salvaging anything in Regina, and proceeded accordingly. 
 
The list of projects important to this city which are fallen by the 
wayside is truly awesome. Again I recall when the now Minister 
of . . . He’s changed his portfolio so often I’ve forgotten what 
he’s doing. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What was he before? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — He was minister of energy before. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, he was just Deputy Premier 
 
Mr. Shillington: — No, no, he served a bit. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The small business. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The small business, right you are. I 
remember when the Minister of Small Business was Minister of 
Urban Affairs. I remember asking repeated questions in the 
summer of 1982 about the multimodal station. Nothing came of 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1985 they amended The Wascana Authority Act 
so that they would not have to contribute as much to the Wascana 
Authority. Mr. Speaker, they have let a number of other projects 
go. They have transferred out of Regina a number of Crown 
corporations. 
 
I wonder Mr. Speaker, if it’s always in the best interest to be 
transferring members of the public service out of Regina. I may 
say that I do not understand why it was done in the way it was. I 
do not understand, Mr. Speaker, why the Crown corporations 
were transferred in the way they were. I don’t understand why it 
is that clerks and stenographers — people who are not in any 
sense management — could not transfer back to the regular 
public service. I do not understand why a government would be 
so harsh. 
 
Mr. Speaker, public servants in those Crown corporations were 
told they couldn’t transfer back to the government, they had to 
be transferred. Well I say, Mr. Speaker, that is callous, that is 
unfair. A goodly number of the people who work for government 
are married women. They are simply not in a position that they 
could transfer to Swift Current or Melville. Their husbands work 
in Regina. Their husbands can’t find jobs in Melville or Swift 
Current, and thus they are not in a position to move. I don’t 
understand why spouses who were otherwise employed within 
the city of Regina — I do not understand why spouses could not 
transfer back into public service. I don’t understand why this 
government would be so harsh and unfeeling. 
 
I know you may think that all public servants dislike the ground 
you walk on. But if you keep it up, it’s going to be  



 
April 3, 1986 

357 
 

literally true. I just don’t understand why you would be so 
callous. I do not understand why married people, most of them 
women, who are employed in non-management positions, could 
not transfer back into public service. 
 
I don’t understand why you wouldn’t want to leave those jobs 
available for people in Melville or Swift Current. I don’t 
understand your thinking. I don’t understand why you wouldn’t 
free up those jobs so they are available in Melville, and why you 
wouldn’t allow the present office holders to transfer back into the 
public service. 
 
I call upon whichever one of the sterling lights of members 
opposite is the minister in charge of Public Service Commission 
— I call upon the minister in charge of the Public Service 
Commission whose brilliance and identity escapes me. Is it the 
member from Maple Creek? I call upon the member from Maple 
Creek to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I call upon the Minister 
of Small Business then, to re-examine the approach. I call upon 
the minister in charge to re-examine that. That really was unfair. 
 
I know members opposite don’t care a lot about what happens in 
the city of Regina. I know you’re prepared to let the current 
member from Lakeview, and so on, I know you’re prepared to let 
those members sink because you don’t care about the public 
service vote. But I’ll tell you, it was harsh and it was unfair. And 
it’s so unnecessary. Why would you not free up those jobs, let 
them transfer back into public service? Free up the jobs in 
Melville and in Swift Current; you’ll do yourself a favour and 
you’ll do the public service a favour. 
 
So I say to members opposite that you ought to re-examine that 
policy. I say to members opposite that I would suggest that you 
re-examine the policy with which you are transferring the public. 
 
But I want to deal as well, Mr. Speaker, with the question of the 
transfer of the Crown corporations themselves. I don’t have a lot 
to say about Agdevco. It does have a large computer program, 
and I’m not sure how it’s going to operate 160 miles present. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the transfer of the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
Corporation to Melville — I really wonder whether that was in 
the best interests of all Saskatchewan farmers. I was truly amazed 
to find out what the walk-in traffic was. Walk-in traffic, I gather, 
is 50,000 people a year. There are 50,000 people a year — 54, to 
be exact — who walk into the front door and who want to know 
something about “my contract.” 
 
That is an amazing traffic. I wonder how many other government 
departments have walk-in traffic of 54,000 people a year. I 
suggest that there aren’t very many people, there are not very 
many who have a walk-in traffic of 54,000. 
 
I really wonder, Mr. Speaker, if it is in the best interest of the 
Saskatchewan people to have that agency transferred to Melville. 
That will no doubt be convenient for the people of Melville, 
Saltcoats, Esterhazy, Yorkton, Pelly, etc., but I wonder if that’s 
going to be as convenient for the people in Shaunavon or 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg or Kindersley. 

I wonder if the people from Kindersley are going to be overjoyed 
at driving to Melville. A goodly number of people in Kindersley, 
Rosetown, Maple Creek, etc. a goodly number of people from 
those constituencies travel to Regina on a regular basis. And if 
they don’t come on a regular basis, there’s always some business 
that they can do when they’re here. If nothing else, they . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, the transfer of those Crown corporations to 
Melville, I suggest that simply was not in the best interests of the 
farmers. I do not know who was served by that. No doubt it’s a 
great deal simpler for farmers in the immediate area. But I recall, 
Mr. Speaker, I recall visiting the community of Melville. I visited 
with quite a large number of people. We did some main-streeting. 
We visited with the chamber of commerce. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Anybody show up for your meeting? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Aha, I tell you, when we walked out of the 
meeting with the chamber of commerce, I remember saying to 
the member from Regina North East and the member from Pelly, 
who I was with, I was saying, well, I am sure glad I’m not running 
as a Conservative in Melville. I remember saying that when I 
walked out of the meeting. These gentlemen will testify to that 
fact; that was my comments as I walked out the door: I’m sure 
glad I’m not running as a Conservative in Melville. 
 
Well, I think I know why the crop insurance was transferred to 
Melville. I think it had something to do with the same perception 
by members opposite that they wouldn’t want to run as a 
Conservative in Melville. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have spent a little less time in Swift Current than 
I have in Melville, so I’m not quite as able to judge why Agdevco 
was transferred to Swift Current. I will say that I have met our 
candidate in Swift Current and I was very, very impressed. I was 
very impressed with the background, the ability, the integrity of 
John Penner. It struck me that in terms of his outlook and his 
philosophy on life, in terms of his background, he was an ideal 
representative for that community. 
 
He’s been an alderman on city council; he’s been a business man 
in town. I do not know what more one could ask for a candidate. 
So when I ask myself, why would they transfer Agdevco to Swift 
Current? Why would they go to the additional expense of setting 
up a new computer program, since I assume they’re not going to 
use the telephone line, and busying new computer hardware and 
paying travel expenses. I wonder if it had anything at all to do 
with the fact that in the city of Swift Current we have the best of 
all possible candidates in John Penner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, members are encouraging me 
to go around the entire province constituency by constituency. I 
don’t know whether I would test Mr. Speaker’s patience or not if 
I did that. I do  
  



 
April 3, 1986 

358 
 

want to deal, Mr. Speaker, with the Department of Labour. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Is there a line in there for jelly beans? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I do not see a vote for jelly beans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to deal with the Department of Labour. I 
recall in this Legislative Assembly in the fall of 1982 debating 
Bill 102. And I recall one rather warm summer day in August in 
here telling the current member from Yorkton what I thought was 
going to happen. Now I recall members opposite disbelieving 
what I was saying. All I can say is that I vastly understated the 
damage which has been done by Bill 104. I vastly understated the 
damage that had been done. 
 
And I recall, Mr. Speaker, finding that out by sort of personal 
experience. In another of the elections in which members were 
engaged — this was a federal election — I recall being sent out 
of my own riding and being asked to go up and canvass in a poll 
in the northern part of Regina. I saw, by the standards of my 
riding, enormous new houses, and asking myself: what on earth 
am I doing canvassing in what has got to be an impossible poll? 
 
Well it wasn’t impossible, because I found out as I began to go 
door to door that these were lots which had been sold by the city. 
By and large these had been bought by tradesmen who built their 
own houses. These large houses were in fact owned by tradesmen 
who built them themselves. And they were furious about what 
had happened to them. A great many of those people hadn’t 
worked, Mr. Speaker, in months. There was a large number of 
them hadn’t worked since 1982. The last work they got was in 
1982. 
 
They were having difficulty paying their mortgages. Wives were 
scrambling around trying to find work. And I say no . . . All of 
them talked with . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’ll tell you, this 
much is true, the member from Saskatoon Mayfair. When they 
spoke about the government, they spoke with the same energy 
that the member from Quill Lakes speaks. So one might have 
mistaken them for the member from Quill Lakes. But in fact it 
was not the member Quill Lakes, even though they spoke in 
terms that sounded a great deal like that. They were every bit as 
angry. 
 
It comes as no surprise, Mr. Speaker, that we won that poll. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, in that riding now represented by the member 
from the water-closet club, in that entire riding, we lost four polls. 
We lost four polls in that riding. Four polls — that’s all we lost. 
We won that particular poll that I was in. We won it by a very 
large margin, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what has happened to the trades really . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, you’re going to find out. You 
found out in north east. The member from Lloydminster believes 
we’re going to find out in the next election. I say we did. 
 
There are a large number of tradespeople who live in north east. 
It’s that kind of riding. A large number of

those people, being electricians, carpenters, plumbers, take a 
great deal of pride in their work. That’s what they want to do. 
They want to be electricians; they want to do carpentry; they 
want to do plumbing. A large number of them haven’t done it for 
a lengthy period of time. If you don’t know how they voted, then 
I suggest you check the report of the chief electoral officer for 
the by-election in Regina North East, and you’ll find out . . . 
(inaudible) . . . Well if the members are so overwrought with 
courage, you might call an election. I say that members of this 
caucus are ready for an election, are calling for one, and you 
people are afraid of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Talk is cheap — talk is cheap. You can sit 
here with all the bravado you want, but I’ll tell you, if you people 
have any courage at all, you can call an election. You haven’t 
done so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments to Bill 104 have done enormous 
damage. The Minister of Labour, so-called, the former minister 
of Labour, the current member from Melville, did an enormous 
amount of damage. When the member from Yorkton went to the 
annual meeting of the federation of labour and was greeted with 
a stony silence, he got a great deal better than what he deserved. 
The damage he has done has been enormous. 
 
I met people from all the different trades, and I found skilled 
carpenters working for five, six bucks an hour. I found 
electricians working for eight bucks an hour if they could find 
work, and they generally couldn’t. What happened was the 
combination of Bill 104 and the amendment to the construction 
labour relations councils Act. The two of them together enabled 
some unscrupulous contractors to take advantage of the system. 
Mr. Speaker, it isn’t just the tradespeople, it isn’t just the 
tradespeople who have got badly hurt by this government. 
 
I was sitting in the Embassy café this morning with my campaign 
manager. I had a gentleman walk up to me who will not be 
identified; I wouldn’t unloose the wrath of this government. But 
he said to me, he identified his business, and I won’t give you 
that — the industry is too small; you’d know it — but suffice to 
say it is related to construction. He said the last four years have 
just . . . 
 
The first thing he said, he says, when’s the election? The same as 
everybody else asks. I said, well I don’t know. I said, well I don’t 
know when the election is. I said, well, I don’t know when the 
election is; we hope it’s soon but we don’t know. He said, well I 
hope it’s soon. He said, I’ll tell you, these last four years have 
just about killed me. 
 
I don’t know the man well. It would surprise me to find out he 
was a New Democrat, but there’s no doubt, I think, about how 
he’s voting. 
 
Combined with Bill 104 and with the construction labour 
relations Act, this government has combined with that a 
tendering policy which must be the worst in Canada. I do not 
believe there is in the Dominion of Canada a worse tendering . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Put your hearing aid back on again. I 
do not believe there is in the  
  



 
April 3, 1986 

359 
 

Dominion of Canada a tendering system which is worse than 
what we have here. There are no rules. 
 
I know contractors and architects who are prepared to play by 
“the rules.” They’re prepared to do what has to be done to get a 
contract from this government. But there simply aren’t any rules. 
Nothing works for them. Nothing works for them. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What about swimming pool contracts? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — If you had handled any single one of your 
problems as well as the swimming pool problem was handled 
when we were in office, you wouldn’t be afraid of an election. If 
any one of your problems that you had, had been handled with 
the same integrity that that was handled, you wouldn’t have the 
problems you have today. 
 
In tendering, Mr. Speaker, there simply are no rules; everything 
is done according to the whim of the minister. We no longer have 
a tendering system. We have a call for proposals, the terms of 
which are so subjective that nobody can know how a minister is 
going to judge the tenders. And thus what happens is that it is 
done by the whim of the minister. And this has hurt everybody 
who’s connect in any way, shape, or form with construction. 
There simply aren’t the rules. 
 
And that’s what this guy said. He didn’t say, I’ll play by whatever 
rules are established. I think the person had some integrity. But 
he said, you know, there are simply no rules at all. And there 
aren’t. 
 
I’ll tell you who gets the contracts. The people who get the 
contracts are the friends of the government. Now members 
opposite may think that that’s a great policy. It may do wonders 
for the treasury of the Conservative Party. Your treasury may be 
overflowing, but I’ll tell you, I’ll say to members opposite, that 
if you want to get an earful, go and talk to the contractors. Go 
and talk to the contractors, talk to the architects, talk to everyone 
else who’s at all involved in the construction industry. Because I 
say, Mr. Speaker, that the entire construction industry has just 
been devastated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no real meaningful attempt to in any way 
deal with that problem. The policy, planning, and research is 
down by one person. The labour relations department, an office 
which needs more assistants rather than less, is down one staff 
person. Labour standards is down one staff person. Pension 
benefits is static. Technical safety services, in the aftermath of 
the brilliance with which you handled the Polly Redhot problem, 
that staff is down by four. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, I said that I was going to, at the conclusion 
of my remarks, move an amendment to the motion. I will do that 
now. I therefore move, seconded by the member from 
Shaunavon: 
 

That all the words after “that” be deleted and the following 
substituted therefor: 
 
That this Assembly expresses its deep  

disappointment with the budget because: 
 
1. It fails to eliminate the unfair flat tax; 
2. It fails to eliminate the unfair PC sales tax on used cars 
and trucks; 
3. It fails to restore property tax rebates to home owners, 
farmers and small business; 
4. It fails to contain a positive and comprehensive job 
creation program; 
5. It does not contain adequate measures to reduce the cost 
of farm fuel, farm chemicals and fertilizer; and 
6. It does not express vigorous opposition to the proposals 
of the Nielsen task force report which would be disastrous 
for Saskatchewan agriculture. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s apparent that I could have carried on for 
a great deal longer. There was a number of these things I did not 
cover. However, Mr. Speaker, I will move this, seconded by the 
member from Kindersley. 
 
It is obvious I will be voting for the amendment and against the 
motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I said Kindersley — seconded by the 
member from Shaunavon. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The debate continues on the motion and the 
amendment concurrent. 
 
Mr. Katzman: — Mr. Speaker, for half an hour speech that sure 
took a long time. Mr. Speaker, I’ve got a lot to say about it. I see 
the time it is; therefore, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:01 p.m. 


