


















































May 23, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 23, 1986 
  
 
 
 

1473 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 
Clerk: — Yesterday I received a petition, and under rule 11(7) I 
have examined the petition and hereby lay on the Table a petition 
from certain citizens of the province of Saskatchewan, praying that 
your Hon. Legislative Assembly may be pleased to urge the 
Government of Saskatchewan not to sell SaskTel's CATV cable 
distribution systems. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Young: — Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure this morning on 
behalf of my colleague, the member from Rosthern, to introduce 
to you, and through you to the House, a group of 16 grade 12 
students seated in the west gallery from the Waldheim High 
School. They are here accompanied with their teacher, Mr. 
Speaker; Dave Hinz, and chaperons, Mrs. Buechert and Mrs. 
Willems. I'd like to ask all members to welcome them to the 
House, and I'd advise them that I will be meeting with them at 
10:30 for pictures. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives me 
a great deal of pleasure to introduce through you and to the House, 
to all the members, 22 grade 9 students from the Lake Lenore 
High School. They're seated in the Speaker's gallery. They're 
accompanied by their teacher, Richard Shafhauser, and by their 
chaperons, Kathleen Mueller, Linda Weber, and Michele Yaeger. 
 
I will be meeting with them at 10:30 for pictures and for drinks 
and questions following that. I welcome them here; I ask other 
members to join with me to welcome the students from Lake 
Lenore and their company. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, would like to 
join with the member from Quill Lakes. It's some years that I've 
lived in Lake Lenore, but I would like to say that it was one terrific 
community, and I, too, would just like to welcome these students 
from Lake Lenore. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to welcome 26 grade 
four students from Grenfell Elementary School. They're seated in 
the Speaker's gallery, and they're accompanied today by their 
teachers, Gordon Warman and Carol Piller, and bus driver, Sharon 
Moffat. 
 
I hope you enjoy the proceedings here this morning, and I look 
forward to meeting with you and answering some of your 
questions and any concerns that you would like to talk over after 
question period. So have a good time in Regina today; have a safe 
trip home, and say hello to everybody in Grenfell. 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Trade Complaint Against Canadian Lumber Exports 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister of Economic Development and Trade, and has to do with 
the role of the Weyerhaeuser corporation in the U.S. attempt to 
slap a 27 per cent duty on Canadian lumber exports. Yesterday in 
the House, the minister, in what I felt was a speech but he said was 
an answer to a question, claimed that the Weyerhaeuser 
corporation in the United States is not part of the U.S. coalition 
which has launched a petition for a 27 per cent duty, even though 
Weyerhaeuser is a member of two lumber industry associations 
which are charter members of the coalition. At one point the 
minister said: 

 
Weyerhaeuser  . . . is against the position being taken by the 
association in the United States. 

 
My first question to the minister is this: With respect to the 
Western Wood Products Association, and with respect to the 
National Forest Products Association, did these associations have 
votes, and how did Weyerhaeuser vote in each case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the hon. 
member yesterday, and as I see in the Prince Albert Herald of 
Thursday, May 22nd, Weyerhaeuser made it very clear that they 
were not part of the coalition and they did not support the position 
being taken by the coalition. 
 
Now there is, Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member knows, quite a 
difference between being a member of some association and being 
a member of an active lobby group for coalition involved in a 
particular position. Weyerhaeuser has made public statements, has 
made it very clear, both in Canada and in the United States that 
they are against the lobby coalition trying to impose countervail on 
Canadian lumber and Canadian lumber products. They've made 
that very, very clear. They are against that and they are in favour 
of freer trade and an open border between Canada and the United 
States. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 
minister says that Weyerhaeuser has made it clear that they are 
against the action of the coalition. Mr. Minister, I put it to you that 
when the National Forest Products Association voted on the 
petition, Weyerhaeuser did not oppose the action but, rather, 
abstained. 
 
I ask you whether that is true, and I ask you whether this is the 
type of strong opposition on which you are depending in order to 
oppose the action of those who are wishing to slap on a 27 per 
cent duty. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I can read from the P.A. 
Herald the statement being made by a Barney Lukas of 
Weyerhaeuser: 
 

 . . . told the Herald today that his parent company would have a 
lot to lose if the 20 per cent  

  



 
May 23, 1986 

1474 
 

 
 

countervail duty was imposed by the U.S. on softwood. 
 
Obviously Weyerhaeuser indicates that they have a lot to lose, and 
they are not part of the coalition asking for the imposition of that 
duty. 
 
Now, Weyerhaeuser has publicly stated, both in Canada and in the 
United States, that they are against the lobby and the coalition 
trying to impose this particular countervail on Canadian forest 
products. They're against it on principle, and they're against it on 
the fact that it would cost them money because they have holdings 
in Canada. 
 
Now it seems to me that we as Canadians and we as people of 
Saskatchewan, who sell much of our lumber product that we 
produce in the Saskatchewan forests into the United States — it is 
very important that we continue to have access to that market. And 
if companies operating both in Canada and the United States — 
and large companies — are prepared to stand up publicly and say: 
we are against what the Americans are trying to do, then we 
should say: good, that's the type of position, that's the type of 
corporate policy that we in this country would like to see. That 
means jobs for the people in Prince Albert, and that means a 
market for the product that we produce in this province. And that 
is very, very important — that is very, very important. 
 
Weyerhaeuser is acting responsibly. They are against the lobby; 
they are against the countervail, and I think we should be happy 
about that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. The 
minister says Weyerhaeuser is against the lobby. That is what he 
has said over and over again. Does the minister deny that he, the 
minister, provided the press of this province with material 
yesterday which said, in part, as follows: 
 

Simpson Timber Company, together with Weyerhaeuser, 
abstained from the National Forest Products Association vote 
deciding whether or not the countervail suit should be initiated. 

 
Do you not agree that you have provided the press with that 
information, and do you say, Mr. Minister, that that amounts to 
vigorous opposition to the coalition's attempt to slap a 27 per cent 
duty on Saskatchewan lumber? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, to the members opposite, I 
spoke to two members of the media yesterday. I handed out 
nothing to the members of the media yesterday. I simply quoted to 
them exactly the same thing I quoted in this House  . . . (inaudible 
interjection)  . . . Well that is exactly what we said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I continue to say, as I said yesterday, and I think we should be 
quite proud of it — if Weyerhaeuser is prepared to stand in 
opposition to the U.S. policy of countervail, we should be happy 
about that. That means jobs for us. What the member opposite is 
trying to do, as I indicated yesterday, you want to cast out because 
you don't really like Weyerhaeuser coming into Canada to build a 
paper-mill. That's what you're really against. They are 

 taking a strong position against  . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: —Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — They are taking a strong position against 
the U.S. countervail. They are coming into our province and 
building a large project, creating jobs. You are against it. When 
you're in Regina you're against it; when in Prince Albert, you're in 
favour of it. And that is really the issue that you're talking about. 
And why don't you stand up and really say where you stand with 
regard to the Weyerhaeuser project that you have been 
wishy-washy on for the last two months. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I asked the minister a 
question. I got a speech on an irrelevant subject. I asked you  . . . 
And when the occasion comes for making speeches, I will make 
them, and I wish you would confine your speech making to the 
appropriate occasions. 
 
Now I ask you, Mr. Minister, a very, very short question: do you 
deny, Mr. Minister, that when the National Forest Products 
Association voted to decide whether or not the countervail suit 
should be initiated, do you deny, first, that Weyerhaeuser is a part 
of the association, and secondly, that they abstained on the vote? 
Do you deny that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I mean, this is like saying, if you belong to 
an association  . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well the members opposite yell and 
squawk about answering the question. That's exactly what I'm 
going to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the point that the Leader of 
the Opposition seeks to raise: if one is part of an association, and 
many people are part of an association whether you're a member 
of the law society, as you are  . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I'm going to ask the members to come to order. 
It's impossible to operate with the amount of noise we've had the 
last two days, and I'm asking members to come to order, and I 
called both sides of the House to order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the point I make is this: if 
you're a member of an association, whether it's the law society or 
whether it's a member of a variety of groups, your association is 
for a wide variety of things that you belong to an association, and 
various people in that association might have a view that's 
different than something else, and the association will carry on 
with a particular lobby here and you can speak out against it. 
Within your own party — there's a group within your party that 
want to have prostitution in co-ops. Now you've indicated, I think, 
that you weren't in favour of prostitution co-ops within the 
province of Saskatchewan — same type of thing  . . . (inaudible 
interjection)  . . . 
  



 
May 23, 1986 

1475 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I would ask the minister to  . . . 
(inaudible interjection)  . . . Order, please. When I'm on my feet I'll 
ask the member for Quill Lakes to be quiet. 
 
I would ask the minister when he's answering questions to stay 
with the question and not be making speeches. 
 
 Hearings on Bill Reducing Federal Transfer Payments 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 
Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, it has to do with the Mulroney 
government's legislation now before parliament to cut transfer 
payments to the provinces for health care and post-secondary 
education. The Minister of Health has already indicated in 
estimates that he expects the cut-backs to cost the province about 
$9 million this year as a result of this Bill being passed, and the 
Canadian Hospital Association has said that the legislation will see 
federal payments to Saskatchewan for health cut by $154 million. 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, can you indicate clearly whether or not the 
Saskatchewan government will appear before the parliamentary 
hearings on this legislation now under way in Ottawa, and will 
you be there to oppose the legislation and to try to convince the 
Mulroney government to live up to its obligation of supporting 
health and post-secondary education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, as I indicated yesterday, we are taking 
our position directly to the Minister of Finance, and the Minister 
of health for Saskatchewan has taken the position as well to the 
federal Minister of Health. We think that that is the appropriate 
governmental response. Rather then go through the parliamentary 
committee, we are taking any objections that we have directly to. 
 
I think it's been the past practice that provinces don't always 
appear before parliamentary committees, and we believe that a 
direct government, a government response is the appropriate 
forum to take our concerns. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — A supplement to the minister. I wonder, Mr. 
Minister, if you can indicate to the Assembly your position and 
your government's position on Bill C-96; that you agree with the 
Minister of Finance that as a result of this Bill being passed in its 
present form, that this year it will cost the provincial government 
about $9 million in transfer payments, or in health, $9 million in 
transfer payments; and that over the life of the Bill, the five-year 
period coming up, it'll cost the province about $154 million. Do 
you agree with the position, at least that there will be a loss to the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the 150 million figures are ones that you 
are taking at face value, and figures given by another organization. 
The analysis that we are going through is not to that extent. But we 
should keep in mind that, one, that it is not a reduction in cost; that 
they are capping the increase in the transfer payments. The 
transfer payments — and it was your government's policy when 
you were in office — are not segregated health versus education. 
So don't try and attribute it all one to the other. 
 
Having said that, yes, we would like the existing system to  

be maintained. We have made that abundantly clear to the 
Government of Canada  . . . (inaudible interjection)  . . . Oh yes we 
have. And, secondly, we also are the only party in Saskatchewan 
to make the commitment, Mr. Speaker, that we will maintain the 
health and education systems as we have proven over the last four 
years with the dramatic increase — 70 per cent increase in health 
alone — and that those affected in the province of Saskatchewan 
need not be concerned. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I want you to be a little more 
clear as Minister of Finance. Your seat mate and Minister of 
Health has indicated that there will be a reduction in transfer 
payments this year of $9 million. Do you confirm that that is the 
amount that Bill C-96 will cost the province? Do you agree with 
the colleague from Wolseley, the Minister of Health? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — yes, we look at the $9 million, but we should 
also keep in mind that health budget, for example, in 
Saskatchewan is up 11 per cent this year. Manitoba has taken the 
other position yesterday — NDP Manitoba — has increased health 
by 4.5 per cent which is, in effect, a dramatic reduction in 
Manitoba health expenditures. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, supplement to the minister. He 
has now clearly indicated that he agrees with his colleague, the 
Minister of Health, that there will be a cut-back in funding to 
health in the province when Bill C-96 in introduced. I have here a 
letter from the Premier of the province, Premier Grant Devine, and 
I want to quote from it by way of background. in the letter he says: 
 

As a result of these gains, Saskatchewan's EPF (established 
program of financing) revenue in '86-87 under the new 
proposed formula will actually increase over previous forecasts 
by about $10 million. According to current long-term growth 
forecasts, we expect Saskatchewan's EPF revenue under the 
proposed formula to increase by approximately $168 million 
over the next five years. 

 
This is the Premier speaking. Now we have here an interesting 
proposal. The Minister of Finance and the Minister of Health say 
it's going to result in massive losses. The Canadian Hospital 
Association has indicated that it will be about 154 million over the 
next five years. The Manitoba government has said that in the 
province of Manitoba it will cost $313 million. We have a Premier 
who believes we're going to make money by it. I ask the minister 
this: is our $2 billion deficit a result of this individual, the Premier 
of this province  . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member rose on a 
supplementary. Supplementaries are not allowed to have a long 
lead-in, and I think anybody would recognize that that has been an 
extensively long lead-in. And I'd ask you to get directly to the 
supplement. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question  . . . I had started 
my last sentence by asking the question, and I would like to 
continue. My question to you is this: is part of the problem that we 
have a $2 billion deficit the fact that we have a Premier who 
believes, when he's getting ripped off by the federal government 
by $154 million  
  



 
May 23, 1986 

1476 
 

 
 

over five years — is it the fact that the Premier doesn't understand, 
and he's now filling the pockets of the federal government like he's 
filled the pockets of the oil companies, Peter Pocklington, and the 
banks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — It's obvious one of the difficulties the 
opposition has — they don't understand what the situation is. 
Under the established program funding agreement with the federal 
government, there are increases every year. There are increases 
every year. And the Premier's statement is accurate. But, Mr. 
Speaker, there is a capping on what would have gone under the 
previous agreement. So it's still being increased every year, but not 
to the extent under the previous agreement. So the difference 
between the previous agreement and what we expect this year is 
$9 million less. But there is still a substantial increase of transfer 
funds from the Government of Canada. 
 
So what the opposition has failed to grasp throughout this whole 
argument, and they spent three weeks failing to understand it, is 
that there is an annual increase every year. There is more moneys 
coming every year — not as much as previously, but there is more 
coming every year, Mr. Speaker. And I indicate again that the 
health expenditures in this province are up 70 per cent over the last 
four years. 
 
We will continue to maintain health. We will not cry and whine 
and say, it's somebody else's fault. We believe we have an 
obligation to maintain the health services and the educational 
services, and we will continue to do so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: —Hear, hear! 

 
Statement by Crown Prosecutor in Case Concerning a 

Member 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Justice, and it involves the Crown prosecutor presently involved in 
a case against my colleague from Canora, Mr. Lloyd Hampton. 
The day before yesterday, in a court proceeding in Canora, the 
Crown prosecutor, Mr. John Hillson, who represents the Attorney 
General, suggested that several people involved in the case  . . . He 
suggested it in the press — questioned the integrity of the Plains 
Hospital, questioned the integrity of a physician who attended a 
witness, questioned the integrity of the family of my colleague. 
 
I ask the Minister of Justice if this gentleman is in a position to 
prosecute this case, or is he in a position to politically assassinate 
my colleague and bring down the integrity of several institutions 
who, in fact, are very upset with his actions playing in a court 
room before the Saskatchewan press. And was he instructed by 
your office to participate in this assassination? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member 
unfortunately is making some serious allegations affecting our 
system of justice in Saskatchewan. The member must know — 
and certainly counsel for the accused, for all accused in 
Saskatchewan, know — that if there is a specific complaint about 
the conduct of the Crown counsel, there is a process available to 
that  

particular lawyer to report the matter and complain of the conduct. 
There has been no attempt, to my knowledge, to go through those 
types of channels. 
 
I don't intend to change the procedure, Mr. Speaker, because an 
elected member happens to face a criminal charge. And I believe 
the tradition in this province has been that way for many years. 
Our Department of Justice has that reputation, and I don't intend to 
change it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — New question, Mr. Speaker. And I'd just like to 
refer to an article in the Leader-Post, May 22nd, and just by way 
of information: 

 
Crown prosecutor John Hillson told court all was set for the trial 
until Tuesday afternoon (the day before the trial) when 
Hampton's lawyer, (Mr.) Ken Wasylyshen, telephoned him to 
say that Jean Hampton was ill with cancer and couldn't appear 
at the trial. 

 
At that point, Mr. Speaker, the Crown prosecutor had a letter in his 
hand from a Regina physician indicating Mrs. Hampton's health 
wasn't in good enough condition to appear in court the following 
day. The statement is absolutely erroneous. He goes on to say that: 
 

Hillson said he was later told by a doctor that Jean Hampton 
was suffering from asthma, not cancer, and while her problems 
might be stress-related, there was no reason she couldn't appear. 

 
That particular physician from Canora refused to admit Mrs. 
Hampton to the hospital the night before the court case. And as it 
follows up in the article in the Leader-Post: 
 

Then late Tuesday, the wife of  . . . Western Canada Concept 
member from Canora entered the emergency ward of (the) 
Preeceville Union Hospital, he said. She was sent home from 
the Preeceville hospital (and), in Hillson's words, "She 
somehow ended up in the Plains hospital (in Regina), entered 
the emergency ward and she remains there today." 

 
She's still there today. she's under constant health care. She's been 
on oxygen since she was admitted. Why was she refused admittal 
to the Canora hospital? Well that question is not before — or the 
Preeceville hospital — before the Assembly today. Why does the 
counsel, or the prosecutor representing the Crown in this case, 
question the integrity of the Plains hospital suggesting she was 
admitted at anything less than a serious illness? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Speaker, this matter is before the 
courts; it's a criminal charge. Mr. Speaker, it's obvious the NDP 
members don't want to hear the answer either. And if they would 
be silent for a minute, I would give a full answer. 
 
There has been no specific and unusual instructions provided from 
my office to the prosecutor in this case. The matter is being 
handled as any other case in Saskatchewan would be handled 
under the circumstances. If the accused and his counsel have a 
  



 
May 23, 1986 

1477 
 

specific complaint about the conduct of a Crown counsel, there is 
a process in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the allegations coming from the member are 
unfortunate, and he's starting to sound like the NDP members a 
few weeks ago. The justice system in Saskatchewan will not be 
changed or guided by the political problems or aspirations from 
any members opposite, and I don't intend to change that. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. Several weeks 
ago in this House another member on the government side was not 
charged and — I certainly agree to that situation — stood in the 
House and admitted his innocence. 
 
In this case a member of the opposition is taken by a Crown 
prosecutor who has the press following the case in the court room, 
politically assassinates him and his family, draw the attention of 
the integrity of our whole health system, and you're standing in 
this House, Mr. Minister, and suggesting that the procedure is all 
well, and that you are not directing this case of political 
assassination against my colleague. Are you suggesting that this 
prosecutor is acting on his own volition and not from direction 
from your office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Speaker, in this case, as any other 
prosecution case, I provide no specific directions of conduct to any 
Crown counsel. Let me make that perfectly clear. And the member 
should know better. 
 
In this case, if the accused counsel feels that his party — his 
accused has been aggrieved, if something improper has been done, 
there is a process. The counsel is to report the matter, and this 
channel of report is well-known to either my department or my 
office, and the matter will be dealt with as we deal with similar 
matters on other occasions. 
 
Other complaints have been received by the Department of 
Justice. There's a method of dealing with the problems. The fact 
that an elected member happens to be the accused in this case 
doesn't mean that I should change our system of justice, and I don't 
intend to do so. And I resent the insinuation that any instruction 
came from my office to the Crown prosecutor in this specific case 
because it certainly did not. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 
Bill No. 45 — An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 

1984 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend the Urban Municipality Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 

 
Bill No. 46 — An Act to amend The Court of Appeal Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Court of Appeal Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second  

time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 47 — An Act to amend The Direct Sellers Act 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Direct Sellers Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Today I'm pleased to have a group of students 
from the Kyle Composite High School. They are 31 grade 7 
students. They're seated in the Speaker's gallery, and today they're 
attended by their teachers, Mrs. Wendy Turner and Miss Pam 
Bogdanoff, and their bus driver, Mrs. Carol Argue. I'll be meeting 
with the students about 11:30 this morning. 
 
I would ask the Assembly to welcome these students, and I trust 
that they will enjoy their time here in Regina and in the Chamber. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to welcome the 
students from Kyle as well. I graduated from the Kyle high school, 
lived there most of my younger days, and I certainly have fond 
memories of Kyle and the people from Kyle. I have many good 
friends in that area still, and I certainly welcome the students from 
Kyle to the Assembly, and I hope you enjoy your stay in Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 
POINT OF PRIVILEGE 

 
Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of privilege. In 
the press last night and this morning it was indicated that I 
allegated somehow that you, the Speaker, was involved with a 
government conspiracy which was involved in muzzling me in the 
legislature. 
 
I certainly didn't mean to draw you into the conspiracy, Mr. 
Speaker, and in fact if the public perception is out there that you're 
involved in the conspiracy, I apologize to you, and certainly will 
deal with the government on my own terms. 
 
Some Hon. Members: —Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Thank you. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 44 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of 

The Parks Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Bernston: — The (Parks) Consequential Amendment 
Act is a companion Act to The Parks Act. The 
  



 
May 23, 1986 

1478 
 

 
 

consequential Act has the effect of changing reference from the 
previous Provincial Parks, Protected Areas, Recreational Sites and 
Antiquities Act to The Parks Act in several Saskatchewan statutes. 
 
The consequential Act also clarifies the authority of other 
Saskatchewan statutes in relation to park lands. The most notable 
of these clarifications is that park lands, once designated, will be 
administered exclusively under The Parks Act. Previously these 
lands were administered under at least three statutes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act respecting the 
Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the 
enactment of The Parks Act. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as the minister has indicated, 
this is a consequential Bill which ties into a Bill which is now, I 
believe, in adjourned debates, and we will be making a number of 
comments and asking a number of questions about the main Bill 
when it gets into the committee stage. 
 
I believe my colleague from Athabasca has put on the record our 
position very succinctly and clearly on the Bill and will want to 
ask some questions on this and the other main Bill when it gets 
into the committee stage, and I, therefore, will not be making a 
longer statement at this time. But we look forward to asking the 
minister who is responsible for the Bill, and I hope he's here in the 
Assembly at that time, some questions on both of the Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 6 — An Act respecting the Application to 
Saskatchewan of the Convention on the Civil Aspects of 

International Child Abduction 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I have with me three 
officials: Doug Moen, Susan Amrud and Madeleine Hollman. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I want to ask a couple of 
questions about the Bill that we're dealing with on international 
child abduction, and the questions are relatively straightforward 
and I think more informational as opposed to confrontational, 
because this isn't a political Bill in any sense of the word. 
 
But what I was wondering, in terms of meeting with your 
colleagues from across Canada, can you indicate whether or not 
this Bill is a standard Bill that is drafted and follows along the 
lines of other Bills being passed by provincial legislatures across 
Canada? and if you could give me an indication if it's a standard 
Bill; if not, what changes would there be from those in other 
provinces? Is it an expanded format, or less stringent? 
 
And as well, you indicated in your opening remarks that Canada 
has already ratified the international agreement. And I wonder, is 
this Bill necessary, or is this a statement  

more or less being made by the province to confirm the statement 
being made by the federal government? What I'm wondering is, in 
a jurisdictional sense, is whether or not, if we didn't pass the Bill, 
that the agreement that Canada has now entered into, wouldn't it 
already be suffice to carry out the needs that are being felt by 
many families in the province at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — In answer to the member, the Act is 
uniform with other jurisdictions, our counterparts, in substantive 
issues. So the Act is very similar in nature. The other question you 
had was on specifics, and perhaps when we go to the clause by 
clause we can indicate where we differ. In relation to the issue of 
passing it, it is necessary that the province pass the Bill for it to 
take effect here because of our jurisdictional responsibility. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder if the minister, as we go along, if 
you'll explain the differences that exist; if you will also indicate 
now which provinces have passed this type of legislation. I am 
curious to know where we fit into the process at the present time. 
Can you give me a list of provinces that have passed? That's one 
category — those provinces that have introduced and those that 
haven't started the process yet. Have you got that handy and could 
you tell us that now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Yes, it's easy for me to indicate who hasn't 
yet passed their legislation. That would be Prince Edward Island, 
Alberta, and Northwest Territories. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And at the present time do you have an 
understanding with those jurisdictions that they have legislation 
that is going to be passed in the near future? Have they made a 
statement, I guess, saying that they support the legislation and will 
be doing so in the near future? And you may not have that 
information. But if you have it, I'm interested, and there will be 
others interested in knowing that there's a unanimity in the passing 
of this type of legislation across the country. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Yes. I believe Alberta has made a 
commitment and they're in the process of having theirs prepared 
and completed, and the same with Prince Edward Island. So we 
were in the middle of the pack, so to speak, in terms of passing 
ours. And it's essential that we do because it does recognize a 
long-standing problem and provides some predictability for 
families. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister maybe could explain 
discussions that took place within the province leading up to the 
Bill's introduction. Did you have any consultation with groups or 
organizations who are interested in this Bill coming forward? I 
don't believe there was a white paper or a green paper or any of 
that type of a discussion paper around. But did you have formal 
discussions or informal discussions with groups or individuals, 
some type of a hearing process into this, over the last two or three 
years? 
 
(1045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Yes. There has been some discussion 
within Saskatchewan in addition to the national discussions which 
have taken place with groups such as Child Find. And as the 
member may know, one of 
  



 
May 23, 1986 

1479 
 

our government members, the member from Saskatoon Nutana, 
has been involved with Child Find and has been helpful in 
achieving progress in this regard. 
 
As you know, this is the last day of Missing Children's Week, and 
it's quite appropriate and in fact coincidental that we happen to be 
discussing this on today's date. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister indicates that there was 
discussion with Child Find. Were there any other groups or 
organizations involved in the discussions that went into the design 
of the Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — The decision to proceed was reached in 
The Hague Convention process in this matter. There was 
consultation on a national basis and obviously with the legal 
community as well, and we feel comfortable that people were 
talked to and consulted with in relation to this area. 
 
It's something that has been under consideration for a good period 
of time, and obviously we don't hear much about it until the media 
covers an unfortunate circumstance which could be avoided by 
this type of legislation. However the government is comfortable 
that all groups concerned who are involved, or all individuals, will 
be pleased with this particular legislation and the effects of it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — While the minister indicates that this  . . . 
While basically the Bill gives effect to the U.N. convention — and 
I agree with that — I wonder, was there any opposition within the 
province that was brought to your attention? Did any groups or 
individuals come forward with complaints or additions that they 
would have liked to have seen to the legislation? 
 
I suppose what I'm asking here is not opposition inasmuch that 
they were opposed to it, but possibly that it wasn't a strong enough 
Bill or a strong enough statement. Were there any concerns in that 
area expressed on either side of the proposed Bill when you were 
drafting it and designing and crafting the legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — No, I don't recall any that have been made 
to me, and my officials advise that no concerns were raised with 
them of that nature. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The other question that I would like you to 
give to me and to the committee is: as this Bill is being effected 
here — and Canada has agreed with it, as I understand — can you 
tell me the date that the agreement was signed by the Canadian 
government? I'm just interested in knowing what the 
circumstances were around the signing. Was it at the initial stage 
when there were a group of countries come together? 
 
The other question that I want to ask is: how many countries  . . . if 
you will get for me the number of countries that are now part of 
the agreement of putting into effect the U.N. convention on 
international child abduction. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Canada was one of the nations that signed 
at The Hague on the 25th day of October, 1980, and eight 
countries have agreed, and it's the type of continuing process 
where further countries are passing  

the necessary legislation as time goes by. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder, can the minister indicate . . . You 
say eight countries have signed. Have you got the list of the 
countries that are now signatories of that convention? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — The countries that have acceded so far are 
Canada, Portugal, France, and Switzerland; and four more that 
have signed are the United States, United Kingdom, Greece, and 
Luxembourg. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder if you could for me, Mr. Minister, 
in section 4 of the Bill — I may not be reading it quite right — but 
would you explain what this means? Would you just give a short 
explanation of section 4? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — What this clause takes into account is the 
process that must be followed after we're done our job in 
Saskatchewan, when we notify the federal government, who, 
pursuant to the requirements, activates the legislation. And this 
could take up to six months from now for it to take effect. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — So what you're saying here basically, that 
there's a lag period of about six months from the time it gets Royal 
Assent in this Assembly till it has impact. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — That's correct. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister has indicated that other 
provinces will all be included in this, and I think he's given me a 
commitment that as we go through the Bill, you will indicate 
where some of the meaningful changes are with other legislation. 
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I think we are ready to proceed 
through section by section of the Bill. And I would just like to say 
that I believe my colleague, the member for Quill Lakes, has 
indicated that we support the principles of the Bill. And therefore, 
if we can just go through, and if you can outline at some point 
what some of the changes are. And that may not be . . If you don't 
have it here and if it's too complicated, if you would agree to send 
me a script of the different legislations in different provinces and 
the basic changes — not a technical Bill, but if you would give a 
brief outline of the different areas — that would be acceptable as 
well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — We'll provide the member with that. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to bring this 
one to the attention of the member, just so he's aware that it does 
mention The Legal Aid Act. And this is a clause that we don't feel 
will have to be used. However, it provides the ability for the 
Crown to pursue costs in certain cases, which albeit may be rare. 
However, we felt that that clause should be in there. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Could you just explain to me when  
  



 
May 23, 1986 

1480 
 

 
 

the  . . . As it says here, "  . . . court proceedings except to the 
extent of costs assume for residents of Saskatchewan pursuant to 
The Legal Aid Act." When will that kick in, or will that be an 
automatic thing for certain groups, or income level, or how will 
that be determined? Or is it done on an individual basis by review 
of the department? I guess that would be the question I would 
have, of when The Legal Aid Act would have impact in these 
cases. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I want to indicate that it would be 
extremely rare that this clause would be implemented. However, 
the Crown will always reserve the right to proceed for costs, in a 
situation of extreme difficulty, where perhaps outside counsel will 
be used and the individuals involved clearly can afford to pay. It's 
a safety clause that was inserted. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And if you could just explain to me who 
will be making that decision. Is it the discretion of the deputy 
minister or is there someone in the department who will be 
responsible for making that decision? I would just like you to 
indicate at what level. First of all, obviously it is a discretionary 
decision. And who in the department will have that responsibility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — As a matter of policy I've directed that the 
deputy attorney general would have the responsibility. 
 
Clause 5 agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 agreed to. 
 
Clause 7 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — In clause 7.1, I  . . . Just to read to you part 
of 7(1): 
 

If it is necessary to learn or confirm the whereabouts of a person 
in order to give effect to the convention, the minister may 
demand from any person or public body,  . . . 

 
I'm just wondering here — I'm not accusing of too much power, 
but in putting that clause in this is one area I was wondering 
whether you had any opposition or whether you felt it necessary 
that it had to be stated that strongly that when it comes to: 
 

 . . . the whereabouts of a person in order to give effect to the 
convention, the minister may demand from any person or public 
body, including Her Majesty the Queen in right of 
Saskatchewan, information with respect to the location and 
address of that person that is in any record in the possession or 
control of the person or public body. 

 
And basically here what we're talking about is government 
records, in Social Services and in other departments, where now 
we have a law that will be able to demand that kind of 
information. I'm just wondering the background. And here I'm not 
arguing one side or the other, but can you give us a little 
background here on why that statement has to be that strong and 
whether you have any personal concerns, as Minister of Justice, 
that it may be open to abuse in getting files, personal files, out of 

 departments. And you know how that could have a tendency to be 
abused if it weren't watched very closely. 
 
I would just give a word of caution to the minister that this not be 
ignored, and that it be paid very close attention to, that in getting 
files this gives very broad power within this Act to get personal 
files out of any department in government. I understand what 
you're saying here, and that it may be necessary, but I'm just 
wondering whether it isn't also open to abuse. 
 
Here I'm not suggesting that this minister would ever do anything 
like that, but the time may come when we would have concerns 
about information being drawn out of other departments that may 
have severe consequences to the individual whose file is being 
taken out. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Yes, certainly we've considered all aspects 
of the concerns raised by the member. The terms referred to, 
however, is used in other provincial legislation, just as The 
Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, and it is intended, and 
specifically regarding getting an address, for example, of an 
individual. And it's necessary to supersede other legislation that 
may interfere with the legitimate process intended by the 
legislation. 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I would just indicate again, and I don't 
want to dwell on this, but information respecting the location and 
address of that person is just very important, and when that request 
goes to other departments that it be for the name and address, and 
nothing else in those personal files be transferred. And I just end 
that discussion at that point. 
 
But I would just like to say as well that in giving more powers to 
any department, the public always has concerns, and I'm not 
saying that there shouldn't be more red tape and more power in 
certain instances, but I think we would be foolish as well if we 
didn't worry about Bills that give very strong powers and be 
concerned about the possibility of abuse of governments on an 
individual or on personal files. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — The member will note that the Act 
provides, in the event of a refusal for any reason, a judge would 
then make the decision whether the information would be 
provided or not. And clearly the governments always are very 
selective and we're very restricted in the way they use this type of 
a clause. However it's been used in other legislation and it's been 
successful and has not been abused in any case, to our knowledge. 
 
Clause 7 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 8 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Schedule 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, if I could just ask one 
question on the schedule under article 13. I have a little note here 
that I'm not clear on, but this is . . the entirety of article 13 is 
accepted as well? 
  



 
May 23, 1986 

1481 
 

Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Yes. 
 
Schedule agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I would like to thank my officials for their 
assistance. 

 
Bill No. 35 — an Act to amend The Reciprocal Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Act, 1983 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — This Bill, as the minister indicated, I 
believe, in his remarks in second reading on, I believe, it was May 
5th in a very short statement, indicated that this was basically a 
Bill of housekeeping nature. And having perused it and looked 
through it, I certainly agree with him that that's exactly what it is, 
and we will be letting this Bill proceed. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 36 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of 

The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — This Bill, as well, is purely of a 
housekeeping order, but I just think that I should make a couple of 
comments on it. First of all, I want for clarification that first of all 
the basic changes are in section 2 that repeals a provision with 
regard to the pension benefits, and then section 4 which replaces 
that repealed provision with a new and revised and maybe clearer 
provision. I believe that's what is the changes there. But you add to 
that if there is something else. 
 
And in section 3 it amends The Labour Standards Act to give to an 
employee, whose wages are being garnisheed to pay a 
maintenance order, protection from being fired because of that 
garnishee. And I have a couple of other comments that I want to 
make about that part of it. But if you would just indicate to the 
committee if those are the two basic changes; and if there's more 
to it, if you could indicate what they are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — No, those are the two basic changes. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Having said that, and having stated that the 
Bill is of a housekeeping nature and that we basically will be 
giving our support, I would be remiss if I didn't say that this is, I 
suppose, an indication of — and I don't want to be critical of 
people who draft legislation, but we should be more careful in 
bringing legislation before the House. And I suppose "sloppy" 
would be too strong of a word, but the fact is that consequential 
amendments were passed at the last session, are now  

being amended again. 
 
And I'm not being overly critical here. But I just say that in 
drafting up the legislation I suppose one could say that, had we 
done it right  . . . And here I'm indicating in section . . referring to 
section 2; I'm referring my comments about section 2, rather than 
section 4, which you have indicated there are changes in. 
 
Under section 4 and the amendment that is taking place here, 
section 4 of this Bill enacts a different change to The Pension 
Benefits Act, as I understand it, from that effected by 1984-85-86. 
And in my opinion this could be an improper use of a 
consequential Bill, that there's a change occurring here that people 
may say should actually have taken place in a different form as 
opposed to in a consequential Bill. 
 
But I would like you to explain why that change is taking place 
here, rather than where we would suggest that it should be taking 
place — in a regular Bill as opposed to a consequential — and I 
just make that point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — This amendment is necessary as a result, 
and is consequential, of the enforcement of maintenance orders 
Act. It was necessary and this is the proper process. And there was 
a danger, if the change wasn't made, that payments into a pension 
plan would be garnisheeable, and we simply want to guard against 
that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The point isn't whether or not it can be 
effected here. But I would just put to you that the more logical 
way to have done it would have been an amendment to The 
Pension Benefits Act. And I think that what we're seeing here is a 
change in a consequential amendment Act that should have been 
done in a different manner. 
 
And I suppose there's 10 people in the province who would worry 
about it. But I just think that if this trend would continue — of 
making changes in a consequential amendment Act, that, we 
believe, should be made in a regular Bill — that it's an improper 
use of the . . It's basically really not a consequential amendment at 
all. But I'm not going to debate this for a long time. 
 
But I wanted to get that on the record so that if this is a trend that 
continues, that we're being more than expressing a little concern, 
and I'm not going to hold this Bill up because of it, but I wanted to 
put on the record that we're concerned about it, and the minister 
will know that we have to watch this government at every turn for 
what they're slipping through here, here, and there. 
 
I'm not as concerned about section 2 because I know that that can 
happen. You can have a Bill that has to return to the House in the 
next session to get cleaned up, and that's fair. But here what I'm 
saying is that I think there's something happened here that is not 
consequential. it's really very much a basic change that should 
have taken place in The Pension Benefit Act  . . . (inaudible 
interjection)  . . . 
 
I don't know if it's funny, but today the minister has been behaving 
basically very well. He's been serious up until now, and how he 
starts giggling and laughing — I say very  
  



 
May 23, 1986 

1482 
 

 
 

unbecoming, very unbecoming of a Minister of Justice. I think that 
our debate that we've had up to now has been very formal. But I 
say for the minister to sit in your seat and laugh and giggle, I don't 
think that's the way we should be debating this. But I just say I'm 
not going to get into a harangue over whether or not this section 4 
should be amended here in a consequential amendment Act. But 
we believe that it should have been done in another Bill, in the 
proper forum. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the simple fact is 
that I don't believe in what the opposition member believes. 
Perhaps if he was a lawyer or if he would defer the questioning to 
the lawyers in his caucus, they would know what they were 
talking about, because he clearly doesn't know what he's talking 
about. 
 
I believe the opposition has agreed with the intent of the Bill, and 
if he's consenting to the Bill, I wish he'd stop playing political 
games and let's get on with it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister has asked that I defer it to one 
of my colleagues who is a lawyer, so I will do that. If you want to 
play games and have a harangue, then we can do that. I will pass 
the file over to my colleague from the Quill Lakes and he will ask 
you a few questions. But I'll tell you that if you want to get into an 
argument about this area of trying to slip through issues in a 
consequential Bill that should be handled in another area, I will do 
that. But I'll tell you that if you're saying that you know that this 
should be in the Bill and there's no problem with it, you're wrong. 
You're very wrong. 
 
And I say to you that this is an example; it's not a big one, but it's a 
trend that we see happening with this government. We are trying 
to slip little things through here, and it grows and grows, and if we 
let you birds get away with it, without making a statement, the 
next thing you know you'll be selling off a Crown corporation in 
one of the consequential Bills. That's how you birds carry on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure there's 
anything of substance to respond to. We think this legislation is 
important; that's why it's brought here for full debate. The member 
is discussing some legal issues which he clearly doesn't 
understand. The intent of the Act, I think he should be able to 
understand. He hasn't addressed his mind to that. However, I really 
have nothing further to add because nothing of substance was 
raised. 
 
Mr. Koskie: —Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am rather shocked by 
the approach that the minister takes. A serious issue was raised by 
my colleague from Shaunavon. This recommendation has come 
after we have had legal advice — just pointing out the fact that it's 
very sloppy procedure. That's all we're doing, Mr. Minister, 
pointing out what it should have been. 
 
(1115) 
 
With respect to the pensions, the amendment should not be in the 
consequential amendments Act, but should in fact have been in the 
amendment to the Pensions Act. Basically from the standpoint of 
operating in the statutes, you should be able to go to the Pensions 
Act, and if there  

is more than a consequential, then it should be filed in the 
Pensions Act. That's the point we're making. And all we're doing 
is raising this because in our review of it, and our lawyers that 
have taken a opportunity to look at it, indicate that this is their 
opinion. I concur with it. 
 
I don't know why you get so defensive. Heaven knows the 
performance of this government and the sloppiness of 
management throughout this government is well-known 
throughout the province. In Canada it is one of the most 
mismanaged and sloppy governments in all of Canada. And that's 
all we're pointing out, is that you are a party to the sloppiness and 
mismanagement. And I don't think you should be offensive 
because what we're trying to do is to help you out of this morass of 
mismanagement. And that's what we're doing. 
 
And don't say that it hasn't been looked at. It has. We've had 
lawyers look at it, and the recommendation that came to us is 
well-founded, I say. And all we're doing is raising it to your 
attention and ask you to give it a consideration in the future. And I 
don't think by raising it we should be insulted here in the House by 
someone of your calibre. I leave it at that, Mr. Minister, and allow 
it to go through in this sloppy mess, but let the record show that 
we raised that very issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't want to get 
into political games with the opposition. The member just walks 
in, didn't hear the argument regarding the Bill, and he stands up 
and makes a political speech. I think what's important here: does 
the opposition agree, or don't they, with the Bill. The process 
which was followed was followed and constructed by the very 
competent people in the Department of Justice. And I'm frankly 
getting tired of the members opposite insulting the integrity and 
credibility of the people who do hard and good work for the 
province of Saskatchewan in my department. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 6 — An Act respecting the Application to 
Saskatchewan of the Convention on the Civil Aspects of 

International Child Abduction 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — It will now be read a third time and passed 
under its title, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Bill No. 35 — An Act to amend The Reciprocal Enforcement 

of Maintenance Orders Act, 1983 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — I move the Bill be read a third time and 
passed under its title, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
  



 
May 23, 1986 

1483 
 

Bill No. 36 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of 

The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
 The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 41 — An Act 
respecting Stock 
Savings Plan Tax Credits be now read a second time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I had an opportunity to review, very 
briefly, the Bill with respect to stock savings plan tax credit, and I 
do want to make just a few remarks. 
 
I think the minister's remarks suggest some appropriate responses, 
or responses which I certainly hope will be appropriate. The 
minister speaks of initiatives, including this particular Bill, or 
providing a strong signal that the investment climate has changed 
in Saskatchewan. I must say that if the climate has changed, it's 
none too soon, having regard to the performance of this 
government with respect to investment. 
 
I want to refer all hon. members to the budget speech given by the 
member for Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, and particularly to page 42 of 
the printed budget speech which talks about public and private 
investment in Canada, and particularly about public and private 
investment in Saskatchewan, and it gives the dismal performance 
of this government with respect to generating public and private 
investments. It is laid out there; the totals are clear. 
 
In 1981 the figure was $5.15 billion, and it was lower than that in 
'82, and lower than that in '83, and lower than that in 
'84 - '82-83-84 were lower even in dollar terms than 1981 — and 
when corrected for inflation there would be a substantially lower 
level of public and private investment in Saskatchewan in each of 
those years. When we come to 1985 it becomes $5.24 billion, 
fractionally above 1981 in current dollar terms, but when corrected 
for inflation in any constant dollar terms, investment in 
Saskatchewan in each of the years '82-83-84 and '85 was below 
1981. 
 
That, I think, tells its own story and it is . . Even in, let us take 
manufacturing, which might be amenable to being encouraged by 
the measure put forward by the Minister of Finance, in every 
single year, 1982, 1983, 1984, and 1985, investment in 
manufacturing was lower than it was in 1981. And these, Mr. 
Speaker, again I say, are the figures put forward by the Minister of 
Finance in his budget speech. 
 
He makes the point that these tax credit loopholes — and  

that's certainly what they are; we call them credits when we put 
them in and call them loopholes when they're there for a while. 
But these tax credits loopholes, it is alleged that these will create 
jobs. 
 
Well, may I point out what's happened to unemployment in this 
province between 1981 and 1985. The unemployment has 
increased by 90 per cent. I wonder, therefore, whether or not 
anyone can take great pride at the success of the measures put 
forward, measures similar to this, in previous budgets. 
 
We have had the venture tax credit, the venture capital tax credit 
— perhaps more properly called that; the livestock investment tax 
credit; we will have a livestock facilities tax credit; and now a 
stock savings tax credit; and the labour-sponsored venture capital 
tax credit — all costing perhaps $33 million for Saskatchewan 
taxpayers. These are significant sums, and at least so far the results 
in investment and in job creation have been dismal. 
 
Once again, investment in manufacturing lower than in any years  
. . . lower in each year since 1981. And with respect to general 
investments, when corrected for inflation, lower in each year after 
1981 — lower in '82, '83, '84 and '85 than 1981. 
 
This Bill is said to cost us about $4 million a year. I suppose that's 
an estimate. But that's the figure which the minister has included 
in his budget speech. 
 
We have to ask ourselves: what percentage of the people of 
Saskatchewan will benefit from this Bill? We have to ask 
ourselves what percentage of the people of Saskatchewan will 
benefit from this Bill. I think we will find the number of people 
who will be able to take advantage of this Bill to be very, very 
small. Members suggest that I may be one of them. That may be 
true. That may be true! But I ask whether tax Bills should be 
structured to benefit people with incomes at the level of the senior 
ministers in this House, or whether they should be structured to 
benefit ordinary people with ordinary incomes  . . . (inaudible 
interjection)  . . . 
 
Let's be very, very clear. The member for Weyburn says, what 
have we done for people with ordinary incomes? Well, we tried 
very hard, and will try again after the next election, to see that 
doctors of veterinary medicine and ministers of the Crown pay a 
fair share of the tax load, and that this load is not shifted onto 
ordinary people who have their property tax rebates taken away — 
their property improvement grants taken away. 
 
I think therefore that people who are . . Indeed I suggest that 
people who are doctors of veterinary medicine and lawyers — and 
I include both the member of Weyburn and myself in that ambit 
when we are not engaged in the activities of this House — I don't 
think that we pay our fair share, compared with what ordinary 
people pay. And I wonder why we should be  . . . (inaudible 
interjection)  . . . 
 
(1130) 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member for Weyburn may take the 
position that doctors of veterinary medicines, their incomes are 
within the ordinary, normal, and  
  



 
May 23, 1986 

1484 
 

 
 

average range. That may be true. I do not know a great deal about 
that particular profession. I will talk about lawyers, a profession 
that I know something about. And I say that most lawyers who've 
been at the bar for 20 or 25 years have an income which is a good 
deal more than the average income of people who have been in the 
work-force for 20 or 25 years. And if people don't believe that, 
then they're not living in the real world. And I sometimes think 
that the members opposite believe that ordinary people have 
incomes like doctors of veterinary medicine or lawyers. But I don't 
think that's true, and I don't think we should necessarily be 
structuring our tax system to provide additional benefits for the 
lawyers or the vets, and not for ordinary people. 
 
And I ask members opposite whether they believe that many 
ordinary people will be taking advantage of this. However there 
are certain benefits which may accrue, and no one is denying that 
— benefits which may accrue. I am making the points which need 
to be considered by all members of this House. And I hope that 
this House never becomes a forum where one puts a proposal on 
the table and the simple question is, are you for it or against it, 
without any discussion of its merits and its disadvantages. 
 
And I am now putting forward some comments on this Bill which 
I think indicate that there are at least some things which need to be 
said about its provisions. And I hope that as the debate proceeds, 
members will enter the debate, tell us about what percentage of the 
people they feel would benefit from this Bill, and whether or not it 
represents the best way to make our tax system fairer. 
 
Those, Mr. Acting Speaker, are comments I wanted to make at this 
time. I will have an opportunity to speak more fully in committee, 
not on the principle of the Bill, which as far as I'm aware is not 
under broad debate, but on the provisions of the Bill which I think 
will bear some consideration in committee. 
 
I for my part am not clear on what particular stock issues will 
benefit from the Bill. I am clear, and I believe that it does not now 
include issues which are outstanding. I believe I am clear in that it 
will include issues by new companies that are qualified in the 
sense that they have 25 per cent of their payroll, or may have 25 
per cent of their payroll in Saskatchewan. I am not clear about 
whether or not the Bill applies to further issues by existing 
companies where the shares are listed on a stock exchange. 
 
There are, I would think, not more than five companies now with 
head offices in Saskatchewan which are listed on stock exchanges. 
I can think of four, quickly, but there may be more — but not 
many more. There are not many companies, now in existence, the 
shares of which will qualify if the Bill covers that particular piece 
of ground. but, Mr. Acting Speaker, I think many of these points 
are best pursued in committee, and accordingly I will be 
concluding my remarks at this point and pursuing these points in 
committee. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a concern about this Bill  . . . 
(inaudible interjection)  . . . Well you're going to hear about it if 
you can be patient. If the member from  

Indian Head-Wolseley can be patient, you'll hear about it. 
 
My concern has to do with the style of financing of public services 
which this government and other governments in Canada, to be 
fair to it, engage in. We have on the order paper today three Bills 
which provide for exemptions — credits, as my colleague says, 
when they go in, and loopholes after they've been there for a 
while. We have three Bills on this order paper which provide 
loopholes in The Income Tax Act. 
 
I do not know how long it is going to take Conservative 
governments in this country to realize that the most important 
service which governments can provide for business is to provide 
soundly financed public services and a sound currency. And when 
governments fail to raise sufficient revenue for public services, 
when they allow deficits to accumulate, then, Mr. Speaker, they're 
doing the business community a disservice. 
 
I for one find exemptions to The Income Tax Act, which provide 
for exemptions to wealthy people, objectionable. They are 
certainly not in the interest of fairness and equity. They are not, 
Mr. Speaker, either, I think, in the interests of the business 
community whom they're designed to serve. No great service is 
done to the business community, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by running 
the public service and the fiscal affairs of the province in the 
fashion in which this government has done. 
 
I remind you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this government took 
office in 1982 with a balanced budget and per capita debt which 
was the lowest in Canada. Four years later   . . . Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I don't know if I have the floor or if the member from 
Weyburn has it, but it is getting very difficult to talk with him 
yelling from his seat. He had every opportunity to get up and 
speak and chose not to. I suggest to the member from Weyburn, if 
you have some comments, make them publicly. If you don't, try 
and remember your manners, Mr. Member. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government took office at a time, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, when the budget of this province was balanced, 
when the per capita debt, in gross terms, was the lowest in Canada. 
It no longer is the lowest in Canada. We're now fourth high in 
Canada. In addition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we now have a deficit 
for this last fiscal year which I predict, when the public accounts 
are in, is going to be the highest in Canada, west of the Maritimes. 
All that has been accomplished in four short years. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a problem in this country with 
financing of public services. It is not acceptable to the public to cut 
back on public services, and the Conservative governments in 
office won't finance them. And that, Mr. Minister, in the long run 
to fail to adequately and soundly finance public services does the 
country no good, it does the business community no good, and it 
certainly does the taxpayer no good. 
 
Mr. Minister, what we have in this Bill is a key reason why 
Canada has the highest per capita debt of any of the seven 
industrialized nations. That's a fact. This country, with all of the 
advantages in the world, an endless supply of  
  



 
May 23, 1986 

1485 
 

timber, fresh water, arable land, a mineral base on the Canadian 
Shield which is probably unexcelled in gross terms in the world 
with all of that and all those advantages spread among 22 million 
people, we have the highest per capita debt among the 
industrialized nations. And all of that isn't directly laid at the door 
of this government, except that this government has proceeded to 
exacerbate the problem in this province with a deficit which is 
simply running away on them. 
 
They stated it to be 500  . . . (inaudible interjection)  . . . Well there 
the member from Weyburn goes again. It is impossible to carry on 
a debate with members braying away, knowing they have nothing 
to say on their feet because what they say on their feet is subject to 
examination. What they say from their seat goes unrecorded and 
accordingly doesn't come back to embarrass them. If the member 
from Weyburn had anything intelligent to say, he'd say it from his 
seat. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Order. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Now we're getting the really witty reparteés 
from the back row, telling me to shut up. That's one of the 
brightest things I've heard said — one of the brightest things I've 
heard said from the member from Moosomin — one of the 
brightest things I've heard said. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, on a point of order. Well 
the member for Regina Centre just indicated that I had told him to 
shut up, and that is not true, albeit I should have maybe, but I 
didn't. I just called for a little order because I, in my opinion, 
thought that he was a bit off of the issue of the day. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — I don't find the point of order in order, 
and would the member please continue. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — In that case, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I take the 
word of the member from Moosomin and accuse the member 
from Saskatoon Eastview of telling me to shut up  . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order, order. If the member 
would like to get on to the discussion in the debate, well I will  . . . 
(inaudible interjection)  . . . Order, order. The debate continues. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the key problems 
in this province is the level of public debt that has accumulated in 
four years. And if members opposite think that that is not an issue, 
then all I can say is they need to get out of this Assembly and onto 
Main Street, Saskatchewan, and listen to the business community. 
Because the business community, if they are critical of this 
government — and they are becoming increasingly so — one of 
the issues that they raise is the deficit. They are as concerned about 
it as anybody. 
 
What we have here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a Bill which is one of 
the key reasons why this country has the highest per capita debt of 
any of the industrialized nations. Why? Because, Mr. Speaker, 
The Income Tax Act, which ought to be a prime engine of 
financing public services, is riddled with these problems. And now 
we have another one. 

What we have is an exemption for the rich, and the member from 
Regina Elphinstone is quite accurate. Ordinary people may, I 
suppose, on occasion invest in the stock market. But they buy 
Royal Bank shares or Bell Canada shares, General Motors shares 
— something with a proven record of dividends. Apart from Ipsco 
— and I think one might now exempt that company — there's 
virtually no Saskatchewan company with a well-established record 
of dividends. They are mostly newer companies who don't qualify 
for the widow's pensions, etc. 
 
What we have here is an exemption which will accrue to 
speculative investors — relatively sophisticated investors, 
relatively affluent investors. Because to gain this $3,000 
exemption, you have to invest a fair amount of money in a highly 
speculative venture and you've got to be prepared to lose it. And 
that doesn't include ordinary people who cannot afford to lose their 
$10,000 or $20,000 that they invest. They put it in Bell Canada, 
Royal Bank, General Motors, etc. 
 
It is the affluent investor who has $10,000 to lose, and who has a 
sufficient knowledge of the workings of the stock exchange and 
the security market to invest, who puts his money into these type 
of ventures. It is, Mr. Speaker, the doctors, the lawyers, those  . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Vets. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, most veterinarians, except some 
members opposite who don't seem to be able to make a living 
practising veterinarian — don't seem to be able to make the 
normal living that a veterinarian enjoys. It is the wealthy, the 
speculative investor who is going to take advantage of this. And 
this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is what's wrong with The Income Tax 
Act. It is what is wrong with the financing of this country's public 
services. 
 
(1145) 
 
Mr. Speaker, what happens when you implant these exemptions in 
The Income Tax Act, the result of so doing is that the affluent 
escape taxation, and they do. The tax system in this country is a 
scandal. it's an absolute scandal. The number of affluent people, 
Mr. Speaker, who avoid paying a significant amount of income tax 
would embarrass any country but this one. The affluent avoid the 
Income Tax Act., the less affluent say the system isn't fair, and if 
they — meaning the wealthy — aren't going to pay income tax, 
I'm not going to pay income tax. And an alarming number of 
people seek, by fair means or foul, to avoid paying income tax. 
 
And then you have yet another chain reaction of the Department 
of National Revenue attempting to enforce it and perhaps going 
overboard, but meeting a problem of a citizenry which doesn't 
respect the fairness of the Income Tax Act. When they don't 
respect its fairness, they do not always understand their obligation 
to pay. Well these kind of tax exemptions which riddle the Income 
tax Act with unfairness have long-run and widespread, serious 
consequences, and we have three of them on this Bill today. 
  



 
May 23, 1986 

1486 
 

 
 

So I say, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill is not 
one to be taken lightly. These kinds of exemptions lie at the very 
heart and soul of the problems this country is having in financing 
public services. And our problems, I say again, are among the 
most severe in the world. There are other countries which have a 
more difficult time meeting their debts, but none with Canada's 
level of standard of living, level of affluence, or natural resources. 
 
Mr. Minister, the members opposite think it's always good politics 
to be putting money in someone's pocket. Perhaps, Mr. Minister, 
perhaps, Mr. Deputy Speaker, taken on an individual case that's 
true. The speculative, the sophisticated investor may think this is 
good politics. I don't think the widows are. And I don't think the 
ordinary people are who know that they're unlikely to put money 
in a company as defined by this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the whole approach of this government is that you 
can buy voters one at a time. You take the oil industry, Mr. 
Speaker, and you pour money in their pockets and you've got 
some friends. And this has been their whole approach to 
governing, is that one by one, one group after another, you buy 
them off. 
 
The cumulative effect however, Mr. Speaker, is disaster. The 
cumulative effect is that you have a deficit which is out of control, 
which is certainly the most rapidly increasing in Canada. I say, 
when the Public Accounts come in, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this 
Bill  . . . that Saskatchewan will have the highest operating deficit 
in per capita terms in Canada west of The Maritimes when the 
Public Accounts are in. To compare this province to The 
Maritimes is to make a totally unfair comparison. They are 
provinces which don't have anywhere near our resources. They 
have no oil revenue, very little expense, very little minerals, and a 
much more difficult time than we do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the legislation that is brought forward today raises 
some very serious issues about financing of public services, 
among the most serious issues which governments face. 
 
The members today have debated a number of Bills, spent some 
time on them, as well they should. None of them I think, begin to 
approach the importance of this Bill in the questions it raises. 
 
I heard some figures given the other day by the Minister of 
Finance with respect to what he thought this Bill was going to do. 
I can only say that if we are going to approve an exacerbation of 
the problem — and this Bill is an exacerbation of this country's 
fiscal problems — then the results had better be spectacular. I, 
somehow or other, am not convinced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want an opportunity to consider this Bill in the light 
of what the Minister of Finance said, in the light of other 
information which will be available to us as we have time, over 
the weekend and in the next few days, to consider other sources of 
information. I therefore, Mr. Speaker, beg leave to adjourn debate. 

Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Devine that Bill No. 30 — An Act 
respecting a Livestock Facilities Tax Credit be now read a 
second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Devine that Bill No. 39 — An Act to 
amend The Livestock Investment Tax Credit Act be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, last day we discussed some 
aspects of this Bill that really troubled me. The concern was that 
we're anxious here to provide exemptions for wealthy people that 
are involved in the cattle industry, as far as paying income tax 
exemptions. And the Bill is in a time period — for 1987, '88, and 
'89 — that is way, way beyond the mandate of this government. 
 
And I think that it's unnecessary, unnecessary to deal with tax 
give-aways that are not conducive to a health agricultural 
environment at this time. If we want a healthy livestock industry in 
Saskatchewan, make $5 million available to starting farmers. 
According to the budget, there's $5 million for one Bill and 4.5 
million for the other. And we're making $5 million available 
through the livestock investment tax credit system, and that $5 
million would help a lot of young farmers that aren't paying tax, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
You, in your background, know that only those people that are 
making a fair return are paying any income tax. And this Bill 
makes $5 million available in tax credits to people that are paying 
income tax, and yet as far as the livestock industry is concerned — 
to encourage young people to take over their ranches of their dads 
that are trying to get out of it, and to encourage the livestock 
industry in general — isn't doing anything for it. It's not a 
stimulus. 
 
It's a Bill that is doing something that we don't think should be 
happening, and at a time when you don't have a mandate; you 
don't know if you're going to be the government in 1987 and 1988 
and 1989. I think it's ridiculous to proceed with this Bill, and we'll 
try and see if we can come up with the means to delay the passage 
of this Bill in third reading, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In response to 
two or three of the points that were made by the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg in debate on this Bill, he first makes the 
point that, once again, the classic NDP line that it's only the 
wealthy — everybody but farmers, in their mind — who enjoy the 
benefits of this tax credit. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, he has his facts wrong 
again. He stood before this House, Mr. Speaker, and said quite 
clearly that it is only the lawyers and the rich investors and the 
doctors that in fact benefit from this Bill. Mr. Speaker, the fact of 
the matter is, in the '85 tax year, of the 4.1 millions of dollars in 
tax credits, 
  



 
May 23, 1986 

1487 
 

everything but 123,000 went to producers, Mr. Speaker — nearly 
4 millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, Once again the NDP are wrong 
and leaving the wrong impression out there in the public's mind. 
 
He secondly made the point, Mr. Speaker, that the time frame for 
this Bill is entirely beyond our mandate because it goes for the 
next three years, that that's not healthy for the industry. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, he — he as much as anybody should know that if one 
thing a farmer needs, it's to know what the rules are for the next 
three or four years so he can plan for the future. Because you don't 
buy cows today and have a calf and get them all fattened up in one 
month, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It takes time to establish a herd, build up a feedlot and that's 
exactly what's happening out there, Mr. Speaker. So I would argue 
that it makes sense for the ranchers and the farmers and the feedlot 
operators of this province to know what the rules are going to be, 
not just for the next month or six months, but in fact for the next 
three years. 
 
We shouldn't be surprised by the attack of the NDP opposition on 
this Bill, Mr. Speaker. They attacked it before when we introduced 
it in this House, and they attack it now. They are against the 
farmers in this province, Mr. Speaker, receiving some tax breaks. 
 
It was okay to have tax breaks and tax incentives, you know, for 
the central Canadian manufacturing industries; never once in their 
term did they introduce tax breaks for Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. 
Speaker. And for a party who loudly caws about tax reform and 
fairness, Mr. Speaker, their silence has been deafening on this one, 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to standing up for Saskatchewan 
farmers and Saskatchewan cattlemen and Saskatchewan 
producers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In his remarks, Mr. Speaker — and I checked these carefully — 
the hon. member takes the two tacks. On the one hand he says that  
. . . what we see here today is some politicking to try and get the 
ranchers back on-side and then at the same time in a later place in 
this debate he says it's only the rich investors and the lawyers. 
Now you can't have it both ways. Either the ranchers, Mr. 
Speaker, are getting the breaks, as we believe they are, or he is 
wrong in his conclusions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker  . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: —  . . . Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — State your point of order. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like the minister to 
not deceive the House and read into the record where I said the 
point he's trying to say now. I have the record before me, and on a 
point of order, he is deceiving the House. I charge him with 
deceiving the House intentionally because I did not make that 
statement. He should read it  . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I do not find the point of 
order in order, and would the Minister of Energy and Mines 
proceed. 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, reading from page 13, 14, 
hon. Mr. Engel in debate here says, they won't be slap-happy 
programs that give tax breaks to the wealthy who are paying taxes, 
not ranchers  . . . 
 
We say, Mr. Speaker, the numbers clearly show, Mr. Speaker, that 
nearly $4 million of these tax credits went to the producers. That's 
who we aimed it at, and we aimed it there because we want more 
cattle fattened here; we want the jobs that go with that fattening 
here; we want the jobs that go with the slaughtering in this 
province; we want the jobs that are put in place on Main Street, 
Saskatchewan, at the feed mills, and at the farm supply places 
because, Mr. Speaker, not only do we believe in agriculture, we 
believe in jobs for rural people and urban people, and that's what 
this Bill is all about, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I urge all members of the Assembly to support this legislation 
for the rural families out there and for their children and for those 
who are looking for jobs out there in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas - 33 
 
Birkbeck Morin 
Andrew McLaren 
Berntson Bacon 
Lane Parker 
Taylor Young 
Pickering Hopfner 
Hardy Rybchuk 
Smith (Swift Current) Baker 
Myers Gerich 
Hepworth Zazelenchuk 
Dutchak Swenson 
Dirks Blakeney 
Embury Tchorzewski 
Sandberg Engel 
Klein Koskie 
Currie Shillington 
Smith (Moose Jaw South)  
 

Nays - 0 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 42 — An Act to 
amend The Income Tax Act (No. 2) be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Maxwell that Bill No. 43 — An Act to 
amend The Wildlife Act be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a 
  



 
May 23, 1986 

1488 
 

 
 

committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morin that Bill No. 28 — An Act to 
amend The Education and Health Tax Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Yesterday, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had the privilege of listening to the Leader 
of the Opposition speaking to this Bill. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
strength of this Bill has been the wish and the dream come true for 
the women, especially, of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk about that 
strength and we talk about the ordinary people, the Leader of the 
Opposition had indicated yesterday that basically this was a 
relatively small token. I find this very hard to believe, that the 
Leader of the Opposition could make such a flippant statement 
such as that. 
 
I would like to indicate to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when I 
was a child growing up, we were brought up believing that there 
were three very vital points, issues, that we had to address to be 
able to survive and to be able to get on in this world. And that was 
to provide for food, shelter, and clothing — three very important 
issues that are being addressed through such a Bill such as Bill 28. 
 
When I talk about the issues of food, shelter, and clothing, I would 
like to indicate to you that through these three very important 
items that I've just mentioned is that the majority of women in this 
province do carry out the budgetary of the home. And the majority 
of the women today have that exercise, and it is not a very, very 
light exercise to have to be responsible for in the household. 
 
I'd like to say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when the women 
go to the clothing stores, they appreciated the fact that the 5 per 
cent tax had been removed on the clothing. I would like to indicate 
to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when we are talking about the 
items of food and clothing, that probably as many times as women 
go to a grocery store, at the same time they are buying some sort 
of a clothing item that is for their children or husband or 
themselves. So I'd like to indicate to you that the savings have 
generated a profitable income to the individuals as they proceed 
through their purchasing. 
 
I would like to indicate to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that now it's 
no longer up to the age of 14; it's for all ages, from juniors right 
through to seniors. Teenagers today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 
probably one of the more lucrative group of people in the province 
or across the country, in which the removal of this tax is very 
essential to them and a very, very dollar-saving item to them. 
 
Because teenagers  . . . As I know when I was a teenager, we 
would go through various fads and we had to have this or that to 
kind of stay within the realms of the various different types of 
clothing that hit the markets from year to year, and various styles, 
etc. So it's a very expensive time throughout their lifetime to be 
growing and spending their dollars on the clothing aspect. 

So I'd like to say that this particular Bill has touched all segments, 
and the teenagers are going to be able to really show and see the 
savings that they acquired throughout their years. 
 
But when we got and look at all segments, I can say that it's hit the 
seniors, where the seniors are  . . . where they want to buy clothing 
for their granddaughters or grandsons or their daughters and sons, 
that their income levels of earning are not there any longer, so it's 
going to be definitely a benefit to the seniors. 
 
What I would like to say, that when the Leader of the Opposition 
was speaking yesterday, he had mentioned that he would like to 
talk in the generality of the taxation; and I too, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, would like to have that privilege. 
 
(1215) 
 
The Leader of the Opposition had misled the House, and probably 
in a very sincere meaning, because from the years I've spent in this 
legislature I've heard much misleading from the members of the 
NDP opposition. The Leader of the Opposition clearly stated 
yesterday that all members on the government side had ran 
campaign ads that we were going to remove the 5 per cent tax in 
the first term of office — clearly said that, clearly said that we ran 
half-page ads, full-page ads. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is a blatant 
untruth. 
 
I will challenge the Leader of the Opposition right now. I will 
challenge the Leader of the Opposition right now, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to pick up any piece of literature, campaign literature, 
from my campaign. I will challenge him to bring forth any piece 
of literature from my election campaign back in 1982. And I will 
challenge him to produce that, as he said he would — as he said he 
would — in this Assembly, to say that I said that we would 
remove the 5 per cent E & H tax in our first term of office. 
 
Not such a bad idea. I'm all for that. I would have been all for 
removing the 5 per cent E & H tax in our first term. And it's not 
over. I mean, there's many things can happen. But I'm saying is, if 
the condition of this province, the treasury of this province, would 
have been in a better shape than what we found it in, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we probably could have. 
 
When we look at the various, various types of rhetoric that comes 
from across the floor  . . .I would just like to move into some of the 
things that where we could maybe broaden on our tax base to do 
such things for the province of Saskatchewan, and things that my 
Premier are working on and has had announcements on. 
 
Here are just a few of those items that, with the co-operation of the 
NDP, we'd probably have a lot more of. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
you take Weyerhaeuser in Prince Albert; we have an agreement 
for a paper-mill in Saskatchewan. The NDP are out in Prince 
Albert; they're for it. In the legislature they're against it. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we have Gainers in North Battleford. Out there 
the Leader of the Opposition is for it; in here they're against it. 
  



 
May 23, 1986 

1489 
 

And I'll tell you that, through broadcasting the tax base through 
these jobs that these particular projects could create through job 
creations, would give us that opportunity, through the corporate 
tax collected, through the income tax collected, through all these 
jobs, it would create this kind of funding that we could eliminate 
the 5 per cent E & H totally — totally. 
 
And I go on. The fertilizer plant in Regina — they're against it. 
But, Mr. Speaker, creation of jobs, and we could remove the 5 per 
cent E & H tax. We have power projects in Estevan. Again, jobs, 
tax, and we could remove the 5 per cent E & H tax — eliminate it 
completely on everything. 
 
Upgraders in Regina and Lloydminster — out there they're for it; 
here they're against it. And believe me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 
are not friends of any corporation, small or large. They are not 
friends of anybody. They are power-hungry. And if we could have 
their co-operation, there would be many more; but that was just a 
list, an example. 
 
I could go on, but I know that it is getting away from the guts of 
the Bill. What I would like to say is that those projects are 
job-creating projects that the Premier and our government have 
worked hard to get for Saskatchewan and for the Saskatchewan 
people to create the jobs, bring that income in, to bring that tax to 
the treasury, so we could eliminate the 5 per cent tax on totally 
everything. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the leader talks about 
promises made and promises broken, but I challenge him to bring 
those documents into this House that I have supposedly supposed 
to have said. 
 
He also went into another point, Mr. Deputy Speaker; he talked 
about the tax on used vehicles; he talked about our hidden agenda. 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I to this day have not seen any hidden 
agenda. We've been an up-front government, we've been open, 
and we've been listening to the people of this province. But I 
would like to indicate to you that he is suggesting, he had 
suggested in the House yesterday that our hidden agenda would be 
to bring the tax back on used vehicles. 
 
We humbly had admitted that it was not a proper tax; we humbly 
did it. We humbly admitted it to the province of Saskatchewan. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can say that if the people want to 
believe those untruths — I mean, I cannot talk for those particular 
people, but I know that when it comes to belief, the belief of who 
they would sooner believe, then I think basically the rationale of 
the voter out there, whoever, will justifiably put it in the right 
place. And I'm sure that they do realize that we are moving ahead, 
moving strongly ahead, and that we are speaking the truth. 
 
I would like to say that when he went on to talk about that we did 
not give a dollar back, a dollar back that we've collected — I think 
it was somewhere in the neighbourhood of 5 million — that we 
have not given a dollar back to these people, I want to indicate to 
you that he neglected to talk about the tax that they imposed, the 

succession duty tax, what I would call the death tax. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, they collected $28 million on the death tax. 
 
When a man or woman died, they had to pay tax on the 
inheritance — a tax that, even after the people went through the 
suffering of losing a loved one, they knocked on their door and 
said, now you're going to pay a death tax; you're going to pay a 
succession tax. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I call cold blood 
— cold blood! It's just unbelievable that could even have been 
thought of — a death tax! 
 
They, Mr. Deputy Speaker, never indicated  . . . The Leader of the 
Opposition asked, why do we not give this back? Why did we not 
give this $5 million back to the people that bought these used 
vehicles? Well, I throw the other question out, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. When the Leader of the Opposition can stand in this 
House and be so righteous, why did he not go to these widows and 
orphans and offer that $28 million back to those widows and 
orphans that lost their loved one. I cannot understand the mentality 
of the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
But I would just like to say, getting back to the Bill that the hon. 
minister has tabled here, I would like to say that the opportunities 
for the business in this province is going to be unreal. It's already 
beginning to happen. The Manitoba people are already lobbying 
their government, their NDP government, to drop the E & H tax 
along the border areas. And it's spreading like a disease because, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you can well imagine, Manitobians are 
now driving into Saskatchewan to buy clothing for their families, 
for their loved ones. 
 
Not only that, but a member has just reminded me that in the last 
session their government, the NDP Government of Manitoba, 
raised the E & H tax from 5 per cent to 6 per cent. You know, so 
the mentality of the socialists are to tax the ordinary people. They 
are against the corporations for coming into the province, so 
they're totally against job creation by these corporations coming 
in. so they're going to have to get the money from somewhere, and 
that somewhere is the ordinary people, the people that are trying to 
struggle and maintain jobs and to make a living. 
 
So when we talk about the taxation system and the way it's been 
drawn — and they certainly can take credit for it, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, for the increase from 31 per cent income tax to 51 per 
cent. I mean, it wasn't our government that raised the income tax 
level in this province to that height. It was not our government; it 
was the NDP when they were government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I hear the member from Shaunavon in 
his statements where he said  . . . a cynical plan to promise to the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan to remove the sales tax. I 
mean, I don't even think he was thinking when he said that, a 
cynical plan. 
 
They have no intention, Mr. Speaker, if they were ever 
government again in this province — which I know the people 
have other plans for them — but if they were ever government in 
the future, that the people of this province can rest assured that 
they will not be paying 5 per cent  
  



 
May 23, 1986 

1490 
 

 
 

E & H tax. 
 
But I wouldn't be a bit surprised if they weren't something 
equivalent to the eastern parts of our country here and paying 10, 
11, and 12 per cent, because they will drive every bit of industry 
out of this province. They will drive every bit of industry out of 
this province and they will have to tax the ordinary people. They 
will have to tax the ordinary people to supply all the benefits, all 
the benefits, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the province. 
 
If they get back in as government  . . . if they get back in as 
government in the future, what is their hidden agenda? What is 
their hidden agenda? I ask you: what is their hidden agenda? they 
will not have industry in this province. They will not have any 
corporate tax to collect in this province. So I can see that there 
may be another referendum in this province on nursing homes. 
There may the moratorium on nursing homes again, the 
moratorium on nursing homes in this province again. There will 
also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, may be nor more construction on our 
hospitals, because where will they get the dollars? Where will they 
get the dollars to pay for all this construction? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Chairman, a point of order. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — State your point of order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — My point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that we 
have sat here and watched the member wander all over the globe 
in respect to the subject matter, and has very seldom mentioned 
the Act and the contents and the principles of the Act which we 
should in fact be debating. And I was wondering if the Deputy 
Speaker has been listening, and whether he would concur with that 
and make a ruling. 
 
(1230) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — I can assure the member that I have 
been listening. Order. And I have heard him tie it in, whatever he 
has been saying, back to the tax, to the Bill at hand. And I would 
ask that the debate continue. 
 
An Hon. Member: — New point of order, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — State your point of order. 
 
Mr. Engel: — My point of order is this: will you give the 
opposition the same latitude? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — That is not a point of order. That is not a 
point of order, and I would ask the debate to continue. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know there's many 
others that would like to speak on it, but I'd just like to finish up by 
saying with a final point. With my minister's introduction of this 
Bill, the removal of the clothing, I'd just like to wrap it up by just 
saying that, if the members opposite ever got back in, the sales tax 
on clothing would probably go back on; the sales tax on gasoline 
would probably go back on. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say that our  

government is committed to less tax for the ordinary people of this 
province. And I would like to say that when they talk about our 
hidden agenda, we do not have a hidden agenda. We buried the 
sales tax on gasoline; we've buried other taxes. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I would just like to assure you and the people of this province that 
we will keep those taxes buried, that we will keep those taxes 
buried just like we'll keep the NDP opposition buried in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to 
basically address a few comments in respect to the Bill before us, 
and that is in respect to the sales tax. I want to say, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that the party opposite in the last election made two 
specific promises — two very, very significant and major 
promises. 
 
And the first promise was that they were going to cut income tax 
on the average of 10 per cent. And you will remember that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that was the most major promise made by the 
party opposite, that they would in fact eliminate the sales tax in the 
first term of office? 
 
The second promise they made was in respect to what we’re 
dealing with, and that is sales tax. And do you know, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that was the most major promise made by the party 
opposite, that they would in fact eliminate the sales tax in the first 
term of office? 
 
The member from Cut Knife-Lloyd gave us a challenge. He said, 
produce any documents to demonstrate that one of the major 
promises of the party opposite was indeed to eliminate the E & H 
tax. Well I'll tell you, I have one here from the leader of the  . . . 
now the Premier, and let's take a look at what the Premier put in 
his pamphlet. And let me tell you, this pamphlet was not restricted 
to the Premier's constituency — it was not restricted to his 
constituency. It was used throughout the province. 
 
And I'll tell you what it says in respect to the elimination of the 5 
per cent E & H tax. It says, "This measure will be the first phase of 
the new PC government's commitment to the complete elimination 
of the sales tax in its first term of office." Fairly clear. Fairly clear. 
We have the member, again, from Weyburn, who never gets into 
the debate — they don't allow him to — but he's chirping from his 
seat. He won't enter the debate. He wants to interfere while we put 
forward. 
 
I know it's very touchy because what they have done is breached 
one of the major planks in their platform. Do you know what they 
were promising the people of Saskatchewan when they said that 
they would eliminate totally in the first term of office the E & H 
tax? I'll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Do you know what it was? 
For each point on the E & H tax, 5 per cent sales tax, for each 
point it's over $70 million. That is the promise that you are making 
to the people of Saskatchewan and asking them to vote for you, 
that you would in fact have a rebate of $370 million. 
 
Well let's see what this here honourable party, this party which 
said they would reduce taxation, have done. Let's take a look at the 
taxation policies of the government  
  



 
May 23, 1986 

1491 
 

opposite versus their promises. Promises they said . . and I'll go 
over it again so all can be clear. They said in respect to the E & H 
tax, the sales tax, the measure will  . . . The elimination of the 5 
per cent sales tax, the measure "will be the first phase of a PC 
government's commitment to the complete elimination of sales tax 
in its first term of office." That is the commitment. 
 
And I'll tell you I have further advertisements here, and time after 
time, and member after member, promised exactly the same thing. 
Here is one here from the  . . . It says, "Walter Johnson, 
Progressive Conservative." He was running as a member that time. 
You know what it says here? "Reduce provincial income tax — 10 
per cent reduction in provincial income tax." That was what they 
said. "Sales tax: eliminate the sales tax — 5 per cent on clothing 
and utilities right now, remainder in the first term of office." 
Remainder in the first term of office — this was the commitment, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when you look at sales tax today, and what this government 
is budgeting to raise from sales tax, do you know how much the 
total revenue that they're going to get from the E & H tax this year 
for their budget? It's $386 million; sales tax — $386 million. And 
this is the tax which they said to the people of Saskatchewan: vote 
for me, and we will eliminate the E & H tax during the first term 
of office. 
 
And I'll tell you, you deceived the people of Saskatchewan once, 
but you won't do it again. And it's evident that you can't do it 
because you're hanging and clinging onto office. You're afraid to 
call an election. You threatened to do it. You got all your 
committee rooms all over the province and now you have to back 
down. You're cowardly. If you had any confidence, and if you had 
kept your promise, you'd have nothing to fear. 
 
But you promised the people of Saskatchewan to totally eliminate 
the E & H tax. Do you know how much that would be, Mr. 
Deputy Chairman, this year, if they had kept it? If you look at the 
revenues, it's $386 million. That was the price. That was the carrot 
that they offered to the electorate to elect this here group of birds 
that can't manage this province. 
 
And if you look, Mr. Speaker, in respect to all of their taxation 
policy, they said they would reduce the income tax. Well let's take 
a look at income tax, too. And do you know what you find? They 
introduced in their budget — this most intelligent budget — do 
you recall that? The member from Kindersley will recall that most 
intelligent budget, the one that destroyed him, that kicked him out 
of office, out of the portfolio — an intelligent budget, the one that 
destroyed him, that kicked him out of office, out of the portfolio 
— an intelligent one. He brought in this intelligent budget, and he 
said, well, I've got a real budget here. And you know what he did? 
He put on, imposed a flat tax — a second income tax on the 
people of Saskatchewan. That's what he did. A second tax. And 
you know how much he raised in respect to the flat tax, Mr. 
Chairman? Do you know? — $106 million increase in taxation on 
the people of Saskatchewan, and he promised that he was going to 
reduce the income tax by 10 per cent; $106 million increase in 
revenues through the flat tax. That's what he did. 
 
And what other good things did they do for the people of  

this province in respect to taxation, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well 
let's take a look at it. They increased massively the income tax by 
putting a surcharge on the basic net income: $106 million they 
plucked out of the pockets of the citizens of Saskatchewan when 
they in fact said that they would reduce income tax by 10 per cent. 
What a sham! What a disgrace! What misleading of the public! 
 
Why should you have any trust left? Why should they trust you 
when what you promised, and then watched and see what you 
have done. that's what you've done. You said, vote for us and we'll 
cut your E & H tax. That's what they said. Every one of them said 
it because their leader said it. It was their policy. 
 
And I say to you, now what they're bringing forward here — and I 
want to relate it to the specific provisions here. And the member 
from Cut Knife-Lloyd gets up and waddles around and says it 
never was promised. Well I'll say that they're ashamed to admit 
that it was promised, but all the people of Saskatchewan know that 
they promised to eliminate the E & H tax in the first year of office. 
 
Do you realize what the Premier said after being elected, and I 
heard him being interviewed. And they asked him this question: 
are you sure you can eliminate the E & H tax? He said, no 
problem at all. In the first term of office we'll get rid of the E & H 
tax. 
 
Well, I'll tell you, they  . . . $386 million they're plucking from the 
pockets of the people of Saskatchewan. And then with income tax 
which they promised, they are again taking $106 million 
additional income. 
 
And let's go on and see how good a treatment you have given to 
the people of this province. And I'll ask you: go around 
Saskatchewan and say, has your tax load been lessened under 
these birds opposite? 
 
And I'll tell you another step that they took, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Do you know what they did? They took and removed the property 
improvement grant. And you know  . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. I 
have allowed the member to stray into the income tax field  . . . 
(inaudible interjection)  . . . Order. Order, order! When I'm on my 
feet I believe I deserve the same respect as the Speaker himself. 
And I am asking for order, and I intend to get it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Respect has to be earned. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — I will ask the member to continue the 
debate, but we're not talking about property improvement  . . . 
(inaudible interjection)  . . . Order. Order. I am warning the 
members. The debate continues. 
 
(1245) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to thank you so much, Mr. Deputy 
Chairman. If you are really  . . . I'll abide by your ruling. But I 
wanted to restrict to the basic principles here with the member 
from Cut Knife-Lloyd. I wish you had started at that point. 
  



 
May 23, 1986 

1492 
 

 
 

Let me relate my comments — let me relate my comments. Here 
we are talking about their taxation policies — taxation policies. 
We're talking about sales tax. And I'm talking about a specific 
promise that you birds made. You indicated to the people of this 
province that you would, in fact, eliminate the 5 per cent E & H 
tax. And you know what it would mean in terms  . . . do you know 
what you were offering the people, deceiving the people? Well 
today, $386 million. I'll say that you never intended to keep that 
promise. You wanted to deceive the public. I'll tell you, you got 
elected once deceiving the public, but you won't do it a second 
time — you won't do it a second time, I'll tell you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Your game is up. People of Saskatchewan are 
looking for honesty and integrity in public life. They don't want 
half-truths and lies and misconceptions. They don't want a major 
promise being given to the people and then broken. And then just 
before an election, coming forward with a little tiny carrot and 
saying to the public of Saskatchewan, you're stupid enough that 
we can pass this over. Look at this. We only promised to eliminate 
it in the first term. 
 
But do you know what they said? Now what we're going to do is 
give you a little carrot. And do you know what they're saying to 
the public in doing that? They're saying to the public: you're so 
stupid; that's what we think of you. That's what you're saying — 
that's what you're saying — that we can deceive you again by 
making minor concessions of about $25 million. 
 
I'm not against the concessions of reducing the E & H tax. We're 
supporting the principle. But let's expose the magnitude of 
deception that has taken place. That's what we have to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — The magnitude of the deception. And I want to 
say, Mr. Speaker, here is what they have done. Just before an 
election, they know they've got a problem with this here. They 
made a basic problem and they didn't keep it. So they said, well 
come along and we'll give a little bit, about $25 million worth — 
about that, out of 386 million which they're raising. Yes. And do 
you know what they say? They think, then, that that will satisfy 
the public. But I'll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it won't. 
 
But how crass they are, how deceptive, how bold, how untruthful 
this outfit is opposite. Because you know what they did? They 
haven't kept a major promise, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of eliminating 
it, but do you know what they did? They didn't reduce the income 
tax, as they promised; they increased it. But do you know what 
they did besides? Is that they took away the property improvement 
grants again. 
 
So let's look at all of the major thrusts of increase in taxation 
opposed to what they're doing here to try to save their political 
hides. But I'll tell you, you'll never be able to do it with deception 
of the public of the magnitude that you have perpetrated. And I 
say to you, I ask you, I invite  

you to call the election. 
 
And I'll tell you, one of the issues is going to be the deception and 
the misrepresentation. We're going to ask the public to look at the 
major promises of your party opposite, and we're going to  . . . 
when you ask them to look at the new promises. And I'll tell you, 
the people of this province will not believe you birds again 
because you deceived them before, and they'll say you'll deceive 
them again. 
 
They start talking about sales tax and the good position of the 
province. The member from Cut Knife-Lloyd went around, and he 
started talking about all of these undeveloped megaprojects that 
they're talking about  . . . (inaudible interjection)  . . . yes, but that 
was on taxation. 
 
Well what I want to say is how badly the public have been 
deceived. What they're doing in order to attempt to try to get 
elected, because they know that they misrepresented to the public, 
a basic promise, and so they introduced this Bill, the sales tax Bill. 
But in truth, Mr. Speaker, what they have done is this: they are 
putting forward this legislation. But in truth, do you know what 
they have done? They have put on the backs of the public all of 
those additional taxes that I've talked about. But do you know 
what in addition they have done, Mr. Deputy Speaker, do you 
know what they have done besides? They have put in place in this 
province, in four years, a deficit of over $2 billion. 
 
Do you realize that the provincial debt here increased the global 
debt from 3.4 billion to 8.7 billion — from 3.4 billion to 8.7 billion 
is where the debt is standing at today. Do you realize that the 
accumulative debt in the Consolidated Fund is $2 billion, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. You don't realize what that is. Interest alone is 
over $200 million annually — just on the interest on the debt in 
the Consolidated Funds. 
 
And I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker  . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, do you 
know what is happening? Another deception is taking place, and 
people out there are saying, what has gone wrong in 
Saskatchewan. Look at the massiveness of the debt that is 
accumulating, and these birds are saying, things are so good. Well 
I'll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, $200 million of interest alone on 
the debt; do you realize what that would pay? That pays more, Mr. 
Minister, more than the total cost of medicare. So before we ever 
start to pay for health care or education or highways, do you know 
what we have to do as a result of the mismanagement of those 
birds across the way? We have to collect from the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan $200 million every year just to pay the interest; 
that's what we do. And then we can start  . . . (inaudible 
interjection)  . . . That's right — so the New York bankers can do 
well, so their friends, the bankers, can do well. That's who's doing 
well under the administration of this government. Do you know 
what the debt, the average debt on the average citizen, has risen 
to? Almost $9,000 for every man, woman, and child. 
 
And when we left office, I'll tell you, the state of the fiscal 
management of this province was unequalled anywhere in Canada. 
It was unequalled, and you can't deny it. We had the lowest per 
capita debt of anywhere in Canada. I'll  
  



 
May 23, 1986 

1493 
 

tell you, we had economic development  . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Order! Order, 
order. The member is straying so far from the Bill now, into the 
deficit . . Order! The debate continues. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to indicate that what 
is happening here is deception. They're going around saying, oh 
look what we are doing for you; we are giving you an exemption 
on clothing; what a wonderful thing we are; just look what we're 
doing! But do you know what they have done? They have driven 
this province into the greatest morass of fiscal mismanagement 
anywhere in Canada — $2 billion in debt  . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order! 
 
Mr. Engel: — I challenge the Chair on this ruling because the 
man is tying it in with the Bill, Mr. Chairman. You're not being 
fair. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — I have stated my ruling and that is it. If 
the member isn't  . . . I will warn the member right now — from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg — that this will be the last time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to, in summary 
form then, Mr. Speaker, just so that what is known, so that all that 
may be watching here today will know what's taking place, I want 
the public to know. Believe me. Laugh. All right, you go ahead 
and laugh, but I'll tell you I'm going to summarize what has taken 
place. 
 
Here is a party that promised — and I'm going to summarize — 
you promised to eliminate the 5 per cent E & H tax in the first 
term of office. The magnitude of that promise is significant 
because it represents about $70 million for each point, or $360 
million. That's what they said they would eliminate. Instead, what 
they have done is broken that promise. They also said they would 
eliminate — and time after time if you look at the election material 
of your leader, you'll find that he said they'd reduce income tax. 
 
I say to you, and I say to the people of this province, you have 
been betrayed. It has been the biggest betrayal of any party in 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You came in and you said you'd have economic 
activity so that taxes could be reduced and promises could be kept. 
But you haven't kept them. And now what you're trying to do is to 
give some relief. But you've broken your promise, and what you 
have done is taken the people of Saskatchewan's credit card, and 
you've charged up a massive debt that they have to pay. You have 
mortgaged the future of young people of this country, and I'll tell 
you, you won't have a chance come the next election. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that this facade, this misconception that is 
taking place, this hooting across because it is touching a nerve, a 
sensitive nerve. Why else would they not allow me to speak, and 
shout from their seats? Why  

are they hooting? 
 
Do I have the floor, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Do I have the floor? 
Will you quieten them down? 
 
I want to summarize exactly where it's at. So what we have here as 
I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are not opposed, of course, to 
reducing taxes on the people of Saskatchewan, but this is not a 
reduction relative to the massiveness of the increase of taxation 
which I was explaining to you. And I say to you here today that 
the people of Saskatchewan are watching, and deception will not 
get you any further. The E & H tax you said you would eliminate, 
you've broken that major promise. Today you are collecting more 
from E & H than you were four years ago. Three hundred and 
eighty  . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Being near 1 o'clock this 
House now stands adjourned until 2 p.m. Monday. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 
 
 


