


















































December 11, 1986 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

December 11, 1986 
 
 

169 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Martineau and the amendment 
thereto moved by the Hon. Mr. Blakeney. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Prior 
to calling it 5 o’clock I was just at the point where I wanted to 
describe to the hon. members some of the accomplishments of 
SGI in light of some of the comments made by the hon. member 
from Regina North in his comments. In his comments he chose 
to make sweeping criticisms of Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance. I’m afraid, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that he is fallen into 
the trap of making his charges before ascertaining the true facts, 
and I might caution him that those of us on this side of this 
House are used to this sort of inaccurate and uninformed 
negativism coming from the opposition members of the 
previous House. We are hopeful that the new members of the 
opposition might apply more diligence to their jobs and raise 
the standards of the opposition’s performance in this legislature. 
 
Let me say that if the hon. member had looked carefully at the 
record of SGI since the PC government came into power in 
1982, he would have found that far from being “run into the 
ground,” to quote him, SGI has turned around dramatically. 
 
It’s true that when we took power in 1982 we did indeed find 
that SGI faced some very serious problems. SGI had been 
receiving, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some $20 million from the 
province’s gasoline tax. And as you know, on taking office we 
ended that tax and the people of Saskatchewan will be eternally 
grateful to us for that. The fact is we found that SGI had a 
general business that was subsidized by provincial motorists 
through this gasoline tax to the tune of $7 million a year. 
 
We also found that the auto fund had an accumulated deficit of 
$22.5 million even though the NDP government had increased 
auto insurance rates by 65 per cent over the previous three 
years. We also found that SGI had over $32 million in 
unrecognized reinsurance losses and it was carrying 
unprofitable product lines. SGI also had a ponderous 
administrative structure with nearly 1,600 employees and there 
were many other problems, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Obviously our 
PC government moved quickly to change SGI’s direction 
dramatically. 
 
Our first move was to appoint a new board of directors, and we 
set about passing legislation creating Saskatchewan auto fund, 
which is a separate legal entity that can own its own assets and 
make its own investments. This, and a rigourously applied cost 
accounting system, ended the auto fund subsidization of the 
general business. 
 
Under our government, SGI then refocused the entire  

operation back to the basics, noting that SGI exists to provide 
property and casualty insurance to the people of Saskatchewan. 
Any plans not relating to this were therefore cancelled. 
 
Claim procedures were tightened and increased emphasis was 
placed on fighting fraudulent claims. SGI’s product lines were 
reviewed, poor risks were weeded out, proper prices were set 
for high hazard exposures, and loopholes in the vehicle and 
registration system were closed, nearly eliminating the 
fraudulent registration of stolen or fictitious cars. 
 
Surplus property was also disposed of. 
 
Then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, management went at the job of 
bringing the size of staff down to the needed numbers. An early 
retirement program was introduced as well as a corporate 
down-sizing plan. This reduced the staff size by 17 per cent. 
The number of management positions were slashed by 25 per 
cent. 
 
A planning process was set up to establish common goals 
throughout the corporation, and a commitment to achieving 
them, and this was implemented in 1983. 
 
SGI also set up a training program to offer in-house insurance 
courses, as well as management training courses, 
communications training, and customer service program. 
 
In retrospect the government’s program at SGI has paid off 
well. 
 
Removing the gasoline tax reduced the auto fund revenue by 
$20 million. The government also froze the rates on insurance 
for one year. In 1983, it allowed an average 3 per cent increase 
in premiums and increased the automobile deductible from 350 
to $500. In 1984, it was able to avoid an increase in auto 
insurance premiums. For 1985-86, insurance rates were again 
reduced on an average of 7 per cent. 
 
As well, our farmers in Saskatchewan got a 10 per cent 
reduction on car premiums, and the cost of a driver’s licence 
was dropped by $15. 
 
I could mention many other achievements of SGI but I just 
wanted to put this on the record, Mr. Speaker. The people of 
Saskatchewan have heard too many sweeping criticisms from 
the opposition in this legislature based on nothing more than 
wishful thinking and a total lack of knowledge, and I would 
trust that the hon. member will mend his ways and determine 
from here on to provide better service to the people of the 
province. 
 
I must say also, Mr. Speaker, that in his comments the other 
night he also made some very sweeping accusations about my 
other department. But all in all, I am pleased that the hon. 
member from Regina North West will be undertaking the job of 
being a critic for some of the areas that are my responsibility, 
and I do congratulate him on that. However, as I said before, I 
was disappointed that before undertaking this job he did not see 
fit to research the areas thoroughly and thus be in a  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

170 
 

position to bring some accuracy to his first comments. 
 
With regards to his December 9th comments on the Department 
of Co-operation and Co-operative Development, he is correct in 
saying that our government, this PC government, has reduced 
the size of the staff somewhat. Yes, we did find ways to cut the 
fat that existed under the NDP old government and to bring, Mr. 
Speaker, to bring great efficiencies into the department. But 
when he suggested, Mr. Speaker, that there is a resulting lack of 
accomplishments in the last four years, he is clearly indulging 
in wishful thinking. 
 
For the enlightenment of all members, let me straighten the 
record. Under the old NDP administration the best years for 
incorporating co-operatives was 1981-82, when 41 new 
co-operatives were incorporated in the province. In the past four 
years under a Progressive Conservative government, we 
exceeded anything the former government did. To date in 
1986-87, we have incorporated 64 new co-operatives and by the 
end of this year, Mr. Speaker, we expect to double the best year 
the NDP ever had. 
 
I might add that agriculture is a priority of this government and 
over the past 30 months, Mr. Speaker, 41 per cent of all new 
co-operatives have been agricultural co-operatives. That will 
have a significant impact on the province. To achieve this 
record our staff had to work very efficiently. From April 1, 
1985 to March 31, 1986, department field staff attended 6,353 
meetings to develop or assist existing or potential co-operatives. 
Of course new legislation that was brought in by our 
government made this possible. 
 
The previous administration procrastinated on updating 
co-operative and credit union legislation during its entire term 
of office. Now I can say that the government departments are 
meeting regularly and productivity is way up. We are having 
very good meetings with the major co-operatives, and this is a 
process that did not take place, Mr. Speaker, under the former 
administration. Twice annually we meet with the boards of the 
major co-operatives in the province and have a good exchange 
of ideas and thoughts. 
 
And let me add that central co-operatives and credit union 
systems are working with government on several significant 
projects and programs. Just three examples are: the upgrader 
which we heard about today in question period; we are working 
together with the major co-operatives to find solutions to the 
farm debt; and we’re also working with the wheat pool on rail 
line and elevator rationalization. 
 
I think the story of co-ops under this administration is very 
bright indeed. And, Mr. Speaker, that is why it is a particular 
pleasure for me to be named Minister of the Department of 
Co-operation and Co-operative Development. And like so many 
people in the province, I was raised in a rural area. And I don’t 
think anyone can be born and raised in Saskatchewan without 
knowing the vital impact that co-ops and the credit union 
systems have on all of us. Indeed it’s a way of doing business in 
the province. And I believe that Premier Devine left no room 
for doubt of our government’s goal to build Saskatchewan  

through the co-operative sector. 
 
And when you look at the Speech from the Throne, when we 
talk about building, about diversifying, about protecting, I think 
that in my view no groups have a greater responsibility or 
greater opportunity in this than the co-operatives and the credit 
unions of the province. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, our government proclaimed the 
new Credit Union Act on January 1, 1986, and my department 
will continue to work with the credit union movement and other 
interested parties to ensure that the new Act serves the credit 
unions’ members’ needs and interests effectively. 
 
In this province, Mr. Speaker, hundreds of thousands of people 
are members of co-operatives and the presence of co-operatives 
and credit unions is felt in our market-place on an ongoing, 
continual basis. In fact, Mr. Speaker, if you rank businesses or 
companies according to revenue, here in Saskatchewan 
co-operatives and credit unions lead the list. 
 
Nine of Saskatchewan’s top 25 companies are co-ops and 25 of 
the top 100 are also co-ops. And the two largest headquarters in 
our province are the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and Federated 
Co-ops Limited. I’m sure we all know about these two vital 
businesses. 
 
Credit unions alone have total assets of close to $4 billion here 
in Saskatchewan. So, as I can say, there is no doubt that 
co-operatives are going to respond to the challenges ahead. We 
all know that co-operatives were spawned out of mainly the 
Dirty Thirties when times were tough, but what the co-operative 
movement has shown us over the last 50, 60 years is they are a 
vital part of our business community even in good times. 
 
I’m sure every person in Saskatchewan will be encouraged to 
have heard Saskatchewan Wheat Pool president Ted Turner’s 
message at his recent annual meeting. Mr. Turner, Mr. Speaker, 
spoke forcefully on the need for that great organization to 
launch a new marketing initiative. 
 
I believe Mr. Turner was expressing the thoughts of just about 
every Saskatchewan citizen when he looked to the future and he 
articulated the challenges facing all of us. He was referring to 
his own particular company, of course, but he challenge that he 
saw can apply to every one of us today. 
 
Mr. Turner, for your information, told his annual meeting that 
the company should launch a bold and aggressive marketing 
campaign to sell its products throughout the world. He said that 
the Pool would be failing its members and owners if it did not 
become directly involved in trade at a time when new markets 
are harder to find and harder to crack. He said, if we fail to act, 
we will not achieve the potential growth opportunities that are 
available to us, and he said the Pool would fall short of doing its 
jobs on behalf of its members. 
 
Mr. Turner’s chief executive officer, Milt Fair, echoed that 
theme in his own speech at that annual meeting when he 
suggested that there must be more emphasis placed on  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

171 
 

special crops and livestock. He said: 
 

It’s crucial that market development become a way of 
life for the pool and for Canada. (He said) Farmers 
must look at a renewed emphasis on livestock 
production which is crucial to soil conservation and 
potentially important as a marketing alternative. 

 
Mr. Fair also told of initiatives that his firm is taking along this 
line. 
 
(1915) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is just one example of how our 
co-operatives work at its best. And I’m sure that everyone 
realizes that the initiatives showed by the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool are totally in line with our government’s goal of building 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Members may be interested to know of the impact of the co-ops 
and what they do for their members. Many central co-operatives 
with head offices in Saskatchewan are expected to return a total 
of approximately $38 million in cash to Saskatchewan farm and 
urban members during the coming winter months. In addition to 
this cash pay-out, approximately $11 million is expected to go 
out as a patronage refund which will include member equity in 
local co-operative organizations. And that’s no small dollars, 
Mr. Speaker. And that just gives us an idea of how vibrant that 
segment of our society is. 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I look forward to working 
with a large and vibrant co-operative industry and supporting it 
through my new department. 
 
It is not news to say that the past four years have been difficult 
years because the terms of the market-place generally have been 
against us in Saskatchewan and because quite frankly the 
weather has been against us too. We have gone through drought 
and grasshoppers and we are still caught in the grip of 
desperately low grain prices. 
 
But who can doubt that we have come around at least one 
crucial corner? A year ago our problem was drought and 
grasshoppers and poor crops. Now the bins of Saskatchewan are 
full as they have never been full before, and though it’s true that 
the quality of the grain is not high and prices perhaps are still at 
depression levels, I’m sure that we can all say that hopefully the 
drought cycle has been broken and we will soon begin to see 
some price responses or price realization in the market-place. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that, who can 
doubt that Saskatchewan is a sleeping giant? We can just look 
at our agriculture resources alone. Our province has over half of 
the agricultural land in the Prairies, and nearly 40 per cent of 
Canada’s total arable agricultural land. 
 
When I look at the growing market on this continent and in the 
Pacific rim countries for grain, and meat, and other food 
products, I’m convinced of one thing: our problems, I’m sure, 
with agriculture are short term. Our government has already 
provided the greatest support package for  

farmers through the present difficulties. And now that the 
drought has been broken, the challenge facing us, I believe, is 
simple: we must marshal all the forces available in 
Saskatchewan to identify markets for the products we grow, and 
to get on with the business of growing and processing those 
products for which there are markets in this fast-growing and 
fast-changing world. To the extent we succeed in that, the 
future of Saskatchewan is assured. 
 
We can take heart from the fact that our Premier is taking 
agriculture on to the national policy-making stage. He has 
brought it to federal conferences and in recent days federal and 
provincial leaders in this country endorsed wide-ranging farm 
sector strategies which they are confident will provide policy 
direction for the next century. It’s an agreement that promises 
increased funding for research and continued income and 
marketing support for our agriculture producers. It is the 
strategy, Mr. Speaker, that was developed in the past year and 
was endorsed during the meeting of the first ministers. 
 
In Premier Devine, Mr. Speaker, we have a leader who has the 
courage and the vision to take this province to its rightful place 
as a leader in Canadian confederation. And Saskatchewan, I’m 
sure, will be a force to be reckoned with in world markets. The 
Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, provided a blueprint for 
the next stage of the development in our province and in the 
creation of a better life-style for all of us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure for me to endorse totally the 
document. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I begin my remarks in terms of talking 
about the contents of the throne speech, I would like to first of 
all reiterate my congratulations to yourself on your election to 
the Chair. And I might say that within the last week I’ve noticed 
myself a certain uptake in decorum and a much better function 
of question period. And I think a lot of that has to do with your 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: —: Let’s not get carried away. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, let’s . . . The member from Regina North 
West says not to get carried away, but I think that we can thank 
the little smoother functioning of question period to your 
getting some experience on the job – on-the-job training, as we 
all, new members here, are getting the on-the-job training. 
 
I would also like to congratulate the other new members on this 
side of the House and also on the other side of the House to 
their election to this Assembly. I might say that I wish there 
weren’t quite as many other members on that side of the House 
as there are – in fact, that we would be changing places. 
However, that’s that side. History has been prologued and we’re 
here to get on with the job. 
 
I would like to also, if I may, Mr. Speaker, refer to our spouses 
and companions. And I wonder if I could have  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

172 
 

leave of the Assembly, whether all of us could rise as a moment 
of acknowledgement for the role done by all our spouses and 
companions in helping us to get elected to this House. I am sure 
the members on the other side and on this side of the House 
certainly appreciate the role that they’ve done. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’ll tell her when I get home tonight. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay. The member from Meadow Lake says 
he’ll have that appreciation when he gets home tonight. Well 
I’m glad he will. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some other people I’d like to thank as 
well. I’d like to thank and acknowledge the work done by some 
of the former members for the constituency of Regina 
Rosemont. I would like to thank the work done on my behalf by 
Ed Whelan, well-known parliamentarian to this House; to Mr. 
Bill Allen, the member for the New Democratic Party who 
immediately preceded myself. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, I would like to as well 
acknowledge the work done by the member that immediately 
preceded me, Mr. Gordon Dirks. And while Mr. Dirks and I 
certainly had a fairly large divergence in terms of political 
opinion, I won’t fault him on the work that he did for the people 
of Regina Rosemont in putting forward what he thought was 
correct and what he thought was the correct political program. 
Mr. Dirks set a standard in terms of working and pouring 
resources into the constituency. He set a standard that I intend 
to aim for, and I hope to be able to meet over the next four 
years. However . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . As the member 
from North West says, I hope to be more successful at it, as 
well. 
 
However, I’d like to touch, Mr. Speaker, on some of the 
substance of the matters that were raised in the throne speech 
debate. And in doing so I say it seems to be odd for me, as a 
first-time new member, to be rising in a debate such as this in 
which we talk of the important issues and problems which face 
the people of Saskatchewan. And I say it’s odd because of the 
form in which it’s presented. 
 
In some ways, Mr. Speaker, it’s as if there’s two solitudes in 
this place: there’s our side and their side, and the two never 
really talk to each other. We put forward our party lines; they 
put forward their party lines; and the words just seem to float 
out into an empty space. 
 
You know, in some ways, it’s . . . Someone referred to it today 
as when they come here to watch the throne speech debates it’s 
like participating in the theatre of the absurd, you know, and 
that’s unfortunate because of the fairly weighty matters that we 
deal with here. 
 
I certainly don’t have any answer to doing it other than, I think, 
the concept of respecting what each member says in a spirit of 
co-operation or just of mutual respect, the fact that we all are 
here and the fact that we all have something to say. And 
whether or not we agree with each other, at least we’re saying 
it. 
 
I’d refer members’ attention to the speech made by the Minister 
of Economic Development earlier on today, in which he struck 
a tone which appeared to me as probably  

a productive tone, in terms of dealing with the problems that 
face us. I hope that over the next four years we can continue 
that kind of tone, despite the fact that we’re going to have fairly 
robust differences of opinion in terms of the policies that are 
being presented before the people of Saskatchewan. At least we 
should try to talk to one another in a realistic fashion and try to 
deal with those problems. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to, if I could now for a few 
minutes, speak to the francophone members of the population 
of Saskatchewan and say a few words to them. I notice my 
colleague from Cumberland addressed the people in his native 
language, and while French is not my native language, I think it 
would add to the spirit of the House and to the debate to address 
the francophone people of Saskatchewan. 
 
(The hon. member spoke in French.) 
 
(1930) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to speak for a few minutes on the 
substance, or the supposed substance, in the Speech from the 
Throne, and how it affects the constituents of Regina Rosemont 
in the following areas: in the terms of the unemployment rate in 
Regina Rosemont: how it affects the senior citizens; how it 
affects our urban Métis and Indian people who live in Regina 
Rosemont; how it affects the small-business people of Regina 
Rosemont; how it affects the farmers of Regina Rosemont – and 
we do have farmers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who live in that 
constituency. 
 
And I also want to speak and say a few words about something 
that is near and dear to my heart, and that’s the whole question 
of the environment and how we should, I believe, approach 
environmental questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the Speech from the Throne there was a plan 
outlined – or the outlines of a plan outlined – to deal with what 
the government considered the major problems facing the 
people of Saskatchewan. But as our leader, the member from 
Regina Elphinstone said, the Speech from the Throne was more 
notable for what it didn’t contain than what it did contain. 
 
And that’s unfortunate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when it comes to 
the question of those who are unemployed – those people, 
young and old, male and female, white, native, who don’t have 
jobs and who are looking for gainful employment and jobs that 
are rewarding and satisfactory; those residents of Regina 
Rosemont who were working, or who are working, and who 
feel threatened by the increasing rate of unemployment, not 
only in Regina Rosemont but throughout Saskatchewan and 
throughout Canada, for they recognize that in fact it is a 
national and international problem. 
 
But they are worried about it, and they are frightened by it, and 
they know that between 1982 and 1986 the government of the 
members opposite didn’t do very much about it. And they know 
for sure that the government from 1986 to 1990 wont’ be 
worrying too much about it. And they’re reassured with that, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when they look at the throne speech and  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

173 
 

see that that is not a priority of this government, that it doesn’t 
rest uppermost in the minds of the members opposite and that in 
fact it’s nothing more to this government than an urban 
problem, so to speak. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I notice a number of our members on this side 
talked in the throne speech debate about the reasons they were 
put here, the reasons that they came here as opposed to other 
members – the members in the Progressive Conservative Party. 
And I don’t want to talk, Mr. Speaker, about the reasons why 
I’m here as opposed to the former member representative from 
Regina Rosemont. But I would like to talk a little bit about why, 
when I look across this hall, I believe that there’s a fair number 
of those members opposite who won’t be there after the next 
election, unless and until they begin to pay attention to some of 
the real problems that face the real people of this province. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that it’s a matter of 
any ill will, or even if it’s a matter of will at all in regards to the 
members of the government opposite, in terms of dealing with 
the problems that face us. I think that their problem is a 
structural problem. It’s a problem that faces them because they 
are members of a political party which puts the interests of one 
class of society ahead of the interests of another class of 
society. And, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, I want to deal with that a little 
later. But I want to deal with some of the structural realities. I 
want to deal with some of the structural realities that the 
government faces and why they won’t be able to deal with the 
question, first of all, of unemployment. 
 
To deal with unemployment requires a massive government 
intervention into the economy, an intervention to which the 
government opposite is philosophically opposed. They are 
philosophically opposed because they have said from the time 
they were elected here in 1982 and in 1986 that free enterprise 
is the way to go, that the free enterprise system is the one which 
will produce jobs, which will produce prosperity for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the facts of the free enterprise system and 
how it creates jobs in Saskatchewan speaks well enough for 
itself. Give-aways is not the word. Give-it-aways is not the 
word. Sell out; sell out to foreign interests of our economy, is 
the method by which this government sees the free enterprise 
system operating. 
 
What happens, Mr. Speaker? Let’s take the example of the 
bacon plant, the famous bacon plant in North Battleford. Here 
we have a system in which the resources of the people of 
Saskatchewan are taken from the treasury and put into the 
hands of a multimillionaire robber baron. And that’s the only 
word for Peter Pocklington – robber baron. And you can ask the 
workers at Gainers that. Putting our money into the hands of 
this robber baron to come to Saskatchewan to create jobs. 
 
And I ask the members opposite: why couldn’t you take that 
money, work with the city council of the city of North  

Battleford using the economic resources of the province and the 
brains and expertise of not necessarily the entrepreneurs but of 
local community people in North Battleford, and build that 
plant to service not just Gainers but Intercontinental and any 
other packers who wanted to slaughter hogs in this province? 
 
But no, you’re tied to the ideological chain that free enterprise 
must be served and those who must be put on the table are the 
free enterprisers, not the people of Saskatchewan. And that is 
why your reliance on outside forces, your reliance on outside 
capital will for ever doom you, for ever doom you in being able 
to deal with the question of unemployment. 
 
I want to compare that with the previous administration, the 
approach of the previous administration, which marshalled and 
put together the resources and the strengths of the people of 
Saskatchewan to build businesses here in Saskatchewan, to 
expand the potash industry and expand jobs in the potash 
industry. And one only has to look at the mien expansion at 
Esterhazy and the mine expansion in Lanigan as examples of 
how we utilize, in a socialist manner, job creation strategies and 
the resources of the province. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, these people who are against welfare are the 
biggest welfare hand-outers in the world to their corporate 
buddies. Meanwhile the member from Maple Creek, the 
minister in charge of Saskatchewan Government Insurance, 
talks about cutting the fat – cutting the fat. Well cutting the fat, 
Mr. Speaker, is one nice way of saying, throwing people out of 
work. And that’s what this government’s job is all about – 
throwing people out of work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — You’re not interested in solving the 
unemployment problems and if you are you’re going about it 
the wrong way, gentlemen, because the international pools of 
capital upon which you want to draw won’t be coming here. 
They won’t be coming here for a whole number of structural 
reasons, including market size and so on and so forth. And your 
dreams of diversifying and manufacturing and producing and so 
forth are the same as the paper projects that we’ve seen 
presented before us like the fertilizer plant for Regina, like the 
Husky upgrader, like the bacon plant going into production, 
etc., etc. 
 
Mr. Speaker, between November of 1985 and November of 
1986, Saskatchewan was the only province in Canada – the only 
province in Canada – to see a drop in the number of people 
employed. Two thousand people – 2,000 fewer people 
employed in Saskatchewan while the rest of Canada was going 
up. Every other province was going up. 
 
And that translates, Mr. Speaker, into hardships for real people. 
They’re not statistics and they’re not fat to be cut. They’re real 
people. And I just want to use an example of what I mean by 
real people. If every person of the 36,000 people in this 
province who are unemployed were put into the towns of 
Weyburn, and of Estevan, and of Lloydminster, and of Melfort, 
and of Melville, and the  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

174 
 

members were to take a walk through those towns, every man, 
woman, and child in those towns would be out of jobs, because 
that’s what it really means. That’s how many people are 
unemployed. And that’s a waste. And that’s a waste of human 
potential. I don’t believe any of the members opposite agree 
with wasting human potential. But I’m cautioning you and I’m 
warning you that your approach – your open for business, your 
sloganeering, your partners for progress, isn’t worth the paper 
it’s written on, unless you use the government to lead the way 
in creating jobs. For it’s only the government in this province, 
as history has proven, which will create jobs. 
 
And that, gentlemen, is a big difference between us; that’s the 
dividing line. We think that the government is here to put 
people to work. You think that it’s Peter Pocklington to rip off 
our resources, and that’s the big difference, gentlemen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — And we’ve answers. There are answers, you 
know. It’s not magic. If you look, Mr. Speaker, if the 
government opposite would look to those good socialist 
countries of Europe, like Sweden and Norway and Austria, and 
take a look at the unemployment rates there: 2.1 per cent, 2.1 
per cent in Norway; 3.8 per cent, 3.8 per cent in Sweden; three 
and a half per cent in Austria – and that’s high because they’ve 
had a little bit of a recession – 3.8 per cent, Mr. Speaker; I think 
they would take a very serious look at some of the solutions that 
those socialist countries have used, that those countries have 
used in creating jobs and putting people to work. 
 
For example, Austria has reduced the work week to 30 hours. 
They’ve reduced the work week to 30 hours. And why? 
Because they were partners. The working people and the 
government in Austria were partners and said, jobs come first, 
not profits. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Wolseley says to keep 
talking. You better believe it, Mr. Member, you better believe 
it. 
 
One has to look at, for examples, solutions that the Swedes use. 
They used a very simple solution. One of the things they did 
was extend paternity and maternity leave and called it parenting 
leave. And so parents had a year off from work, and they could 
divide it up either way –mothers and fathers – so they could 
look after their children. But I suppose the members opposite 
aren’t interested in looking after children. And they guaranteed 
those people the right to return to work. That provided a 25 per 
cent increase in the number of jobs available. 
 
(1945) 
 
And you know it doesn’t take very much of a brain, Mr. 
Speaker, to think of something simple like that. But then the 
government and the members opposite wouldn’t dream of doing 
something like that. Why? Because it would challenge the 
profits of their corporate friends, wouldn’t it? 

It would challenge their corporate profits and we wouldn’t 
have, for example, a vote on that from the member from 
Yorkton. He certainly wouldn’t want to vote for something like 
that. After all, the profits of Morris Rod-Weeder may go down. 
You know, we couldn’t have that, could we? Despite the fact 
people would be working and we’d lower the unemployment 
rate in Yorkton, you wouldn’t vote for something like that, 
would you, sir? 
 
And there’s a number of other . . . There are a whole number of 
issues in terms of economic development and unemployment 
that I could go into, but I won’t. But I want to raise something 
that the Government of Saskatchewan is thinking about, and 
which I think has a fair bit of merit. And that’s the whole 
question of community development corporations. Mr. Speaker, 
the community development corporations, if they are structured 
in the manner, for example, of the New Dawn Corporation in 
Cape Breton, or the Nanaimo Community Development 
Corporation, or a number of the other examples coming up, are 
good. 
 
Let me just explain the difference, however, Mr. Speaker, 
between what the people of Nanaimo or the people of Cape 
Breton are doing in putting people back to work through their 
CDCs as opposed to those being proposed by the government of 
the members opposite. 
 
Those community development corporations in other places are 
owned by the community, and the shares in them are owned by 
the community. And when people leave the community, they 
will sell their shares to other members in the community. And 
they raise capital to create jobs in industries and small 
enterprises in conjunction with the needs which are decided in 
consultation with things like city councils and the provincial 
governments of other communities. And I contrast that 
approach versus the VCC approach. 
 
So the hon. member said the VDC approach, but I don’t know if 
that’s quite the correct way of placing it; but the venture capital 
corporation approach. And the problem with the venture capital 
corporation approach is the structural problem that you people 
face – that you’re going to rely on outside venture capital, 
outside the needs of any individual community in terms of the 
line on economic development. And that’s a real problem. But 
the whole notion – and I want to say this – the whole notion of 
community development corporations in principle is a good 
notion, and I think that you should take a look at the way in 
which you’re implementing. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move to the question of seniors 
and how the Speech from the Throne will not address the needs 
of senior citizens. They didn’t in the past and they won’t in the 
future. And the reason is very simple. The reason is a very 
simple one, Mr. Speaker, and that is because of the fiscal crisis 
which presently faces the Government of Saskatchewan – the 
fiscal crisis which is their doing, which is their doing through, I 
would believe, a whole history of waste and mismanagement, 
four years of economic mismanagement in terms of 
wrong-headed investment. But it impacts on the senior citizens 
of Rosemont. 
  



 
December 11, 1986 

175 
 

You know, I don’t see any signs in the throne speech debate 
that that fiscal crisis will be alleviated by the actions of the 
government opposite. And I got a hint of that, Mr. Speaker, 
through the comments from the Minister of Finance, the 
member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, when very recently he 
opened an attack on the city council of Regina and one of its 
institutions, Pioneer Village, in which he said . . . 
 
First of all he objected to the dismissal of one of the directors, 
one of the management people. And I don’t know what role 
whatsoever that the member for QuAppelle-Lumsden has, and 
the Minister of Finance has, in terms of dealing with the city of 
Regina in that matter, other than trying to raise some political 
mischief. But the thing that worried me, Mr. Speaker, the thing 
that worried me and worried the senior citizens of Pioneer 
Village was the kind of blackmail, was the kind of blackmail 
that the Minister of Finance entered into. 
 
The minister said, if you don’t reassess your dismissal of that 
person, I’m going to go to cabinet and I’m going to demand the 
$6.3 million which was committed to Pioneer Village and to the 
board by the former minister; I’m going to demand that cabinet 
reassess its position on that. And, Mr. Speaker, blackmail is a 
heavy word but I can’t think of any other word that deals with 
that kind of threat hanging over the board of directors of 
Pioneer Village and hanging over the senior citizens of Pioneer 
Village. 
 
What I want to know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I want to 
know: is this just a ruse? Is this just some ploy by the Minister 
of Finance to now withdraw the $6.3 million commitment that 
he made to the senior citizens, and that was made to the senior 
citizens by the former member for the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation, the former minister in charge? Is this a ruse to 
withdraw that money? The senior citizens of Rosemont would 
like to know that; the board of directors of Pioneer Village 
would like to know that; and I certainly would like to know 
that. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker – and the government recognizes it – 
the federal government recognizes it, the provincial government 
recognizes it, we recognize it, that it’s senior citizens who are 
living in the most abject poverty, senior single women in 
particular. And the government opposite could do something 
like that, could do something for senior citizens. And it 
wouldn’t take vast, vast amounts of money in terms of being 
able to help senior citizens who are in financial distress. 
 
For example, he could introduce a senior rate for government 
services, for SaskTel, for Sask Power, — as an example, a 
government rate where senior citizens who lived on a fixed 
income could have a lower rate than those paid by citizens 
whose incomes keep rising because they’re participating in the 
work-force. The government could do that. 
 
The government could also provide totally free medical care to 
senior citizens – totally free, not charge them for one thin dime 
if you’re 65 or 60 or whatever the cut-off age was put forward. 
If they wanted glasses, if they needed hearing aids, orthodontic 
work, the government could say, we’ll pick up the tab. And that 
will take some of  

the financial stress off senior citizens. 
 
And they could also help themselves in the long term in terms 
of government financing of the health services by delivering 
health care to senior citizens through such delivery mechanisms 
as a senior citizen community clinics. Now I see the former 
minister of Health, it gives him great delight over there, taking 
great delight at that suggestion. And I would like to see the 
minister or the former minister of health stand up and say to me 
what is wrong with having community clinic services for 
seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we look at the throne speech debate we see 
nothing in it in terms of the agenda for our Indian and Métis 
people that live in the urban areas. The member for Cumberland 
has already adequately dealt with the whole question of work 
and the ability to work and the need to work and in fact the 
potential for work of our native citizens and Indian citizens in 
the cities. 
 
And I’m not going to go on at great length about how the lives 
they live in urban areas, of native people, marginalizes them to 
the sides of society, condemns them to a cycle of poverty, and 
which the government has not made any attempt – not one 
attempt in Regina, not one attempt in Saskatoon, not one 
attempt in Prince Albert, nor Swift Current, nor North 
Battleford, nor Yorkton – to break, not once have they tried to 
cut that chain, Mr. Speaker. But what they have tried to cut are 
programs – programs administered by the native people for 
native people. And I refer for example to the native housing 
program done through Gabriel Housing. 
 
Now while the member from Regina South may think that 
because he hadn’t lived in a house with a garage, that is a 
luxury, I would submit that when housing corporations run by 
native people can get the best deal, better deals than he can get 
on his house for less money, then that’s a good deal for the 
people of Saskatchewan and it’s a good deal for native people. 
And I’m surprised to see that those in charge of Sask Housing 
Corporation are opposed to good housing for native people. 
And I say shame to that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to speak a bit about small-business 
men in Rosemont and why small-business men supported 
myself in the recent election. And I can think of only one, 
gentlemen, one small-business man who is a prominent member 
of the Conservative Party, who didn’t support me. 
 
But I look upon the restaurant owners and I look upon the 
owners of the confectioneries and of the dry cleaning 
establishments and so forth in Rosemont, and you know, they 
thought in 1982 that you were their party. And they were 
disappointed by you. And they voted for me because they didn’t 
think that in 1986 you were going to be their party, and they 
knew that very well. And they knew that very well because of 
your wrong-headed economic policies – not directly related to 
small business, but your wrong-headed economic policies in 
terms of attempting to lower the standard of working people in 
Saskatchewan, lower their standard of living, lower the 
disposable income which they lived off in terms of providing 
their goods and services out there. 
 
Some people say, Mr. Speaker, that that was a by-product  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

176 
 

of the government’s economic policy; that the attack on 
working people, their living standards, was nothing more than 
the after-effects of their open-for business policy. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t agree with that. I think that was an integral part 
of their economic strategy to lower the living standards of 
workers, to break the trade union movement, to put people out 
of work, to scare them into kowtowing to the bosses and the 
bankers that they represent. 
 
That was their economic strategy, Mr. Speaker; that was their 
economic strategy and I see no change in the present throne 
speech to change my mind – not one inch on that at all, not one 
inch, not one inch. The small-business people of this province 
in the urban areas are saying to you gentlemen, stop the attack 
on the working people of this province because we’re standing 
with them and we’re standing with the New Democratic Party 
who speaks for them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t expect any abatement 
in that attack. And I don’t expect that because when I look 
around the province and see what’s happening . . . I look at 
Lanigan. And do we see the minister responsible for the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan attempting to intervene in a 
dispute which is ripping not only management-labour relations 
at Lanigan – which were no ball of fire in the past – but ripping 
it apart, tearing asunder not only the working relationship in the 
mine site, but in fact ripping and tearing asunder the 
communities of Lanigan and of Humboldt? And you know, Mr. 
Speaker, I attribute the fact that we have a member from 
Humboldt sitting here, and we have a member from Quill Lakes 
sitting here, because this dispute spreads into their area and 
because those two members took a side and supported the 
working people, as opposed to the government, in this dispute. 
They took the side of the working people and that’s why they’re 
sitting here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I see 
another sign, in terms of the length of dispute that’s gone on at 
Nipawin, in the co-operative there. And I don’t see, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister in charge of the co-operatives standing up 
here in this House and talking about trying to save the Pineland 
Co-op by trying to get the dispute settled up there. No, no, not 
at all. She’s more concerned, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with cutting 
the fat. And I suppose that she considers the people who are 
walking the picket line in Nipawin in front of that co-op just 
part of the fat to be cut. Well we don’t consider that, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s not our fat, Mr. Speaker, that’s not our fat. 
Those are our people. And we say that with pride, and we stand 
behind them. 
 
Okay, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move on to a little bit about the 
whole question of the agricultural crisis. And we had, I think, 
the probably clearest and most concise and most effective 
presentation of the problems which confront us on the economic 
level in Saskatchewan by the Minister of Economic 
Development and Trade. And I’ve sat and watched the affairs of 
this House since 1982 from the  

galleries and never, ever, have I heard a more clear, precise, 
concise statement of how they see the real world out there, you 
know, and the minister must be complimented for that. I think 
he’s wrong. I think he’s wrong in . . . I think where the 
wrongness shows up most clearly is when he talks about the 
agricultural crisis and what the problems are in agriculture. 
 
(2000) 
 
And the Minister for Economic Development and Trade said, 
the major problem facing Saskatchewan agriculture today is the 
question of trade; it’s a question of trade. Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
think, and the members, I believe, of our party don’t think that’s 
the major question facing Saskatchewan agriculture today. I 
think the major problem in the rural areas of agriculture facing 
the people of Saskatchewan today is the whole question of rural 
depopulation – the loss of people from the farms; the loss of 
people from the small towns and the villages and the hamlets 
out there. And that we see the denuding of Saskatchewan – 
turning into the fertile but barren plains. 
 
And it’s a very, very, very, very critical question that we face in 
this area. And in some ways it’s not a question for partisan 
political rhetoric, although I suppose the members think that 
I’m not exactly a great one to talk about partisan political 
rhetoric. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we don’t deal with the 
question of rural depopulation and if we don’t deal with that 
question soon, and if we don’t deal with it in a major and 
effective manner, we’re not going to have a rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to just deal with some of the statistics because it’s 
time we put an end to some of the myths – some of the myths 
out there about protection and saving and so on and so forth. 
 
Between 1971 and 1982 Saskatchewan lost 11,000 farmers. Is 
there any member opposite who disagrees with that statistic? 
Eleven thousand farmers! Between 1982 and 1986 
Saskatchewan lost 4,000 farmers. Now, Mr. Speaker, that 
averages to 1,000 farm families a year gone from 
Saskatchewan. The facts are pretty simple and they speak for 
themselves. 
 
Now 11,000 farmers over 11 years isn’t a great record. But I 
can tell you 4,000 farmers over four years isn’t a great record 
either. So when you talk about saving and protecting and 
preserving and diversifying to manufacturing, I think the only 
thing you’re manufacturing are myths. The only thing you’re 
diversifying is the problems, both on the farm and in the rural 
area. The only thing that you’re producing is the same thing 
that’s being produced by the south end of a north-going cow 
because, Mr. Speaker, the facts of the matter are plain. My party 
didn’t save the farmers from depopulation. Your party’s not 
saving the farmers from depopulation – from depopulating rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And we’ve got to come together, come to grips with that 
problem and deal with it because . . . What are they saying – 25 
per cent? – 25 per cent of all Saskatchewan farmers are in 
danger of losing their farm in the next 10 years. Farm Credit 
Corporation – 25 per cent. That’s 25 per cent of 50,000 gone 
unless we can develop some  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

177 
 

effective long-term solutions to agriculture. 
 
And it’s not just a question of trade. It’s a part of it, but it’s not 
just a question. 
 
The Minister for Economic Development mentioned a GATT 
type of solution – a GATT type of solution in terms of dealing 
with part of the agricultural problem. And we’re in favour of 
that. 
 
We’ve called an international grains agreement – and we’ve 
called for that, and we’ve called for that. Do we hear you 
members calling for that now? Is that what you’re saying? Is 
that what you’re telling us? You’re in favour of an international 
grains agreement? To bring an end to . . . And the word, Mr. 
Premier, isn’t mine – pardon me, Mr. Speaker, — isn’t mine, 
but was the Premier’s, to bring an end to the anarchy, the 
anarchy of the international grains market-place. 
 
The Premier said it, Mr. Speaker. I agree, there’s anarchy out 
there. And the only way you can do that is through a 
democratically planned and controlled trading arrangement on 
an international level. That’s one part of the solution. 
 
But the major problem facing Saskatchewan farmers is not the 
fact that they can’t produce wheat, not the fact that they can’t 
get it overseas. It’s the fact that they’re being squeezed by the 
credit crunch and by the bankers, the banks that these people 
represent. And one by one they’re disappearing from the 
Saskatchewan landscape like the elevators. 
 
And if you were serious, if you people were serious about 
stopping the erosion of Saskatchewan rural society, you’d put a 
moratorium on farm debt. You’d say, hold it, Mr. Banker, hold 
it; forego the interest payments. And it’s going to take a while, 
but we’re going to help Saskatchewan people back on their feet 
out there on the farms. And we’re going to develop programs 
which will build up the small towns of rural Saskatchewan and 
which will put people back into rural Saskatchewan to develop 
that kind of life-style that I believe the majority of people in 
Saskatchewan support. 
 
You know, the question of agriculture just isn’t an economic 
question. It’s a social question. 
 
And the people in Saskatchewan very soon are going to have to 
make a choice on what they want to have, a Saskatchewan 
populated by farms, including new types of farms and new 
types of farm ownership – between that type of Saskatchewan, a 
Saskatchewan where people live, or between the large corporate 
Saskatchewan which the gentlemen in the shadows opposite 
would like to see. 
 
The question comes down in some parts in terms of 
intergenerational transfer, to be very simple. It’s either land 
bank or it’s bank land. It’s either the land bank or it’s bank land. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — And that’s what’s happening out there. It’s 
coming down to five or 10 or 15,000 megafarms,  

corporate farms – or a limit to farm size. It’s coming down to 
those kind of questions, Mr. Speaker. And those are the kind of 
questions that my colleague and I will be raising over the next 
four years, over and over and over again in rural Saskatchewan, 
because the people of this province are going to have to take 
that social choice. 
 
I’ll tell you why they’re going to have to take the social choice 
from the point of view of the city workers. The working people 
in the city think they’re getting a raw deal. They see money, 
dollar after dollar after dollar being poured in to the mire called 
the farm crisis with no solutions in sight. No results. A thousand 
farmers a year leaving the province, and the buckets keep going 
and the money gets poured down into the wine cellar, and it 
brings forth no fruit. 
 
And the people in the cities, Mr. Speaker, are becoming . . . 
Let’s just say they’re becoming angry at the thought of their tax 
dollars put into a crisis situation in which the provincial 
government is seen not to be doing anything about. Because 
they don’t see it as a solution. They don’t see the band-aid 
approach to agriculture as a solution. And they don’t want a 
band-aid approach to agriculture as being the solution. 
 
They want long-term, long range economic planning for rural 
Saskatchewan and for urban Saskatchewan and they’re prepared 
to pay their fair share. They’re prepared to pay their fair share, 
but they’re not going to keep throwing tax dollars after millions 
of tax dollars so that they can have government that gets 
elected, that turns around and kicks them in the teeth; kicks 
their trade unions in the teeth; lowers their living standards; 
freezes their minimum wage positions. They’re not going to 
stand for it. And, Mr. Speaker, at some point in time we’re not 
going to stand for it either. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, earlier on the Minister for 
Economic Development talked about co-operation in the House 
and the need for that kind of co-operation. All I want to say is, 
in terms of dealing with co-operation, I think when we came 
here we had a sense that that co-operation could develop. 
 
And when I was assigned my job as critic of the environment, I 
wrote to the Minister of the Environment and I asked him in the 
spirit of co-operation whether or not I could obtain a briefing 
from his department officials in terms of what his department 
saw as the major environmental issues of the day, and some of 
the solutions and some of the ideas that were being percolated 
in the department. 
 
And what did I get, Mr. Speaker? Flat no. And not only did I 
get a flat no on this supposed co-operation, not only did I get a 
flat no – the minister turned around and put a gag order on his 
officials. He put a gag order on the officials of his department 
and said, don’t talk to any of the MLAs or any of their staff 
people. He put a gag order on them. And, Mr. Speaker, it seems 
to me that if there is one area, one area in the province where 
non-partisan co-operation could be possible, it’s dealing with 
the air we breathe and the water we drink and the good 
productive land that we  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

178 
 

walk on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — But, Mr. Speaker, between the reality – to quote 
or to paraphrase T.S. Elliott, “between the reality and the 
rhetoric falls the shadow.” And when I look across the hall, 
across this House, Mr. Speaker, it’s like looking into the 
shadows where the shadow people live whose rhetoric is so fine 
and whose reality, for most of the people in my constituency, is 
less than fine. The shadow people. And they’re shadow people, 
Mr. Speaker, for one very simple reason. That’s because of 
whom they represent. These people, Mr. Speaker, do not 
represent the oppressed; they don’t represent the workers; they 
don’t represent the small and medium-sized farmers; they don’t 
represent the small-business people of Saskatchewan. They 
represent an ideology and a class of people, large entrepreneurs: 
the Peter Pocklingtons, the bankers, the Weyerhaeusers, all 
those large, international capital pools which come into 
Saskatchewan not to create jobs, not to provide . . . (inaudible) 
. . . not to provide a better living for people, but only one thing, 
to prepare the profits of their corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s not just rhetoric from this side of the House. 
I want to quote, Mr. Speaker, an eminent authority on the 
question of political power from Saskatchewan. “Politicians . . . 
“ This eminent authority, Mr. Speaker, said, “Politicians by 
nature are power drunk.” “Politicians by nature are power drunk 
and owe their appointment to the society by the management of 
big corporations. Thus the possibility really exists for the 
politician to collude with corporate management in a 
bureaucratic symbiosis system. To assume one political power, 
and I’ll be extremely considerate in regulating your operation, a 
counter-objective to corporate relation.” I want to repeat that. 
“Politicians by nature are power drunk and owe their 
appointment to the society including the management of big 
corporations.” 
 
And I turn, Mr. Speaker, to the front page: “A Critique and 
Evaluation of the Report on the Canadian Royal Commission 
on Corporate Concentration,” by D.G. Devine. Premier Devine, 
Mr. Speaker. I would say we’re dealing with an expert in this 
matter. Politicians are power drunk, Mr. Speaker; politicians are 
power drunk and I don’t believe there’s anybody any more 
qualified to speak on that subject than the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conclusion . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Table that. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, they’re urging me to table the 
document. I’m not going to table the document. This is a 
collector’s item for the museum. “Politicians by nature are 
power drunk.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve gone over my time. I know the members 
opposite will be glad to see me sit down. I want to thank you for 
the opportunity and I want to thank the people of Regina 
Rosemont for the opportunity to speak out on their behalf. In 
the next four years I intend to speak on their behalf, and speak 
out as a voice of the oppressed. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Before I get into the main body of my remarks, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I would like to add my words of congratulations to 
those of the other members of the legislature who have offered 
congratulations to the Speaker on his election. And I must say 
it’s with a great deal of pride that I listened to an interview by 
the CBC radio with the member who became and is Speaker. 
And it was with that same great deal of pride that I listened to 
Mr. Speaker’s remarks at the opening night banquet held just 
recently, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I was impressed by this very 
distinguished gentleman – impressed by his sincerity and his 
genuineness and by his absolute feel for what this legislature 
and the Speakership represents in terms of the dignity and the 
integrity of this Chamber. And quite frankly, I’m very proud to 
sit as a member of this legislature under his Speakership. 
 
(2015) 
 
I also would like to congratulate all newly elected and 
re-elected members, and especially the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview and the member for Pelly for their excellent jobs of 
moving and seconding the address that’s under consideration, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
After the last speech by the member from Regina Rosemont, a 
very good job I must say . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Entertaining. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Entertaining too, yes. And we look 
forward to more of those. In fact it was so good I think I’ll send 
out 1,000 or so copies in my riding. 
 
More seriously, I’d like to spend some time in a couple areas 
tonight. I first want to spend a few moments on building 
opportunities for the people of this province, particularly the 
young people, Mr. Deputy Speaker – building opportunities as 
they face a world and are on the doorstep virtually of the 21st 
century; building opportunities really for our most valuable 
resource, our youth. 
 
I also would like to spend a few minutes on a secondary, and 
that would be the constituency of Weyburn. And I thank them 
again for their support in this past election and for all their help 
over the past four years, and the direction and guidance that 
they have provided me. I’m very proud and humbled to 
represent these people and to share their hopes and aspirations. 
 
And when I talk of my constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
naturally leads me into a discussion really of farming and of the 
oil patch – two of the important businesses in my constituency. 
 
And to do that and to engage in that discussion on my 
constituency as it relates to farming, I want to back up, and 
back up to the fall of 1985 – September specifically. And it was 
at that time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that . . . And I suppose a 
headline in the daily newspaper in this province’s Star-Phoenix 
dated September 7, ’85 said it all. And the headline went, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, “Journey to  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

179 
 

national agriculture policy begins.” And the first line of that 
story by Larry Johnsrude, the Star-Phoenix reporter, ran this 
way: 
 

Premier Grant Devine started the process for a 
national agriculture policy Friday, but indications are 
he still has a considerable distance to go. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that was in September of 1985: “Journey to 
national agriculture policy begins.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that fall marked the beginning of what 
was at times to be a difficult process, but as we all know now, 
has turned out to be a very, very rewarding process. It was 
shortly after this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and consistent with this 
government and our Premier’s style, that a provincial 
conference was called where farm leaders, the cream of the crop 
if you like, from all over Saskatchewan came to a conference in 
Saskatoon to help draft this national agriculture policy. There 
was farm groups there of all sorts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, farmers 
of all stripes, political and otherwise. 
 
They put together, through their ideas and efforts – and I must 
say there was a great deal of effort put into it by a lot of farmers 
and farm groups – they put together a document that our 
Premier carried to the first ministers’ conference in 1985, later 
that same fall, where agriculture became an agenda item, which 
was a remarkable feat in itself I you look at the history of a first 
ministers’ conference, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And not only did our Premier have agriculture on the agenda at 
that first ministers’ conference, but with him at that 
conferences, but with him at that conference he had a number of 
farm leaders. And I think specifically of people like Lynn 
Biggart who was then president of the Saskatchewan Stock 
Growers, and Ted Turner, today and then president of the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. The grass roots were with them. 
They were there in developing this agriculture strategy, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and that was one year ago. 
 
Well what happened since then? Not to drag the story on, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve had our Premier at western premiers’ 
conferences; we’ve had him carrying the ball, If you like, at 
ministers of agriculture’s conferences on more than one 
occasion; we’ve had him at the mid-western governors’ 
meeting. An editorial in the Leader-Post of June 25, ’86: 
“Devine advice finds fertile ground,” the headline reads. “ . . . 
in the wake of Devine’s visit to the Mid-western Governors’ 
Conference last week in Columbus, Ohio . . . “ 
 
So not only has the Premier been embarking and did embark on 
the strategy and consultation with people in this country, Mr. 
Speaker, but also in consultation with people in other countries. 
But it was at that first ministers’ conference in the fall of ’85, 
our Premier addressed agriculture on that agenda that, in my 
mind – and I’ve shared these statements, some of these 
statements, with the legislature before, but I want to share them 
again – because it was at that speech, and I happened to be 
there, Mr. Deputy Speaker that I think some of the clearest 
thinking and clearly enunciated thinking that I have ever seen 
relative to agriculture occurred at that meeting and, Mr. 
Speaker, there wasn’t a first minister  

there that didn’t agree with our Premier. 
 
And in his remarks to those first ministers, and I quote some of 
what the Premier said: 
 

The third thing I want to touch on, Mr. Prime 
Minister, is a central irony. We have so much 
production from our ability to produce, with surpluses 
in the United States and feeding butter to the livestock 
industry in Europe. At the same time we look at huge 
population growth and staggering amounts of 
starvation in other parts of the world. It bothers people 
to think that you have children and families in Africa 
or wherever without food, while we have the capacity 
to be so productive, and we are falling short. 
 

And he went on to say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

There is something a little haywire when we have that 
ability to produce and the wherewithal to put that kind 
of standard of living on tables of North America, yet 
at the same time we have got millions and millions of 
people without cash, in poverty, and empty stomachs. 
It seems to me, Mr. Prime Minister, that Canada is a 
natural to take a lead in that. We have to address all of 
these together because they are connected. I go 
through this exercise because I am not just talking 
about a farm problem, I am talking about a consumer 
problem, an industrial problem, a trade problem, a 
protectionism problem, and a humanitarian 
opportunity. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s why – these remarks are evidence for why 
our Premier is regarded as a statesman in Canada, when it 
comes to agriculture and the global view of agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The haywire policies that he was 
talking about, Mr. Speaker, were things like the story in The 
Globe and Mail in September of this year. The headline was, 
“Europeans advised to burn surplus food.” 
 
I don’t have the exact date on the story. It’s out of Brussels. 
 

Europe’s food mountain will burn if the Europeans 
community headquarters in Brussels get the go-ahead 
for a plan to destroy the huge surpluses of butter, milk 
powder, beef and wheat. 

 
And the story went on to say, Mr. Speaker, and I quote again: 
 

This would probably involve burning 750,000 metric 
tonnes of butter and 500,000 tonnes of milk powder 
without the embarrassing surpluses which in the past 
have been sold cheaply to the Soviet Union and fed to 
pigs and calves . . . 
 

And the story went on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is something haywire in the world. There is 
something haywire in global agriculture policy  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

180 
 

when you’re burning 750,000 tonnes of butter and feeding it to 
pigs. There is something wrong in the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our Premier was the man who sensed the problems globally, 
brought it to the attention of the first ministers, and embarked 
on a course in Canada of defining a new food and agriculture 
policy here. 
 
This past fall, Mr. Speaker, I had occasion once again to 
accompany our Premier on a ministers of Agriculture meeting. 
And I don’t think I’m talking out of school here, but in terms of 
dealing with the consequences of this trade war and bizarre 
global policy, our Premier this fall led the charge on the 
deficiency payment issue at the ministers of Agriculture 
meeting. 
 
Now some opposite, Mr. Speaker, would argue that this was 
merely an election ploy. I would point out to them that this 
issue had been raised by our Premier long before the election. 
And the story I want to share with members of the legislature to 
show you the kind of leadership that our Premier, and respect 
our Premier enjoys across Canada, if not across the world, goes 
this way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We were into a discussion of a deficiency payment. Our 
Premier, leading the discussion, stated the case. Response by 
the federal Minister of Agriculture was not as specific as our 
Premier would have liked, and the Premier engaged the other 
ministers there again in a discussion of the need in a very 
specific way and in a very defined way what this deficiency 
payment should be, and what it was all about. 
 
And I sat there listening to him at this place at the table. I’m 
telling you, Mr. Speaker, that was one of the proudest moments 
of my life because the man spoke from his heart. He knew of 
what he talked. And you could sit there and watch every other 
Minister of Agriculture from across Canada – Quebec, Ontario, 
Newfoundland, Manitoba – it didn’t matter where, and their 
heads were nodding in agreement. And after he finished, Mr. 
Speaker, almost to a person they chimed in with one simple 
phrase: “I agree with Mr. Devine. I agree with Premier Devine. 
I agree with Premier Devine.” 
 
I’ll tell you what. I was very, very, very proud to even be at the 
same table as our Premier, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And I know the Premier can do this 
himself, but I as well want to acknowledge in my time as 
minister of Agriculture the great deal of effort that went into 
forging this national agriculture policy and deficiency payments 
that went in by some very, very competent officials. 
 
The result of all of this, the most recent result was the 1986 first 
ministers’ conference, Mr. Speaker. In between time, of course, 
we had the economic summit in Tokyo, the joint statement 
recognizing agriculture as a priority, and I would suggest to you 
that that would not have been addressed by those five nations 
had it not been for our  

Premier. I would suggest that to you. It most recently resulted at 
the last first ministers’ conference of the long journey ending, 
really, one year later, and that’s a short time in political time 
frames. 
 
The direction for a national agricultural development strategy 
for Canada, Saskatchewan’s partnership for agriculture, in one 
short year was endorsed by all premiers and the Prime Minister 
of this country. I would suggest to you that that is a 
fundamentally important step, perhaps the likes of which we 
haven’t seen . . . I might even be so bold as to say that we may 
not have seen that kind of fundamentally important statement, 
maybe even so far back as 1879, when John A. Macdonald 
announced a national policy. Unfortunately, because of that, 
we’ve become, in the prairies, a bit “hewers of wood and 
drawers of water,” and I’ve never really forgiven my venerable 
colleague for it. But it falls into that kind of category, Mr. 
Speaker. I was extremely proud of our Premier as he led the 
charge on this from day one. 
 
I would make a prediction, Mr. Speaker . . . I make a prediction 
here tonight that just as our Premier has led the way on 
developing a new food and agriculture strategy in Canada for 
the farmers and the people and the consumers of this country, 
that you will hear more of this man on the global stage. Because 
he, like none other, understands the global problems that 
agriculture faces today. 
 
I say that, Mr. Speaker, because what we are talking about here 
is the important two-pronged approach of this government. On 
the one hand we have to acknowledge the short-term realities, 
the need for things like deficiency payments so we can get our 
farmers, our society, through the ups and the downs and 
through the adjustments that change always bring. At the same 
time the national agriculture policy addresses how we will deal 
with global agriculture, national agriculture in the long run, and 
maybe, when all is said and done, that’s the more important of 
the two. But by golly, Mr. Speaker, when the second phase of 
the two-pronged approach was announced just recently, I’ll tell 
you what, our farmers were very, very heartened to see that not 
only does our Premier have the long-term vision, in terms of 
forging new food and agriculture policies, but that he 
recognizes that you have to protect them in the downturns. 
 
(2030) 
 
And that’s why you saw – and this is a rare event in Canada – 
that’s why you saw in The Globe and Mail, December 10, 1986, 
headline: “Ottawa gives farmers $1 billion,” Above that, “Cash 
to cushion trade war’s impact.” I say it’s a rare event because 
it’s not very often that the word “farmer” even appears in The 
Globe and Mail, let alone in the headlines, Mr. Speaker. But I 
have to commend The Globe and Mail for having it as a lead 
story. I was slightly disappointed that for example, the 
Leader-Post, our own daily newspaper, that it barely made the 
front page and was certainly viewed in their mind as something 
less sensational than their headline that day. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, this deficiency payment, this $1 billion 
deficiency payment, I would suggest to you, ranks right up 
there with one of the major economic events that this  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

181 
 

province has ever witnessed, and it was because of our Premier 
that that billion dollars flows into the pockets of Canadian 
farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — During the last election, Mr. Speaker, 
I read a quotation in the Star-Phoenix, in the paper by Larry 
Johnsrude, March 31 ’86, and he was quoting Mr. Blakeney as 
saying, “We have learned from 1982.” And I raise that quote, 
Mr. Speaker, because I want to frame it in another perspective, 
and I put it this way: you learned from ’82; I ask when it comes 
to food and agriculture policy in Canada have the NDP learned 
form the 1986 election? 
 
I want to make these next remarks in the most constructive way 
possible because the issue is so big, as the member for 
Rosemont has just said, that it should transcend partisan 
politics. And I hope he will convince his colleagues on that 
point. 
 
I say this because what I’ve heard this afternoon in the 
legislature – and I’m not picking on or pointing at the member 
from Humboldt because it was his maiden speech, and I respect 
that. And I know as well he has had absolutely no help in the 
last four years with the NDP caucus that was here because there 
was never one shred, never one single shred of evidence that 
they had, in fact, an agriculture policy, Mr. Speaker. They were 
bankrupt of ideas when it came to agriculture policy. 
 
And tonight in the legislature we heard references once again to 
land bank as if we can hang our hat onto that. And I raise this 
issue, Mr. Speaker, because I heard the hon. member talking 
about things like plant breeders’ rights, and I heard him talking 
about trade and his views on those issues. And quite frankly, 
Mr. Speaker, my disappointment was – and I don’t point at him 
because there has been no back-up there for the last four years, 
and some might argue the last decade when it comes to NDP 
farm politics – but these were sort of some classic ideological 
positions that might have been plucked from the NFU policy 
manual, quite frankly. 
 
And I say that in not a disparaging way because the NFU policy 
manual has had some good options in it over the past, and I 
would suggest that this government has enacted some of them, 
and I think of things like The Farm Land Security Act, which 
enjoyed widespread approval of all farm bodies out there. 
 
But why I address this tonight, Mr. Speaker, is when I listened 
to that hon. member discard the options and say, we’re not even 
prepared to look at the plant breeders’ rights, for example, or 
the free trade question, except in this narrow ideological 
strait-jacket, I said, what a tragedy – what a tragedy that this has 
just been dismissed so summarily. It’s a tragedy for all 
Saskatchewan farmers; they deserve better than that. In fact, I 
would argue that this issue is so big that we face, it behoves all 
of us to get behind our Premier as he takes the case to the 
international stage which it must be taken to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — When I listened to those remarks this 
afternoon – and once again I’m not singling out this member 
because it could have been others – it was like a flashback to 
the ‘50s in so far as their picture of how farm policy should be. 
Quite frankly, how often have you heard the world “future” 
from across the way? But it was like a flashback to the ‘50s. 
 
And you know, I loved that era too. I grew up and was raised 
and to this day still am involved in a family farm. I loved that 
era; I wish we could go back to it. I wish we could go back to 
the days when three or four hours ago on the farm at this time 
of the year we would have gone out, we would have gathered 
up 30 or 40 cows. At that time we still ran them into the barn, 
and we had the tie stalls. We threw a bit of chop. We chucked 
some hay down from the loft. The old ’44 Massey was run into 
the barn at night to keep it warmed up so it would start to haul 
out the manure stone boat in the morning. We fed a couple of 
pigs that were at the other corner of the barn. There was the 50 
chickens. 
 
It was a great time in rural Saskatchewan, but it was the ‘50s. 
We are in the ‘80s and we are headed to the 21st century. I say 
to you . . . I say, come with us. Come with us as the Premier 
leads in the development of new farm policy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Do not shut out these options because 
of some narrow, ideological views. Come with us. Share this 
Premier’s view of the vision of what this province can be. He 
understands the essence of this province. Add your voice of 
support to our Premier. The issue is that big, and if not for your 
sake, and if not for the sake of all the farmers in this province 
and all the consumers and all the people who work as a result of 
the farm economy – if not for any of those sakes, at least for 
your children’s sake. 
 
And I say that in a very serious and sincere way. And I would 
want the member from Humboldt to know that I’m not picking 
on his remarks personally or individually because I know that 
they are . . . It’s been a classic sort of NDP view on farm policy. 
 
And I want to close off this part about my constituency, because 
the farm part is so far important to my constituency, with an 
anecdote that I shared with some of my constituents during the 
election when the Premier came into Weyburn for a breakfast, a 
breakfast that was well attended by everybody from the oil 
patch to the small business sector to the people who work at 
Canada Wire and Cable, right on through to the farmers and the 
housewives and so on and so on. 
 
And the story related was this: I had been campaigning just a 
day or two before this in the north rural part outside of 
Weyburn, and I walked up to a door, not knowing the farm 
house particularly, but walked up to a door and was met by an 
elderly lady probably in her 80s, and a younger fellow which I 
presumed to be her son, and introduced myself and – as I 
suspect many of you did in this last election – made a few 
casual comments and then sort of asked the key question, 
because we are always interested  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

182 
 

if that person at the door is going to support us. And I said that I 
hoped that I could count on your support in the upcoming 
election, to which she replied . . . She asked this question first 
of all: are you with Grant Devine? I said, I certainly am. She 
said, I want to tell you – and she might have added the word 
“sunny” parenthetically, but I can’t remember for sure – I want 
to tell you that that man is the best Premier that this province 
has ever seen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And she went on to say that they had 
been there, they had homesteaded that land in 1898 – if my 
memory serves me correctly – and from that time forward that 
was the fourth or fifth generation on that land. And this lady 
could relate about droughts, and rusts, and grasshoppers, and 
frosts, and good prices, and bad prices, and she could relate to a 
man who understood and was prepared to stand up for farmers 
and farming. And ladies and gentlemen, the people in my 
constituency just happen to believe, as do I, that Premier Grant 
Devine is the best Premier this province ever had. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like now to turn to 
the secondary I spoke of earlier, about building opportunity, and 
more specifically, as it relates to the throne speech, about our 
youth and their education. This speech, I believe, sets a 
direction for Saskatchewan that I agree with as a citizen of this 
province. And this speech makes a statement by the government 
that I am proud of as a member of that government. 
 
I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that this speech sets an 
agenda for education and advanced education that I am excited 
about as the minister responsible for those portfolios. And I 
would also have to say, Mr. Speaker, and pay tribute to some of 
the former ministers that have held these portfolios. I think first 
of the member from Swift Current, though I would suggest to 
you, Mr. Speaker, was not only one of the best education 
ministers across Canada, but is one of the best women 
legislators in all of Canada this very day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, on the advanced 
education side I would also like to pay tribute to the hon. 
member from Meadow Lake, and as well the former minister, 
Gord Currie, who, Mr. Speaker, I think endeared himself to all 
in the educational and academic community for his sincerity 
and his genuineness in his approach to the work. So I, as well, 
would like to commend those people for what they have done 
before myself because it makes my job much easier. 
 
And as well, I would like to pay special recognition to the 
officials that I worked with when I was minister of Energy in 
that portfolio. I know the member from Swift Current is in good 
hands with some very, very excellent officials in the department 
there, and I would like to make special mention of that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speech from the Throne confirms our government’s 
commitment to education at all levels. And I emphasize  

confirms, because we have already demonstrated our 
commitment to education in our first term of office. Under our 
government Saskatchewan has become a leader in educating our 
young people, not only in Canada but in North America, Mr. 
Speaker. We have been one of the few to lay out a plan for the 
future, the future development and growth of an education 
system. In fact, when our government stated its priorities: 
agriculture, jobs, health care and economic diversification in 
education, education was clearly seen as the key to success in 
these other areas. 
 
We have an excellent track record of backing up our 
commitments, Mr. Speaker, not just in words but rather in 
action. We established an educational development fund to 
finance new initiatives that will help our students in their 
pursuit of educational excellence. 
 
Let me give you an example of what the education development 
fund is doing across Saskatchewan. Computers. We have 
already witnessed the advent of computers and the need for our 
children to become computer literate. Some say that the need 
for computer literacy is a foregone conclusion and an essential 
outcome of literacy education. Our government recognized 
students needed a commitment from government to give them a 
chance to become computer literate – a chance to prepared for 
the next decade, the 21st century. That’s why we introduced the 
education fund, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also recognized that to prepare for the future we must look 
closely at the way we teach and the way we perceive education. 
To do that we asked some tough questions to define core 
curriculum. We want to emphasize basic skills and find a 
balance between compulsory and elective courses. We also 
opened our program policy development process to the public – 
asked people what they thought of education. It’s a consultative 
process; it’s a recipe that’s worked for us well in the past as a 
government, and one that will work for us well in the future. 
 
We have also spent four years catching up, fixing, building, 
repairing, renovating, and improving our schools after years of 
neglect under the former government, Mr. Speaker. This year 
capital construction alone is worth $50 million. 
 
In post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker, we had to begin to 
address 11 years of inadequate provision by the former 
government, and we made great progress. Between 1982 and 
’86 our government increased total funding to the 
post-secondary education sector by a greater percentage than 
any other province in Canada. 
 
The five-year, 125 million university renewal and development 
fund is a forward-looking innovation that is now being copied 
by other provinces, and some say imitation is the sincerest form 
of flattery. It has initiated projects such as the agriculture 
college building at the University of Saskatchewan campus that 
is on the drawing boards and full steam ahead, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Between 1982 and ’86 our government increased funding to the 
technical institutes by 37 per cent, after  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

183 
 

taking account for inflation. The total training capacity in the 
technical institute system has risen 50 per cent since 1982. In 
the four years before 1982 it had not risen at all. 
 
Between 1982 and ’86 the number of training days delivered to 
the community colleges rose by 17 per cent. The improvements 
to the student aid package that we delivered mean that 
post-secondary education is more accessible to more people 
than it has ever been before. The increase in enrolments across 
the province bear testimony to that fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the record that we have established in education is a record 
of which we are proud. But we don’t intend to rest on our 
laurels. The demands of the present and the future require us to 
do even more. 
 
(2045) 
 
I would like to take a little time to talk about what those 
demands are and how we intend to meet them. Quite simply, 
Mr. Speaker, let me talk about the government’s agenda for 
education for the next four years. 
 
Our education system has always had an important role in the 
economic, social and cultural development of Saskatchewan 
and in the personal development of its citizens. From its 
beginnings this system has provided a quality of education that 
powerfully increases the opportunities available to 
Saskatchewan people; the skilled personnel necessary to keep 
the Saskatchewan economy competitive in world markets; the 
research directed at solving particular Saskatchewan problems; 
the extension services that bring those solutions out to the field; 
the disinterested analysis of social issues necessary in a 
democratic society; and the base for a richer cultural life that is 
engendered by increased exposure to, and the ultimate love of, 
knowledge and the arts. 
 
Today, more than ever, provision of these services is of critical 
importance to Saskatchewan. Historically, our rich endowment 
of natural resources has afforded the province a relatively high 
standard of living. Now we are into an era where maintenance 
and improvement of that standard of living will depend on how 
we develop and harness our human resources. The education 
system is moving from being an important but secondary 
element toward becoming the critical factor in the process of 
provincial development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s an extremely important and powerful 
statement in my mind. And I repeat it. Now we are into an era 
where maintenance and improvement of that standard of living 
will depend on how we develop and harness our human 
resources. The education system is moving from being an 
important but secondary element toward becoming the critical 
factor in the process of provincial development. 
 
The primary benefits of the education system are most readily 
apparent in the training function – the imparting of skills to 
individuals that allow them to be more valuable employees, 
benefiting themselves and their employers and thus society as a 
whole. The skills imparted can range from basic literacy to the 
latest techniques in brain surgery. Critical as the training  

function is, however, it is necessary for us to keep in mind what 
I might call the future benefits of our education system. 
 
In an era where our major export industries, as we heard the 
Minister of Economic Development and Trade talk so 
eloquently about today – agriculture, oil, and potash – where 
these export industries face stiff international competition, our 
system must be capable of performing research directed towards 
more efficiently exploiting our resource and developing new 
uses for those resources. 
 
Saskatchewan, as we all know, faces high transportation costs 
in getting its products to world markets. Consequently, if we are 
to be successful in finding non-resource based products to 
export to the rest of the world, they must be valuable relative to 
the cost of transporting them. These products will be 
knowledge-based or high-tech products. We must be capable of 
generating in Saskatchewan the ideas and the people that form 
the bases for these types of products. And as Saskatchewan 
struggles with the reality of a new world economy, our system 
must develop the clear thinking that can inform society on how 
best to marshal what can be scarce resources. 
 
I think it behoves us to think for a moment, Mr. Speaker, what 
all of this means. During the industrial revolution – the last 
great economical upheaval – firms, industries, whole countries 
won or lost the struggle to compete on the shop floor or on the 
assembly line. 
 
In the new information economy we have to face the fact that 
firms, industries, and whole countries will win or lose the 
struggle to compete, not on the shop floors and not on the 
assembly line, but in the classroom and in the research 
laboratory. Now this is a sobering thought when one thinks 
about it. We’ve moved from the industrial economy to the 
information economy. 
 
Consider what it means, hon. members of the legislature. In the 
past we could get by with having just a good education system. 
So long as natural resources were the principal determiner of 
our wealth, the difference in the standard of living we 
experienced, if our human resources were good, was only 
marginally lower than what we would have experienced if our 
human resources were excellent. As the education system 
becomes the critical factor in provincial development, good will 
be no longer good enough. 
 
If our resource industries are unable to adapt to changing 
international markets, they may not merely become just slightly 
less profitable, they in fact may face total shut-down. If our 
high-tech products are merely good, while those of our 
competitors are excellent, we will sell none of them, not just 
fewer of them. 
 
If our quality of life is obviously lower than elsewhere, 
Saskatchewan’s population will shrink, not just remain static. If 
we cannot solve the basic problems of allocating resources, our 
social and political problems will become fatal, not just 
worrisome. 
 
In short, the difference between our standard of living if our 
human resources are good, as opposed to excellent,  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

184 
 

may well be the difference between poverty and wealth. A 
sobering thought, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If this is the situation, then I think the reasonable question that 
members of the public and the opposition might well want to 
put to our government then: if this is the situation, what then do 
we propose to do about it? 
 
It’s not good enough, Mr. Speaker, to just have endless 
recitations of what is wrong, as I have experienced here tonight 
somewhat in some of the speeches. We must have some 
propositions or some solutions about what we will do. 
 
Let me begin with the K to 12 system. We have been actively 
reviewing the curriculum of studies. This is the key to the 
whole system. Consultations have been held across the province 
with every group who had a point of view. In its simplest form 
the message we received is clear. We must reinforce the 
provision of those basic skills that our children will require to 
deal with the new information age. 
 
Those skills are: the ability to read and write well; a basic 
fluency with numbers; and above all – and I stress this – and 
above all the capacity for clear thought. In a world where the 
quantity of information is growing massively, an individual’s 
ability to succeed will rest not on having and storing 
information, but in knowing where to find it and what to do 
with it. It is the capacity to reason that is important, not the 
capacity to store facts. We must emphasize logic rather than 
warehousing. 
 
In the months ahead I will be announcing the measures we will 
take to implement this new curriculum. 
 
Turning now for a moment again, Mr. Speaker, to the 
post-secondary education system, I believe that the impact of 
this new world economy will be, if anything, greater. 
 
Our task is nothing less than to make adult education on an 
integral part of our economic diversification strategy. I repeat. 
Our task is nothing less than to make adult education an integral 
part of our economic diversification strategy. This is our 
number one priority. 
 
We must also do two other things. First, we must reinforce the 
role of post-secondary education in the social and cultural life 
of our communities. I want to recognize and pay tribute to the 
enormous and vital contribution made by our universities, 
colleges and institutes to the quality of life in our communities. 
Whether it is support for the arts, valuable library facilities, 
preservation of vital knowledge about our past, or just the 
tradition of open-minded inquiry, higher education helps sustain 
the characteristics that make our species unique: a love of 
knowledge, and a pursuit of understanding. I will be seeking 
advice on how to promote and reinforce this contribution in the 
months ahead. 
 
Second, we must direct our adult education system towards a 
philosophy of education that is in keeping with the unique 
heritage that we have as a province and a people. I think 
perhaps I could elaborate for the members on this. 

A few days ago our province, and I know many members here 
were probably at that banquet, our province paid tribute to five 
outstanding citizens who had made major contributions in their 
field of activity, to this province and to our country. One of 
those was a woman by the name of Sylvia Fedoruk. 
Incidentally, she helped calibrate and introduce the first cobalt 
radiation therapy for cancer in the world. Her contributions to 
medical physics, Mr. Speaker, are too long to list here and her 
achievements really too many. But the point I want to make is 
this: she began her education, as so many of our citizens do, in a 
small one room school — I should say, as so many of our 
citizens have, in a small one room school in rural 
Saskatchewan. She went on to university, to the University of 
Saskatchewan, to study, and eventually, in a real sense when 
you think about it relative to her cancer work, has changed the 
world in a very fundamental sort of way. This achievement 
would be remarkable enough anywhere. What is more 
remarkable still, that it is not unique in our province. For a 
small rural province we have achieved an impact on national 
and international affairs well beyond what mere weight of 
numbers would suggest. 
 
I believe the reason for this is in fact quite simple – that it lies at 
the heart of our philosophy of education – is that we are 
resolved as a people that we will have the best quality of 
education possible, the very highest quality possible, and we 
will have it in every corner of our province, Mr. Speaker. We 
are resolved not to let distance matter. We are resolved not to 
let the ups and downs of our economy matter. We are resolved 
not to let the relative isolation count for anything. This, then, is 
our philosophy of education. I can state our objective in a 
simple sentence. The best quality available, period. 
 
And when I say this, Mr. Speaker, I am reminded of only two or 
three weeks ago, when I talk about the unique Saskatchewan 
cultural flavour and what it can mean for our youth, I’m 
reminded of an incident in Pelly. The hon. member spoke so 
well here in the throne speech debate about that constituency 
and its history. But our cabinet had occasion to be in Pelly for a 
cabinet meeting, and we had the opportunity as cabinet to spend 
a noon hour with the grade 11 and 12 students at the high 
school there. And just as I recounted about Sylvia Fedoruk and 
how she was schooled in a one-room school in rural 
Saskatchewan and went on to university and ultimately to 
establish herself at the world-class level, I sat there and I 
listened to our Premier answer questions from these students, 
these young people, these grade 11 and 12 students. For an hour 
or so I suppose, Mr. Speaker, that went on, and then our 
Premier wrapped up. 
 
And as I was proud sitting with him at the agriculture ministers’ 
conference a couple of months before, I was even more proud 
and humbled as I sat there at that table with him and I listened 
to what he said to these children, because he said better than I 
ever could enunciate what we’re really talking about when we 
talk about the unique cultural flavour in Saskatchewan. 
 
What he told these children could well have been told to Mrs. 
Fedoruk some years ago. He said to those children there, and 
you could have heard a pin drop, Mr. Speaker  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

185 
 

– those sparkling eyes of his and this very, very sincere method 
that he has – he told those children, let nothing be beyond your 
grasp. Take on anything. Fear not of anything. The world really 
is yours. And the case example would be Mrs. Fedoruk. And he 
went on to enunciate more clearly than I ever could in sincerest 
terms possible about what a great future and opportunities that 
lie ahead for these young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so I suppose one should know, then, that it is no 
mistake that in this throne speech, as in the past four years of 
this administration, that education is a priority with this 
government because our Premier, not only does he believe it, 
but he enunciates it. And more importantly than all of that, he 
transmits that view and that sense of vision and the essence of 
the greatness of this province to those young people because 
they are going to be our competitive edge in the 21st century. 
 
This, then, is our philosophy of education – the best quality 
available, period. To achieve this we will have to find means, 
there is no question. We will have to find means to deal with 
geographic factors. We will also have to help individuals 
overcome financial barriers. We will have to come to grips with 
barriers based on discrimination. All of this is easy enough to 
say, but how is it to be achieved? 
 
What I am talking about, Mr. Speaker, and members of the 
legislature, is nothing less than a new mandate, a new mandate 
for post-secondary education and training in Saskatchewan. 
And there is not much time, Mr. Speaker, if we are to beat the 
clock that is already running. 
 
I propose to follow a schedule designed to produce results 
within the next six months. I will begin by holding a series of 
meetings with all the actors in the post-secondary system itself. 
Thus we will match the process begun a few years ago by my 
previous colleague in the K to 12 system. I will also be meeting 
with those who approach the system as users or beneficiaries. 
 
I want to hear what business wants of the system, also what 
students want. I want to meet with parents, and teachers, and 
taxpayers, and employees, employers and labourers. In short, 
Mr. Speaker, I want to hear from everyone who has anything to 
say about the future for adult education in Saskatchewan, and I 
want to hear it soon. 
 
Following those discussions, Mr. Speaker, our government will 
then chart the course that leads to the 21st century. And it’s a 
sobering thought indeed to think that the students who enter the 
K to 12 system this next fall will graduate in the year 2000 – the 
21st century. It’s a pretty sobering thought, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(2100) 
 
I realize I spent some considerable time . . . I would like to talk 
even more about the role of libraries as minister responsible for 
the provincial library. I had a chance today to meet with the 
libraries trustees association. An excellent meeting with them. 
But much time has gone by already. But I would just say this 
relative to libraries. My goal is to have the young people in this 
province hooked  

on reading, not on drugs, Mr. Speaker. A simple goal – hooked 
on reading. 
 
It fits right in with what I sense is the public mood out there, 
that much as we have to have the balance in our curriculum 
development -–and I haven’t met and visited with all those who 
I would like to as I frame a policy for the people and cabinet’s 
consideration – there is in my view an overwhelming support 
that we must have the basics: reading and writing and 
arithmetic. It will take some convincing to convince me 
otherwise because I believe those were important 20 years ago 
and 40 years ago, and they’ll be important 20 years from now. 
 
That doesn’t mean to say that we don’t address things like 
computers, Mr. Speaker, or that we don’t address the languages 
of the future. But, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to reading, what 
better way than to have a strong library system and have our 
young people hooked on reading. 
 
As I close the one final comment I would make – and I echo 
somewhat the words and the thoughts by the member for 
Kindersley earlier today – and that is the desire for all of us – 
and I think I alluded to it earlier when it comes to agriculture 
policy – to have substantive and real debate and not look at 
issues with the blinkers on, but for the betterment of all people, 
I think there’s an expectation for that of us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you weren’t here when I started my remarks earlier 
tonight, and I think the dignity, as I said earlier, and the 
interview that I’ve heard of you on the CBC radio, you 
epitomize so well, you vocalize so well the dignity and the 
expectation of this Chamber. And I think part and parcel of that 
is how we approach issues here really in something less than the 
. . It hasn’t always been in the most dignified sense. 
 
The other comment I would add to this, Mr. Speaker, I think I 
can take the liberty to do this as we start a new legislature, and I 
also say this in a constructive way, that those people who sit in 
the rows up there – the legislative press gallery – have a role to 
play here too. It’s not going to be good enough any more as we 
move into the information economy, for the simplistic analysis 
of issues. Not only is it not going to be good enough for us, I 
don’t believe it’s going to be good enough for those, if that’s all 
they’re going to present on the evening news to the people of 
Saskatchewan or, for that matter, the people of Canada. 
 
It’s no longer going to be good enough to distil issues into 
right/wrong, them/us, either/or, this/that . . . The issues are too 
complex. It’s a natural phenomenon, if you like, for a politician 
to want to reduce it to “we’re right; they’re wrong.” It is no 
longer going to be good enough. It’s no longer going to be good 
enough to just present drama and sensationalism, high drama if 
you like, as it appears in question period, whether it be here, in 
France or in Ottawa. 
 
There was an article published in . . . called National Affairs, 
and I should have more information on where it is. It was April 
of ’86. It was entitled “Looking for Answers Beyond Question 
Period.” And that would be my hope a little bit, Mr. Speaker, as 
we enter a new legislative  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

186 
 

session, that there will be some looking for answers beyond 
question period. I think the people have some expectation of it. 
And I take the liberty of making those remarks in the throne 
speech debate in this, the first sort of floor speech for me in this 
new session, and I’m not likely to engage in them again, but I 
did want to put them on the record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ll end with this. To all who, in the event that I don’t have the 
chance to over the course of the next week or so before we have 
a Christmas recess, wish all members and their families a happy 
and blessed Christmas. 
 
And the final comment, but of course I will support the main 
motion, and not the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. First 
of all, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate you, on behalf of 
myself and the constituents of Athabasca, on your appointment 
as Speaker of this legislature. 
 
I now want to turn to the throne speech, and I’m not going to 
take a lot of time tonight, Mr. Speaker, as I see the document as 
being a general statement of how the government plans to 
proceed in the next 12 months, and one will probably have to 
wait until the winter unfolds and we get into the spring and just 
see what the new budget contains and just see how tough this 
winter is going to be on the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
I was quite encouraged when I heard the Premier’s remarks that 
he wanted to tackle the problems of regionalism, and he 
indicated that the only way that we could really tackle the 
problems of regionalism would be through all members of the 
legislature working together and working co-operatively to 
solve these problems. 
 
I was quite optimistic when I heard these words. I thought, well, 
maybe he’s going to turn over a new leaf and we’re going to 
tackle the problems that we have in the regions and then the 
problems that we have all throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
But the, Mr. Speaker, I became a little bit suspicious when I 
started to take a look at the situation that we’re in in 
Saskatchewan, especially financially. We go back to 1982 
where we had, this province financially had $139 million in the 
bank, to the good. And we take a look now, just five years later, 
and we have a deficit of well over $2 billion, and I suspect that 
when the Minister of Finance brings down that budget this 
spring that you will see that the budget will be close to 2.5 
billion, the deficit. I think that you will probably see that the 
accumulated deficit, which has gone up in five years from $3 
billion to close to $10 billion, will probably be in the 
neighbourhood of $10 billion. 
 
Then I start to get a little bit suspicious and I think we’ve got 
some real problems. Not only have we got problems today, but 
we have problems for the future, for our children and our 
grandchildren and for generations to come, to pay back that 
type of debt. I get suspicious when I go back to the campaign 
and I see the Premier going  

around the province indicating that by Christmas time there 
would be payments going out to the farmers totalling $1 billion. 
We know that that’s how this government got elected – going 
around the province . . And it’s the farmers who put the 
Conservative government in power. And I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s going to be the farmers who will get them out of 
power in the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — An farmers are starting to say that already. 
One of my colleagues was telling me today that he was out in 
the country and five farmers came up to him at one event and 
said: you’re right; this is not true; there is no $1 billion coming 
to the farmers. And I think that the farmers should have been 
suspicious when the Prime Minister of Canada brought out a 
program a few months ago – a $34 million program – to train 
farmers to get them off of the farm. He was getting them 
prepared to get off of the farm. And that was a major program 
that he brought out. I think that farmers should have been 
suspicious at that time when that program was brought out. 
Train the farmers so they could leave the farms to go out in the 
labour force where there is no jobs and get onto unemployment 
insurance. And I think that . . . that most certainly got me very 
suspicious. 
 
I got suspicious when I looked at the throne speech, Mr. 
Speaker, and I see that there was nothing in there for the North. 
The North wasn’t even mentioned. And the Premier was talking 
about regionalism and co-operation and solving the problems 
that we have in certain areas of Canada. I think we have to look 
just right close to home and take a look at northern 
Saskatchewan, and that is where we really have problems and it 
wasn’t mentioned in the throne speech. 
 
I now want to turn and make a few remarks, Mr. Speaker, on 
the Weyerhaeuser deal. As we indicated this spring when it was 
announced that Weyerhaeuser was going to take over the Prince 
Albert pulp mill, we indicated at that time – we didn’t have all 
the information before us – but with the information that we had 
at that time, we indicated that it was a bad deal for 
Saskatchewan. We now have a lot of information – this only 
being one volume of three volumes that has been put out on 
information. And as we go through it, we find out that it really 
is a bad deal and it’s the type of a deal that is going to come 
back to haunt us for many, many generations. 
 
First of all, we see where Weyerhaeuser came into 
Saskatchewan and have taken over assets of the Prince Albert 
Pulp Mill, and the minister who was piloting this Bill through 
the House indicated that in order to make that pulp mill viable, 
we had to have a paper-mill. But I wonder, Mr. Speaker, when 
we take a look at the situation as it is now, why we had to throw 
in the chemical plant in Saskatoon; why we had to throw the 
sawmill in Big River in; and why did we have to throw in 8 
million acres, approximately 8 million acres of prime forest 
land in Saskatchewan in the deal. And there was no money 
involved. They were given all these assets of Saskatchewan 
taxpayers and not one cent down. They have 30 years, 30 years 
to pay that back . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I will get to that, 
too. 
  



 
December 11, 1986 

187 
 

They have 30 years to pay back the loan of $248 million. I get 
suspicious when I wonder, you know, why was the Meadow 
Lake sawmill not thrown in there; and why was not the Carrot 
River sawmill or the Green Lake sawmill. And I think this is 
where the confusion is out in the constituencies and especially 
in the forest industry where individuals who are now saying that 
they are in real trouble because of the change-over from Sask 
Forest Products to Weyerhaeuser. 
 
And we know, Mr. Speaker, that the losses in the first year, up 
to a total of $73 million, will be written off against the original 
$248 million, the debenture that was signed by the government. 
Now that’s a large amount of money. When you take a look at 
the losses, and then when you get past that, you find out that 
they don’t have to pay anything back on that debenture in the 
next 30 years if they don’t make a profit, and by what we can 
find out in this document, that they have to make 20 per cent 
profit or more in order to repay any payments. So it’s possible, 
and I think it’s a reality, that they’re going to have all these 
assets and never pay a cent to this province. 
 
And I have been talking to individuals who are working in the 
forest industry. And you go up into Big River where that town 
relies on the forest industry. It’s a sawmill town; it’s a logging 
town. And that’s where they survive. And they are really 
concerned because of the changes. 
 
(2115) 
 
And we take a look in this document, and we’re not even too 
sure whether there’s going to be a paper-mill added to Prince 
Albert. And it says very clearly in this document: under the 
agreements, construction of the paper-mill could be delayed by 
events beyond the control of Weyerhaeuser Canada . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon? . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . That’s right. There’s a strong possibility that there will not 
be a paper-mill. They’re not really committed to building one. 
And it’s hard to say what the events will be. But if the market 
drops out or something like that, or a decision that was brought 
down last night by the Canadian government who rejected the 
offer by the Americans in the softwood industry, we would get 
into some of these problems. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that we 
would have some real problems here because they really don’t 
have that commitment to go ahead and build the project. 
 
And then we take a look at some of the other agreements that 
are in there. I want to quote from the intercorporate 
arrangements that were made. We sign an agreement to . . . a 
debenture for $248 million and the taxpayers of this province 
guarantee that money, and there’s no pay-back period, plus 
there’s no interest. We don’t know what the interest is going to 
be. 
 
But then we take a look at some of the items within this 
document. And I want to quote about intercorporate 
arrangements: 
 

Weyerhaeuser Canada, either directly or through its 
affiliates including Weyerhaeuser Company, intends 
to provide marketing, administrative, management, 
and technical services in respect of  

the integrated operations. Weyerhaeuser Company or 
its affiliates will be paid commissions for the 
marketing of lumber, pulp and paper, in the amount of 
4%, 3%, and 5% of mill sale prices. 
 

Now they know what they’re going to get paid. They are going 
to use all their corporation affiliates to sell the material that 
they’re getting out of Saskatchewan. And really they have no 
commitment. They know they’re going to get paid. They know 
that the more expenses they can chalk up in the first three years 
that they could have $73 million take off in the initial payment. 
And I think this is where we have to be very careful. 
 
And they talk about a paper machine, of building a paper 
machine. And I think that this is where we have to be very 
careful too, because it’s possible that the renovations that are 
going to take place at the pulp mill could turn out to be where 
that paper machine is going to go. And there will really be no 
new structure taking place. 
 
I now want to turn to roads and transportation, Mr. Speaker. 
This is where it really gets interesting when we take a look at 
the document for roads and transpiration and agreement. And I 
just want to quote some of the things that are entailed in this 
document. 
 
And I think it’s interesting to note that Weyerhaeuser Canada 
will obtain over-dimensional permits from the province for the 
transportation purposes of its wood and its chips. And then, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re going to fund and provide for construction and 
reconstruction of up to 20 miles of road annually. 
 
Now when we take a look at that, that the province is going to 
pay for up to 20 miles of road per year, at the government’s 
expense, they’re either going to reconstruct these roads or 
they’re going to build new roads. We take a look at what could 
happen – the province could be paying for up to 600 miles of 
roads and highways in this province for Weyerhaeuser Canada 
to haul their materials to the pulp mill. And that’s what this says 
in here. 
 
It also goes on, Mr. Speaker, to say that Weyerhaeuser Canada 
will have the right and the authority to transport wood chips, 
round timber and other raw forest products on the road system 
on a year round bases. 
 
So really, Mr. Speaker, they don’t have to apply for any permits 
for overweight permits or anything because they have the right, 
on a year-round basis, to haul their products on the 
Saskatchewan road system. So there’s really no need for 
overweight permits. 
 
And now they go down here, Mr. Speaker, and they’re going to 
immediate upgrading of the road system – immediate upgrading 
of the road system for Weyerhaeuser. Saskatchewan will: 
 

. . . construct the following structures and roads at its 
expense in order to accommodate (Weyerhaeuser 
Canada’s) traffic . . . on the Roads System. 

  



 
December 11, 1986 

188 
 

And that’s at the expense of the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I will get down to some of these roads here in just a few 
minute, Mr. Speaker. But when you take a look at what they’re 
going to do, they’re going to upgrade these roads immediately 
at the expense of the province of Saskatchewan. And that is 
their priorities. 
 
The roads and bridge designs, that’s all going to be done at the 
expense of the province of Saskatchewan. And they’re going to 
do this at the expense of the province. 
 
And I want to indicate that they’ve said that there’s an 
emergency, and they have to reconstruct certain bridges which 
they have already undertaken to do, and that’s the bridge north 
of Prince Albert. 
 
And we know, Mr. Speaker, that all the moneys that are going 
to be put into the highway and road system – and if we take it 
30 years or we could go 20 years, and then there would be 400 
miles – and we know that the chips that are hauled are all 
hauled on a highway system. None of it’s hauled on roads. It’s 
on the major highway system. 
 
They either come from Big River to Prince Albert, or the 
Candle Lake area to Prince Albert, or Carrot River to Prince 
Albert on our major highway. 
 
And Weyerhaeuser Canada has the right, the full right, do not 
even have to ask permission, to haul on a year-round basis. And 
you can imagine what’s going to happen to our road system and 
our highway system. It’s just going to be a total mess. 
 
And the immediate upgrading. And then we take a look at the 
road between – from Highway 155 to Canoe Narrows and Jans 
Bay and Cole Bay – a road system that is narrow and dangerous 
and has had many fatal accidents in the last few years. And 
petitions have come in to the Minister of Highways, and so far 
the Minister of Highways has not acted. Twice now I’ve 
approached him to go up there and take a look at that road 
system, but nothing has happened. But Weyerhaeuser Canada – 
immediately they start constructing. They are constructing 
south of Prince Albert on the major highways, north-west of 
Prince Albert, the new bridge – all for Weyerhaeuser Canada. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister of Highways, come up to northern 
Saskatchewan and take a look at that piece of road from 155 to 
Jans Bay and Cole Bay, where all the school children are 
transported every day, and it’s a dangerous road. And I say to 
you, Mr. Minister, that is a priority. That road is a priority. It’s 
more of a priority than I think the Weyerhaeuser roads that 
you’re doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — We’ve had many fatal accidents on that 
road and it’s serious. And I say, Mr. Minister of Highways, you 
should come up there and take a look and make that a priority. 
 
I think you should come up to LaLoche and take a look at the 
road to McMurray which is a priority. And I know the Deputy 
Premier, he’s going to rebuild that road, or he’s  

going to construct that road from LaLoche to McMurray. And 
the member from Meadow Lake, he agrees with that. So we can 
expect to start at that and I suspect, Mr. Minister of Highways, 
that that will be in your budget. And if it’s not, we will know 
where that money has gone. It’s gone to Weyerhaeuser Canada 
to upgrade and to rebuild roads for Weyerhaeuser. So we’ll just 
see where the priorities are when the highways budget comes 
out. Is it going to be for roads and highways that will benefit all 
of Saskatchewan, or will it be for roads and highways that will 
benefit only Weyerhaeuser Canada? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to what I would like to see 
happen in this term and what I intend to work for and impress 
upon this government to do up in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
First of all I want to turn to the food transportation subsidy that 
was taken off. Well I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that $250,000 
was taken away from the citizens of the far North in 
Saskatchewan, a food transportation subsidy that provides fresh 
food, vegetables and milk to the citizens up in that area – you 
took it off. And I’m going to insist that you put that $250,000 
back into that food transportation subsidy because . . . I just 
want to show you here, and I have a letter dated on November 
7th, and this is some of the prices that the citizens up in that far 
North are paying. 
 
Eighty-five dollars for 100 pounds of potatoes. That’s what they 
pay up in Black Lake. They pay about $3 a gallon for gasoline. 
Eggs. A dozen eggs, $2.50. Milk, $4.25 for 2 litres. This is what 
they’re paying up in Black Lake. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to the Minister 
of Health, this is a program that should be immediately 
reinstated. It’s important to them citizens up there, and I’ll tell 
you it’s a lot more important than the money that you gave . . 
the $10 million grant that you gave to Peter Pocklington. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — You can find money in the millions of 
dollars to give to Peter Pocklington. You can find $250 million 
to give Weyerhaeuser Canada, and it didn’t get you any 
members elected. We have the member from Battleford here. 
We have both the Prince Albert members. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the Minister of Health – a 
member who comes from northern Saskatchewan and knows 
what it’s like to live up there, and knows what it’s like to pay 50 
cents a litre for gasoline when you’re getting it down here for 
29 cents – to immediately take . . . And it’s only $250,000, and 
you can reinstate that food transportation program. And I ask 
you to do that, and I intend to work for that. 
 
I intend to work for better health up in my constituency. I’ve 
discussed it with the Minister of Health and I will continue to 
discuss that throughout the coming months to try and provide 
better health services. It’s something that is badly needed, not 
only just in the immediate area of LaLoche and Buffalo 
Narrows, but in the far areas of Black  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

189 
 

Lake and Stony Rapids and Fond-du-Lac. 
 
Another thing that I think that we have to get away from, Mr. 
Speaker, in this province is the part-time welfare jobs that we 
have by this government, that they’re implemented by this 
government across – jobs that encourage, they force young 
people to go onto the welfare rolls. 
 
I’m going to give you some real examples. A grade 12 student 
coming out of school this year, graduating and wanting a job 
goes over. There’s a program at 4.50 an hour; it’s a welfare 
program for 20 weeks. The young grade 12 student goes and 
tries to get a job. And what is he told by the administrator of 
that program? “You go and get yourself on welfare. You get 
your first cheque, then you come back, and then you can work 
for 20 weeks on this job.” You are forcing young men and 
women to go on the welfare rolls. You are forcing them to it — 
you’re forcing them to go out and work for $.50 an hour. 
You’re forcing them from welfare to unemployment insurance, 
and I think it’s disgraceful and it’s degrading. 
 
And it’s no wonder we have so many problems, Mr. Speaker, 
not only in Saskatchewan, but I tell you, in northern 
Saskatchewan it is really hard. When you take a look at the 
many problems that we have with alcohol and drugs, and 
breaking and entering; there’s violence, violent crimes, and I 
think that this is where you have to take a serious look at your 
job creation. If you want to keep creating a welfare society, you 
just keep creating these 20-week jobs so individuals can get 
enough weeks to get UIC. 
 
I urge through you, Mr. Speaker, to the members opposite, to 
take a serious look at what you’re doing to the young men and 
women of this province and get away from that. What they need 
is good, long-term jobs with some security. They need the same 
kind of commitment and the same opportunities that you’re 
willing to give to Dennis Ball or those fellows that you pay 
$95,000 a year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Thompson: — You just imagine what it’s like to get up in 
the morning and you don’t have no job to go to, and I tell you 
it’s something that has to come to a stop here. There is just so 
many young people in this province, and not only young 
people, it’s hitting other people now where they are on welfare; 
they are on unemployment insurance. And no wonder we are 
having problems, Mr. Speaker. You get up in the morning, you 
haven’t got a job to go to, you’ve got no security. I tell you, she 
gets pretty bleak out there. 
 
The housing is another area, Mr. Speaker, that I want to 
address. And I particularly want to address the $3,000 home 
repair program. This is a program that I have asked the minister 
to change. It’s a program that you spend $3,000 and then you 
get $1,500 back. Mr. Speaker, that totally eliminates the poor 
people in this province, because the people don’t have the 
$3,000 to start with, and there is no way they can take 
advantage of the $1,500 grant until they have spent $3,000 to 
repair a program . . .  

A repair program. And I say this has to be looked into – and the 
Deputy Premier is shaking his head. And I say that’s a fact. It 
eliminates the poor people, because I tell you, there are many of 
my constituents who don’t have the $3,000 to put out first in 
order to get your $1,500 rebate. 
 
And I can tell the minister from Regina South, the new minister 
of housing, that your $10,000 grant at 6 per cent is another 
thing that you should look into. I know individuals who are 
getting . . . they put in an application, the cheque comes in, and 
they’re not going to build till the spring, and they’ve got a 
$10,000 cheque sitting in there. And they’re drawing interest, 
and I say that’s a fact. You better believe it, it’s a fact. And this 
is something, Mr. Speaker, that the new minister from Regina 
South, the new minister of Sask housing, he better take a 
serious look at it. You take a look at . . . and I’ve asked him to 
do that . . .I’ve written a letter and asked him to do it, and I 
sincerely hope that he has. 
 
The senior citizens in northern Saskatchewan are another group 
that are living in dire poverty. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, you 
should come up North and just have a look at the way some of 
the senior citizens are living. They are living in houses without 
sewer and water, running right down the street. They are living 
in conditions where they have no power. And I think that this is 
something that has to be looked at very seriously. And I ask the 
minister of housing to come up North and I will take him 
around. And I will show you the type of poverty that some of 
the senior citizens are living in, in northern Saskatchewan, and 
most certainly shouldn’t be living in those conditions. 
 
Single parents is another area. And applications have come in, 
requests have come in for communities like Beauval. 
Thirty-four applications – most of them single parents. And this 
is another key area that we have to take a look at. I asked the 
minister of housing to take a look at what he’s doing with some 
of the staff housing that he has in northern Saskatchewan and 
just who is using these houses. And you’re going to find out 
that they’re druggists who move in; you’re going to find out 
some electrician moves in and immediately goes into a staff 
housing. And yet we have senior citizens and families with five 
children who can’t get a house. But if you know this 
government and you move in, you can get in. And I would like 
to know if they’re paying 25 per cent of their income on the 
staff housing. 
 
And you go into Buffalo Narrows and take a look at who’s 
living in staff housing. And you’re going to find out, it’s 
druggists, electricians. You’re going to find out that pilots are 
living in them. And yet there’s senior citizens . . . I have a 
senior citizen living 11 miles out of town in dire poverty and 
can’t even get into a home in Buffalo Narrows. So I ask the 
minister, you take a serious look at that. 
 
And you can come in, Mr. Minister . . . I’d be pleased to take 
you around and show you some of these situations. And they 
are bad. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
December 11, 1986 

190 
 

Mr. Thompson: — We have to take a look at the traditional 
industries that we have in northern Saskatchewan, fishing and 
trapping. And I think it goes without saying – I brought that up 
before – that we have to start processing the fish that we 
produce in this province. We continually are taking these fish 
from northern Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well that’s fine. I say to the Deputy Premier that it’s time now 
for you to put those fish plants in northern Saskatchewan. Put 
them in there. I say it’s time for you to go and build that road to 
McMurray. And I say it’s time to reconstruct that road to Canoe 
Narrows. Now is the time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I would ask that we take a serious look at 
the fishing industry and the freshwater fish marketing 
corporation and how it’s operating. I think we have to start 
processing at home and not sending our raw materials out to 
another province to be processed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I only have a few more comments to make before 
sitting down, but these are some of the items that I intend to 
work for. But I want to also continue to impress upon this 
government to implement the surface leases that we have in 
northern Saskatchewan. We have 50 per cent Northerners 
working at Cluff Lake, but let me tell you it’s down close to 20 
per cent at Key Lake. And I say to the ministers opposite: I ask 
you to implement and make sure that those surface leases are 
honoured and that we get 50 per cent at Key Lake and that we 
get 50 per cent at Wollaston Lake, the same as we have at Cluff 
Lake at the present time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Northerners should not be penalized for where 
they live. All they’re asking for is a fair deal, and I say to you, 
Mr. Speaker, they’re not getting a fair deal right now. All 
they’re asking for is a fair deal. They want to be treated as 
equals. You go north of Meadow Lake – the banks, they will 
not issue a mortgage north of Meadow Lake. Just imagine, up 
there if somebody wants to buy a home and get a mortgage, 
they can’t do it. Meadow Lake and north, that’s the line. If you 
get an insurance policy, Meadow Lake and north it’s 10 per 
cent more. I say that it’s unfair and that Northerners should be 
treated as equals and given equal opportunities, and that’s what 
I’ll be working towards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I look forward, Mr. Speaker, to this term, 
and I intend to work hard on behalf of my constituents. And I 
sincerely hope that the problems that I have brought out tonight 
and other problems that I will bring to the attention of this 
government, that solutions will be worked out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the main motion but I will 
be supporting the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, let me 
congratulate you as you assume your new, difficult role. I know 
that you will handle yourself with firmness and with dignity, 
but more importantly, with fairness. 

 
I would like to welcome the new members to this Assembly. I 
hope that they understand that we are all here for the good of 
the people, to comply with their will to build this province. 
Unfortunately, some members so far after listening to the 
various debates – some new, some not so new – are using this 
forum already, Mr. Speaker, for their own personal gain. And 
I’ll deal with some of this later on in my remarks. 
 
It gives me great pride and pleasure to rise and speak today in 
favour of the Speech from the Throne. And this throne speech 
continues the tradition that our government started, that of 
building a solid foundation for growth in this province. And 
after again listening to the members opposite, I was hoping that 
at least the new MLA’s opposite would understand building and 
business, but I see it’s the same old thing, only more of it. You 
just don’t have the foggiest idea or understanding of business. 
You never have; you never will – lawyers included in that. 
 
In the olden days of business I used to hire lawyers. They 
couldn’t understand business, but rather tried to solve some 
problems later and were well paid for that; could never 
understand how business functioned, how business created jobs. 
None the less, before our term is done and a long, long, long, 
long, long time from now, hopefully you’ll be getting the 
message. It’s unfortunate too, because your former member 
from Pelly as he was beginning his leadership campaign was 
just starting to understand slightly. 
 
But this evening does mark my first speech in this, the first 
session in the 21st Legislature, as the member of the legislature 
for the constituency of Regina South. The constituency of 
Regina South is made up of a large cross-section of 
hard-working individuals from varied and diverse backgrounds. 
 
There are many professionals, self-employed and 
small-business people, wage earners, civil servants, teachers, 
senior citizens, and yes, farmers. Together these people elected 
me on October 20th to represent them for the Progressive 
Conservative government of Premier Grant Devine. It’s my 
intention to give these people the kind of representation they 
want and to give them the kind of government that they want – 
responsible, yet compassionate; government that consults with 
the people and responds to their needs while maintaining fiscal 
responsibility. 
 
For instance, for the young people of Regina South, we believe 
that everyone should have the opportunity for a equality 
education. In order to provide the best possible education to all 
Saskatchewan students, we must provide the necessary funding. 
Under the leadership of Grant Devine, this goal has become a 
reality. Our general education budget is higher now than ever 
before in our province’s history. 
 
And that’s just the beginning. Our Progressive Conservative 
government removed unfair restrictions, increased loan limits, 
and reduced the interest rates on student loans to 6 per cent. 
Four hundred million dollars was established in the educational 
endowment fund that  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

191 
 

saw the upgrading of educational facilities province-wide. Our 
children are the future of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They 
must be given every advantage to succeed. 
 
I would like to take this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
member from Lakeview speaking from her chair is already 
concerned about her future. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to thank my constituents 
for the confidence that they have shown in me by helping to 
re-elect this Progressive Conservative government. The people 
have demonstrated to us that they believe we are the best choice 
to lead Saskatchewan into the future. 
 
I would like to congratulate our Deputy Premier and Provincial 
Secretary. Unfortunately he’s not here for the moment. There he 
is. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He’s crossed the floor. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Not for real. But he did run an excellent 
campaign. Perhaps he’s there sharing his ideas with you. That’s 
how he got all of us here. 
 
I am personally committed to serving the people of Regina 
South under this administration now and for many years to 
come. Four a half years ago Premier Grant Devine’s 
government was first elected. I was proud to be a part of that 
team under his leadership. He had a vision for Saskatchewan. 
He saw that there were tremendous opportunities here in this 
province, but he also recognized the needs for protection of all 
our people. 
 
It makes me proud to call Regina my home. I’ve lived in Regina 
most of my life, and yes, in all parts of it. Regina has been good 
to me – in my youth and later on as a family man and business 
man. Yes, I proudly represented Regina North. Now Regina 
South – perhaps some of the other members should be cautious 
because you might not be able to tell. But Regina has been good 
to me, Mr. Speaker, in my youth, and later on as a family man 
and a business man. Similarly for the last four years our 
government has been good to Regina. 
 
One of the first and most obvious improvements that comes to 
mind is the carbon filtration plant at the Buffalo Pound project – 
and that has vastly improved the quality of our Regina water. 
And this we accomplished in our first term of office. The taste 
and odour problem in our city’s water supply existed for many, 
many years. In fact, it was ignored by the previous government 
throughout three terms of office. But because of the efforts of 
our government, we can now all enjoy the very basic and 
necessary services of good water year-round. 
 
Our health care system continues to be one of the finest in 
North America. Expansion at the General Hospital, at the 
Pasqua Hospital, have greatly improved the efficiency and 
operation of those facilities. 
 
The construction of the Wascana rehabilitation centre again 
demonstrates the commitment of our government to health care. 
An additional $300 million to the health capital fund is 
evidence of our long-term commitment to  

the health of the people of this province. 
 
(2145) 
 
This year 53 projects have been undertaken by the city of 
Regina through the provincial capital fund, a program of the 
Department of Urban Affairs. These projects total almost $12 
million of which our government will contribute over eight. The 
effect of these projects will be to improve the quality of 
everyday life for the citizens of Regina. 
 
The 911 emergency telephone service is a prime example. Other 
major projects include upgrading of Arcola and Dewdney 
Avenues; upgrading of our storm sewers; replacement and 
refurbishing of city buses; construction of a much needed and 
much utilized south zone leisure centre. 
 
I could go on and on just speaking about the benefits to the 
people of Regina over the last four years: $40 million new 
school construction and renovations in Regina; more units of 
senior citizens’ accommodation; the Western Canada Games 
all-purpose field house, which is presently taking place on 25th 
Avenue. But I’ll resist the temptation, Mr. Speaker, to reiterate 
all of these accomplishments in too much detail. The record 
speaks for itself. And the record repeats itself in every 
community across this province. 
 
To the constituents of Regina South I wish to emphasize my 
commitment to serve them and indicate that my door is always 
open and I am always ready to listen to their concerns, their 
suggestions, and their needs. I am committed to represent my 
constituents every day as we build a better Saskatchewan 
together. 
 
Our government realized that to meet our common goals we 
must work together with the people in order to build 
Saskatchewan. It was and is a Partnership For Progress. Our 
record shows this: new business and investment opportunities; 
thousands of jobs created; and equally important, protection for 
Saskatchewan families – a better quality of life. 
 
As minister responsible for urban affairs and the Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation, I believe that we must turn our attention 
to promoting stability and long-term security for all people. We 
must continue to create jobs and generate economic opportunity 
and activity in every community in this province. That’s the 
message that I hear, Mr. Speaker, when I meet with people from 
all walks of life, from all across our province. 
 
One of the accomplishments of this government that I am 
especially proud of is the Saskatchewan home program. 
Saskatchewan continues to lead the rest of the country in 
providing assistance to its residents for secure, comfortable, 
modest housing in some instances. In 1982 the concept of 
secure housing was foreign to people of our province. Many 
families were in jeopardy of losing their homes – their very 
basic need – when interest rates hit record highs. Our 
government responded to that need and introduced the 
mortgage interest reduction plan, the first plan of its kind in 
Canada. We ensured that no home owner would face mortgage 
rates higher than  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

192 
 

thirteen and a quarter per cent at a time when lending 
institutions were charging in excess of 20 per cent. Over 44,000 
Saskatchewan home owners qualified for benefits during the 
life of that program, and recently this program was expanded 
and improved and reintroduced as the Saskatchewan home 
program. 
 
The Saskatchewan home program will guarantee that mortgage 
rates will not exceed nine and three-quarters per cent for the 
next 10 years. This program guarantees Saskatchewan residents 
the kind of stability and long-term security that they need, what 
they want and deserve as they pursue their dream of owning 
their own home. 
 
What is new and different to this program is the second 
component of the Saskatchewan home program that provides 
matched grants and low interest loans for home renovation 
projects. 
 
Under this aspect of the program, Mr. Speaker, a home owner 
may apply for a matching grant of up to $1,500 towards a home 
improvement of up to 3,000. And I would like to inform the 
member from Cumberland, at this point in time it is a five-year 
program. 
 
It’s not necessary to spend $3,000 at once to get back $1,500, 
but rather your northern communities can spend $100 and get 
another $100 to do a $200 job, and it’s a five-year program. 
They can encompass the $1,500 matching grant over three 
years. I would suggest that you take that message back to your 
constituents. Do your job. Let them know what’s available to 
them. They can qualify for those programs and improve those 
homes. 
 
In addition to this grant assistance, home owners may finance 
the cost of repairs and improvements with a low interest 
government guaranteed home improvement loan of up to 
$10,000 at a 6 per cent interest rate for up to 10 years. 
 
The member from Cumberland is smiling at me at this time, and 
yet have you been fair to me? You spoke in your native 
language yesterday, and in fairness, you said that you would 
provide a translation immediately following. That never came. 
You referred to my constituency in English words that I could 
understand. I would like to respond to your comments but you 
don’t allow me that opportunity. Where is that interpretation? I 
would like to debate those remarks now, at this time. You have 
something to hide? Why didn’t you provide that interpretation 
so that I could address your concerns now, as I did with the 
member from Athabasca? 
 
These programs, Mr. Speaker, not only improve the family 
home, thereby increasing its value while enhancing the quality 
of life, but will also create thousands of jobs in the home repair 
and renovation industry in every centre of this province. To the 
end of November, over 70,000 applications have been received 
for the matching grant program – 38,000 in Regina alone. In 
just three short months over 5,000 jobs have been created by the 
private sector. An additional 7,500 applications have been made 
for home improvement loans, for a total loan value of over $54 
million. The total value of the home improvements proposed 
under the  

matching grant program is almost $172 million. We are looking 
at a total value of over $226 million into this economy. 
 
In the five-year duration of this program, Mr. Speaker, it is 
expected that 25,000 jobs will be created for our Saskatchewan 
people. However, that’s just one aspect of it. 
 
Over 75 per cent of all the work initiated is being done by 
Saskatchewan businesses. The modest forecast indicates that 
this province-wide economic activity as a result of this program 
could easily surpass $2 billion. 
 
These programs build on a strategy – a Partnership for Progress. 
They demonstrate our commitment to efficient and effective 
government, a government which recognizes the needs of all 
the people. 
 
These benefits are being felt and appreciated not only by the 
individual home owners, but by the contractors and tradesmen 
whose phone are probably ringing right now with new business 
that might not have been there were it not for these programs. 
And as we sit here this very moment, Mr. Speaker, there are 
plumbers, electricians, and carpenters carrying out their trades 
in thousands of homes throughout this province as a direct 
result of the program. 
 
A family home is the largest single investment that most 
Saskatchewan families will make. And this government is 
committed to seeing that as many residents as possible purchase 
their own home and enjoy it to the fullest. 
 
Young families in Saskatchewan have benefited from the Build 
a Home, and the first-time home buyers’ programs. These 
families have often faced difficulties in obtaining their first 
home. This program has given young people the necessary help 
so that they may realize the dream of home ownership. 
 
Another way in which our government is again leading the 
nation is through recognizing one of the major outstanding 
social problems of the day – enabling its residents to retire with 
financial security and independence. We are meeting this need 
through the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 
 
The Saskatchewan Pension Plan is voluntary, and it’s open to 
residents between the ages of 18 and 65. The plan features a 
built-in minimum pension and a government matching 
contribution for those workers who have previously been 
excluded from other pension programs, specifically 
home-makers, part-time workers, small-business people, and 
other self-employed persons. Again this is another example of a 
very basic right to our society, the right to a decent standard of 
living throughout retirement years. This is something the people 
of Saskatchewan want and we believe, deserve. 
 
You know one of the quirks about human nature is that we 
sometimes take too many things in our everyday life for 
granted. One example that comes to mind is the price of 
gasoline. Just over four years ago when this government first 
took office the price of gasoline in this province was at record 
levels, thanks in a large part to a  
  



 
December 11, 1986 

193 
 

healthy provincial government tax. Again we responded to the 
needs of the people and removed that tax as our first official 
duty upon taking office. The removal of that tax has saved the 
drivers of this province and put into their pockets directly $600 
million – money that they can now spend freely the way they 
see fit in other areas of our society. And in Regina we now 
enjoy the lowest gasoline prices in the nation. 
 
Another tax which the residents of this province wanted 
removed was the tax on clothing, Mr. Speaker, such a basic and 
elementary need. So in March of this year we removed the sales 
tax on clothing and footwear under $300. This move has been 
applauded and enjoyed by the people throughout our province. 
On a day-to-day basis one might forget just what an impact 
these taxes had on our lives. But the best way I can think to 
remind each of you of that impact if you haven’t had the chance 
to travel out of province lately: I had the opportunity this last 
summer to attend Expo in Vancouver, and one certainly can’t 
help but notice paying up to 10 cents per litre more in gasoline 
or paying 7 per cent sales tax on not only clothing, but 
restaurant meals as well. 
 
While I’m on the subject of Expo ’86 I want to take the 
opportunity to review some of the outstanding accomplishments 
that were made by this province at one of the most successful 
world expositions ever. Saskatchewan was a presence to be 
proud of at Expo ’86; 2.8 million people visited our pavilion 
during the 165 days of the fair. In addition to those 2.8 million 
who came through our doors, countless thousands enjoyed the 
exterior exhibitory of our pavilion, a feature which was unique 
to the Saskatchewan pavilion. 
 
Among the exterior exhibits we displayed to Expo’s 23 million 
visitors were sports kiosks. J.I. Case displays, the Western 
Development Museum steam calliope, and so on. Saskatchewan 
artists were featured throughout, and they have since had the 
opportunity to start new lives in the entertainment business – at 
least some of them. Our Harvest Restaurant became a legend 
even before its rating in the Vancouver Sun of five stars out of a 
possible four. 
 
Yes, we made an impact at Expo and it was in the tourism 
industry. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, time does not permit me 
to start talking tourism now and explaining to the member of 
Cumberland exactly how those programs help his people. And 
he smirks there. As we try to help his people in the North, he 
smirks, Mr. Speaker. He doesn’t understand how it works. The 
member from Athabasca, if he invites me to his constituency – 
and in all sincerity we can go and look at projects that he has 
difficulty with – I’d be delighted to do that. 
 
There is much more I could say. But in view of the time, I will 
conclude my remarks for now by saying that on October 20th, 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan had a choice. It was 
their decision that a Progressive Conservative government was 
the key to a secure and prosperous future. I believe they have 
made the right decision. 
 
I look forward to working with our Premier, Grant Devine, and 
this government to ensure that their hopes  

for the future are realized. It gives me great satisfaction to have 
been a member of this government for the past four and 
one-half years and to be able to stand here today to affirm our 
record of promises made and promises kept. 
 
I invite my constituents, for that matter all citizens of this 
province, to share with us what they want. Become part of the 
decision-making process. Give us your ideas. Tell us your 
needs. I feel that this government has gone a long way toward 
meeting the needs of the people it serves. The fact that we are 
here on this side of the House today is proof that we have given 
the people what they want, and that they want us to continue in 
that tradition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is with pleasure and pride that I tell you that I will be 
supporting the throne speech and the Build Saskatchewan 
initiatives presented to this House. 
 
Being near 10 o’clock, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:01 p.m. 
 
 


