


















































April 15, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 15, 1986 
 

607 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Conflict of Interest Guide-lines for MLAs 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to address a 
question to the Premier, and it deals, Mr. Premier, with your 
long-standing promise to introduce conflict of interest 
guide-lines for your MLAs. 
 
You first promised the conflict of interest guide-lines for your 
MLAs during the Redberry Lake affair a year ago, and on 
March the 17th in the throne speech you also alluded to the fact, 
or promised again to introduce them. And on April 1st in the 
House when I asked you, you claimed that the guide-lines 
would be made public, and I quote you, “within the next couple 
of days.” 
 
And so I ask the Premier, can you explain why the unexpected 
delay in introduction of the conflict of interest guide-lines, and 
can you tell the people of Saskatchewan when, in fact, they will 
be made public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: Yes, Mr. Speaker. I apologize to the 
member; I should have tabled them earlier this week. I’ll table 
them tomorrow so that he will have them. I don’t have them 
with me, but you’ll have them tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I thank the Premier for attending to that. I’d 
like to . . . As I understand, Mr. Premier, what you’re proposing 
here is, rather than the guide-lines, a white paper in order that 
you may, in fact, proceed with public hearings. Is that your 
intention, to proceed by way of a white paper as alluded to in 
the budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well you’ll see the details tomorrow. 
But, Mr. Speaker, we have put together what I think is a 
reasonable white paper that has some pretty stringent 
restrictions on elected officials here with respect to conflict of 
interest. And we are going to have, and request to have, an 
independent, respected person review that white paper and so 
that it can be reviewed by other people. 
 
And we are quite prepared to entertain the suggestions, 
certainly, that are in the conflict of interest guide-lines. We 
want some input from the legal profession and some input from 
the public, and we’re prepared to look at anything that is 
reasonable. 
 

Delayed Answers to Written Questions 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
question to the Premier, and it deals with the difficulty in 
attempting to get answers from this government. We are now on 
the 20th sitting day of this session, and I would ask the Premier, 
we have a number of written questions that were ordered to be 
answered by this Assembly nearly two years ago. 
 
Can the Premier tell the Saskatchewan people when your 
government will be finally answering the questions such  

as the employment arrangements of the former PC candidate, 
Terry Leier; the government employment arrangement with 
your brother-in-law, René Archambault; the money paid to your 
main advertising agencies by the government departments in 
Crown corporations; the money paid out to various law firms by 
government departments in Crown corporations; and the 
out-of-province travel of your Minister of Justice? 
 
Now I know that it takes some time to get answers to these 
questions because some of the numbers are fairly significant. 
But I think two years is becoming outrageous, and I wonder 
whether you can give a commitment that we will have an 
answer by the end of this week on these questions that are on 
the order paper for this length of time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure the hon. 
member is entirely accurate when he says that these haven’t 
been dealt with for two years. I can recall in my estimates, and 
certainly in the legislature, where we dealt with Mr. 
Archambault and in terms of how much his contract is, and all 
the rest of that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We didn’t get any answers though. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We certainly did get answers and I 
provided the answers. So I don’t believe it’s fair for you to say 
that none of these have been addressed. They are addressed in 
the normal course of events, year after year, as the estimates 
come up. And if people have questions on an annual basis, then 
they’re addressed in the legislature, and I can remember 
addressing at least one of those that the hon. member 
mentioned. So, Mr. Speaker, they will be dealt with in due 
course, as they always are. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — If the minister would look at the returns 
from 1983-84, he would find that return no. 118 dealing with 
René Archambault and the employment from May 8th, ’82 to 
March 22nd, ’84, has not been answered, and if you have that 
information now, if you’ve been giving it out, we haven’t heard 
it. But maybe you could give it to us now here in the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I obviously don’t 
have estimates information with me in question period, but I 
can recall going through my estimates, Mr. Speaker, what the 
information was, and they asked me, and I provided them with 
the information. I mean, it’s dealt with on an annual basis, and 
it comes up on an annual basis. And, Mr. Speaker, we will 
continue to deal with it in that fashion as it’s always dealt with 
in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, you could correct the 
Premier. He seems to be totally confused about orders of the 
legislature for answers to written questions. What we’re talking 
about is orders from this legislature that call on you to give a 
written answer. They are now two years old, and I refer you to 
— some of the answers were given last week — but 29 
questions, ordered answered by motions of this Assembly, 
remained unanswered, and six of them are nearly two years old. 
Among these unanswered questions, the written questions that I 
referred to, are the cost of your out-of-province travel for that 
time period, the cost of out-of-province travel of 21 different 
cabinet  
  



 
April 15, 1986 

 

608 
 

ministers. These are the answers that we need. 
 
They’re written questions. They’re on the order paper. They’ve 
been ordered by the Assembly to be answered, and they’re not 
estimate questions. And if you care to read the rules of the 
Assembly, after four years you would think the Premier of the 
province would understand some of these very basic principles 
of the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, before I was in the 
legislature, and while I’ve been in the legislature, I have always 
understood fairness, and maybe the members opposite never did 
figure that out and that’s why they’re sitting over there. 
 
In fairness, Mr. Speaker, we have been tabling information in 
the legislature. We tabled some last week; we will table some 
this week; we will table some next week, and he knows that 
that’s the procedure. And we will continue to do as it’s been 
done in the legislature for as long as the House has been sitting. 
 
When we were in opposition, we asked for information, and we 
received it when it was tabled. All right. So you will receive it 
when it’s tabled in here, and we will respond to it on the normal 
course of events. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier mentions 
fairness, and I would be fair to him. Are you giving the 
commitment, then, that next week the balance of these 
questions will be answered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I give the commitment that 
in due course those items will be tabled in the legislature. Some 
have been tabled last week, some will be tabled now, some will 
be tabled next week. Maybe it will be two weeks, maybe it will 
be three weeks. But, Mr. Speaker, I give the commitment that 
over time they will be tabled as they normally are, year after 
year. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Final supplementary to the Premier. Do 
you think it’s fair that members of the opposition and the public 
have waited two years for the disclosure of the cost of trips by 
cabinet ministers, and they’re still waiting? Do you think that 
we would be insisting too much if we asked you that next week 
you could come forward with the cost of the travel of your 
cabinet for the period last year and the year before? Do you 
think that would be fair? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can say that this 
administration has provided information faster than any 
administration that has been in the legislature in Saskatchewan. 
And we provide that information quickly, and we respond, and 
we table the information; and we have in estimates, and we 
have for requests. So, Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing different in 
the way this is handled now than when it was handled in the 
past. And, Mr. Speaker, in fact most of it is handled quicker 
than it ever has in the past. 
 

Cost of Government Advertising 
 

Mr. Thompson: — My question is to the Premier, and it deals 
with the cost of government advertising. 
 
The Public Accounts have shown that your government  

spent approximately $17 million on self-serving advertising in 
1984 and 1985, and it is reasonable to assume that you spent 
more than 20 million on such advertising in the physical year 
just ended, 1985-86. Does the Premier have any idea how much 
his government plans to spend on advertising in the current 
year? Will the figure top 20 million once again, and if you deny 
that, can you supply the Assembly with your own figures, Mr. 
Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not accurate, and I don’t 
want the public to believe that the figures that the hon. member 
has put forward . . . what I said a few days ago in the legislature 
with respect to advertising. There is a significant difference 
between what we spend our money on and what the former 
administration spends their money on. We have to have, and the 
public wants, information on new job programs; information on 
new agricultural programs, and information on the economic 
conditions in agriculture and what you can do to get some help. 
And they appreciate that. What they don’t want, Mr. Speaker, is 
what they saw before, was millions and millions of dollars spent 
by Crown corporations advertising a monopoly, calling it the 
Saskatchewan family of Crown corporations. It was an insult to 
every family in the province. 
 
Crown corporations, my friend, are not families. Crown 
corporations are bureaucracies. Crown corporations have a role, 
but they don’t have the role in this province, under my 
administration, to sit there and say you must deal with a Crown 
corporation because it’s a family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we use public funds to provide information 
in this province, it’s to provide information; information to 
students, information to people in agriculture, information to 
those that want health care, information for seniors, information 
on how to access programs — not blowing up a Crown 
corporation and calling it a family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a significant difference — a significant 
difference between advertising and blowing up Crown 
corporations, calling them a family, versus giving solid 
information to students and seniors and farmers. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they appreciate it, and we will continue to provide that 
information under this administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
I asked a very straightforward question, and I would appreciate 
a straightforward answer. Do you, or does anyone on the 
government side, have any idea how much tax money your 
government proposes to spend on the advertising this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we will provide the House 
with the estimates of what we will spend in 1986-87, and when 
we go through the estimates and the accounts of the previous 
year, we will go through exactly what has been spent and where 
it has been spent. My point is that we will defend those 
expenditures as information to the public so that they can have 
good access to all the programs. 
  



 
April 15, 1986 

 

609 
 

The members opposite are concerned, and they tell me they are 
concerned, about unemployment. And they say yes, they’re 
concerned about it. When we put out a publication that says: 
here’s where you can phone, here’s where you can get 
education, here’s where you can get training, they complain 
about it. And, Mr. Speaker, it was a good publication because 
people read it. It was in the middle of newspapers, and young 
people came to me and said, that’s the first time I’ve been able 
to find that kind of information. And the NDP are against that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s one thing consistent about that bunch over 
there — they’re against everything. They’re against information 
for students. They’re against information for farmers. They’re 
against projects. They’re against economic development. 
They’re against all kinds of agricultural programs. They can 
stand there day after day after day, and they’re against helping 
people. If there’s unemployment in the oil patch, they say, well 
that’s too bad. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will provide the information on what we 
spend, and we will certainly defend it as good, solid 
information to students and seniors and farmers and the general 
public in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. On 
March 25th in this Assembly, the Deputy Premier took notice of 
questions with respect to the cost of specific government ads. 
Do you or your government have that information now, Mr. 
Premier? You undertook to provide that information to the 
Assembly and to Saskatchewan taxpayers nearly three weeks 
ago. Do you have it, and if not, why do you not have it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t have it with me, and 
if I do, I haven’t got it at my fingertips. And if the Deputy 
Premier took notice of it, Mr. Speaker, then I’ll provide it as 
quickly as I can. 
 

Agricultural Representative Services in Kamsack 
 

Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
question to the Premier, also the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. 
Minister, two years ago your government decided to remove the 
ag rep service from the town of Kamsack. You transferred the 
existing ag rep at that time, and you didn’t replace him with 
another ag rep. In April of ’84, Mr. Premier, your minister of 
Agriculture at the time defended that position. 
 
Mr. Premier, has your government learned its lesson, as it has in 
the used car tax and many other issues, and will you now agree 
to again reverse your decision and put an ag rep into the town of 
Kamsack in the very near future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, I 
appreciate you saying that. I realize that after . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Lusney: — . . . after all the fighting that we have done to 
get one back in there . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — . . . it appears, Mr. Premier, then this is going 
to be politically expedient for you to replace that ag rep. And I 
suppose what we can call this is an election ag rep. Will this ag 
rep remain there after the election? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can say, Mr. Speaker, that 
in my consultations with the community of Kamsack and with 
the farmers, and particularly with people like Rod Gardner, that 
they drew this matter to my attention and they said it’s 
important that they have permanently — permanently — an 
office and an ag rep office in Kamsack, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I don’t have as much confidence in the members opposite 
as I do people like Rod Gardner and some of the associates and 
real farmers there. And they said to me, Mr. Speaker, that that 
should be open. And, Mr. Speaker, I said yes, I agree with you, 
and there will be an ag rep there. 
 
And when it comes to, Mr. Speaker — and my hon. colleague 
mentioned that they have changed their mind from time to time 
and they congratulate me for removing the tax off used cars, I 
would just say I was wise enough to remove it within a few 
months, Mr. Speaker. They had a very, very unfair tax on 
people in this province, called the NDP death tax. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they did not remove it for years and years and years. 
And when they did remove it, Mr. Speaker, they never gave 1 
cent back to anybody in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 

Employment Status of René Archambault 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I have a 
question to the Minster of Education. Minister, a week ago in 
this Assembly I asked you a question to which you took notice. 
That is a week ago, a question with respect to the employment 
status of the Premier’s brother-in-law, one Mr. René 
Archambault. 
 
My question to you, Madam Minister, is: is René Archambault 
still employed by your department? If so, in what capacity? Is 
he on permanent staff or on a contract as a consultant? And 
what is his rate of pay? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d be happy to 
answer the member’s question today. I have the information 
with me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the status of Mr. Archambault is one of being on 
permanent staff with the Department of Education, and has 
been since 1984. Previous to that, from 1982 to 1984, he was on 
a secondment from College Mathieu. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
understanding that Mr. Archambault’s salary is at the range of 
the professional 7 level, which is approximately $4,000 a 
month. 
  



 
April 15, 1986 

 

610 
 

I believe that there was a second component to the hon. 
member’s question last week, and it had to do with a $1,000 
grant, as outlined in Public Accounts. And I would like to 
inform the member that that grant was for travel, and the reason 
it is in the grant section is because it is 100 per cent 
reimbursable, through the Secretary of State, from the federal 
government. There are approximately two or three other 
department employees that have their travel grants to do with 
French education in that section of the Public Accounts. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, a supplement. Thank 
you for the information. I am still wanting to pursue the 
question of why a grant was provided for the purposes — as 
you say, travel. I consider that to be highly unusual, even 
though I know some of this funding for the Official Minority 
Language Office comes from the federal government. 
 
Do you not think, Madam Minister, that to provide a grant to an 
individual for travel is unusual when you consider the fact that 
in the operations of the government travel is paid for in other 
ways? It is legislated and by regulation. How do you justify the 
paying of an individual a grant for travel purposes? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Speaker, no, it is not unusual in 
this particular case. And the hon. member, if the member from 
Quill Lake would be quiet and listen . . . 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I want to repeat my 
question. I want to know how the minister justifies the paying 
of a grant to an individual who’s a full-time employee of the 
department for the purposes of travel. Isn’t that an unusual 
practice, Madam Minister? And if it’s not, will you be prepared 
to table the regulations or the policies of the federal government 
which provide this kind of payment in the form of a grant? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I would be happy to answer once again, 
Mr. Speaker. No, it’s not unusual; and yes, I would be glad to 
table the regulations and policy as it pertains to the 
reimbursement of expenses paid by employees of the 
department Now in this particular case it is for professional 
development — conferences, that type of thing. And as I stated, 
it is fully reimbursable from the federal government upon 
receipt for expenses incurred for professional development. 
And that is exactly what has happened in this particular case. 
 
I have also pointed out to the member that there are other 
employees to do with the Official Minority Language Office 
that are in the same category, and they fall under the same 
section within Public Accounts, Mr. Speaker. There’s nothing 
unusual about it. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you, Madam Minister. Now will you answer the latter 
part of the question? Are you prepared to table the claims and 
the policies under which this kind of grant for travel purposes is 
permitted? I will accept your word that it is not unusual, as you 
say, because of some federal government policy through which 
they provide the funding. But will you be prepared, as soon as 
possible, to provide me with that information so that I can 
satisfy  

myself that indeed this is not an unusual practice? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I would be glad, and in fact 
I will take it one step further and I will give the member the 
information so that this government and this House no longer 
puts up with allegations of no information. 
 
The claims in this particular case, Mr. Speaker: travel, for air 
flight, are $387.88; the lodging was $316; and the registration, 
meals, and parking was $287.25 which came to a total for the 
person in question of $991.13 and I will ensure that not only is 
the policy tabled in this House that this pay-out comes under, 
but I will ensure that a copy is sent to the hon. member from 
Regina North East. 
 

Payments to Inner Dimension Design Associates 
 

Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Supply and Services. Public Accounts for ’84-85 show that your 
department paid out $59,981 to a company called Inner 
Dimension Design Associates. The principal of Inner 
Dimension Design Associates is a Lois Devitt, who also 
happens to be the wife of your deputy minister, Otto Cutts. Can 
the minister explain how this kind of payment, which would 
have to be done with the knowledge and approval of your 
deputy minister, is not a clear conflict of interest. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, the individual in 
question is a professional in her own right, but obviously I don’t 
have details of this particular thing, so I will take notice of the 
question and bring the details back. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Supplement, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, this 
$60,000 contract to a company run by your deputy minister’s 
wife — was it awarded by tender? 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a letter dated August 14, 1984 from your 
department which makes it clear that this contract was possibly 
not awarded by tender. It is from the executive director of your 
department’s planning and development division, and, by way 
of information, it was addressed to Lois Devitt and it begins: 
 

The Department of Supply and Services wishes to offer 
your firm the commission for full design and supervision 
services for interior improvements at Saskatchewan Place. 

 
Can the minister explain how his department decided to offer a 
$60,000 contract of government business to this firm as 
opposed to any other firm? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, I would make a couple 
of points. As I’ve indicated in this House and publicly around 
the province, there have been a very significant increase — in 
fact a 30 per cent increase — in the number of self-employed 
women in Saskatchewan since this government came to power. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Now I know that that party is not 
only against business, but is against business women;  
  



 
April 15, 1986 

 

611 
 

however, I would point out as well that the deputy minister was 
only recently married, and, as I indicated earlier, I don’t have 
details on the thing. I will get the details; I will bring them back 
and report to the House. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I’m surprised that the minister would try to turn 
this into a women’s issue. Can you explain . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Two other firms doing the same kind of work 
likely have women involved, too, Mr. Minister. Can you 
explain how your department goes about splitting up this kind 
of work between companies? Last June during Estimates when 
your predecessor attempted to defend this contract, he claimed 
that there’s only three companies in Regina which are qualified 
to do this work. Now you say she got it because she was a 
woman. I maintain . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s 
exactly what he said. That’s exactly what he said, Mr. Former 
Minister. The former minister is trying to go on the defensive, 
Mr. Speaker. I wish I could question him. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. If the member has a question, 
will you get to the question. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, I would love to ask the former 
minister this question, because he’s the one that should be on 
the hot seat. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The member continues to make remarks and 
isn’t getting to his question. The time has elapsed. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 4 — Economic Development, Trade and 
Tourism Help Growth 

 
Mr. Parker: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure for me to rise this afternoon in the Assembly and too, 
at the conclusion of my remarks, I’ll be moving the following 
resolution: 
 

That this Assembly commends the efforts of the 
Government of Saskatchewan in encouraging the growth 
and development of the province through the policies and 
programs of the Departments of Economic Development 
and Trade, and Tourism and Small Business. 

 
My motion will be seconded by my colleague, the member from 
Regina North, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s well documented, the commitment that 
this government has made, and continues to make, to the 
growth of this province, particularly through the areas of 
tourism and small business. We recognize the importance that 
this sector plays in the growth of our province, and we 
continually strive to address the needs as we hear them put to us 
by the members of that sector of our business community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one only has to look back recently to the 1986 
budget tabled by our Finance minister to see the commitment 
that has once again been made to the growth of our province 
and to the growth of the small business sector. 

Now I’d like to address and confine my remarks this afternoon 
primarily in two areas, Mr. Speaker. One, to the area of small 
business. The programs which we have enunciated to help 
promote growth in small business, and also in tourism, because 
as everyone knows the tourist industry is basically comprised of 
a large number of small businesses . . . And the growth potential 
for this particular industry is tremendous, given the fact that 
right now it represents the second largest industry in the world 
and, in fact, leading economic experts have indicated that by the 
year 2000 the tourism industry will in fact be the largest in the 
world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s particularly important, particularly for 
small-business men in Moose Jaw and small-business men 
around the province, to get some kind of an idea of the 
programs which have been put forth by our government. In 
some cases the programs which have been developed maybe 
have not been made clearly available to the merchants. 
 
I think that at this time I’d like to review some of them in order 
that any of the small-business men who are listening, and who 
are aware of course of some of the changes which were made in 
the 1986 budget, might also get an understanding of some of the 
programs which were in place, and continue to be in place, so 
that they may take advantage of them and capitalize on the 
positive aspects of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the most positive programs which we 
initiated would have to be the small business interest reduction 
program. When it was first initiated, Mr. Speaker, the feeling 
was that merchants were being really pressed by the uncertainty 
and the continual climb of interest rates. And we know that the 
small business community rarely ask for very much government 
assistance, Mr. Speaker. They’re the backbone of the job 
creation sector in this province, and we continually look 
towards them to help fight the constant problems facing us in 
terms of creating jobs. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one only has to look back to the 
environment and the atmosphere which we encountered in 
1982, when we formed government, to see the effects of the 
uncertainty of rising interest rates and the havoc that they can 
play in the market-place with respect to small business, 
particularly. 
 
Now I can relate back to the city of Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, 
and prior to 1982 when interest rates were hovering in the 
20-plus per cent range, and the government of the day chose to 
ignore the pleas of small business. At that time businesses were 
virtually being forced into closure, massive reductions. They 
were put into a very uncomfortable position in terms of trying 
to maintain their competitiveness. And in small businesses in 
Saskatchewan, relying on the fact that most of the consumer 
goods that are brought into this province have to be transported 
in, in order to maintain a competitive edge it’s necessary for 
stores in this particular province to maintain very high levels of 
inventory. And when that’s not possible, we find that they 
operate in a very, less than desirable, competitive capacity. 
 
  



 
April 15, 1986 

 

612 
 

What we were finding around Saskatchewan in 1981, 1982, was 
a situation where those stores and those businesses that were 
able to stay open and compete were forced to drastically cut 
back their inventory levels because they just couldn’t afford to 
stock up at the levels that they felt necessary, given the 
uncertainty and, indeed the level of interest rates at that time. 
 
Now we had another problem in the city of Moose Jaw, and I’m 
sure that other cities have encountered it as they came on 
stream, and that was the disastrous reassessment which was 
done provincially by the previous NDP government. And of 
course what made things worse in our particular case, Mr. 
Speaker, in Moose Jaw, was the fact that we had two members 
who were sitting members of that NDP government, one of 
them a very high ranking cabinet minister, who had no concern 
for the citizens and the businesses of Moose Jaw — as a matter 
of fact, offered no assistance whatsoever to help explain the 
disastrous effects of the NDP reassessment, the results of which 
are documented, and as a result we’re still in a rebuilding 
process, Mr. Speaker. Now when you couple the effects of the 
reassessment, provincially administered by the NDP, with the 
high and uncertainty of interest rates, it’s no small wonder that 
the small business interest reduction program was received so 
well. 
 
But we weren’t satisfied just with introducing a program, Mr. 
Speaker; we find that it’s a very desirable policy to follow up 
once a program is introduced, just as we do before we introduce 
a program by going around with a consultation process at which 
we encourage the businesses to come out and sit down with the 
minister of the day and his officials and discuss the problems 
which they’re encountering. It’s through this exchange of 
dialogue that . . . I think it’s only natural that we can achieve the 
best results in terms of how the provincial government can 
co-operate with the private sector in doing the types of things 
that the private sector does well, and that is, creating jobs. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, after introducing the nine and five-eighths 
per cent interest reduction program, through further 
consultation we found that there was a need to perhaps even 
improve upon this program. The program itself had, not unlike 
other programs, had room for improvement. And this was 
addressed in the 1986 budget, Mr. Speaker. We have now 
moved to an 8 per cent program, and we’ve increased the 
ceiling from $50,000 to $100,000. 
 
We’ve also expanded it to include automobile dealers and 
implement dealers. And these were two items that came up 
consistently when we had our meetings around the province 
talking to small-business men. And I’m particularly pleased, 
and I’d like to thank my colleagues in cabinet and the minister 
for taking heed of the pleas of the small-business community 
and responding by making the changes to an already popular 
program and coming out with our new interest reduction 
program, but at an 8 per cent interest rate as opposed to the nine 
and five-eighths. 
 
I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that this program, combined with 
our two year corporate tax holiday and the other programs 
which I will be enunciating, certainly  

is being very well received in areas such as Moose Jaw. 
 
And as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I notice that the 
small-business men in Shaunavon are particularly pleased with 
the latest budget. I notice here that a Mr. Jim Turner of Turner’s 
Department Store in Shaunavon was quoted in saying, “I’m 
very pleased with this budget”. One of the areas he is most 
happy about is the elimination of the sales tax on clothing and 
most types of footwear. He said this measure will cut out a lot 
of confusion when shoppers under 14 who didn’t pay tax on 
clothing bought adult garments which were taxable. 
 
It’s just another commonsense measure, Mr. Speaker, that was 
taken to respond to the types of concerns and the types of 
requests that have been made to this government through our 
consultative process. 
 
Another budget item that helps the small-business men is 
reducing the loan rate to 8 per cent and raising the ceiling on the 
borrowing amount to $100,000. As I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, 
this is a quote from a business man from Shaunavon who found 
the budget and the programs as they apply to small business 
particularly appealing. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have problems, as do all small urban 
centres and medium size urban centres in the province of 
Saskatchewan and, I’m sure, not unlike the problems 
encountered throughout western Canada. When changes occur 
in the market-place, we see shifts. We see closures and 
movements of one type of store because of the competitiveness 
and because of the market-place, and we see the openings of 
other types of stores. 
 
And this is certainly not untrue in the city of Moose Jaw. We’ve 
had a large number of new business starts in Moose Jaw in the 
last four years, Mr. Speaker. And at the same we’ve 
unfortunately had some closures, and most recently they have 
been of the department store variety. And if we noticed, we see 
a trend provincially in this direction. And Moose Jaw, of 
course, is not immune to this type of trend in the market-place. 
 
But one thing I will have to say, Mr. Speaker, the business 
community of Moose Jaw, and the chamber of commerce in 
Moose Jaw, have got a tremendous make-up. I think it’s one of 
the things that has kept Moose Jaw and made Moose Jaw what 
it is. I’m confident, and I know for a fact, that with the 
co-operation, and through the consultative process, that this 
provincial government, sitting down with the city of Moose Jaw 
and the Moose Jaw Chamber of Commerce, are going to 
address those temporary concerns, and we’re going to see a 
revitalization in down-town Moose Jaw. 
 
And I know that the business people in Moose Jaw have to be 
commended for the way that they have withstood the problems 
which plagued them under the previous NDP government. It’s 
well documented, the fact that the NDP have no love for small 
business. They make that known abundantly and in many ways. 
 
But with respect to the small business interest reduction 
program, Mr. Speaker, and as it applies to the city which I 
represent, Moose Jaw, we found that with the nine and  
  



 
April 15, 1986 

 

613 
 

five-eighths program, we had 135 applications, and we had 
about 587 jobs that were maintained in addition to new jobs that 
were created. So you can see, Mr. Speaker, the program was 
well received. And I’m certain that now that it’s been improved 
to an 8 per cent program and the ceiling lifted, the next set of 
figures are going to be even more enlightening. 
 
Another program, Mr. Speaker, which is very well received in 
Moose Jaw and very well received throughout Saskatchewan, I 
would say, is the winter works employment program. And of 
course, as everyone is aware, the winter works employment 
program was created to address the high levels of seasonal 
unemployment and the problems faced by businesses during the 
economic slow-down by offering an incentive to businesses for 
new job creation. Once again, Mr. Speaker, this is program 
which was brought about through the consultative process. It 
was a program which was put in place to address a specific 
need, and I would suggest by the success of the program that it 
certainly has accomplished that. 
 
Once again, in the city of Moose Jaw we find that there were 80 
approved jobs under the winter works program, Mr. Speaker — 
very successful. The total amount paid into the small business 
sector in Moose Jaw to complement the winter works program 
was well over $100,000 last year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another program, Mr. Speaker, which I think is very, very well 
received, was the small business employment program. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, I notice the members across, in their usual way, 
are trying to interrupt because they don’t want to pay attention. 
It’s once again another indication of their total lack of regard 
for small business. I think it’s important that the small business 
community are aware of these programs and are aware of the 
benefits which can accrue to them and how they can participate 
in them. 
 
The small business employment program was created to address 
high unemployment and the problems faced by small business 
during the economic slow-down, by offering an incentive to 
small businesses for new job creation. It was open to all 
Saskatchewan-based businesses and profit-oriented co-ops 
which had net taxable income of $200,000 or less. Excluded 
industries were farming and construction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Final statistics, as of November, indicate that 2,297 full-time 
jobs were created in 1,174 firms. These firms received total 
payments of over $10 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Once again, Moose Jaw was able to participate and take 
advantage of this program. We found that there were 34 
applicants received under this program and 81 jobs were 
created, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1445) 
 
So I think it’s very evident that the programs that we have been 
designing, and the programs that the Department of Tourism 
and Small Business, and Economic Development and Trade 
have been putting forth, are programs which are fitting into the 
need out there.  

They’re programs which are responding to requests which are 
coming to us from small business. I think it’s the way that small 
business likes to see the government support what they do best, 
and that is invest their money, take their chance, and create 
jobs. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, another popular program was the fixed rate 
finance program. The fixed rate finance program was open to 
any Saskatchewan industry, trade, service, tourist, or 
commercial undertaking. Excluded from this program, Mr. 
Speaker, are farming operations, primary producers, financial 
services, and professional groups. 
 
Now here again, Mr. Speaker, the basic criteria for any business 
who feel that they would like to participate in this program: the 
loan must be used for establishing a new business or for 
financing the expansion, upgrading, or the modernization of an 
existing business; the loans must be within the 30 to $500,000 
range, with a payment term of three to five years. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to point out that any small 
businesses who are interested in applying for any of these 
programs can certainly contact their MLA, and the information 
on these programs will be forthcoming. 
 
The lending institutions will apply their regular credit analysis 
in assessing loan applications, Mr. Speaker. And once again, 
another program which has been very well received by the 
business community. 
 
Another program, the product development management 
program, a program which some small businesses may not be 
aware of. The program provides expert product management 
and technical assistance to Saskatchewan manufacturers who 
are not large enough to have their own research and 
development facilities. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, it’s an area which we found . . . 
Through the consultative and through the management 
assistance program, we find in talking to small businesses that a 
lot of times the problems that they encounter aren’t necessarily 
problems of a financial nature. They don’t necessarily need a 
direct infusion of capital. What they need is advice. They need 
assistance, technical assistance. And here, once again, I’m very 
proud of the job which has been done by the Department of 
Tourism and Small Business, and Economic Development and 
Trade in responding to this sector of the economy who can 
certainly benefit by these types of programs. 
 
I won’t go into the details of the types of businesses who have 
applied and successfully taken advantage of this program. 
 
Needless to say, Mr. Speaker, one of the most significant 
programs which this government has introduced in the last four 
years has been the venture capital program. Now this program, 
Mr. Speaker, is one which we would certainly like to see 
expanded in our city, in Moose Jaw. I know the areas which 
have taken advantage of the program have found it very, very 
successful, and the venture capital program . . . Since the 
enactment of The Venture Capital Tax Credit Act, 52 venture 
capital  
  



 
April 15, 1986 

 

614 
 

corporations have been registered with a total capitalization of 
over $32 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So once again, we can see that we have a situation in 
Saskatchewan where we have a significant abundance of 
capital, and we have another problem where we have a 
significant number of small businesses. We have a lot of 
business men with good opportunities, good ideas, but 
under-capitalized, and it’s a matter of bringing the two together. 
And I think that no program has done that as successfully, and 
continues to, as the venture capital program has. 
 
And once again, we weren’t satisfied with just introducing the 
program and leaving it at that. Through the consultative 
process, going around the province and discussing the 
programs, having them critiqued by the public, by the 
consumers of the programs themselves, the small business 
community, we find that there was a need to expand this 
program. And I’m pleased that the minister and his officials 
have risen to the occasion and have come through with much 
needed expansion to include a wider range of Saskatchewan 
communities in the venture capital program. And I suspect that 
communities such as Moose Jaw is certainly one which may be 
addressed at some time down the road to respond to the request 
for the application of this very successful program by our 
business community. 
 
Another very successful opportunity for businesses was 
unveiled with the small business seminars, Mr. Speaker. Now 
the small business seminars are an effective means to providing 
management assistance to Saskatchewan small businesses. The 
improvement of small business management is possibly the best 
means, of course, for generating long-term strengthening of 
small business employment opportunities. 
 
I mentioned earlier the management assistance program. And I 
was fortunate enough to participate in more than one of the 
management assistance programs throughout the province, and 
I found them to be extremely successful; very, very popular. It’s 
the type of program that . . . Well, as a matter of fact, over 43 
communities in the province of Saskatchewan have participated 
with over 930 businesses who benefited from the services of 
private consultants. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, the high cost of engaging a private 
consultant, as faced by small businesses throughout this 
province, quite often makes it virtually impossible for the 
average small business to take advantage of this opportunity, or 
this required service. So by introduction of the management 
assistance program, we find that consulting is now being 
provided by 16 private consulting teams. 
 
Now there’s another 10 communities with a total of 200 
businesses that are going to be added to the program this year. 
The reaction from the participants indicates a general 
assessment of the program as being very beneficial and useful, 
and I certainly found that myself to be the case. 
 
The consultants are getting additional assignments with the 
small businesses after the program has been  

completed. This suggests that the program is also encouraging 
small business consulting in the community. So once again, Mr. 
Speaker, in a lot of cases the small business sector might not 
otherwise have occasion to engage with the private consultants, 
and it’s an excellent opportunity to give them the benefit of that 
expertise, and at the same time it expands the opportunities for 
the consultants. 
 
The new business publication, Mr. Speaker, has been 
developed. And basically, if you’re starting a new business in 
the province of Saskatchewan, it’s a new book which provides 
information on planning a new business as well as government 
regulations and programs of assistance. And this book, Mr. 
Speaker, has been in extreme demand. The publication has now 
had its third printing. To date, over 16,000 copies have been 
requested by small businesses and business-related 
organizations. 
 
A series of 29 business aids publications have been completed 
and are available through the business resource centres. Eleven 
additional titles will be completed shortly. And of course the 
significance, Mr. Speaker, is the need for concise publications 
to assist people buying or starting new businesses, and it’s been 
borne out by the overwhelming demand and the large number 
of comments and testimonials received from the business 
people. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, once again, what we find out there in the 
business community of Saskatchewan is not strictly a request 
for an infusion of capital by government. There are a lot of 
programs, Mr. Speaker, which can be met and which can be set 
up to address the needs of small business without a lot of cost 
involved to the government and to the small business sector — 
provide a service which certainly there’s a demand for. And 
that’s what it’s all about, Mr. Speaker, responding to the needs 
of the business community. 
 
I think one of the areas that we were asked to address when we 
took office in 1982, Mr. Speaker, was the area of deregulation. I 
think it was no small secret that the number of obsolete 
regulations which were hindering the business functioning in 
this province certainly had to be looked at. And it’s something 
which we did look at immediately upon assuming office in 
1982, and I’m certainly pleased to acknowledge that over 1,000 
obsolete regulations have been abolished. 
 
I could go through reams of obsolete regulations which have 
been abolished, but leave it to say that there are a significant 
number, and we’re continually working towards abolishing 
more regulations that prevent small businesses from expanding 
and doing the kinds of things which they like to do in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the community economic development program is 
a program which is currently being enjoyed by 53 communities 
in our province. Eleven of those communities have been 
involved in the program for four years now; 20 of the 
communities have been involved for 18 months; and 22 have 
been involved for just eight short months. And we find from 
this program, Mr. Speaker, that 116 new businesses have 
located in these communities.  
  



 
April 15, 1986 

 

615 
 

We find that 14 existing businesses have expanded their 
operations; 24 professional services have been acquired. 
 
Now I think that’s proof in itself, Mr. Speaker, of the results 
that one can achieve in the province of Saskatchewan in the 
small business sector if one addresses itself to the needs as 
expressed by the participants, by the small business community 
themselves. 
 
Rather than government sitting in a closed room and deciding 
what they feel with be good for the people, our philosophy of 
going around and consulting with the small business 
community certainly is starting to pay off, because the 
programs that we’re starting to come out with, and have been 
coming out with for four years, are programs which have been 
designed and tailored to best meet the needs expressed at the 
various meeting around the province. And I’m happy to say that 
those meetings shall continue. 
 
The community profile program, Mr. Speaker, is a program to 
provide accurate, up-to-date information about the economic 
and social resources of a community, that would be of interest 
to a potential new resident or a new business investor. It’s the 
only source of this type of information about a community 
that’s currently under one cover. Now there again, Mr. Speaker, 
one can certainly think of the practical applications of a 
program such as that — and another program which has been 
found to be very, very positively received by the business 
community. 
 
One of the programs which we hear a lot about and a program 
which is really catching on around the province is our “Buy 
Locally” days program. Here again a lot of communities are 
taking a lot of pride in the ingenuity and the imagination which 
they can put into their “Buy Locally” days program. And the 
purpose of the program, of course, is to influence consumer 
behaviour by pointing out to Saskatchewan consumers the 
importance of supporting the local business community 
whenever possible, thereby contributing to the stability and 
viability of a community regardless of its size. 
 
It’s the first program of its kind in the province, Mr. Speaker, 
and I think the significance speaks for itself. Saskatchewan is a 
province made up, as we well know, of small communities 
spread across a vast land mass. And one of our constant battles 
is to maintain the viability of the small town and the small 
urban centre. And nothing addresses that and points it out more 
significantly than our “Buy Locally” days program. 
 
And when we find the presentation of awards at the “Buy 
Locally” days program annual celebration, and we hear of the 
imagination and the various ingenious methods of promoting 
local businesses that are taking place around the province, I 
think the small business community in each of the various 
communities certainly are to be commended for their 
participation in this very popular program. 
 
The entrepreneurial immigration program, Mr. Speaker. We 
find quite often that immigrant entrepreneurs with  

solid business backgrounds and sufficient financial resources 
can add needed retail commercial services in smaller centres as 
well as create employment for existing Saskatchewan residents. 
So here again, Mr. Speaker, is a program which has a very 
significant application. And when one considers the 
multicultural make-up of the province of Saskatchewan, one 
certainly realizes the scope of possibility for this type of a 
program. We are continually encouraging the development and 
stability of our smaller centres, and this is one way, Mr. 
Speaker, that small centres can take advantage of additional 
capital moving into their area. And quite often we have 
inquiries from entrepreneurs who are coming in from outside 
the province who would like to have information. And this 
program certainly addresses that need. 
 
The marketing benefits and import replacement program, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a system which contains 1,400 profiles on 
Saskatchewan manufacturers. The system will help match 
public and private sector procurement requirements with the 
products and capability of Saskatchewan companies. The data 
being compiled is an inventory of the personnel, machinery, and 
plant employed by manufacturers in the metalworking, 
woodworking, plastics, and computer industries. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Speaker, another program which has been very, very 
positively received is the Saskatchewan farmers’ market 
program. A recently completed study shows that the equivalent 
of 65 full-time jobs at $15,000 a year are created at a cost to the 
department of less than $1,000 a job. Of 28 farmers’ markets, 
they generate approximately a million dollars in earnings for 
hundreds of small vegetable, food, and craft producers in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Esterhazy and Outlook are the two 
new markets established in 1985. They also provide important 
social and tourism benefits to their communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, another significant gesture by the 
department is the guide to public sector purchasers. We find 
that the directory entitled Meet Saskatchewan’s Public Sector 
Purchasers was published in response to a need identified by 
Saskatchewan’s manufacturers and suppliers. Suppliers of 
goods and services have written to tell us that the directory is an 
invaluable tool in reaching the people who make purchasing 
decisions for all three levels of governments, schools, and 
hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just as we have “Buy Locally” days, another 
program which certainly has achieved prominent success 
throughout the province is our Saskatchewan Made program, 
and I think the name speaks for itself. To date 614 
Saskatchewan manufacturers, service firms, and craft producers 
have applied to use the logo, Saskatchewan Made. 
Approximately 1,500 Saskatchewan products are now being 
identified as Saskatchewan made. And I think that this is a 
program which not only can be deemed with a great deal of 
pride, but a program which certainly lends itself to the 
advancement of investment and development of manufacturing 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. It’s something that a lot 
of manufacturers are taking an awful lot of pride in, and well 
they should. 
 
  



 
April 15, 1986 

 

616 
 

As a matter of fact, the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix produced a 
14-page section in the December 6th TV Times, featuring 
advertising and editorial stories about Saskatchewan products. 
And it’s this kind of endorsement and support from the media 
which certainly assists small businesses in getting the 
recognition that they so dearly deserve in promoting products in 
a competitive market-place, which are products which can bear 
the insignia of Saskatchewan manufacturing. The Regina 
Leader-Post also produced a two-page spread in the December 
14 edition featuring Saskatchewan-made product advertising in 
editorial stories, and apparently they are looking forward to 
doing an even larger story this year. 
 
So the Saskatchewan-Made program, Mr. Speaker, is certainly 
one program which is continuing to build and adding 
enthusiasm and confidence to the manufacturing sector of our 
province. Now the Saskatchewan manufacturing opportunities 
show, Mr. Speaker — the first in 1985, the show attracted 40 
exhibitors including both railways, Ipsco, the cities of Regina 
and Saskatoon, Supply and Services Canada, Saskatchewan 
Supply and Services, Crown corporations, and Saskatchewan 
businesses. Here the exhibitors displayed samples of imported 
items which they would prefer to have made in Saskatchewan. 
Manufacturers were invited to visit the displays and examine 
opportunities to make contact with buyers. This type of import 
replacement show has proved successful, and plans are well 
under way to host the 1986 show on February 10th and 11th, 
1986 — or it was hosted on February 10th, 1986. 
 
Both railway companies pointed out that they were successful 
in obtaining some new suppliers as a result of the ’85 show and 
are now wishing to pursue new initiatives. Mr. Speaker, here 
again it’s a very practical application of putting together a need 
which is met by an opportunity and creating the climate and the 
environment necessary to allow the small business and 
manufacturing community to address itself to a need for 
products which we already have defined by the users of the 
products, and in this case they simply bring them in to an 
exhibit and have the two parties meet, and certainly the results 
are proving to be very successful. They are very positive. 
 
The Saskatchewan-Made handicraft show and sale, Mr. Speaker 
— the work of 40 of Saskatchewan’s top crafts people featured 
in a three-day sale held in the Saskatchewan gallery. And here 
again, Mr. Speaker, I was very, very pleased to be able to 
participate. Over 500 people were invited to attend, among 
them people who run commercial galleries, people who select 
retail stores, design building interiors, or buy office furniture in 
the larger public offices, or buy official gifts or retirement gifts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for any of the members who were fortunate 
enough to attend the gallery, as I was, they would certainly have 
taken a lot of pride in seeing the types of craftsmanship and the 
types of skills which are evidenced here in the province of 
Saskatchewan by the various crafts workers. I certainly 
encourage any of the members, the next time we have an 
opportunity to have the craft show held, particularly here in the 
legislature, to participate  

and go in and examine the works and the wares that are 
available by our Saskatchewan crafts people, because it’s 
certainly well worth while. A supplier development initiative 
was undertaken by the branch in 1984, and it’s assisted many 
firms to improve their products and marketing. The two main 
areas that are being concentrated on right now, Mr. Speaker, are 
the oil and gas industry, as well as the public sector 
procurement. 
 
Now for example, Mr. Speaker, we find throughout the 
province accomplishments such as the Bay Trail Plastics in 
Humboldt, who are now producing plastic salt-holding tanks for 
Lyle’s Water Treatment Ltd. in Regina. Now these are tanks 
which were formerly produced in Ontario. So we can see the 
types of jobs which are being now fulfilled in the province of 
Saskatchewan, providing opportunities and supplying materials 
which were currently . . . we were forced to go outside the 
province to . . . 
 
Another one, Mr. Speaker, Wood Master Enterprizes Inc., 
supplied shelving and customized storage and desks for the new 
Prince Albert technical institute — there again, Mr. Speaker, an 
opportunity for a local entrepreneur to capitalize on a need for a 
product which otherwise would have had to have been met from 
outside the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Inventronics in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, a company which I’m 
very familiar with — this firm was given the opportunity to 
supply customized computer desks to Supply and Services. 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, were it not for Inventronics having 
the ability to meet the demand and have this opportunity to 
supply, the products would have had to have been, no doubt, 
brought in from outside the province. 
 
Instrumental in alerting Fabro Enterprises Ltd., from Swift 
Current, to new equipment needs — a computerized lathe to 
thread API casing and a stainless steel, sand-screen winding 
machine, a potential sale to Esso Resources of $1.5 million in 
oil well sand-screen, and immediate casing threads for Mobile 
(Saskatchewan) Oil and Shell at $600,000. These screens were 
formerly fabricated in Texas, and threading in Alberta, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So once again you can see the significance of replacing 
shipments of goods and services formerly brought in from 
outside the province by goods and services manufactured right 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. And of course I don’t 
have to remind anyone that along with that is the advancement 
of new job opportunities. 
 
Arco Display Limited in Saskatoon now supply with marketing 
branch efforts numerous Saskatchewan firms with labels, 
decals, name and instruction plates, from their newly acquired 
computerized duplicator. And I could go on and on, Mr. 
Speaker. I won’t belabour the point. 
 
There’s numerous accomplishments which are evident, Mr. 
Speaker, but I’m sure that the members opposite, with their lack 
of respect for small business, aren’t interested in hearing them. 
But the point being, Mr. Speaker, there are numerous new 
business opportunities now in the  
  



 
April 15, 1986 

 

617 
 

province of Saskatchewan where we find opportunities, and 
we’re creating jobs at the same time and fulfilling a demand 
which otherwise had to be met by importing from outside the 
province. 
 
In concert with the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, Mr. 
Speaker, we find the following were achieved. Leon’s 
Manufacturing in Yorkton; they’re now manufacturing 
transformer cases for Federal Pioneer. Purchases by Federal 
were previously from an Alberta firm and represent $650,000 a 
year — $650,000 a year previously purchased out of the 
province of Alberta, now being produced in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And with that, a significant 
number of jobs for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Brekmar Industries in Saskatoon now produce $500,000 a year 
of fibreglass transformer bases for Sask Power. There again, 
Mr. Speaker, transformer bases which would otherwise have 
had to have been brought in from outside the province are now 
being produced here in the province of Saskatchewan. Brandt 
Industries in Regina and Leon’s Manufacturing in Yorkton are 
now manufacturing $350,000 annually of anchor screws for 
Sask Power. These were formerly supplied by Ontario. 
 
I know the members opposite don’t like to hear this because it 
means more jobs created in the province of Saskatchewan for 
Saskatchewan people, but it’s the type of thing, Mr. Speaker, 
that this government is addressing itself to. Where we see 
opportunities, where we have our Crown corporations such as 
Sask Power, who are going to be spending taxpayers’ dollars, 
significant numbers of dollars in a given year, purchasing 
commodities which are otherwise necessitated to be brought in 
from outside the province, and now we find opportunities to 
open up manufacturing possibilities here in the province and, at 
the same time, creating jobs. And that’s basically what the 
bottom line is, as far as this government is concerned, Mr. 
Speaker, and that is the constant creation of new jobs. 
 
The department organized and led 25 user and purchasing 
public sector personnel on plant tours of Leon’s Manufacturing, 
Ram Industries, and Morris Rod-Weeder in the city of Yorkton, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned in my opening remarks, I 
would confine myself to basically two areas. One was the area 
of small business and the opportunities which have opened up 
due to the programs of Tourism and Small Business, and 
Economic Development and Trade. The other area I indicated 
that I would touch on, Mr. Speaker, is an area which I feel very, 
very close to, and that is the area of tourism and the expanded 
tourism marketing programs which this government has brought 
in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we find that we had over a $1.5 million increase in 
the tourism marketing budget, and it’s resulted in increased 
activities in the tourism sector, particularly in the North. It’s 
projected that the total program will result in incremental 
tourism expenditures of $25 million by the end of ’85 and could 
create almost 1,200 jobs. 
 
Now as I indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, when one recognizes 
the significance and the growth potential of  

this dynamic industry, the tourism industry, and all one has to 
do to showcase that is to watch television and see the build-up 
leading in to the Expo in British Columbia this year, to see the 
kind of impact that tourism and the tourist destination can have 
on small business, and growth potential, and job creation. 
 
We are blessed with many tourist destinations and potential 
tourist destinations in the province of Saskatchewan. And in 
creating and developing those tourist destinations to their 
utmost potential, the opportunity exists for the small business 
sector in this province to once again take advantage of the 
opportunities with the assistance of the provincial government 
where necessary, and at the same time the spin-off benefit, of 
course, is the creation of literally thousands of new jobs. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the intensive efforts opposite the package tour 
development, for example, in the Department of Tourism, 
resulted in the following Saskatchewan tours that were 
developed. Some of the members may very well have 
participated on one or more of these tours and be familiar with 
them. 
 
The Heritage covered-wagon tours. No doubt in the area of 
Shaunavon down in through there, they would find these 
covered-wagon tours very, very popular in the summer-time as 
it relates to tourism promotions. 
 
Bear hunt Saskatchewan, at Little Bear Lake and Hudson Bay. 
And I know that probably no two members in the legislature 
would be able to take advantage, in terms of their constituents 
able to develop new job opportunities and new business 
opportunities opposite tourism promotion, than our two most 
northerly members. 
 
As we pointed out earlier, the focus on tourism at the present 
time seems to be directed most often in the northern part of our 
province. And I think that’s given the perception of 
Saskatchewan, and justly so, as a great place to come to enjoy 
the over 100,000 lakes that we have in northern Saskatchewan, 
and the types of recreational activities which accompany lake 
development — dog sledding, group fishing, photography, 
wilderness trails, canoe riding, motor coach tours, Mr. Speaker, 
and on and on. And once again, I won’t get into all the details 
of all of the program. 
 
But once again we find that the department initiated a program 
to give support to private sector and motor coach operators, Mr. 
Speaker. And here again, it’s not necessarily strictly an infusion 
of capital that’s necessary to promote and develop the tourism 
industry. We find in this particular case that selling aids and 
other support to assist the private sector in selling 
Saskatchewan, in selling tour packages, have been developed, 
including bi-monthly newsletters providing continuous updates 
and items for inclusion in tour itineraries; audio visual 
materials, Mr. Speaker, editorial support materials, and travel 
information collections. We find that we have the most 
comprehensive inventory of tourist facilities and services now 
exist, with approximately 4,000 listings on a computerized 
system. 
  



 
April 15, 1986 

 

618 
 

And here again, Mr. Speaker, when we’re addressing the needs 
and the opportunities as they relate to tourism and the growth of 
the tourism industry in this province, we find that one of the 
biggest hurdles that we have to overcome is getting our 
message out and telling people what we’re all about. It’s no 
secret to anyone, I don’t believe, that the perception of 
Saskatchewan had always been that we were basically flat, 
boring, dull, and cold. I think that we’re finally starting to 
portray the proper image of what we are all about. We’ve got 
the make-up, we’ve got the history, and we’ve got the types of 
tourist attractions, Mr. Speaker, which offer a refreshing change 
to the travelling tourist public. And I think that this year it’s 
very important for the tourism industry in Saskatchewan to 
capitalize on the massive traffic, particularly automobile traffic, 
that’s going to be going through our province both ways — 
going to and from Expo in Vancouver. 
 
I think that plans are well under way for various communities 
across Saskatchewan to try to detain and try to encourage the 
travelling motorist route off the wind tunnel, off the 
Trans-Canada Highway, and see a little bit of our province. And 
I’m sure once that’s accomplished we’ll find that our tourism 
receipts in subsequent years will significantly increase. 
 
We find that we have a year-round, toll-free, travel inquiry 
service, Mr. Speaker. It’s available throughout Canada and the 
continental United States. This telephone service allows quick 
access to Saskatchewan travel information — just another 
service benefit. And it’s this type of benefit and availability and 
convenience that the tourists are looking for. 
 
Tourism travel has become a way of life, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
accepted that people are travelling more, and they’re spending 
more money on travel, and as such they’re demanding more. 
And you have to respond to this. The Saskatchewan tourism 
industry is certainly responding to this, and they have to be 
congratulated for their efforts. 
 
We find that out-of-province Canadian marketing has 
significantly increased the inquiry share of provinces other than 
Saskatchewan in the total inquiry mix. We note that 
Saskatchewan in 1984, for example, benefited significantly 
from major federal marketing in the United States and Canadian 
markets. These promotions resulted in inquiries being referred 
to the province. 
 
The Canadian program is totally absent in 1985, and the U.S. 
media buy was approximately 50 per cent of that in ’84. We 
find that a total of 57,600 tourism inquiries have been received 
to the end of September ’85. And the responses to department 
travel aids are up over 1984 totals by a factor of three to one. 
 
So you can see, Mr. Speaker, the significance of the efforts 
being put forth by the Department of Tourism in recognizing 
the importance of this industry. And I think for years it’s an 
industry which was basically taken for granted. You know, we 
didn’t address ourselves to it, and I’m certainly pleased to see 
that this government has done so. 
 

And I’d certainly like to commend my colleague, the member 
from Regina North, who I had the pleasure of working with in 
the Department of Tourism, and the significant inroads which 
were accomplished through his leadership certainly are being 
recognized and still acknowledged by the tourism industry 
throughout Saskatchewan. It’s the profile of this important 
department that is going to get the response necessary from the 
business community, and we’re certainly starting to see that. 
 
We are opening up new visitor reception centres, Mr. Speaker, 
and of course . . . The existing centres, we found, were a 
disgrace to this province, and they seriously detracted from the 
image of Saskatchewan as progressive and innovative. 
 
And as a matter of fact the member from Moosomin indicates 
and reminds us that we have a brand-new one in Moosomin, 
and it’s certainly one that I’m sure visitors will feel very, very 
welcome and very proud to enjoy when they do come into the 
province of Saskatchewan on the Trans-Canada from Manitoba. 
My understanding is that there are going to be several. There 
will be a new one near Maple Creek and Langenburg. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that this is a very important complement to 
our tourism promotion package, and that is the visitor reception 
centres. I think it’s very important that, when visitors first cross 
the border, that they are greeted with the type of information 
which will encourage them to stay in the province and also give 
them an opportunity to find out what we’re all about, what 
opportunities exist here, and certainly they are numerous. 
 
The Saskatchewan conference on tourism — once again, Mr. 
Speaker, we see the response evident at these conferences. The 
conference in 1985 in Regina had to be termed extremely 
successful. I was fortunate enough to attend that conference, 
and the attitude evident amongst the delegates certainly spoke 
for itself. We find that the enthusiasm and the interest in the 
tourist industry is starting to really swell, Mr. Speaker, and 
particularly, I think, with the introduction of the tourism task 
force, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When the Minister of Tourism appointed his task force to 
address some of the concerns which were evident in the 
province as it relates to tourism, we found that Saskatchewan 
was the only province in Canada, in fact, not to have its own 
private sector tourist industry. And I think that, Mr. Speaker, I 
was very fortunate to have been given the opportunity and take 
a great deal of pride in having chaired the minister’s task force 
on tourism. 
 
And one of the things that was apparent throughout the 
province was the fact that many of those in the tourist industry 
resented the fact that all of the direction, as it relates to tourism, 
was coming from the government. We have this tremendous 
number of businesses throughout the province of Saskatchewan 
engaged in dealing with tourists every day — engaged in 
dealing with tourists every day, Mr. Speaker — and yet all of 
the direction, all of the promoting, all of the ideas on how we 
promote ourselves as a province, coming strictly from the  
  



 
April 15, 1986 

 

619 
 

government. 
 
Well this government, Mr. Speaker, recognized the importance 
of the business community and the private sector. One of the 
prime functions of the tourism task force was to consult with 
the tourist industry throughout the province as it existed. And 
one of the things we found, Mr. Speaker, was in the province of 
Saskatchewan we would have something in the neighbourhood 
of 75 associations currently dealing in tourism, all going in their 
own direction, Mr. Speaker, with no umbrella organization to 
maximize the benefits of the strength of that association. And 
I’m particularly pleased, Mr. Speaker, in knowing that the 
steering committee which resulted from the minister’s task 
force is now addressing that need. 
 
And I feel very, very confident that in the very near future we 
will have a Saskatchewan tourism industry association 
operating somewhat similar to tourism industry associations in 
other jurisdictions, in other provinces. And I think that this type 
of an association, Mr. Speaker, working in conjunction and 
co-operation with the provincial government and the 
Department of Tourism and Small Business, will certainly give 
us that extra thrust that’s necessary for us to compete 
effectively. 
 
We will find ourselves in a situation where right now we have 
the Canadian government promoting tourist travel into the 
country. The Saskatchewan government certainly should be 
addressing itself to promoting tourist traffic into the province. 
 
And once the tourist gets to this province, the private sector 
tourism industry association will be in a position to treat the 
tourist the way a tourist likes to be treated. And no one should 
know better how to treat the tourist than those who deal with 
them on a day-to-day basis in their business operation, and that 
is namely the small-business men around the province of 
Saskatchewan who will make up and comprise the 
Saskatchewan tourism industry association. 
 
And I feel very, very proud, Mr. Speaker, to have been involved 
in the task force on tourism under the minister, and I’m looking 
forward to the achievements of the Saskatchewan tourism 
industry association. Because I know that the type of people 
who worked on that task force and subsequently are working on 
the minister’s steering committee certainly have the best 
interests of this province’s tourism industry at heart, and they’re 
certainly all very capable individuals representing every 
geographic area of the province and virtually every area of the 
tourism sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the areas we felt was necessary in order to 
give the average travelling citizen an opportunity to promote 
our province was the Saskatchewan ambassador program. It’s a 
program, Mr. Speaker, which was encouraged to ask our 
residents to promote Saskatchewan during their vacations and 
travel outside the province. It’s a first-time effort to encourage 
the promotion of Saskatchewan by the residents, to spread 
goodwill, and of course raise the province’s profile. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had countless cases myself, as I’m  

sure all other members have had, of individuals who have 
returned from trips abroad, having taken the Saskatchewan 
ambassador kit with them and encountered fellow tourists and 
individuals in other jurisdictions, and having done an excellent 
job of promoting our province as a tourist ambassador and 
exchanging pins and the various tourist information which is 
available in the kits. 
 
And this particular program, Mr. Speaker, is one of the best 
programs that the department was forthcoming with, and I think 
that it’s a program which will have continued success in the 
years ahead. 
 
The tourism marketing assistance program, Mr. Speaker, is a 
program which offered financial support to private sector 
tourism organizations. It was provided through the tourism 
marketing assistance program, and to date we have 
approximately 100 projects which have been supported on a 
cost-shared basis. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we find that over three-quarters of a million 
dollars of new money has been spent by the private sector on 
tourism marketing. We find, Mr. Speaker, that the community 
marketing planning assistance program, financial and technical 
assistance — it was provided to tourist-related organizations, 
community promotion agencies, with an objective of 
developing and implementing sound and viable marketing 
plans. 
 
(1530) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, once again, it’s simply a matter of assessing 
the situation and working closely with the people who are 
working on a day-to-day basis with the tourists and finding out 
what kind of programs and what kind of assistance is necessary. 
Quite often it’s not an infusion of capital, as I’ve stated before, 
it’s simply offering the kind of assistance to complement what 
they’re already doing, and providing an environment in which 
to allow the development of the tourist industry to take place. 
 
We find, Mr. Speaker, that we have a lot of problems yet to 
encounter, and problems which are going to have to be 
addressed in the province of Saskatchewan because of, once 
again, regulations, the fact that access is very important when 
we’re discussing the opportunities as it relates to tourism. We 
find that it’s a constant challenge to promote our province. The 
increased costs which we encounter today, Mr. Speaker, make it 
important to focus our attention on a rifle approach to 
promoting tourism in this province as opposed to a shotgun 
approach. 
 
No longer is it possible to, for example, indicate that we’re 
going to promote Saskatchewan tourism to United States. It’s 
just simply not realistic. So one has to constantly be aware of 
the market availability and the potential market availability in 
the various areas in northern United States, and in the other 
provinces across Canada, and then zero in on those target areas, 
on those areas with tourism potential. 
 
One of the most recent gestures by the department, and one of 
the most successful, had to be our new  
  



 
April 15, 1986 

 

620 
 

Saskatchewan tourism film, Sun Spirit Saskatchewan. And I 
think, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that everyone in this Assembly 
witnessed that film. And I know that we’ve shown the film in 
Moose Jaw on two or three occasions, and we’ve received 
nothing but compliments on the quality of the film. It’s amazing 
how many people, when they view the film Sun Spirit 
Saskatchewan, it’s amazing how many people don’t realize the 
opportunities and the beauty that exist in this province as it 
relates to tourism attraction. 
 
Now I could go into the details on the film, but I assume 
everyone here has probably seen the film, Mr. Speaker, so 
suffice it to say, Mr. Speaker, that the film was produced here in 
the province of Saskatchewan; it was done locally. The film 
was produced locally, Mr. Speaker, here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. They engaged local actors to play the parts in 
the film. And I think it’s very worthwhile noting, Mr. Speaker, 
that subsequent to the initial showing of the film, the film Sun 
Spirit Saskatchewan has captured several major awards at 
competitions, not only in Saskatchewan and Yorkton, but also 
in the United States/ 
 
An Hon. Member: — Everybody should have one of those. 
 
Mr. Parker: — It’s the kind of a film, as the member from 
Shaunavon has indicated, that everyone should have a copy of. 
And it is available on video cassettes, and I would encourage 
anyone who hasn’t seen the film to take advantage of any 
opportunity you may have and look at the film, because you’ll 
certainly achieve a great sense of pride in knowing that you’re 
from Saskatchewan, once you’ve seen this film. 
 
As I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, tourism advertising, particularly 
out-of-province tourism advertising, is a cost that, while it can 
become very expensive, is certainly very necessary when you’re 
promoting this kind of a product. You have to go out and you 
have to tell the world what we’re all about. And unfortunately 
that’s the way the game is played. 
 
Saskatchewan’s first extensive, out-of-province, tourism 
advertising campaign started in Ontario, Alberta, Montana, 
North Dakota, and Minnesota. As a result of that, we had over 
13,000 inquiries, which was over six times the number of 
inquiries received from the previous time period. They’re 
projected to generate an incremental $9 million in tourism 
expenditures. Saskatchewan, as we know, has never really had a 
multi-media campaign on the U.S. market. 
 
Of course it’s obvious that increased visitations, increased 
revenue, and most importantly, increased jobs, are going to 
result. A survey of inquiries that were received from the 
business reply card that was attached to the ad showed that 56 
per cent of the respondents intended to visit Saskatchewan that 
particular year. 
 
Now another area, Mr. Speaker, which we have decided to 
implement assistance as it applies to tourism development, was 
our venture capital program. As you will know, Mr. Speaker, 
one of the original intents of the venture capital program was to 
make it available for any  

business or any party interested in expanding or developing new 
facilities opposite tourism. This was simply a gesture on our 
part to show the significant respect that we have as a 
government for the increased possibilities and the need to 
update and upgrade and improve our tourism attractions. 
 
The results have been very encouraging, Mr. Speaker, when we 
combine the venture capital program with the fact that we have 
embarked on a program also to encourage private sector 
development in the provincial parks. This is something that was 
unheard of under the previous administration and is something 
we’re finding very, very well received. 
 
There’s no need for the government to own everything in the 
provincial parks. Because of the cost associated with operating 
and administering our public parks, as I’m sure that the average 
taxpayer in Saskatchewan will appreciate, quite often we find 
ourselves in a situation where the potential for improved 
facilities in a provincial park quite often leaves some of the 
parks lacking the types of facility additions and improvements 
that one might like to see. 
 
So now we have an opportunity for the private sector to get 
involved if they have an idea or if there’s an opportunity or a 
challenge which can be met. And jobs can be created, and small 
businesses at the same time are allowed to open up and flourish 
and participate in our tourism industry. I think that as our 
overall tourism industry starts to increase, which it’s already 
showing significant signs of doing, we’ll find that it’s going to 
be that much easier, Mr. Speaker, to encourage development in 
the provincial parks. 
 
The awareness and hospitality advertising are very, very 
important as it relates to promoting tourism. And as I mentioned 
before, one of the important rules that I think we all see the 
private sector tourism industry picking up the slack and taking 
the aggressive role in, is our hospitality training, and in 
awareness. 
 
And I think that one of the programs which we had, Mr. 
Speaker, in effect, which was a function of the provincial 
government — and it’s a program which I certainly would like 
to see, and I’m sure will see, shifted over to the private sector to 
have them carry it on — and it’s a program, Mr. Speaker, for 
tourism development, for awareness development by the 
industry. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a program where the 
individuals in the various communities were encouraged to 
participate at the local level. And an awareness program was 
instigated to show them the possibilities and the potential that 
they enjoy as part of a tourist destination, just as we as a 
province and we as a country were really not aware of the 
opportunities of the dynamic growth and wealth that is available 
in the tourism industry. 
 
You can well appreciate, Mr. Speaker, when you get into Small 
Town, Saskatchewan, it’s once again very, very challenging to 
encourage people in the smaller communities to accept the fact 
that they really are a tourist destination and they have that 
capability. I think that one of the challenges that we have, the 
fact that we don’t have a brand-name attraction. We don’t have  
  



 
April 15, 1986 

 

621 
 

Disney World or, you know, Banff, or Rocky Mountains, so we 
have to capitalize on what we do have, and in order to do that, 
we have to have the co-operation of, in some cases, an entire 
community. 
 
And I know that this last year I had the occasion to go down to 
Eastend, Saskatchewan, and we opened up a small strip mall in 
Eastend, and at the same time we had a ribbon-cutting for an 
extension to a highway, the Red Coat Trail. And it’s surprising 
how many of the residents in that area, in that community, when 
discussing the opportunities of attracting tourism and what it 
could really mean to their community, when they sat back and 
thought about it, you could see them starting to think and use 
their imagination in the types of things they could do to expand 
the attractions which were already in existence. 
 
And I’m sure that a lot of our small communities, Mr. Speaker, 
are going to take on a new look and a new image as we witness 
the attractions of Expo. And we continually hear about tourism 
and the impact of tourism on the job potential and the business 
community at large. 
 
I think that’s no more evident anywhere than in the city of 
Moose Jaw. I think that Moose Jaw, in the province of 
Saskatchewan, has probably one of the best potentials for 
becoming a four-season tourist destination. The city is blessed 
with a name which is very, very well world renowned, and for a 
variety of reasons people have a tendency to remember that 
name. And that’s significant when you’re going to be offering 
yourself as a tourist destination. 
 
When a city such as Moose Jaw assesses what it has in terms of 
its potential, quite often overlooked are the ingredients which 
are necessary to make up a popular and very viable tourist 
destination. I use for example the wild animal park situated in 
Moose Jaw, which many people probably from the area would 
take for granted, but yet a facility such as that is not enjoyed by 
very many communities indeed in western Canada. 
 
And when we look at an average summer in the city of Moose 
Jaw we see that the two most popular and the two most 
significant weekends throughout the entire summer are 
associated, one, with the Saskatchewan air show at CFB in 
Moose Jaw, and the other with the Kinsmen band festival in 
Moose Jaw. And one only has to look at that to get the 
significance of what tourism can mean to a community. 
 
In other words, statistically it’s been proven that if you had a 
new corporation or a new plant with 100 employees and that 
you had the opportunity to increase your tourism traffic by 100 
people per day, you would be farther ahead in many, many 
aspects to go for the increased tourism attraction or ability of 
attracting 100 people a day. I know that may catch a lot of 
people by surprise, but statistics bear out the fact that the 
benefits are very, very overwhelming in terms of what tourism 
traffic can do to a community, not only in terms of job creation 
but in terms of the overall viability of that community. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated in my opening remarks, I 
wanted to focus on just those two basic areas. I feel very  

strongly, particularly in the area of tourism, because I feel that 
cities such as I mentioned, Moose Jaw and many other 
communities in this province, have a tremendous opportunity to 
capitalize on a dynamic industry. 
 
And I know that I’m going to be working very hard, as we have 
been working, in working with the Moose Jaw Chamber of 
Commerce and down-town business development, the city, and 
as a member of the Moose Jaw tourist board, to do what I can to 
assist in developing tourism opportunities in the city. I think 
that it’s a perception that I think our city would enjoy. I think 
the great forte we have now is our geographic location and the 
history of Moose Jaw. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I take a great deal of pride in moving the 
motion: 
 

That this Assembly commends the efforts of the 
Government of Saskatchewan in encouraging the growth 
and development of the province through the policies and 
programs of the Departments of Economic Development 
and Trade and Tourism and Small Business. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by my colleague from Regina 
North. Thank you. 
 
(1545) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I take pleasure in 
seconding this motion made by my colleague, the member from 
Regina North. There is no question that he certainly covered a 
majority of the programs that are available to the business 
community through two of our departments — the Department 
of Economic Development and Trade as well as our Department 
of Tourism and Small Business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They always say that a good story is worth repeating and I 
believe that I would just like to for a moment if I may, go into 
the highlights of a couple of the programs mentioned by my 
colleague. 
 
But I think that first I would like to talk about a couple of 
programs and policies of our Department of Economic 
Development and Trade. One of the first programs that comes 
to my mind, Mr. Speaker, is the Aid to Trade program. It’s a 
program that’s designed to help manufacturers and producers of 
various goods in our province to take advantage and export 
their products from Saskatchewan to wherever they might be 
able to cultivate their business with. 
 
And obviously any increase in business, or any exports that they 
could come up with, new markets and the like, would obviously 
do two things. It would either expand their business to the point 
that it would create additional employment, or certainly it 
would solidify their market-place and provide much needed job 
security for their existing employees. 
 
And that’s why the Aid to Trade program is so vital to us and to 
our manufacturers and processors. Because as we  
  



 
April 15, 1986 

 

622 
 

see it, free trade, trade of any kind is, to put it mildly, the 
life-blood of our province. The implications for free trade or 
freer trade or a comprehensive trade arrangement are pretty 
significant for Saskatchewan, and as a matter of fact, Mr. 
Speaker, significant for all of Canada. 
 
And I guess as you think about trade, you might say it begs the 
question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why trade at all, I suppose. Or 
secondly, if you’re going to trade at all, why trade with the 
United States, for instance? Well, why trade at all? I think that 
it’s fair to say that our ancestors originally came to Canada, 
settled Canada, and they came to trade. They were used to 
trading from the parts of the world where they originated. 
 
And I suppose they left Europe mostly, or various parts of the 
world, and opened up this part of North America basically by 
trading. And I suppose one of the early trade companies was the 
Hudson Bay trading corporation, and certainly the railroads, it 
was an assistance to . . . Oh yes, and the railroads were an 
assistance to trade, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And probably it’s fair to say that our province, Saskatchewan, 
was built and our wealth was built up because we depended on 
trade. And I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we do it well. 
We have a very good reputation for trade. We’re honest, we 
produce top quality products, and by and large most people like 
that when you can deal with that kind of a person. 
 
Last year in Canada we had $170 billion in two-way trade 
between us, as Canadians, and the United States. And the good 
news to that is that nobody forced us into that. It’s number one 
with the United States in trade, and we are their best customers. 
It probably contributes to most of our jobs in Canada. 
Canadians are very hard workers, have a good reputation, and 
we have a good work ethic, so most of our jobs come from 
trading with other people. 
 
Now speaking about Saskatchewan, almost half of the farm 
land in Canada is in our province. We produce a lot more than 
we can eat, so we sell it. We sell it to other people or we trade. 
One reason that we might trade is because it lowers our cost of 
living. We can trade our products for the products that are 
manufactured elsewhere, particularly the United States where 
they have a large industrial base, compared to us here in 
Saskatchewan. It does lower our cost of living. Most of the 
things that we use in our home — for instance, we can cut costs 
on our clothing, on our appliances, our fridges, stoves, on our 
washing machines, sewing machines, and so on. And significant 
costs can be cut by trading, as we sell our products for those. 
 
Well I suppose those are some of the reasons why we might 
want to trade. Our ancestors used to do it; we still do it; we’ll 
probably do it in the future — and it’s paid us well. We have a 
lot of jobs and probably one of the highest standards of living in 
the world. 
 
So that would lead to the next question, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
why on earth would we trade with the United States, or why 
would we want free trade or trade arrangements with the United 
States, with the Americans? 
 

Well first of all, they’re our biggest customer and we don’t burn 
their flags on the step of our legislature. We kind of like 
Americans. They buy most of everything we produce. I don’t 
know why. You figure it out if you can. You probably can’t. 
We trade with people all over the world, but mostly we trade 
with the United States. 
 
Let’s take Ontario, for instance. And pay attention over there, 
members in the opposition. You may not know this, but Ontario 
trades $50 billion a year in exports with the United States. 
That’s larger than any country in the world that trades with the 
United States — Ontario alone. Ontario trades more with the 
United States than Japan does. Now I don’t know why. I guess 
they like it. Nobody forced them into it, but I would suspect that 
it means an awful lot of jobs for Ontario. 
 
So nobody else in the world trades more with the U.S. than we 
do, and I suppose it’s fair to say that they kind of like us. They 
sell us a whole bunch of their stuff. We buy it and we like it. 
And I guess we must because nobody forces us to deal with 
them, and yet we’ve got 70 to 80 per cent of all of our products, 
trading with each other, forward and backward, and without 
tariff. 
 
I suppose we trade with them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 
they’re close to us. Another reason, I would suspect, is because 
the Americans have an awful lot of money — millions of 
American consumers, and they spend money. And they’ve got a 
lot of it to spend. So we trade with them because they have a lot 
of money and they like to spend it. Makes sense. 
 
Another reason that we consider the United States, of course, is 
that access to over 100 million residents as a trading partner, 
where it’s the largest unmanned border in the world, where this 
free trade can occur very nicely without any problems. 
 
So you ask the question: why freer trade? Why more trade? 
Why trade arrangements at all? Well I’m speaking about the 
Aid to Trade program in the Department of Economic 
Development and Trade, and just exactly what it’s got to do 
with . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . First of all, we can’t seem 
to get the Europeans’ attention. That’s why we should trade 
with the United States. Or we can’t get the Japanese attention 
either, because they have very high tariff walls. 
 
The next thing is hindrance to free trade, protectionism. And 
that’s why this Aid to Trade program in our Department of 
Economic Development and Trade is so important, so vital. We 
must break down protectionism. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as people go through exchange 
rate differences and high interest rates and periods of high 
unemployment, they get frightened. And they come to their 
local politician and they say, if you want to get re-elected in 
your riding, you’d better protect the jobs there. Therefore, I 
suppose, you’d better say it’s just for your area, so don’t trade 
with Manitoba, or don’t trade with Alberta, or don’t contact that 
guy from North Dakota, but protect us right there in 
Saskatchewan because we’re frightened. 
 
Well that feeling of protectionism is real in the United  
  



 
April 15, 1986 

 

623 
 

States. We have a 35 to 40 per cent advantage in trading with 
the States, and the productive sector of the U.S. is hurting — 
the timber business, the cattle business, the hog business, and 
others — because of exchange rate differences. And people are 
frightened because they’re worried about unemployment and 
losing their jobs, so they say: keep Canadian goods, and keep 
other goods out. 
 
So what are some of the threats of freer trade or more trade? I 
believe that the biggest threat, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we 
have is from Ontario and Quebec, not from Montana or 
Nebraska or California. We haven’t lost out to our neighbours 
in the South. We’ve lost out to central Canadians. Now I’m all 
for central Canada, but because of the transportation differences 
and the population differences, we have lost out on trade. So 
when it comes to threats, I’m not afraid of trading with Japan or 
with the Americans, but I am a little afraid of trading with 
Canadians, and historically because of the freight rate 
differences and the population base. 
 
I suppose, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s quite fair enough for the 
province of Ontario to strike a free trade arrangement with the 
United States on automobiles — the auto pact. And they do it. 
And I don’t hold that against them. 
 
But for anybody in Ontario to say that they’re not for a freer 
trade, I’ve got to question whether they really believe that or 
not — $50 billion a year exports out of Ontario to United 
States, plus a free trade arrangement on automobiles. Anybody 
in the automobile business who would come out to 
Saskatchewan, a labour leader, and tell us or tell anybody that 
we shouldn’t be involved in freer trade with the United States, I 
don’t believe is on my side. 
 
I think we should have access to those markets because other 
people have had access and have made good use of access to 
those markets. And they must be good markets for us, and that’s 
why this Aid to Trade program in our Department of Economic 
Development and Trade is so vital. Because the U.S. Senate 
finance committee, Mr. Speaker, the U.S. Senate finance 
committee tells us that they’re afraid to free trade, to have free 
trade arrangements with Canada. Can you imagine the United 
States of America being afraid of Canada? 
 
So that valuable, that protectionism that I was mentioning, if 
that’s so important, that has to tell me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
free trade is good for us and that we better continue doing our 
very best to go after it. 
 
That, too, is another reason why our Department of Economic 
Development and Trade opened up our trade offices around the 
world — Hong Kong, London, soon Minneapolis. We have 
presently a trade officer in Minot, North Dakota. And you 
might say, well why? Well, I just spoke about the free trade 
situation. 
 
But we have all kinds of Saskatchewan manufacturers, 
Saskatchewan processors, that employ our Saskatchewan 
people, that are looking to expand their markets. And what 
better way to expand them than to have our agents around the 
world selling their products for them, telling the people abroad 
of exactly what we have here in  

Saskatchewan? 
 
That can’t be done by the politicians sitting in this glorious 
building that was built by our ancestors, but rather we must get 
out and tell the whole world about the fine goods and the fine 
products that our good people in this great province of ours are 
capable of producing, and how we can compete in the 
international market-place and how we should compete because 
our products rank with the best. They are world-class, first-class 
products. 
 
Another program through our Department of Economic 
Development and Trade, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is our industrial 
incentive plan. Now this is an incentive to outside investors or 
inside investors to come along and expand their existing 
manufacturing plants or food processing plants. And we have to 
provide some form of an incentive because, after all, they’re 
going to create jobs. And through that industrial incentive plan, 
they create the jobs, they put up private sector money, and the 
government simply comes along with the incentive. 
 
(1600) 
 
For instance, the Gainers plant going to North Battleford that is 
going to create some 3 or 400 jobs — that was done exactly 
through this industrial incentive plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
it’s through these incentives that the private sector recognize 
that here in Saskatchewan we offer a good, healthy business 
climate for them to function and to operate and to create their 
profits, because it’s through their profits that they are able to 
pay their taxes. It’s through these plants and industry and 
processing that they are able to maintain and create new 
employment. It’s not government that creates employment, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but rather it’s the private sector. All we can do 
as government is to act as a catalyst, a co-ordinator of various 
problems that industry might have, to encourage them, to entice 
them, to provide the incentive for them to continue the good 
work that they are doing in this province. 
 
It’s absolutely vital for this province to expand its resource 
base. Agriculture is our number one industry, and it probably 
will be for an awful long time. But that doesn’t mean that we 
can just sit back and let agriculture do its thing, because there 
are so many forces that we as government have no control over 
that affect that part of our sector. We can’t control drought; we 
can’t control grasshoppers. 
 
So therefore it’s just absolutely vital that we expand our base 
here in Saskatchewan and diversify it. And there are several 
ways that we can do that. Agriculture probably will still be 
number one, but tourism, which I’ll speak on in a few moments, 
is a vital industry that was totally ignored by the prior 
administration. And we all know that tourism will be the 
number one industry in the world by the end of this century, and 
that’s not very far away. All economists are predicting that. So 
it’s through this diversification of manufacturing, of small 
business, of service industries, of tourism, that we diversify and 
not be so dependent on our agricultural sector. 
 
I know that to help and assist manufacturers and really entice 
them to become first-class producers, the  
  



 
April 15, 1986 

 

624 
 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce in co-operation with our 
government have sponsored a new award of excellence 
program, the ABEX (Achievement for Business Excellence) 
award. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’d be surprised at what a 
challenge it is for the various sectors of our industrial 
businesses to compete for that award. They’re very, very proud 
if they can win their sector, or certainly if they can go on and 
win the award as the best exporter or the best manufacturer in 
our province. It’s a very meaningful situation, and it provides 
them with additional incentive on which they would like to 
proceed. 
 
Those are just a couple of the programs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Now I would like to speak about policies just for a moment. 
The Department of Economic Development and Trade carry 
forward the policies and philosophies of the Progressive 
Conservative Party. And our philosophy is based purely and 
simply on free enterprise, and free enterprise is the engine that 
drives our economy, and we’re not ashamed to say that because 
that’s where it all happens. And as a result of this free enterprise 
philosophy that we have, when we carry it forward and develop 
our programs which are always developed in consultation, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, with the private sector . . . It’s fair to say that a 
minister or his department or his officials or whoever they 
might be can’t design effective programs in a vacuum. They 
can’t do it alone. It’s a combined effort of working together that 
these programs and policies are developed. 
 
And that’s why, when we go out as MLAs or as cabinet 
ministers, we like to consult and listen to the various interest 
groups that we deal with. In the Department of Health the 
minister listens to the doctors and listens to the nurses and 
listens to all the other professionals involved in that particular 
industry, so that they can develop meaningful programs that are 
what the people really want; so that as we go about in this 
industrial situation or in the small business sector, and listen to 
the various people, again, together we can provide programs 
that really and truly mean something to the business community 
because it’s a response to what they’re looking for. 
 
And it was just that kind of a feeling that made our government 
successful in bringing forward a new paper-mill to Prince 
Albert. We were dealing prior with a pulp-mill that was a 
Crown corporation of staggering dollars that Saskatchewan had 
put their money in through the prior administrations. Not only 
was the investment sitting there idle, but year by year by year 
we were losing money on the profit operation of it. And you 
might say: well, why? You hired the best people. And it’s fair 
to say that the prior administration certainly had well-paid 
people trying to run it, but we don’t have the expertise; we 
don’t have the marketing connections that are required in that 
type of a competitive business throughout the world, so the only 
way that it will work is in the private sector. 
 
Now when we came up to the private sector with this pulp-mill 
that was hanging around our necks and costing us money and 
losing us money, not only were we able to make a deal to sell 
that pulp-mill, but in fact the private sector said, I’ll tell you 
what we’ll do; we’ll invest another  

$250 million in Prince Albert; we’ll create a lot of jobs and 
we’ll start a paper-mill too. So now we’ve got the best of two 
worlds. And I’ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker, it will make money 
because they have the expertise, they have the knowledge, the 
technology, they have the marketing skills and marketing 
ability, to move this Saskatchewan-made product throughout 
the entire world and do it at a profit. And as they do it, as they 
do it on that profit . . . And I’m surprised that the member from 
northern Saskatchewan is against that — the very thing that’s 
going to create employment in your area, and you don’t like it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it just gets me so mad to listen to them 
when they’re against a project like that. They keep hollering 
about unemployment all over this province and in the North, 
and when we put a project like that together that’s going to give 
you exactly what you wanted, you don’t like it. Well you can’t 
have your cake and eat it too. If you want to create jobs, you’ve 
got to go out and do it and make things happen, and the private 
sector make things happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Klein: — Now here in Regina we’ve got the new Regina 
upgrader. I guess you don’t like that either, and you don’t like 
the jobs that it’s going to create. And you don’t like the spin-off 
benefits that are going to accrue to small business in Regina. 
Well I’ll tell you, it will happen, and it will accrue . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I believe the hon. 
members are just causing a little bit too much noise. The 
speaker is not able to carry on in an intelligible fashion so all 
can hear him. So would all members please calm down. 
 
Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m very 
comfortable in delivering my message to the people this 
afternoon because I truly believe that after my 25 or 26 years in 
business I understand business and what it’s about. I have had 
the distinct pleasure of creating jobs and hiring people for most 
of my life. And by applying that same principle, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker . . . And they don’t like to hear this. They know about 
my record in business and they know that I have over a period 
of 25 or 26 years created several hundred jobs. Now we’re 
talking that by applying the same principle to our government, 
we can in fact create thousands and thousands of jobs as we 
have done. You know very well that our job creation program is 
the best of any government in Canada, and certainly far better 
than what yours has been. 
 
But the Regina upgrader. We’ll just talk about that for a 
moment because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people in this city, 
the people in Regina, are really excited about that. All my 
friends in the real estate business, they know that while this 
construction is on there will be a lot of activity for real estate 
requirements; the small business community that will be able to 
take care of all the spin-off benefits as a result of this big 
project going into place. 
 
It’s so easy to say $600 million. That’s what the project costs — 
$600 million. It’s so easy to say that. But try to get that into real 
terms — $600 million. Mr. Deputy Speaker,  
  



 
April 15, 1986 

 

625 
 

that’s a significant amount of money and all going into this one 
project. It’s the equivalent of, I don’t know what. Even 10 
hospitals wouldn’t be $600 million. So that’s the magnitude and 
size of that project and that’s certainly going to create an awful 
lot of employment and bring a boom back to Regina. 
 
Now our recent announcement of the new fertilizer plant that’s 
going to be attached to that and will accrue additional benefits. 
And you know, there goes the NDP again down on this, down 
on that — the same old boloney. 
 
Do you know what? We put that upgrader project together with 
the co-ops. Now traditionally the co-ops were supposed to have 
been socialist minded and friends of yours, and here you 
couldn’t even put that deal together with them. It took the 
private sector type of government to go with the co-ops to make 
that happen. And happen it will, and the fertilizer plant with it, 
and again another expansion and more jobs and more industry 
for our city. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Klein: — Now I mentioned earlier the industrial incentive 
plant in North Battleford and Gainers coming in. That’s just the 
first phase of their operation. Again, in here, you people in the 
opposition, you don’t like Gainers; you don’t like what’s 
happening in North Battleford; you don’t like that industrial 
incentive plan. Your candidate in North Battleford sure likes it. 
Why don’t you guys get your stuff together? You can’t say one 
thing in here and one thing out there. Be consistent . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . That’s what you’re doing. 
 
Here in Regina, Mr. Deputy Speaker, another one that they said 
doom and gloom for — Supercart International, that nice little 
plastic grocery car manufacturing outfit in Regina. Well, that 
would never get off the ground; that was just somebody’s pie in 
the sky; that wasn’t going to work; whoever heard of a goofy 
plastic grocery cart; is what was coming across. Well, I’ll tell 
you what, they’ve got 60 or 80 people working there now. 
They’re manufacturing. Those plastic shopping carts, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, will be exported to all corners of the world — 
and right here in Saskatchewan. And by the time they finish that 
project they will probably have 3 or 4 or 500 people working in 
that plant right here in Regina. 
 
So we know that our philosophy, we know that our policies, we 
know that our programs are indeed working and will continue 
to work. 
 
I will now, Mr. Speaker, just touch briefly on small business. I 
guess there’s a couple of things that I should point out first, Mr. 
Speaker. The first thing we did for small business and with 
small business, because we recognized just how vital that sector 
is to our economy and is to our government and to our province, 
we formed the Department of Tourism and Small Business. 
Because that had to happen if we believed in it. And we do 
believe in it. 
 
So the first thing we did was form that department. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the Department of Tourism and Small Business acts as 
the advocate for the small business  

community in this province. It kind of is their inner voice in 
government and to the inner circle, so that when there’s a 
problem that they encounter out there in the small business 
community, we can just carry it right through our department, 
right through the minister and into cabinet, and deal with it. 
And there’s a solution; their voice is heard. That’s something 
that you have a lot of trouble with in the opposition, because 
you don’t understand small business. You never have and you 
never will. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like to quote for a moment some 
small business information from the members’ opposite 
research department, the Regina Leader-Post, and this was 
published last fall. It must be true because it’s their own 
research department. But none the less, an article in here says 
that the NDP has yet to address the issue of free enterprise. And 
that’s true. The closest that they came, Mr. Speaker, to 
addressing the issue of free enterprise, was to have a dinner in 
Regina with the small business community, for which they 
charged $125 a plate. I go to dinners with the small business 
community, Mr. Speaker, and we go for nothing. I mean, they 
can talk to me any time they want. They might buy me a dinner; 
I might buy them a dinner. Lord knows, I don’t charge them 
$125 to sit down and talk to me, to find out what’s going to 
happen. And then, Mr. Speaker, what do you suppose 
happened? The results of that dinner meeting was one of the 
best kept secrets in the world. I didn’t hear a thing about what 
you talked about. 
 
(1615) 
 
And I’ll tell you something else; I’ll tell you something else. I 
talked to some of the small business community that went to the 
dinner, and they said that it was a joke. They said, you know, 
they just don’t understand what we’re talking about or what our 
problems are. They must be shorter than you are, Klein, because 
it’s going over their heads. 
 
None the less, I’ll continue, Mr. Speaker, with . . . This article is 
excellent. This little research material means an awful lot to me 
because it just hits it right on the head. It says that the NDP 
seem so ideologically hidebound that it is either unable or 
unwilling to tackle such a basic economic principle as free 
enterprise. And you know, that’s true. Because you know, the 
solution to farms, for instance, was their land bank — well 
we’ll buy your farms; you come and work for us and be 
sharecroppers, and that’s how it’s going to work in farms. And 
then in businesses, well I’ll tell you what, we’ll get somebody 
to start a business and then we’ll come along as government and 
we’ll buy that business and we’ll give them their money to take 
out of our country — which they did — and then we’ll try to 
operate this. And if we lose money, it’s fine because the 
taxpayers are going to keep paying. And on and on. And that’s 
their idea of business. Well it doesn’t work that way. Now this 
article: 
 

To appreciate the rhetorical strait-jacket that the NDP 
finds itself in, all you have to do is scan the resolutions 
passed at successive party conventions. 

 
Now I had a good time with this one the other day when I  
  



 
April 15, 1986 

 

626 
 

was speaking to the Real Estate Association of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. Because when I got to that, I read one of the 
resolutions. Do you know what that resolution was? That 
resolution was to nationalize the down-town cores of Regina 
and Saskatoon. Well if I hadn’t heard anything funny . . . The 
real estate industry was not impressed with that. I said, can you 
imagine if you wanted to sell a building or sell a lot or sell 
something out of the down-town core, you would first have to 
go to the NDP government and probably they wouldn’t let you 
do it because they wouldn’t pay you commission. But if you 
were a big developer from eastern Canada and wanted to come 
in and build a great big building in Regina, you could in and, in 
spite of the fact that the interest rates are 13 or 14 per cent, we 
like you, you big developers from the East, and we’ll give you a 
30-year mortgage at nine and five-eighths per cent, and away 
you go. Well we don’t work that way because nothing works 
that way in business and in capitalism and in free enterprise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the legislature — and this is true, and you may 
remember — not once has an NDP member stood to talk about 
the merits of private initiative and free enterprise and how it has 
built the Saskatchewan economy. And you know, that’s true. 
They have never stood up in this Chamber and expounded on 
the merits of free enterprise — never. And while I had the 
privilege of serving as a minister of our Premier’s cabinet, Mr. 
Speaker, as I recall, there were only three or four questions that 
were ever asked of me, and they all related to my portfolio as 
minister in charge of Sedco and not as the minister of Small 
Business. Because they didn’t understand; they didn’t 
understand the basic principle of what small business and free 
enterprise was all about. 
 

The NDP behaves as if it is incapable of understanding the 
profit motive, or even appreciating its value to the 
economy as a source of job creation. 

 
Well the fellow that wrote this great article is sitting up in the 
gallery. And I’ll tell you, he’s right on. Not only do you behave 
— what he says is exactly true — you don’t understand the 
profit motive. You don’t appreciate how small business and 
how an industrial economy creates jobs. You just simply don’t 
understand. And he’s absolutely right, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The NDP is still trying to come to grips with capitalism, 
an economic structure that it vowed to eradicate when the 
founding principles of the Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation were recited in the Regina Manifesto. 

 
And do you know, that’s true. 
 

They want to eradicate capitalism and eradicate free 
enterprise. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re the opposite of that. We believe that 
everything functions around the small-business, free-enterprise 
sector. 
 
And this is a good one; this gets back to that dinner that the 
opposition had with small business. They’ve got a  

committee now going out trying to get together with the small 
business community. 
 

The NDP small business community — what they face is 
somehow pining away for the party’s socialist ideology to 
make concessions to the reality of Saskatchewan’s 
economy. 

 
Well you can’t find concessions. You can’t make it work one 
way and the other. In free enterprise it works one way; it 
doesn’t work both ways. Either let them do their job and 
encourage and cultivate them to do that work, to do what they 
know best because they’re profit-motivated, and when they 
make profits they pay more taxes. You’d think you’d be more 
interested in that — you people most of all — getting more tax 
money from those profits. So I can understand why you have 
trouble with that one. 
 
And this is another true statement, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The fact that the vast majority of Saskatchewan people 
believe in capitalism and free enterprise creates what is a 
very real, practical, political problem for the NDP. 

 
And you know, that’s true. That’s true because you know that 
the majority of Saskatchewan people, in fact, do believe in 
capitalism; in fact, do believe in free enterprise. You know, 
people want to own their own homes. They want to own their 
own farms. They want to own their own businesses. And all 
you’ve got to do is encourage them to be able to do that. So it’s 
no wonder that you have a problem with that. 
 
Well all right. I would just like, Mr. Speaker, to go into one 
final thing, I suppose, and that’s resulting . . . as to the 
importance of the private sector and free enterprise and small 
business. 
 
And again I’m going to refer to the loyal opposition’s usual 
source of information and criteria, the Regina Leader-Post. But 
it says it right here: “Small firms create most jobs.” Mr. 
Speaker, after the little dissertation that I gave on free 
enterprise, I would just like to say why, and it’s very well put in 
here by Roger Sauvé, who is a writer for the Leader-Post: 
 

If it were not for small business, employment levels would 
likely be stagnant. The media examines and dissects the 
ups and downs of large businesses while ignoring the real 
driving force in job creation . . . the small business sector. 

 
The reason for the disparity of reporting as between large 
and small business is simple. Large firms are very visible 
to the public at large; they affect large numbers of 
employees at any given time . . . In contrast, individual 
small business are virtually invisible. 

 
(The) new tax-based data tabulated by Statistics Canada 
and released late last year suggest that small enterprises 
(fewer than 20 employees) created 80 per cent of all new 
non-government jobs in Canada between 1978 and 1982. 

 
  



 
April 15, 1986 

 

627 
 

Four out of every five new jobs created by small business in 
Canada. And 
 

(the United States) reached the same conclusion for the 
1980 to 1982 period . . . 75 per cent of all new jobs (in the 
United States) came in the small business sector. Trends in 
Western Europe are . . . similar. 

 
And finally, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Governments have developed enhanced programs to help 
small businesses grow and survive. Interest reduction and 
venture programs are the most visible. 

 
So having said that, Mr. Speaker, it’s very obvious my feelings, 
my support to the private sector and to small business. And as a 
result I’m very proud to second that fine motion made by my 
colleague, the member from Moose Jaw North. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have a lot 
of gall and a lot of nerve to put forward a resolution in the 
nature of this resolution. I want to read it, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That this Assembly commends the efforts of the 
Government of Saskatchewan in encouraging the growth 
and development of the province through the policies and 
programs of the Departments of Economic Development 
and Trade, and Tourism and Small Business. 

 
Now I would have thought that if that was taking place — that 
there was economic development in this province — that surely 
the Minister of Tourism and Small Business or, I should say — 
correct me — the former minister of Small Business and 
Tourism would have got up and he would have been able to 
provide to this Assembly some of the concrete economic 
indicators to show that there is economic growth in the 
province. But sadly, Mr. Speaker, they were unable to come 
forward with any evidence of economic growth. 
 
I would have thought that if we had an economy that is 
booming, as they try to claim, that then we wouldn’t have a 
huge deficit. And as you know, Mr. Speaker, in good times you 
think you were generating an economic climate and that the 
provinces would have a balanced budget. So that’s the first 
indicator that we should look at and see what these birds have 
done during the last four years to this province. 
 
They have taken the people of this province, their credit card, 
and they’ve put on a little Tory party. But they’re using the 
people of this province’s credit card — charging it up to the 
people of this province and to the children and future 
generations. 
 
That’s how good this economy is booming, when we look, and 
look, and see a $2 billion deficit — and when we left office, 
$140 million surplus. And they have taken this province to 
where there is over $200 million annually in interest payments 
alone. Now that’s the first indicator.  

Now a province has to be really booming to be able to create an 
economic debt of that magnitude in the province in four years. 
 
But let’s take a look at some of the other wonderful things that 
are happening here during the four years of the administration 
opposite. We could take a look at Premier Devine’s record in 
many of the economic indicators. 
 
Let us take a look at housing starts — housing starts in 
Saskatchewan. Do you realize that the number of housing starts 
in 1985 was the lowest since 1971, and we came out of an 
economic depression under the Ross Thatcher government. So 
the lowest number of housing starts. Now you would think that 
if the population were growing, and that people were coming 
back to Saskatchewan, that one thing you’d have is economic 
activity in the housing. But not so. 
 
So two indicators. Let’s take a look at the two indicators. One: 
massive, massive debt; $2 billion of debt placed on the backs of 
the people of this province — $2 billion. And not only that. It 
would be far worse, this debt, if they hadn’t, in fact, sold off 
many of the assets which were owned by the people of this 
province. You can take a look at what they’ve sold off. They’ve 
sold off Saskoil for over 100 million. They’ve sold off a coal 
mine for over 100 million and have blown it. They’ve sold off 
the highway equipment and appointed a new Minister of 
Highways, and they don’t give him any equipment. What a job. 
But before they appointed him Minister of Highways, they let 
him auction off the sale of the highway equipment. And after he 
has no equipment, they appoint him as Minister of Highways. 
Now that’s a challenging job you have. I hope they gave you a 
wheelbarrow and a shovel. 
 
(1630) 
 
But let’s go on and see what other assets have they sold off. 
Well you can take a look at the assets, the drag-lines that the 
power corporation owned. They’ve been sold off and they’ve 
blown the money. If you take a look at the equipment in the 
potash mines, they’ve sold them off, leased them back, blown 
the money. That’s what is happening. And despite that, they 
have a massive debt here in this province. 
 
And you know what more? If you had economic activity, you’d 
have money generated and an increase in the taxation — 
income tax, revenue would be increased, sales tax, and so on, 
corporate tax. And you know what happened? They had to 
increase on the people of Saskatchewan, impose on them, the 
highest increase of taxation in the history of this province. So 
it’s really booming under this new administration. 
 
But let’s take a look at some of the other indicators. If we take a 
look at metal fabrication, well in 1981 there was $106 million 
worth; and if you look in 1985, it was down to $56 million. And 
of course that means fewer jobs for ironworkers and more 
unemployment for ordinary Saskatchewan people. 
 
Let’s take a look at machinery production in Saskatchewan. 
Well in 1981 when we left office, $188 million in the 
production of farm machinery. Do you  
  



 
April 15, 1986 

 

628 
 

know what it is in 1985? A hundred and twenty-nine million. 
Now that is economic growth. Now we’re really booming here 
in Saskatchewan. And I can understand why the last speaker is 
no longer the minister — because he started to believe the stuff 
that he was pouring out here in the Assembly. 
 
Let’s take a look at some of the other indicators — private and 
public investment in Saskatchewan. If you look in agriculture, 
1,330 million in 1981. Well, do you know what it is in 1985? 
It’s 1,044 million — down in agriculture. If you look in 
manufacturing: 1981, $183 million in manufacturing; in 1985, 
down, 174 million. In trade, finance, and commercial services, 
if you look in 1981, $525 million; in 1985 it’s down to $465 
million. 
 
So what I say is each and every indicator that we have put 
forward there is decline. There’s a loss of jobs, there’s loss of 
opportunities, there’s shattered hopes and the betrayed dreams 
of people which depended upon their rhetoric during the last 
election. People of Saskatchewan will remember your slogans 
— there’s so much more you can be. And I’ll tell you, they’re 
going to give you so much more. They’re going to turf you out 
of office whenever you have the courage to call an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Let’s take a look at some more of the indicators 
to see how well we’re doing here in Saskatchewan. Let’s take a 
look at public and private investment. And one would think that 
if, you know, open for business or open for big business was 
operating and was providing jobs and they had a buoyant 
economic condition here in Saskatchewan, that obviously what 
you would have to have is increased public and private 
investment. Let’s take a look at it. Let’s take a look at the public 
and private investment in Saskatchewan. In 1981, $5.2 billion 
in investments. Do you what it was in 1984? Five point zero 
billion, down. In 1983, it was down — 5 billion. In 1982, the 
year they took over, 4.7. So the public and private investment is 
down, and those are the cold, hard facts, that the public and 
private investment is down. 
 
And I would think that if the province, and if we’re zooming 
along with economic development in the province, that surely 
we would be able to sustain, or at least level off the increase in 
the public debt. But you know what you find in respect to the 
public debt, Mr. Speaker? We find that in 1982 the public debt 
in this province was $3.4 billion. And the public debt under 
these birds opposite, under this booming economy, under this 
economy that they stand up here and try to brag about, is now 
$8.7 billion. 
 
And then if you want another indicator to see how well we’re 
doing, how the people of Saskatchewan are prospering, you 
take a look at the province’s equity, the Consolidated Fund, and 
also the Heritage Fund, the combined Heritage and 
Consolidated Funds. And you know, in 1982, as of March 31st, 
the provincial province’s equity was 1.91 billion. And you 
know, in 1986-87, in their last budget that they’ve brought 
down, there is a minus $740 million. Now I’ll tell you, that’s 
booming. That’s a booming economy that they have put  

forward. 
 
Well let’s take a look at some of the other indicators. Are there 
more jobs being created here? Well the recent statistics, we find 
that in respect to the retail stores have not experienced the 
hoped-for recovery. Growth in sales for 1985 was the second 
lowest in Canada in retail store sales. It was the lowest in 
Canada other than Prince Edward Island, but worse than every 
other province in Canada — that’s in retail sales, increase in 
retail sales. Now that’s a booming economy; I’ll tell you, it’s 
really booming. 
 
And I say, in new investment in the province’s economy is 
declining. New investment has declined in real terms from 5.1 
billion in ’81 to 4.2 billion in ’85. And let’s take a look at 
employment. We find that, first of all, in respect to youth 
employment, that under the respective Tory governments across 
this nation it’s a national disgrace, and there’s no exception here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
And the Minister of Justice laughs. He thinks it’s funny because 
he’s sitting at the highest paid job that he ever had. It’s funny 
that young people are unemployed. He thinks it’s a joke; he’s 
laughing. That’s fine. But I’ll tell you, the young people will 
laugh when they kick you out of office next time, Mr. Minister 
of Justice. 
 
I’ll tell you, youth employment is a national disgrace — and it’s 
a national disgrace and it’s a provincial disgrace also. There 
were 7,000 fewer young people working in 1985 than in 1981 
— 7,000 fewer young people. Unemployment among young 
people is 18,000 — 18,000 people among young people, or 
about 16 per cent. And they say our economy is booming. 
Confidence — we’re marching ahead. 
 
But I’ll tell you, there are some winners and there’s some 
losers. And I’ll tell you, it’s not the young people of the 
province who are the winners, because there’s 16 per cent of 
them unemployed; 18,000 young people looking for work. 
 
And then take a look from 1981 to 1985. The labour force grew 
by 10 per cent, but employment increased by only 6 per cent, 
and unemployment increased by 90 per cent. All of us know 
that last month the statistics came down in respect to 
unemployment, and here in Saskatchewan there was a total of 
47,000 people unemployed. And they say, what a booming 
economy; what a job we have done. Join and take a look. You 
know, you’re doing wonderful — 47,000 people unemployed, 
one in 10 either unemployed or on welfare. What a great 
accomplishment. You should be proud. You should be proud of 
that. 
 
If you take a look in respect to welfare, there’s 65,000 people 
on welfare in this province — 65,000 — one in 10 either 
unemployed or on welfare. And you know, under this booming 
economy, do you know what? Well, I’ll tell you. They’re saying 
that oh, there’s new jobs created. Well, I’ll tell you that 47,000 
people were unemployed last month — one of the greatest 
increases in unemployment across Canada. 
 
And if you take a look at the unemployed employables —  
  



 
April 15, 1986 

 

629 
 

unemployed employables — when we left office there was 
about 4,500 people, unemployed employables, on welfare. Do 
you know what it is today? There’s 15,000 unemployed 
employables on welfare. On welfare! And do you realize . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Now, I’ll tell you. 
 
One key indicator whether a society has a strong economic 
base, whether it’s expanding, is how much are you spending 
less on welfare. Well let’s take a look when we left office, our 
last budget. How much was paid out for welfare assistance: 96 
to $98 million. That’s what was paid out under our 
administration. And do you know what. Do you know how 
much it is under these birds, under this booming economy: $206 
million is being paid out. 
 
And they say we have economic growth and economic 
opportunity. Well I’ll tell you, the people of Saskatchewan 
don’t believe your rhetoric. And the people of Saskatchewan 
don’t believe your Premier any more. You can’t get support by 
going around and by press releases announcing that there’s 
going to be jobs in the future. 
 
Here in Regina we saw how ridiculous, in fact, this government 
can be. They have announced the building of an upgrader. They 
haven’t even . . . Well, they had an opening. Not many people 
turned up, mind you, at the opening. Just a few people turned 
up, but they turned the sod. And they are going to build this 
upgrader. 
 
Well they got another announcement. Now they’re going to 
build a fertilizer plant, and they’re going to attach it to this 
non-existent upgrader. Now that is economic growth, economic 
development. I’ll tell you, people are excited. They were 
excited when you made your announcement of the upgrader in 
Regina, because you know what? They had a by-election in 
North East where that upgrader is — and I’ll tell you the people 
of Saskatchewan were excited. And the people of North East 
were really excited because here they had an opportunity to go 
to the polls and demonstrate how pleased they were with your 
economic policies. 
 
And do you know what happened? In Regina North East, where 
you had won it by over 1,700 votes in the last election, a 
by-election was called, and in spite of all the announcements 
that you made, despite the announcement that the upgrader was 
in the Regina North East, the member, the former Finance 
minister, on the ballot . . . And I’ll tell you, he received about 
72 per cent of the vote. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — So there is no doubt, there is no doubt that the 
people of this province have written you birds off. They don’t 
believe you. You go around with press releases. People can’t 
live on press releases. They’ve got to have jobs, and you 
haven’t been creating them. And you know, recently it was 
pointed out that not only did we have a massive increase in 
unemployment, but if you look at the creating of new jobs for 
our people, that we rated eighth, only ahead of Newfoundland 
and Prince Edward Island. Eighth! Eighth in creating jobs. So 
this is a  

tremendous . . . I’m glad you brought forward this here 
resolution. I don’t how much time you spend on thinking up 
these great resolutions so that we can have an opportunity to get 
up in the legislature and explain and inform the public in 
respect to the great performance of your government. 
 
(1645) 
 
So let’s go into one other area, and as the former minister of 
Tourism and Small Business was alluding to, he indicated that 
really what’s going to save us now here in Saskatchewan — we 
have gone for the big business type of approach in the 
development of the economy. We are going to give substantial 
grants to former leaders or potential leaders, or candidates for 
the leadership, I guess, of the Tory party. And we’re going to be 
handing out huge grants to the Pocklingtons and we’re going to 
develop Saskatchewan this way. And around and around, 
they’re marching around this province making press releases. 
No jobs, but somewhere in the future there might be a job. 
 
In the meantime we find people being laid off at Ipsco. We find 
the closing of Dominion Stores. We find the exodus of young 
people from this province. Do you realize that last month, Mr. 
Speaker — or last year, pardon me, in 1985 — there were 6,040 
more people left this province than what came in? Six thousand 
and forty exodus from this province, out-migration over 
in-migration, out-migration over in-migration — 6,000. 
 
And do you know what happened the first two months of this 
year? Thirty-four hundred people more left this province than 
what came into this province. That’s a total of 57 per day. 
That’s the rate of out-migration from this province during 
January and February. 
 
And they stand up and they say what a fantastic deal we have. 
Oh, is this economy booming! Well I say there are some 
winners — there are some winners. The winners are the oil 
companies, of course. They made some money — $300 million 
— $300 million in tax and royalty holidays. They’re a winner. 
And I guess Peter Pock from Edmonton is a winner when he 
can come in here and open up his brief-case and get it filled 
with $10 million of taxpayers’ money. He’s a winner. 
 
The other thing that the little minister of . . . the former minister 
of Tourism and Small Business, well, he said, maybe we 
haven’t been doing too well. But he said, we’ve got a new plan. 
We have a new plan. And I wonder what it would be. And he 
said, we’re going to have free trade with United States. And 
how come we’re going to have free trade? How do we know 
that that’s a fact? Well, because our little cheerleader said we’re 
going to have free trade; so therefore we’re going to have free 
trade. Well I guess they should have gone down to the United 
States. They should have gone to the United States and should 
have had a discussion because the U.S. committee of the United 
States, U.S. committee, indicates that it’s going to veto free 
trade with Canada. This is what the Americans have said, the 
senate committee. 
 
And now they’re trying to deceive the public into  
  



 
April 15, 1986 

 

630 
 

believing that there’s going to be a great economic development 
by the use of free trade. They haven’t carried out any 
discussions. They don’t know what free trade means or have 
defined it, but they have hired someone at $92,800 a year. Well 
they’ve done the same with trade offices in Hong Kong and 
they have one in London and they have another one — they had 
one over in Vienna. 
 
But I’ll ask you, Mr. Speaker, go around Saskatchewan. Go into 
the towns and villages of this province and see whether or not 
there are any new industries. Well I’ll tell you, the industries 
were there before these birds took office. 
 
In my constituency alone we had a great array of 
manufacturing, and what an economic base it is to that area. We 
have Doepker Industries at Annaheim; and in St. Gregor we 
have a trucking firm; we have Michel’s windows and tarps; and 
we have Western Industries. We have at Englefeld, Schulte, and 
over in Wynyard we have Plains Poultry. And we can go north 
of Watson, we have Dyna-Fab; and we go into Lanigan, we 
have industry. All of those were put in place under the 
economic policies of the New Democratic Party when they 
were in office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And I challenge you to get up in this House and 
to name those plants that have been built under the operation of 
this government. All that we have is some press releases that 
Peter Pock is going to get $10 million because that’s going to 
make it. 
 
Husky Oil got a $90 million grant. And then, oh well, big 
business is our theme. That’s how we’re going to build this 
province, they said. Free enterprise is going to do it. And then 
you take a look at the upgrader here and you . . . How many 
private dollars are invested in the upgrader here in Regina? 
Well it costs $650 million. And I’ll tell you, 350 million is from 
the federal government guarantee and the rest is guaranteed by 
the province. And taxpayers — there’s not a single private 
dollar in the upgrader by any . . . So what you’re doing is using 
taxpayers’ money, because you can’t even attract your friends 
to come and invest in the province. That’s how bad you are. 
 
So obviously, Mr. Speaker, when you take a look at the record, 
if you take a look at what they have done, the people of this 
province are fed up. They’re sick and tired of them. They are 
pleading with them to call an election so that they can turf them 
out of office for another 50 years. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I am going to move an amendment 
to the resolution: 
 

That all the words after “Assembly” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 

 
Regrets that the policies of the provincial government 
have failed to create widespread jobs in economic 
prosperity, have produced a 90 per cent increase in 
unemployment, have produced financial mismanagement, 
and a deficit of over  

$1.9 billion; and further, that this Assembly urges the 
Government of Saskatchewan to take immediate, positive 
and concrete steps to ensure widespread economic growth 
for all Saskatchewan people. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by my colleague, the member 
from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The debate continues concurrent. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just before I adjourn 
debate on this, I have one point I want to make and read into the 
record. I listened to the former minister — little minister — 
talking about the environment they’re creating. I wanted to read 
just one line into the record as reported in Business on April 
1986, Roger Sauvé on business. I want to quote: 
 

In the ’70s the vitality of the goods producing industries 
and the urbanization of Saskatchewan has encouraged the 
growth of the service sector (the growth of the service 
sector — the ’70s). Over three-quarters of all new jobs in 
the province were created in the service category during 
the 1970s. The share of new jobs was larger . . . 

 
Now listen closely, fellows, because this happened during the 
1970s: 
 

The share of the new jobs was larger in Saskatchewan than 
for Canada as a whole. According to the 1981 census, 
Regina had the highest service employment ratio in 
western Canada. 

 
The highest in western Canada. He’s done a detailed study. 
 
And listen, fellows, we weren’t out advertising as open for 
business and using old clichés like the Minister of Finance 
drummed up and learned when he was cutting his teeth in 
politics as Darrel Heald’s assistant. We weren’t using old 
second hand slogans. We had a climate out there that was 
suitable for the service sector. The service sector moved ahead. 
 
I have so much more I want to talk about on this topic, so I beg 
leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 
 
 


	ORAL QUESTIONS
	Delayed Answers to Written Questions
	Cost of Government Advertising
	Agricultural Representative Services in Kamsack
	Employment Status of René Archambault
	Payments to Inner Dimension Design Associates

