


















































March 18, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 March 18, 1986 
 

9 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

The Clerk: — I present and lay on the Table the following 
petitions for private bills by Mr. Baker — Of Canadian Bible 
Society, South Saskatchewan District, of the city of Regina in 
the Province of Saskatchewan, and Canadian Bible Society, 
North Saskatchewan District, of the city of Saskatoon in the 
Province of Saskatchewan; and by Mr. Glauser — of Medical 
Services Incorporated of the city of Saskatoon in the Province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 

NOTICE OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on 
Thursday next I shall move: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Saskatchewan government to 
take steps immediately to refund the 5 per cent sales tax 
collected from purchasers of used cars, trucks, and other 
used vehicles, and to remove the unfair flat tax which was 
imposed upon Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
Thursday next move: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Saskatchewan government to 
take steps immediately to increase the numbers of health 
care workers in Saskatchewan health care institutions, to 
expand Saskatchewan's preventative health care system 
and to improve the level of health care services available to 
residents in rural Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Thursday next move: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan 
to take immediate steps to deal with the high farm input 
costs by taking measures necessary, number one, to reduce 
the cost of farm fuel by 32 cents a gallon; reduce the cost 
of farm fertilizers, herbicides, and pesticides; and restore 
property tax relief for farmers. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
I shall on Thursday next move: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan 
to address the urgent needs of northern Saskatchewan and 
to restore and improve the basic health care, educational, 
and social services which the government has neglected in 
the North. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on 
Thursday next I shall move: 

That this Assembly urge the Saskatchewan government to 
introduce measures to enable our senior citizens to live in 
comfort, safety, and dignity, and to create an agency of 
government to be responsible for addressing the special 
needs our senior citizens. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on Thursday next move: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Saskatchewan government to 
oppose vigorously the federal government's attack on 
Saskatchewan farmers proposed in the Nielsen task force 
report on program review which recommends: paying the 
Crow benefit to the producers; discontinuing farm 
improvement loans; dismantling the Canadian Wheat 
Board; cancelling railway branch line rehabilitation; 
increasing crop insurance premiums paid by producers. I 
so move. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Thursday next move: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Saskatchewan government to 
increase immediately its funding for the construction and 
maintenance of the provincial highway system which has 
been allowed, through neglect and misplaced priorities, to 
deteriorate over the last four years. 

 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on Thursday next move: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Saskatchewan government to 
oppose vigorously the federal government's plans to cut its 
share of funding for health care and post-secondary 
education. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce 
to you and to the members of the Assembly, and to welcome 
here today a group of 22 visiting exchange students who are 
seated in the west gallery. They are visiting here for some time 
from Germany and are here today with instructors and the 
principal and the chaperons associated with the Luther College 
High School in Regina. These students range from grades 9 to 
13. 
 
We're certainly delighted to take the opportunity to welcome 
you here to the Assembly this afternoon. We trust that your 
time will be a very enjoyable one. And I do want to ask one of 
my colleagues to also introduce a special student in the group. 
  



 
March 18, 1986 

 

10 
 

 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to the members 
the Assembly, Marcus Flohr from Bonn. Marcus is a terrific 
young man who's staying with my family. We've been involved 
with several of these exchanges — very successful exchanges, I 
may say. I know I've discussed this with the Leader of the 
Opposition before, who agrees with me, and his family have 
been involved also. 
 
I'd like to point out to the members of the Assembly that 
Marcus speaks impeccable English, and, to the member from 
Prince Albert who calls me the oatmeal savage, I plan to take 
lessons from Marcus. And I'd be happy to meet with the group 
following question period, in my office, room 340. Please 
welcome the students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, I don't know if there's anybody on 
that side that is bold enough to try it or not, but I would like at 
this time, herzliche willkommen and I hope that they enjoy their 
time here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tusa: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. I would like to introduce to the 
House, through you, 22 students from the Robert Southey 
School at Southey, Saskatchewan, who are seated in the west 
gallery. They are here this afternoon to tour the legislature, and 
I'm looking forward to meeting with them at 2:30. 
 
I trust that they will be edified by the question period, and I 
know that they will certainly be impressed by the calibre of 
answers they will receive to the questions. 
 
I thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Flat Tax on Net Income 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a 
question to the Premier, and it has to do with the record tax 
increases introduced in his government's last budget, as well as 
the budget which is planned for next week. 
 
Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, the laughter from members opposite 
indicates the lack of reliance that people can place upon the 
public . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — My question to the Premier is this: can 
the Premier assure Saskatchewan taxpayers that he understands 
that the last provincial budget was unfair to ordinary people, 
and that he will commence to change that, and specifically, can 
you assure Saskatchewan taxpayers that this year's provincial 
budget will eliminate the unfair flat tax on net income which 
makes Saskatchewan virtually the only province, besides 
Quebec, which has, not one income tax, but two? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it's been the position of our 
administration to reduce the taxes for ordinary Saskatchewan 
people. It you look at the tax changes since 1982, people who 
might been low income or on welfare or whatever in 1981, 
1980, paid in the neighbourhood of $150 million tax on 
gasoline, and now they don't pay that in the province of 
Saskatchewan. If you take the ordinary Saskatchewan person 
who used to pay sales tax on children's clothes, now they don't. 
If you look at the Saskatchewan people who used to pay sales 
tax on the utility bills in Saskatchewan under the NDP, now 
they don't under a Conservative administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we said many times that the wealthy, the very, 
very wealthy in the province of Saskatchewan, like the 
railroads, like the high-income people, should be paying their 
fair share of tax. In Saskatchewan the flat tax hits the very 
wealthy, and 97 per cent of the people who didn't use to pay tax 
at all, now pay tax. The taxes we have levied against banks, 
against large businesses, against railroads, were not levied 
under the previous administration. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the tax changes for families, 
the tax reductions for ordinary Saskatchewan people here in this 
provinces versus the tax increases on railroads, the tax increases 
on big business, and you look at the tax increases that we have 
levelled against high-income people that never paid any tax at 
all, then, Mr. Speaker, you will see that families in 
Saskatchewan are getting a better tax break under our 
administration than they ever did under the previous 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Can the 
Premier at least assure Saskatchewan people that he will restore 
the property tax rebates to home owners, farmers, and 
small-business men that he took away from them last year and 
which were available under the previous administration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, when we talk about money 
into Saskatchewan families' pockets, then we have to look at the 
millions and millions of dollars that this administration has put 
into the pockets of family people and home owners and farmers 
across this province. 
 
When interest rates were 22 per cent, you just sat there and did 
nothing. We protected families. No place else in Canada was 
there any protections — NDP governments and not one bit of 
protection against high interest rates, and we were there to 
protect them. Two to $300 a month, let alone $200 a year. We 
were the first to initiate it and it was right here in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at 6 per cent money to farmers all 
across this province, and they're up to $900 million is out in 
agriculture, and you're comparing that to a 200 and $300 grant 
. . . Well I know you like grants. I mean the previous 
administration was into grant this and grant that, and grant this 
and grant that. They may not . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I'll 
grant you, you might not 
  



 
March 18, 1986 

 

11 
 

like this Grant, but he's going to be around for a while. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, in protecting families in 
Saskatchewan, I’m sure that the Leader of the Opposition 
knows that high interest rates hurt families and they hurt 
farmers and they hurt small business, and we have put hundreds 
of millions of dollars into the pockets of Saskatchewan families 
that weren't there before. 
 
And when it comes to tax changes, Mr. Speaker, when it comes 
to tax changes, if you can reduce the sales tax on items where 
families spend their money, and they may not have any money 
— people on welfare have to pay sales tax — and you can take 
it off children's clothes, and you can take if off gasoline, you 
take if off their power bills, it's much more important to those 
people than it is saying we're going to have a rebate system for 
the rich or for the wealthy. In this province, we initiated a flat 
tax so that the wealthy, for once and for all, wouldn't avoid any 
tax at all, and now they pay in this province, and I think that's 
fair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Will the 
Premier acknowledge that the flat tax of which he is so proud 
allows the taxpayer to deduct, before the calculation of that tax, 
any loopholes he may be able to take advantage of by way of 
MURBs or investment in movies and videos but does not allow 
a taxpayer to deduct for flat tax purposes his contribution to his 
church or charity. Will he admit that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I'll admit that we're using 
the federal tax form. And as I've said in this House many times, 
I've asked the federal government to reform the federal tax 
system as well as the federal tax form. And I could think of a 
better place to put that flat tax on that form than currently 
exists, but we're dealing with the federal system, what it's 
designed to do. And the direction, I’m sure the hon. member 
agrees, is to get people who have never paid any tax at all. And 
in this province there were a large number of people who didn't 
pay any income tax. Now under this system they pay some 
contribution; they at least pay tax. Most of those who were 
dodging the tax system pay something in the province of 
Saskatchewan today, and they never did before. So it's designed 
in the spirit of reform to get people who didn't use to pay tax, 
and now they will pay some. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Premier. Can you 
name one, just one major loophole which was previously 
available but which is not now available, except dividend tax 
credits and political tax credits? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Are you able to name any loophole of 
the hundreds — of the hundreds identified by Nielsen — that is 
not available on calculation of the tax, of the flat tax, except the 
two I have mentioned, political tax credits and dividend tax 
credits? 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I've said . . . And the hon. 
member has just indicated two that we have included, so that 
those people will pay some tax. But he and I both know, and I'm 
sure we agree, the intent is to get people who are in very high 
income brackets to pay some tax. And I'm sure he agrees with 
that. Now I'm dealing with the federal form . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, maybe he doesn't agree with it. You 
know as well as I do that in the province, unless we go to a 
provincial-wide tax system alone, we have to deal with the 
federal tax system. I've asked them to reform it, and I've 
encouraged them to reform it. We were the first people in 
Canada to initiate this. And we have got people paying tax that 
didn't use to pay before. And that's generally in the right 
direction, and I believe that we should continue in that 
direction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — You say that you wish the tax system 
to be fairer. You know that the federal budget provided that the 
5 per cent surcharge on high incomes would be eliminated, and 
a 3 per cent surcharge would be imposed on everyone right 
down to an income of $15,000. Did you publicly protest that 
budget on the grounds that it went against your principles? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I have suggested in person, 
and I've suggested in conversation and suggested in letter and 
talked to the Minister of Finance with respect to the changes 
regarding tax reform. We have been moving in the right 
direction in order to get high-income people to pay their fair 
share, and we're going to continue to do that, so that they don't 
take advantage of loopholes. We have removed some loopholes 
in the province of Saskatchewan, and I think you concur — I 
believe you do — that that's a good idea. Now we're going to 
continue to do that, to remove more loopholes so that the 
high-income people pay their fair share, and at the same time 
we are going to protect families against the sales tax. Because 
even if they're poor, they have to pay that 20 per cent interest 
rate, or they've got pay the sales tax on this, and the sales tax on 
that. You never did that, and that's where you and I differ. We're 
going back to protecting low-income families where it really 
matters. They have no out. They had to pay interest, and they 
had to pay sales tax, and we've made changes there, and 
changes people appreciate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to 
momentarily interrupt this battle between two socialist giants 
here in our Assembly. I would like to indicate to you that Mr. 
Gary Filmon, the leader of the Progressive Conservative Party 
in Manitoba . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member is making a 
statement rather than asking a question. If you have a question, 
I'll take the question. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — It wasn't a statement. It was a preamble to a 
question. Basically, Mr. Speaker, there isn't any difference 
between this opposition and that government. And the 
document presented in this House yesterday, and 
  



 
March 18, 1986 

 

12 
 

tabled, certainly proves that. 
 
One thing the throne speech failed to mention is the U.S. farm 
Bill which is going to have a disastrous effect on Saskatchewan 
in the coming years. I want to suggest, sir, that a . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. The member is making suggestions, 
but he is not asking a question. If you have a question, get 
directly to it; otherwise, we'll move on. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I certainly have a question. But with respect 
again to my preamble, I've heard it here for the last . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I'll take the next question. 
 

Nielsen Task Force Report on Agriculture 
 

Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Minister 
of Agriculture, and it has to do with the Nielsen task force 
report. Are you aware of the recommendations that this 
multi-billion-dollar, big-business operation made with respect 
to agriculture? 
 
Does your government oppose the report's major 
recommendations with respect to agriculture: section number 
one, the 20 per cent that they recommend for crop insurance 
premiums; an end to the farm fuel tax rebates; the introduction 
of variable freight rates for grain movement; the cancellation of 
grain cash advances; and a change in the system of taxing 
farmers, which will force them to pay on grain in their bin 
rather than after they sell it? 
 
Do you oppose these recommendations? And if you do, what 
action have you taken to help Saskatchewan farmers lobby 
Ottawa against this disastrous change in agriculture? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I obviously support the cash 
advance system, because in the province of Saskatchewan under 
our administration we have initiated brand-new cash advance 
systems for the livestock industry. So I have initiated 
brand-new cash advances because I believe that they're good for 
farmers. So I will endorse cash advance. I think it's a good idea 
in the elevator system, and I believe that it's a good idea in 
livestock. 
 
With respect to crop insurance, Mr. Speaker, we are now 
working to put together an improved crop insurance 
mechanism, improved stabilization. We've now enjoined the 
national tripartite hog stabilization program, and I believe it's a 
good system for Canada. We are beefing up the crop insurance 
program and, in addition, working with the federal government, 
because we get it on the table at the first ministers' conference, a 
brand-new disaster mechanism for agriculture, particularly in 
western Canada. In co-operation with the Prime Minister we 
said yes, I think we can design one here; and John Wise says 
they can design one. 
 
So I'm in favour of crop insurance; I'm in favour of improving 
it. I'm in favour of stabilization. I obviously favour cash 
advances, and I'm going to be encouraging 

every administration to stick with cash advances. So the kinds 
of things that we have done here . . . For example, 6 per cent 
interest rate — I encouraged the federal government to move 
for 6 per cent interest rates and they did. They brought in 6 per 
cent and the Farm Credit Corporation. I said that you should 
reduce the taxation on farm fuel. They have taken our lead in 
several regards. Where they don't take our lead, then I will 
differ from them. Where they follow the kinds of things that 
we're doing here in the province, then I will give them a 
bouquet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, I don't believe what I heard. Here's 
the Minister of Agriculture standing up and supporting the 
Nielsen task force report, is what you're saying. They said 
they're going to increase the premiums by 20 per cent — 20 per 
cent increase in the premiums. Are you going to make the crop 
insurance unaffordable? They're going to end the farm fuel tax 
rebates. They're going to introduce variable freight rates, which 
you must agree with because you never mentioned. They're 
going to cancel the cash advances, if you agree with it or not. 
 
Are you going to lobby with farm groups to oppose this Nielsen 
task force report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can say unequivocally, I 
will lobby hard for the province of Saskatchewan so that the 
federal government will do the kinds of things that we are doing 
here. 
 
Mr. Engel: — You're avoiding the question, Mr. Premier. The 
question was: are you going to get together with Saskatchewan 
farm groups and lobby Ottawa to say that that task force report 
needs to be torn up, that we can't buy it? Are you going to stand 
up for farmers, or are you going to let them implement these 
five or six changes that will put every farmer out of business, 
including the successful ones? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, yes, I will be promoting the 
kinds of programs that I feel are important to Saskatchewan 
farmers; and yes, I will be lobbying the federal government to 
do the kinds of things that we do and have done here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. I'll remind you — I'll remind the 
member opposite — that I lobbied the federal government 
personally in Prince Albert to take the capital gains tax off farm 
land and they did it for the first time in history, right here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. You opposed that. You didn't like it. 
But I'll tell you: when we asked for help in drought, when we 
asked for help in flooding, when we asked to have the capital 
gains tax removed for the province of Saskatchewan, we got it 
here in Saskatchewan. We're going to continue to lobby for the 
kinds of things that are important here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Water treatment plant for Prince Albert 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister 
of Urban Affairs and it deals with a proposed 
  



 
March 18, 1986 

 

13 
 

water treatment plant for the city of Prince Albert. 
 
In view of the fact, Mr. Speaker, that the throne speech had 
almost nothing to say about the problems that urban 
municipalities face, other than that government will talk politely 
to the federal government about some help — in view of the 
fact that in the city of Prince Albert, the city will soon not be 
able to process enough water that is pure to meet all of its 
needs, and a new water treatment plant is required if the city is 
to expand and meet those needs, can the minister please advise 
this Assembly whether or not his government has decided to 
contribute to the construction of this important plant. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
question from the member opposite. Prince Albert has certainly 
been high on the priority lists of concerns for this particular 
administration. I would remind the members of the Assembly 
that we have funded the construction of a very large technical 
school in that city which is substantially going to assist and 
benefit the people of that particular area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — As it relates, Mr. Speaker . . . As it relates 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, I think I'll sit down 
until the members opposite are quiet. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please! 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, we will continue to address 
infrastructure needs as they arise. As the throne speech 
indicated yesterday, we will be attempting to negotiate with the 
federal government a long-term pattern of funding to enhance 
and to maintain the important infrastructure that we do have 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. 
The problems that exist now and that have existed for some 
time . . . A technical school four years late is not going to 
answer the pressing need of the water problem in the city of 
Prince Albert, and the Minister of Urban Affairs knows that. 
The problem is now and so I ask him: when does the minister 
expect that his government will finally make a decision on this 
important Prince Albert project so that the city will have a good 
quality and adequate quantity of water in the future without 
delay? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I understand the project is 
under construction, but I want to talk about four years late. 
They had 11 years to fix up the infrastructure to provide good 
water to the city of Regina. And did they do anything? Not one 
thing, Mr. Speaker. Not one thing. How many years did they 
have to negotiate an oil upgrader for the city of Regina or to put 
a technical school up in Prince Albert or to help fund an arena 
for the city of Saskatoon? They had more than four years . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Operation of Nipawin Dam 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 
minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. It 
deals with the Nipawin dam and the fact that according to press 
reports it is operating at less than 40 per cent capacity because 
of a design and operational flaw, and I ask the minister: can you 
tell us how much this lost operation is costing the Government 
of Saskatchewan, the power corporation, and the power users of 
Saskatchewan; and can you outline what steps have been taken 
to make the non-Canadian designer and supplier of this 
equipment meet commitments; and are there appropriate 
provisions to recover any losses because of the reported design 
error? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, there are several 
questions put by the hon. member. the first one is cost to power 
and to people of Saskatchewan and obviously I don't know that 
precisely and I'll take notice of that question. 
 
As it relates to recovery of those costs from the offshore 
designer and manufacturer, I fully expect that there is a 
mechanism in place to recover those costs, Mr. Speaker, as I 
expect that when the purchase was made, or the order placed by 
power when the previous administration was in office, that 
those particular things were taken care of. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Can the 
minister give us any indication of when it is expected that the 
power plant will work at something approaching 100 per cent 
capacity, and when the design faults — apparently serious in 
nature — will be fixed, so that the plant works? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes. Again, I'll take notice and I'll 
check with the engineers who are responsible for those kinds of 
things. I understand that there is a design flaw. It's something to 
do with hydraulic cavitation, and I really don't know what that 
is. So I'll find the folks that do and I'll let you know as soon as I 
find out. 
 

Crop Insurance Changes 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, I have another question for the 
Minister of Agriculture. Last summer you came down to my 
constituency with your cabinet — to Assiniboia, in fact — and 
you announced some changes to the crop insurance that have 
caused massive confusion amongst farmers, and amongst your 
crop insurance agents, amongst your people that were doing 
adjustment. 
 
Has some of that confusion cleared up? And a quick question 
constituents are asking me right across southern Saskatchewan: 
when are you going to pay out the 5-bushel coverage you 
promised them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. We have made 
significant changes to crop insurance, in many cases suggested 
by your constituents and people in the Assiniboia area. The 
salvage operation, as it was called, in terms of allowing people 
to go cut their crop and to use it for their own feed or sell it to 
somebody else as feed and leave a strip to be measured later, 
was very well received. 
 
I don't know if . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I know, Mr. 
Speaker. When we let people cut their crop, because they 
  



 
March 18, 1986 

 

14 
 

knew it was going to burn anyway, and salvage the crop that 
was there — something that the NDP never even thought of — 
but if we allowed the people to salvage the crop, use it for feed, 
it made millions and tens of millions of dollars all across 
southern Saskatchewan, and certainly in your riding it made a 
great deal . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We did that; it's 
already done. With respect to that salvage operation, I believe, 
and people from across southern Saskatchewan believe, it's a 
good idea and it should be maintained. 
 
With respect to additional payments, the crop insurance 
payments — as you know, we've processed about 90,000 
applications, which is the largest ever in the history of 
Saskatchewan, and there was a later harvest, so it wasn't 
something that we had applications that came in in early fall. It 
was late right through till practically Christmas time. We are 
still processing those and they're going out to farmers as quickly 
as we can put the information together. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I'm more than flabbergasted by your 
announcements and your answers today, Mr. Minister of 
Agriculture. The massive confusion you caused amongst 
farmers on the 5-bushel deductible has got to be the biggest 
booboo of any government in history. And the farmers 
everywhere are saying, if you would have stayed with that, they 
wouldn't even have bought crop insurance. You've just about 
ruined the program. You've just about ruined it. 
 
The question they're now asking is: those that harvested their 
crop that was adjusted at less than 5 bushels an acre, when are 
they going to get their 20 bucks? When are they going to get 
their money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, people from across 
Saskatchewan asked us to provide changes to crop insurance to 
get more money in their pockets. The people in Assiniboia 
came to me and said, it isn't worth running your combine over 
1.9 bushels, and you know that. I mean you've probably tried it. 
I've tried it and it's very difficult, and it just doesn't pay. And 
they said, would you please allow us, one, to go cut the crop, 
and two, raise that limit to make it worthwhile to go after the 
grain. So you're asking: do you think I should . . . Well I'm 
going to make those payments. Of course we're going to make 
those payments. We'll make them as quickly as we can, quickly 
as we can. 
 
What I would like to know from you is if you think it's a good 
idea that 5 bushels should be taken back to 1.9. If that's your 
recommendation, then I'd look at it. Because a lot of farmers 
would like to see it back to 1.9, but there's many would like to 
see it at 5. Now it's a question of where it's most fair to farmers 
who have to take their combine over a great deal of land that 
isn't producing anything and still have fair crop insurance. 
 
So the suggestions that come back are those that were 
implemented by our administration. We've paid out $370 
million in crop insurance, and we're going to be out millions 
and millions more. And we are going to add more payments to 
that, which is for the first time in the history of this province 
you're going to see money coming out of Saskatchewan right 
into the pockets of 

farmers linked to crop insurance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MESSAGE FROM THE LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR 
 

Change in Membership of Board of Internal Economy 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I have a message from His Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor, a letter dated March 10, pursuant to 
section 68.7 of The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Act: 
 

I hereby inform the Assembly of the following change in 
membership of the Board of Internal Economy effective 
February 13, 1986, placing Mr. Keith Parker, MLA, on the 
board in place of the Hon. Myles Morin. 

 
(Signed) F.W. Johnson, Lieutenant Governor. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I also lay on the Table a report from the Chief 
Electoral Officer: 
 

This is to certify that by reason of the resignation of Russ 
Sutor, the elected member for the constituency of Regina 
North East, and by virtue of Writ of Election dated October 
26, 1985, addressed to Barbara Hodgson, Returning 
Officer for Regina North East, for an election on 
November 25th, 1985. I am in receipt of the Return in 
accordance with Section 143 of The Election Act, which 
declares Ed Tchorzewski elected for Regina North East. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day, 
and by leave of the Assembly, I would like to move, and 
seconded by the Leader of the Opposition: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of the Legislative Assembly 
of Saskatchewan, and premier of this province, and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency and the province, 
and Canada. 
 
Thomas Clement Douglas, who died in Ottawa on 
February 24, 1986 was a member of this Legislative 
Assembly, representing the constituency of Weyburn from 
1944 to 1961. 
 
Born October 20, 1904, at Falkirk, Scotland, Mr. Douglas 
emigrated to Canada with his family when he was six years 
old. They settled in Winnipeg in 1919. 
 
Mr. Douglas left school at the age of 14, becoming a 
printer's apprentice. In 1924, after several active years in 
church work, he entered the ministry at Brandon College 
where he received a B.A. degree in theology. He earned an 
M.A. degree from McMaster University, and undertook 
postgraduate work at the University of 

  



 
March 18, 1986 

 

15 
 

Chicago. An honorary Doctor of Laws degree was 
conferred upon him by the University of Regina in 1978. 
 
After marrying Irma Dempsey in 1930, Tommy Douglas 
and his new wife moved to Weyburn where, from 1935 to 
1944, he represented the federal riding of Weyburn as a 
member of parliament. 
 
After resigning his seat in Ottawa in 1944, he was elected 
to this legislature in the same year, becoming premier of 
the province, president of Executive Council, and minister 
of Public Health. 
 
In 1949 Premier Douglas relinquished the Health portfolio 
and became minister of Co-operation and Co-operative 
Development. He resigned his seat in this legislature to 
assume the federal leadership of the New Democratic 
Party. 
 
Tommy Douglas was re-elected in the House of Commons 
in a by-election in 1962 in the British Columbia 
constituency of Burnaby-Coquitlam, a seat he held until 
1968. From 1969 to 1979 he represented in the same 
province, Nanaimo-Cowichan-the-Islands. He did not seek 
re-election in 1979. 
 
Tommy Douglas's commitment was always evident. He 
served as a captain of the reserve army for the second 
battalion of the South Saskatchewan Regiment, 
vice-chairman of the Canadian branch of the 
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, president of 
the Douglas-Coldwell Foundation, and a member of the 
Sons of Scotland. 
 
His love of sports was evident in his active participation in 
wrestling, swimming, dancing, shooting, boxing, golfing, 
and tennis. His interest in debating, dramatics, and oratory 
produced in him a skill he would use extensively and 
effectively throughout this life. 

 
For me, Mr. Speaker, the memory I have of Mr. Douglas is of a 
warm and caring and jovial individual. What I remember is an 
old-style politician who would sit at the kitchen table of farm 
families all over the province. He would listen and discuss the 
things that were meaningful to the people. He spoke the 
language, he understood, and he could bring all the information 
together and make it meaningful on a larger scale. He believed 
that every citizen should have some part of forming government 
policy, and he used what he learned. For this he was much 
admired and loved. 
 
You could listen to him on the radio and think: I know where he 
got this information; I had a part of it. They used to say at 
election time that Tommy Douglas did not have to kiss babies; 
babies kissed him. Yes, he always took time to visit, even with 
a new premier, and when he shared his experiences and 
insights, that new premier listened and, believe me, took notes. 
His wisdom and insights transcended partisan politics; his 
interest was with the people. Above all else he had an 
unwavering faith and pride in our province and its people, and 
the courage and conviction to build a future for everybody. 

He had the vision that brought good to both social and 
economic foundations in our society. Whether it was pushing 
for rural electrification, or promoting irrigation, or development 
of our natural resources, or introducing a universal medical care 
system, Tommy Douglas demonstrated time and time again his 
commitment to those he served, and his belief in the people. 
 
Tommy will be sadly missed by all of us in Saskatchewan, and 
indeed in Canada. But his wisdom, his humour, and his legacy 
will live on in our memories and serve as an inspiration to all 
who would seek to make this province a better place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, premiers and prime ministers and presidents and 
leaders share something in common, and that's power and 
responsibility. 
 
In the Premier's office in this legislature there's a plaque 
dedicated to leaders — guiding leaders — and it's a letter to the 
rulers of the world from Saint Francis of Assisi, and it says the 
following: 
 

We, the followers of Saint Francis of Assisi, and your 
co-workers in struggling for a better society, send greetings 
and peace in this message. 

 
And I quote (this is to the leaders of the world): 
 

Keep a clear eye towards life's end. Do not forget your 
purpose and destiny as God's creature. What you are in His 
sight is what you are and nothing more. Do not let your 
worldly cares and anxieties or the pressures of the office 
blot out the divine life within you or the voice of God's 
spirit guiding you in your great task of leading humanity to 
wholeness. If you open yourself to God and His plan, 
printed deeply in your heart, God will open himself to you. 
Remember that when you leave this earth, you take with 
you nothing that you have received, fading symbols of 
honour, trappings of power, but only what you have given, 
a full heart, enriched by honest service, love, sacrifice and 
courage. 
 
Embrace the God of all of us and His word wherever it 
surfaces. Imitate His preference for the poor and the 
powerless. Enter into His plan of liberating all peoples 
from everything that oppresses them and obstructs their 
development as human beings. Do not grow tired of 
working for peace among all people. 

 
And finally they say: 
 

Help remove unjust social structures and patterns of 
exploitation. Uphold the rights of dignity of the human 
person. Foster the creation of society where human life is 
cherished and where all peoples of the planet can enjoy its 
gifts, which God created for all, in the spirit of love, justice 
and equality. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't suppose we'll ever know if Tommy 
Douglas read this letter from Saint Francis, but in my sincere 
view he delivered on that message as well as any elected man 
we've known. Tommy Douglas was truly a great Canadian. 
  



 
March 18, 1986 

 

16 
 

 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, expresses its most sincere 
sympathy with members of the bereaved family of Tommy 
Douglas. 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, much has been said about 
this remarkable man since Tommy Douglas died on February 
24th. I propose to address some remarks primarily to his time 
here in this legislature, although his career, prior to that and 
subsequent to leaving this legislature in 1961, is itself a 
remarkable career, encompassing as it does wartime service at 
the earlier end, and the national leadership of a national political 
party later on in his life. 
 
But Tommy had a career in this legislature which was perhaps 
second to none in the history of this province. He was premier 
of Saskatchewan for over 17 years, longer than any other 
person, and in this period Saskatchewan was transformed. 
 
In the first three decades after 1905 Saskatchewan was in many 
ways a frontier province where energies were devoted to 
overcoming the rigours of a harsh environment. Then soon 
came the 1930's, and few places in the world suffered more 
from the combined effects of depression and drought than did 
Saskatchewan. Roads and schools and hospitals and utilities 
were either worn out or non-existent, and what was true of 
public assets was almost equally true of private assets. Wartime 
offered little opportunity to start building and rebuilding during 
those years from 1939 to 1945. 
 
So that in 1944, when Tommy Douglas became premier of 
Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan was one of the poorest places in 
North America, measured by what was, as opposed to what 
might be. In these circumstances Tommy made the province the 
social laboratory of Canada and North America. 
 
Tommy was inspired and inspiring. Because he had confidence 
in people, he gave them confidence, confidence that they could 
progress towards the new Jerusalem of which he so often spoke. 
 
I want now to just itemize a number of the accomplishments 
during the Douglas era. In health there was free treatment of 
cancer, the air ambulance service, a totally transformed mental 
health service — and I still find myself going around elsewhere 
in the world and finding people who talk about the mental 
health service. 
 
A year ago I ran into some people in Antigua and St. Kitts, Mr. 
Speaker, who were talking about the mental health service. 
They had come from the New York State Mental Health 
Service where they had worked with people who had once been 
in Saskatchewan and then went to New York. There were the 
construction of many new hospitals. There was a hospital 
insurance, a medical care plan in the Swift Current health 
region, and eventually legislation for the province-wide plan. 
Each of these were eventually adopted by other provinces — 
that is the medical plan and the hospital plan — to give Canada 
perhaps the most successful health insurance plan in the world 
— certainly one of them. 

 
(1445) 
 
Turning to the field of insurance, comprehensive automobile 
insurance was introduced, and it served Saskatchewan people in 
an outstanding way. Moves in other insurance fields 
dramatically lowered premiums for Saskatchewan citizens, and 
during the late 40s and early 50s you could find premium books 
around for board companies which quoted rates for western 
Canada and said at the bottom: for Saskatchewan, deduct 20 per 
cent, and that was because SGI was in operation. 
 
Turning to rural life, I've heard people describe rural 
electrification as the greatest boon to rural life in the last 50 
years. Farm women love the introduction of rural 
electrification. The basic utilities of electric power, natural gas, 
and telephones were under great pressure during this period and 
were greatly improved. For a period under the Douglas 
administration, electric consumption was increasing at the rate 
of 20 per cent per annum, compounded, and I remember the 
problems of attempting to double the size of the generating 
capacity every four years. Saskatchewan became the only 
provide to distribute natural gas as a publicly-owned utility. 
 
Turning to farm protection, a great range of laws was enacted to 
help farmers keep their land. Many of them are still part of the 
law of Saskatchewan — The Farm Security Act, The Land 
Contracts (Actions) Act, The Limitation of Civil Rights Act, 
and others. 
 
I mentioned the North, and Indian people. Under the Douglas 
government roads were built to the North. It's hard for us to 
realize that in 1945 there was no road from Prince Albert to La 
Ronge, and no road to Buffalo Narrows. Those were isolated 
areas, accessible only by very difficult land transportation in the 
winter, or by air. 
 
During this period, great steps, important steps were taken to 
improve the economic base of Northerners. The fishing, 
trapping, and forestry were strengthened by rigorous 
conservation measures, and some people who lived through 
those eras will know what happened. The beaver population 
was rehabilitated, the forest was rehabilitated, and generally, the 
economic base was broadened. 
 
The first conference of Treaty Indian leaders, basically from 
southern Saskatchewan, was convened by Douglas, which led 
to the formation of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians, 
now the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, and the 
maturity and depth of leadership of the FSIN is due, in no small 
measure, to this early start they got in the 1940s. 
 
I turn now to veterans. The Douglas government had 
particularly imaginative programs for helping veterans of World 
War II get started in civilian life. One of the most imaginative 
ones, perhaps, was a couple of government organizations which 
undertook to dismantle the airports that were strewn around this 
province and built for wartime use. And the assets of those 
corporations were distributed among many, many smaller 
communities of Saskatchewan. For many years one could see 
emergency 
  



 
March 18, 1986 

 

17 
 

housing made of H-huts. And you can still see some hangars 
about, serving a useful purpose. 
 
I mentioned trade unions. Saskatchewan was the first province 
to have comprehensive trade union legislation, and the first 
province to give public servants the right to organize, and the 
right to withdraw their services as part of the right to organize. 
A professional public service based upon merit was established 
which, I think it is fair to say, became the envy of provincial 
public services in Canada. 
 
On the national and international sphere, Douglas was a leader 
in the discussions which resulted in federal-provincial 
tax-sharing, with equalization for poorer provinces, that is now 
so much a part of Canada's governmental structure — which it 
certainly wasn't up until the late '40s or early '50s. It is now 
included in the 1982 constitution. 
 
Internationally, Douglas was a steadfast supporter of the United 
Nations and peace by negotiation. He was neither a pacifist nor 
a sabre rattler, and he leaned to negotiation as the way to deal 
with international disputes. 
 
In this House he was probably the finest debater that the House 
has seen. A fine voice, a great flow of language, a copious 
knowledge of the King James version of the Bible and of the 
Protestant hymns, a substantial knowledge of poetry — of 
Burns, but of many others — allowed him to sparkle his oratory 
with apt quotations. 
 
He had a bottomless fund of jokes, as everybody knows who 
has heard him. He used many of them in this House and outside 
the House. He all but invented a form of political public 
speaking which not many people have been able to copy — 
that's the political parable, the long story which contains an 
analogy to, perhaps, some part of the economic system. His 
cream separator analogy for the economic system is perhaps as 
well known as any; perhaps the mouse-land one. There a 
number which he developed and which served to explain 
complicated matters to ordinary citizens. 
 
In government, as a premier, as an administrator, he was 
razor-sharp, being able to dissect a balance sheet within a 
minute or two. And I've see him do it, and I've seen him 
question me on it and go to the heart of the balance sheet almost 
immediately. He demanded and got top-level performance from 
the people who worked around him. He was quite capable of 
being demanding and hard-driving — sometimes unreasonably 
so, perhaps, seen from the other side of the fence — because he 
certainly demanded performance. But he commanded a respect 
by all, and an affection by most, that made him a pleasure to 
work with, and a very special person. 
 
There are not many Tommy Douglases in this legislature, not 
many in any other legislature. I'm proud to have served as a 
public servant under his government. I'm proud to have served 
in this legislature as a colleague of his. I'm proud to have served 
in his cabinet, proud to have known this pugnacious premier 
who fought the good fight with all his might for the things in 
which he believed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I too wish to join in 

this motion of condolence. As has been pointed out, not only 
was Mr. Douglas a former premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan but as MP or as MLA represented Weyburn and 
area for nearly two and one-half decades. And in Weyburn and 
area I would say, much as the death has left the usual mark of 
sorrow, it has also rekindled many fond stories and memories 
and the recollections of these stories in Weyburn, and that is 
probably as Mr. Douglas would have liked it. 
 
As history has recorded, and as we have heard today, Mr. 
Douglas pioneered many social and economic programs. 
Certainly the Leader of the Opposition made reference to much 
of the farm security legislation that was in place in this House 
until the last year or two. Forty years later when much of it was 
researched in great detail because of the condition we found 
ourselves in, the foundations for it were laid by Mr. Douglas 
and his government. 
 
(1500) 
 
What history has maybe never recorded to the same degree was 
the uncanny ability that Mr. Douglas had to relate to the 
individual, whether that individual was the farmer, the farm 
wife, the business man, or the worker. He had a touch that 
crossed all barriers, age and otherwise. His wit and oratorical 
skills were the tools of his trade. He was always ready with the 
anecdote that put the event, the issue, the concept, in a 
perspective that all could understand, and certainly the cream 
separator story was one that he was well-known for and, in fact, 
as I recall in my maiden speech in this House, one that I related 
perhaps with a little different twist, but certainly it provided for 
me a model of an element of communication that's extremely 
useful for someone in public life. In fact I think one could say 
that Mr. Douglas was the epitome of the good communicator 
and probably had that ability to utilize — the medium I think 
being probably radio — as to today one might deal with 
television. 
 
I suspect that to many people in political life across Canada 
today, and perhaps even some in this legislature, the 
undertaking to enter into and pursue the field of politics was 
because of Mr. Douglas himself, and the impression he left on 
others. I would suggest that he has provided, for many, a 
Saskatchewan model of a grass-roots politician. 
 
 My last direct contact with Mr. Douglas was in fact my very 
first official act as the newly elected MLA for Weyburn in the 
spring of 1982. He and I were at the head table when the 
Weyburn Youngfellows' Club, which is a service and 
fellowship club not unlike Lions and Kinsmen — that kind of 
thing — one that Mr. Douglas related well to; they were 
celebrating their 75th birthday. I was there to bring greetings, 
and Mr. Douglas was there to be guest speaker because of his 
involvement with that club many years ago. 
 
Even at this time in his life, the powerful orator that he was 
shone through. But what stood out probably even more so in the 
minds of many there and in many of the members of that club, 
past and present, was not so much what he said that night, but in 
fact that he cared enough to come to their 75th anniversary back 
in Weyburn, Saskatchewan. He cared enough, and that was the 
measure of this man 
  



 
March 18, 1986 

 

18 
 

— care and compassion and understanding of his fellow man — 
his trade marks. 
 
So I too, Mr. Speaker, along with my colleagues here in the 
legislature, would like to pass along my sympathies to the 
members of the family and to his friends who will sadly miss 
him, whether they be in Weyburn, the province of 
Saskatchewan, or elsewhere in the world. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, am pleased to 
rise today in this Assembly to speak on this condolence motion 
on the life of a great man that passed away on February 24th. 
 
I can’t do justice today, Mr. Speaker, to portray to you and to 
his family the deep emotion I feel towards this man and what he 
has taught us in the legacy he has left all of the people of not 
only Saskatchewan but the entire nation. 
 
I'd like to express my own gratitude and the gratitude of that of 
my constituents from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg for his service 
and his accomplishments that he has rendered in his lifetime. 
 
As a young man who had witnessed and experienced the 
hardships of the 20s and the 30s, Tommy's dedication to his 
church . . . and had a noble calling that kept him in close touch 
with the families and working people and the farmers that were 
suffering in those days. 
 
This calling as a minister enabled him to use his extraordinary 
speaking skills. He later said that he decided to enter the 
political life because preaching moral and spiritual values from 
the pulpit was not enough. And I think today we realize that 
same thing holds true — Tommy didn't have two sermons, Mr. 
Speaker — he always practised what he preached. And I'm sure 
that those that heard him on a Sunday morning or on an election 
campaign trail heard the same message. Whether it was as a 
preacher from his pulpit, or as a tireless CCF member of 
parliament, or as a courageous and successful premier, and a 
national leader, Tommy always remained true to his 
fundamental moral principles and his vision of a better future. 
 
He brought a high moral level to public life in Saskatchewan. 
The virtues that this man lived and practised and conveyed 
through his life were guiding principles that changed our whole 
society — the principles of sharing, the principles of 
compassion and tolerance and justice for all. 
 
His vision of a better future extended beyond our provincial 
borders and beyond Canada. I think that one of the times that I 
got to know Tommy Douglas best was when we were in the 
same hall; in fact his room was right next to mine, the one that 
Joyce and I shared in the Senator Hotel in Washington when I 
had the privilege of going to a presidential prayer breakfast. 
Watching Tommy at that function — it was just prior to 
Watergate — there's a principle about him that made an impact 
on me that I will never forget, and that was that he wouldn't 
criticize other people. He never got involved in pointing fingers 
at a one-to-one level. In spite of a time 

when Richard Nixon slapped his hand on his chest and said that 
because I have peace in my own heart I could make peace in 
China — just weeks later Watergate broke out. In spite of that 
kind of attitude, Tommy had nothing bad to say about even 
Richard Nixon in those words. 
 
He reminded us that we would do well to spend more money 
helping feed the underprivileged people of the world. This, in 
the long run, would do more to contribute towards peace than 
probably any other single issue would do. And so, not only 
Saskatchewan and Canada, but, I believe, a large part of the 
world was better off because of the life that Tommy lived 
amongst us. 
 
The passing of this great Canadian provides an opportunity for 
all of us today to rededicate ourselves to carry out the work he 
started, each in our own way, to make that future truly a better 
and brighter future, and a fairer future for all. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to add my condolences, and those of my constituents 
from Quill Lakes, on the passing of what I consider a truly great 
former member of this legislature and premier of this province, 
and a truly great Canadian, Tommy Douglas. 
 
I want to relate that I met Tommy Douglas on a number of 
occasions. I recall when I was still in high school in Humboldt 
when he was premier at that time, and I believe that Mr. Tucker 
was the official leader of the opposition of the Liberal party. 
Great debates — they went at each other very strenuously 
during those days in politics. I can remember a group of us from 
high school going down to the town hall and taking in the 
speech, and the hall was packed to hear Tommy Douglas. We 
used to go, and he built a great interest in young people who 
went to hear him. 
 
On another occasion I recall — I think it was in 1978 to be 
exact — Mr. Douglas was kind enough to come to 
Saskatchewan, and I recall him joining me in the campaign 
down at Lanigan, and he spent the day. We had a noon 
luncheon for business people and a number of other supporters 
and whoever wished to come. We had a nice turn-out at the 
small legion hall there, and I remember Tommy was there, and 
the intense appreciation of people that he had. I recall we had a 
luncheon, and he wouldn't sit down to eat until he had shaken 
hands with every individual in the room. 
 
And I recall a request that was made to him, if he would go to 
the hospital — that some lady was very ill who was a great 
admirer of his — and how he didn't even resist; it was nothing 
to him to go and see that lady who was in hospital, who wanted 
to see him. Then the principal of the elementary school took 
him in to see a group of young students, and the way in which 
he could communicate with the young people was really quite 
remarkable. 
 
I guess there are so many different accomplishments that one 
could talk about in respect to Mr. Douglas and the way in which 
he dedicated his life to public service, and I suppose all of us 
have been touched. But I think I'd like to touch on the work and 
his contribution in health achievements that are known to all of 
us. 
  



 
March 18, 1986 

 

19 
 

Many of you here will know that as a boy he experienced at 
first hand the crisis of a health problem within the family — 
indeed himself. And obviously he witnessed countless other 
families throughout Saskatchewan and Canada experiencing the 
anxiety of failing health and hospitalization, and he was 
determined to avoid the crisis that would confront people as a 
result of sickness. And as the premier of Saskatchewan, he was 
able to address that problem, and in Tommy's characteristic way 
he acted with boldness, courage, and determination to provide 
basic hospitalization insurance to all Saskatchewan people. And 
it was his courage and determination, and that of Woodrow 
Lloyd and other members of his cabinet, that brought medicare 
to Saskatchewan as well. 
 
And I want to say that as we talk about the achievements and 
the greatness of Tommy Douglas, I think one of the great 
achievements and characteristics of his life is that, while he 
racked up all these achievements, there was tremendous 
opposition from many segments of society. I recall in medicare 
how people across this province mounted an attack against the 
principle of universal medicare. And I think of all the 
achievements, and how many people now take for granted and 
like to, sort of, tie their fortunes on to some of the achievements 
and the hard fights that he had in developing those 
achievements. 
 
And not only to Saskatchewan did he give medicare and 
hospitalization, but because of his founding it here in 
Saskatchewan, inevitably to all of Canada. And that is why we 
are all so proud to remember Tommy Douglas as the true father 
of medicare. 
 
But his achievements extend to so many other areas as well — 
to our school system which he was determined to make the best 
in North America, and certainly the education system excelled 
under his administration. He gave a fair deal to the teachers, a 
future of full opportunity to Saskatchewan's young men and 
women. 
 
(1515) 
 
I say to you that Tommy was a great Canadian, but he was 
always ready to stand up for Saskatchewan. He saw the 
bountiful riches of our natural resources could and should be 
used for social and economic development of our province and 
its people. 
 
And perhaps the greatest strengths that Tommy relied on were 
his fundamental Christian moral values and his firm faith in 
young people. He worked for them. He relied on them. He was 
determined that they might have the fullest opportunities to 
make their world and ours a better, fairer world for all, within 
Saskatchewan and beyond. Tommy especially enjoyed being 
with young people, and he often challenged them with what 
may be called his own golden rule: "Let us measure ourselves 
and our lives not by what we get, but by what we give." By that 
standard few have ever given so much to so many as Tommy 
Douglas. He was loved, he will be missed, and his work will 
continue. And I am certainly proud to have been associated with 
a movement which has achieved so much, and with a leader 
with such outstanding leadership qualities. 

Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I rise today to 
speak on this condolence motion of the passing of Tommy 
Douglas, I know I rise and speak on behalf of all the people of 
Pelly constituency. Tommy was a great orator. He was a great 
public figure, a man of warmth and humour, and a truly great 
CCF premier of the province of Saskatchewan for some 17 
years. 
 
Tommy was a great Canadian. to farm families and rural 
communities during the Douglas years there was rapid change, 
a positive transformation on rural life, for Tommy knew the 
importance of rural communities and the rural families that 
comprised them. He knew the importance of rural 
electrification, the larger school units, and a vastly improved 
rural highway system, and he knew the Saskatchewan farmers 
were among the most productive in the world. And Tommy was 
determined to help them stay that way. He was proud of 
Saskatchewan and he stood up for Saskatchewan, and we, in 
turn, were all proud of Tommy. 
 
In my constituency, Mr. Speaker, there are many who knew him 
personally, and they loved Tommy. I am proud to have had the 
opportunity to know Tommy and to have spent some time 
talking to him, to have listened to the story of how he started in 
politics and what he did before he got into politics. It gave me a 
better understanding of the kind of man that Tommy was. He 
was a man that had a lot of understanding. He was considerate 
and he was a very compassionate type of person. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many others — young people, mostly — 
who never knew Tommy personally, but they know how his 
courage, his dedication, his moral principles, and his vision 
touched and changed their lives. Tommy will be missed by both 
young and old. And he will be missed because of the kind of 
man he was, and all the things he believed in, and all that he did 
for every one of us in this province. 
 
They know that Tommy's passing leaves it up to us, to each one 
of us, to carry on the work that he began. And I know we will 
all miss Tommy. But we know also that what he believed in has 
to be carried on and has to be done, and many people will never 
forget Tommy because of that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with 
other members in speaking to this condolence motion which we 
are speaking to today on the passing of one T.C. Douglas, 
known to Saskatchewan residents, as other have referred to, as 
Tommy. 
 
Tommy, of course, was an individual, as others again have 
mentioned, who was able to speak directly to people by going 
out and meeting them. I suppose the interesting thing in politics 
today is the fact that, in getting our message out, we have 
resorted — maybe because we have to — to 15-second clips 
and trying to affect thousands of people on the spur of the 
moment. It seems to me that the type of politics and the type of 
movement that T.C. Douglas was involved in was quite 
different — travelling thousands of miles by old jalopy through 
mud holes and rain and wind and storms to get to see people 
and to attend meetings. 
  



 
March 18, 1986 

 

20 
 

And I know that the people of the province from all political 
backgrounds will miss him a great deal. I think this was noted 
most currently to me when an old friend of mine, a Liberal 
friend, Pete Lewans from Shaunavon, came to me, a couple of 
days after Tommy passed away, in the post office, and wanted 
to pass on to the party and to others who knew Tommy better 
than he how much he had appreciated working with him as 
reeve of the R.M., and how much he respected him even though 
he didn't agree with him, but how much he respected the work 
that he had done and his commitment to a cause. 
 
I say as well that Tommy had a very interesting view of politics 
and the movement towards a more just and more fair society. 
And I can remember in 1982 after the election, some of us were 
talking with him at a function. And he was saying, the progress 
towards a more just society is not a continuous climb. He said 
oftentimes there will be two steps forward, one step back, and 
three steps forward. And I think he taught his people never to 
become discouraged or despondent because of a setback or 
because of a momentary lull in the progress towards a more 
even distribution of wealth or a more just society. 
 
And I think I would just like to end there by saying that we in 
Saskatchewan are better off, have a better province, because we 
knew Tommy and because Tommy was premier of this 
province. And I just want to join with others in extending 
heartfelt sympathy from the people of the Shaunavon 
constituency to Tommy's family. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I, too, would like to, on 
behalf of my constituents in Regina North East, join with all of 
my colleagues in this House in extending condolences to the 
family of Tommy Douglas. 
 
Tommy Douglas has received many tributes from thousands of 
Canadians since his passing, and no one in my memory is more 
deserving. And some may argue, but I personally believe that 
this great man achieved more than any public person in the 
history of Saskatchewan, and indeed in Canada, and because of 
that he has made our lives better. 
 
Tommy's compassion, his love for his fellow man, and his 
determination to do all that he could to better the lives of 
ordinary people gave him the courage to fight the wealthiest 
and the most powerful groups in society, and individuals in 
society who would have tried, and did try, to preserve their 
privileged place. And it might have been easier to back off; it 
might have been easier to leave things as they were; but he did 
not, and he fought on. And as a result, his influence has been 
felt by every Canadian, wherever he or she lives, from east to 
west and north to south. 
 
I remember as a young boy listening to the radio to the debates 
that came out of this Assembly — that's something we did in 
our family very regularly — and I remember thinking about this 
tower of a man that I would hope to meet some day. And then I 
had the opportunity meet him, because my father took me to a 
public meeting where Tommy was speaking. And although I 
realized then that, physically, he was not a tower of a man, in 
my mind he always remained a tower of a man because of who 
he was and what he did. 

Tommy Douglas sought no rewards and he sought no honours. 
He simply wanted to be a part of making this province, this 
country, and this world, a better place in which to live for 
human beings, and for that he will always be remembered. And 
I'm proud to have been able to know Tommy Douglas because I 
learned from him; I learned from him that things are not made 
of the things we wish — they are made of the things we do. 
 
I'm proud to be able to stand here today and join all the 
members of this Assembly in extending condolences to the 
family of Tommy Douglas and expressing gratitude for all that 
he did for all of us. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like 
to add my condolences on behalf of myself and my constituents, 
Mr. Speaker. As the leader, Mr. Blakeney, has indicated, 
Tommy Douglas was a man who had a vision in northern 
Saskatchewan. And as I go through the North — and I talked to 
many of my constituents, especially senior constituents, after 
the passing of Tommy Douglas — they all indicate to me what 
he really meant to them. 
 
Mr. Blakeney spoke of the roads that Tommy Douglas started 
and had a vision in de-isolating northern Saskatchewan, and 
that has taken place. He built many new schools, and he 
actually was the architect of starting a school system in 
communities such as La Loche and the far northern community 
of Camsell Portage 
 
He also started the health care system that we have in northern 
Saskatchewan, and improved on that. He was a strong promoter 
of the co-ops in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I can remember growing up in Big River and my father talking 
to me about Tommy Douglas. At that time I remember standing 
on a dock when they were throwing the beavers in the lake, 
when the country was dead of beavers, and I remember the 
half-ton truck with the resource officer in it pulling up and 
putting these beavers out on the dock. As a young boy, with my 
father, I had an opportunity to grab one of those animals by the 
tail and throw it into the lake. Many years later we see the 
results of that program. 
 
I can remember one evening riding on an aircraft between 
Prince Albert and Saskatoon with Clyne Harradence. It was a 
dark evening and Clyne Harradence and I looked out over the 
countryside from up in the air. And Mr. Harradence remarked 
to me — he said, "Tommy really meant what he said when he 
said he was going to light up Saskatchewan." And I think that 
says just what type of an individual he was. He got credits from 
all parts and all parties in the province. 
 
I walked into one of my constituent's home in Beauval, a Mrs. 
Mary Millbourne, the day after Tommy died, and one of the 
first things she said to me when she heard of Tommy's passing, 
was that she sat down and cried. And I think that was a reaction 
that was probably in many households across Saskatchewan and 
across Canada. 
 
While the passing of Tommy Douglas will be sadly missed, I 
can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that he will never 
  



 
March 18, 1986 

 

21 
 

be forgotten. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, would like to join 
members of this Assembly, as well as the people of this 
province, in extending condolences to family of the late T.C. 
Douglas. 
 
I had personal opportunity to shake hands with T.C. Douglas in 
'83 at a convention, at which time I felt a very personal 
attachment to the man. In fact it was such a feeling of personal 
affection that I had that I went out of my way to try to purchase 
a memento of this meeting with the late T.C. Douglas, and that 
memento is with me today — a pin that I wear on my necktie 
that has the T.C. Douglas's picture on it. I'm honoured to wear it 
today, and I will treasure it. 
 
I want to say as well . . . extend some of the comments made by 
the Leader of the Opposition when he mentioned about 
Tommy's involvement with the native people, with the North, 
and in particular with native people. I meet with a great deal of 
native people because the North is predominantly native. I want 
to say this to the members of this Assembly, that when I joined 
the legislature in 1982, there were a good number of native 
people in the North that asked me, from time to time, do you get 
a chance to sit and talk with T.C. Douglas? And I'd look at them 
and I'd wonder, you know, has his politics or has politics, or, 
you know, somehow or other there was this gap between the 
North and the South. But with Tommy I don't think there was 
any gap between him and his commitments and his 
associations. 
 
I join with all members of this Assembly and people of this 
province in extending condolences and my sincere sympathies, 
as well, for the passing of this very honourable person. Thank 
you. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Leader of the Opposition: 
 

That the resolution just passed, together with the transcript 
of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased member, be 
communicated to the bereaved family on behalf of the 
Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
Mr. Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition is not in his 
chair at the moment. Could we have a different seconder? 
Motion moved by the Premier, seconded by the member for 
Quill Lakes. The Premier has asked for leave. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Quill Lakes, and with leave of the Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan, and expresses its grateful 
appreciation of the contribution he made to his community, 
his constituency, and this province. 
 
Joseph Jeffrey Charlebois, who died on February 25th, 
1986, was a member of this legislature for the constituency 
of Saskatoon City Park-University from 1967 to 1971. He 
was born in Saskatoon in 1909. Jeffrey Charlebois was 
educated at Victoria School, Saskatoon; St. Louis College 
in Victoria, British Columbia; and St. Patricks's Seminary 
in Menlo Park, California. He operated a family roofing 
business in Saskatoon for many years. He was an alderman 
on the Saskatoon City Council from 1965 to '66, a member 
of the Saskatoon Catholic School Board from 1941 to '46, 
president of the first Canada Winter Games which were 
held in Saskatoon in 1971, president of the Saskatoon 
Board of Trade in 1960, and a member of various service 
clubs and other community organizations. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved families. 

 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add my 
word to those of the Premier with respect to the passing of Jeff 
Charlebois. 
 
As the motion indicates, he had a very distinguished career in 
the service of the citizens of Saskatoon in many capacities: in 
the school boards and councils, in business organizations, in 
church organizations, and in general community organizations 
of the nature of the western Canada Winter Games. 
 
I served in the legislature with him for four years, from 1967 to 
1971. He represented a point of view which was not mine. He 
brought to the legislature views from a small-business 
perspective — not the perspective of all small-business people, 
but the perspective of some small-business people. 
 
He, particularly in the last couple of years of the legislature, 
participated quite freely in debate. I remember having a lively 
debate with Jeff Charlebois — it would be in the 1969 session 
— dealing with certain changes in The Trade Union Act. And I 
think a little look at the Hansard would indicate that it had lots 
of cut and thrust across the floor, because he was putting 
forward a point of view which I did not agree with. I had 
spoken prior to him, and he had cast some reflections on my 
remarks, and I wished to at least point out some of the 
deficiencies as I saw them in his remarks. And so it went. It 
will, I think, be clear from this that he was an active member of 
the legislature. 
 
It is my impression that he represented his constituents well. He 
was a person who had a presence about him because, I suppose, 
of his extensive service in municipal government, and his 
business associations which allowed him to speak with 
authority and conviction, and to make a very useful contribution 
to the House. 
 
And I join with others in extending our condolences to the 
  



 
March 18, 1986 

 

22 
 

bereaved family. 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I also 
would like to join the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition 
in remembering the contribution that Jeff Charlebois has made 
to both the city of Saskatoon and the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
As has been pointed out by the Premier, Mr. Charlebois was a 
very active person. He was born and raised and educated in 
Saskatoon, and operated their family business, A.L. Charlebois 
Co. Ltd., for many years. And he is probably the epitome of a 
community leader, a person who got involved in numerous 
organizations as has been outlined by the Premier, and certainly 
was one who was always ready to give his time and efforts into 
any venture that was going on in our community. 
 
As has been mentioned also, he served on our Saskatoon city 
council from 1965 to ’66 and represented the Saskatoon City 
Park-University constituency in the Saskatchewan legislature 
from '67 to '71. 
 
I think it's probably most appropriate that it be mentioned today 
that Mr. Charlebois was the president of the 1971 Canada 
Winter Games which was held in Saskatoon. As everybody is 
aware, the 1989 Canada Summer Games are going to be held in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Certainly in the conferences I've been at as Minister of Culture 
of Recreation, there is still a lot of talk about those games that 
went on in 1971, how a city could get together and build a 
mountain and really host for the first time some Canada games. 
 
Certainly Jeff Charlebois, as the president of those games, did 
an excellent job, probably more than any other, I think, 
influence in the city at that time, really brought our community 
together to really go on the national stage and to some extent 
I'm sure the international stage. 
 
So I think that really is emblematic of his contributions. And as 
the two other previous speakers have already mentioned, he was 
never afraid to get up and speak his mind, whether he totally 
agreed with someone's philosophy or not, but he was willing to 
give it from his perspective. 
 
Also, the Charlebois family are friends of my parents 
especially, and I also got to personally know him over the years. 
And as well as being a very avid sportsman, and a sports fan, 
Mr. Charlebois was always one to lend support to people in the 
community. And I can certainly speak personally of that 
through the years on sporting scenes. When we had some 
success or some disappointments he was always one of the first 
ones there to lend congratulations or condolences and 
encourage you to keep on. 
 
So I would join with the speakers in sending our condolences to 
the Charlebois family and his many, many friends in our 
province. And on behalf of the constituents of Saskatoon 
University I would like to state that our city of Saskatoon and 
the province of Saskatchewan will definitely miss Mr. Jeff 
Charlebois. Thank you. 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Leader of the Opposition, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the resolution just passed, together with a transcript of 
oral tributes to the memory of the deceased member, be 
communicated to the bereaved family on behalf of this 
Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
MOTIONS 

 
Referral of Provincial Auditor's Report to Standing 

Committee on Public Accounts 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Before orders of the day and by leave 
of the Assembly I move, seconded by the Minister of Health: 
 

That the report of the Provincial Auditor for the fiscal year 
ended March 31, 1985, be referred as tabled to the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(1545) 
 

Referral of Retention and Disposal Schedules to Standing 
Committee on Communications 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Health, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the retention and disposal schedules tabled during the 
fifth session of the 20th legislature and approved by the 
public documents committee be referred as tabled to the 
Standing Committee on Communications. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of By-laws and Amendments of the Professional 
Associations to Special Committee on Regulations 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — By leave of the Assembly, seconded by 
the Minister of Health: 
 

That the by-laws of the professional associations, and 
amendments thereto, be referred as tabled to the Special 
Committee on Regulations. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Annual Reports and Financial Statements of 
Crown Corporations and Agencies to Standing Committee 

on Corporations 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Health, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the annual reports and financial statements of the 
various Crown corporations and related agencies be 
referred as tabled to the Standing Committee on 

  



 
March 18, 1986 

 

23 
 

Crown Corporations. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Public Accounts to Standing Committee on 
Public Accounts 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Health, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the public accounts of the province of Saskatchewan 
for the fiscal year ended March 31, 1985 be referred as 
tabled to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am honoured today to 
move the address in reply to the Speech from the Throne and, 
indeed, I am more than honoured. I feel that it is a rare and 
valued privilege that has been bestowed upon me. And in my 
mind, and I'm sure in the minds of Saskatchewan residents 
everywhere, the programs and the policy initiatives outlined in 
the Speech from the Throne will be seen as some of the most 
laudatory initiatives ever undertaken by any provincial 
government for the people it represents. Indeed, I doubt that 
there is any other jurisdiction in this great and magnificent 
country of ours where residents are so well served by a 
government with such vision, such enterprise, such endeavour, 
such energy and such compassion. 
 
I think that in Saskatchewan today we can finally say that we 
truly have a government of the people and a government for the 
people. We have a government whose strength and wisdom 
comes from the people, and a government that consults and 
co-operates with the people. We have a government in 
Saskatchewan today that carries with it the support of all the 
good citizens of our province. 
 
Reviewing the Speech from the Throne and studying the 
initiatives the Saskatchewan government is again taking, I can 
well understand why in the past four years so many of the 
Saskatchewan government's undertakings have been copied and 
duplicated by administrations in other provinces. I believe that 
Saskatchewan is in the vanguard of positive change in Canada 
today and that our new strength adds to the strength of Canada 
as a whole. Our province is a credit to our nation's great 
heritage. 
 
Canada is a nation of industrious people. It is a nation which 
people of enterprise and endeavour have come to from around 
the world. Nowhere in Canada is this more true than right here 
in Saskatchewan. We see vigour; we see tenacity in our ethnic 
mix. We see determination and dedication in the people who 
make up our culture. This government very much reflects the 
people that it represents. 
 
Like the Saskatchewan people, the Saskatchewan government is 
also visionary and tenacious. Like the 

Saskatchewan people in urban areas and rural regions, in 
hospitals and schools, on our farms and in our small businesses, 
our government is innovative, caring, and compassionate. 
 
Let me say that I should not have been surprised by the 
legislative proposals unveiled in the Speech from the Throne. 
Looking back over the legislative record of our government, I 
can see that our latest proposals are set on a solid foundation. 
From 1982 onwards the Saskatchewan government, backed up 
solidly by the Saskatchewan people, has set a steady course to 
enhance the lives of our residents in all areas. 
 
Let me point out some of the aspects of the foundations that has 
been built over the past four years for the Saskatchewan people. 
In 1982, sky-rocketing mortgage rates were devastating our 
nation. Families — solid, hardworking families — were facing 
mortgage rates of 18, 20, and 22 per cent. They were literally 
about to lose their homes. 
 
Some politicians stood idly by and said, well, that's tough; that's 
how it must be. But not the new Saskatchewan government. Not 
the Saskatchewan people. Our government and our people are 
one. We are together. We govern with the people. And we take 
our ideas from the people. 
 
So with the Saskatchewan people, this government introduced 
the first mortgage rebate program in Canada, bringing mortgage 
protection into our nation and ensuring that no home owner 
would face mortgage rates higher than 13.25 per cent. Some 
44,000 Saskatchewan residents have been or are in the 
mortgage rebate plan. Some $60 million has been committed to 
ensuring that no Saskatchewan family loses its home due to 
mortgage rate increases. 
 
Again in 1982, inflation was ravaging the pockets of the 
Saskatchewan people, but the Saskatchewan government, 
backed up by the province's residents, noted that for years and 
years the provincial treasury had been ransacking residents right 
into their pockets by imposing a completely unnecessary tax on 
gasoline. 
 
Now we all know that the price of gasoline, the price of energy, 
puts up prices all the way down the line — cab fares, bus fares, 
the transportation of food, clothing, and consumer goods of all 
kinds. Everything that we buy that has to be transported has a 
built-in cost added to it, determined by the price of gasoline. 
Yet in the days of inflation and high interest rates, the 
government was benefiting by imposing a provincial tax on 
gasoline. 
  
The solution was simple. the Saskatchewan government said, 
enough. The Saskatchewan people said, enough. And the tax on 
gasoline was abolished overnight. In just four years the 
Saskatchewan people — young people, old people, single 
people, families — have saved some $600 million in direct 
costs by this move, and untold millions in indirect costs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Klein: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is what good 
  



 
March 18, 1986 

 

24 
 

government is all about. This is what is meant by a government 
of the people and a government for the people. This is why 
Canadians nation-wide extol the virtues of the Saskatchewan 
government and the Saskatchewan people. No wonder 
Canadians coast-to-coast look at Saskatchewan with pride and 
tell us that we make Canada an even greater nation — greater 
than it is — because of the initiative, and our drive, and our 
energy here in Saskatchewan. 
 
You may recall too that in 1982 the hopes and dreams of young 
farmers were being frustrated and devastated by high interest 
rates. They faced the prospect of being tenants on the very land 
that their parents, their grandparents, and even their 
great-grandparents, had farmed. And worse, they faced the 
prospects of being serfs to the state, since the state was taking 
over farm land once owned by proud Saskatchewan families. 
 
But in 1982 the Saskatchewan people said, enough — we want 
to see the family farm preserved; people should own farms, not 
governments. So as one of the many initiatives, the 
Saskatchewan government, and again in co-operation with the 
Saskatchewan people, developed the farm purchase program 
under which young, starting-out farmers could buy land at 8 per 
cent interest rates. Eight per cent — think of it. 
 
When the interest rates were in the 20 per cent range, the 
Saskatchewan government, backed up by the Saskatchewan 
people, committed itself to ensuring that the family farm would 
be preserved — and preserved as a family farm, not as some 
monolithic state enterprise — and enabled young farm men and 
women to get on the road to farm ownership. 
 
Today, when we see the sad spectre of farmers in other 
provinces going bankrupt, it is extremely satisfying to see that 
some 5,000 young farm men and women have been helped by 
the farm purchase program to own the land that they farm — 
and in Saskatchewan we would have it no other way. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I look back on four years of good, solid 
government in this province, and I see that in every area — in 
health, in education, in agriculture, in business, in sports, and 
the list goes on and on — I see bold, imaginative initiatives that 
have made Saskatchewan the jewel in Canada's glorious crown. 
 
I see an oil industry that is alive, where one was dying before. I 
see small-business people, dedicated and innovative men and 
women, being assisted by small-business interest loans of nine 
and five-eighths per cent. I see venture capital corporations 
being formed with the help of tax credits. I see Saskatchewan 
residents actually being able to really own a part of Crown 
corporations. 
 
Looking back over the past four years, I see so much that the 
Saskatchewan government and the Saskatchewan people have 
done together. And now in this Speech from the Throne I see so 
much that the Saskatchewan government and the Saskatchewan 
people will do together. 

Just a few minutes ago I said that these latest initiatives by, and 
on behalf of, Saskatchewan people would add to the foundation 
that has determinedly been built over the last four years. Having 
refreshed our memories about that foundation and about the 
tremendous achievements of the Saskatchewan people in 
building that foundation, I would like to speak a little bit about 
the challenge and the opportunity before us. That challenge and 
that opportunity was outlined in the Speech from the Throne. 
 
In a nutshell, I think we can say that the aims of the 
Saskatchewan government and the aims of the Saskatchewan 
people over the last four years — and over the coming four 
years too, I might add — can be summed up in protection, 
participation, and opportunity. 
 
(1600) 
 
When you spend $1 billion on health care — more than has 
ever been spent by any other government in our province's long 
and noble history — you can see where protection comes in. 
 
When you see thousands of Saskatchewan residents buying 
shares in Crown corporations, obtaining low-interest, 
small-business loans, buying their own farms, and getting 
involved in dozens of ways in society through various 
government programs and policies, you can see where 
participation comes in. 
 
And when you see that Saskatchewan has a 92 per cent 
employment rate, and where Saskatchewan now has a thriving 
industrial base, you can see where opportunity comes in. 
 
Now as we face the future, we see in the Speech from the 
Throne how these three areas — protection, participation, and 
opportunity — are all again emphasized. You also see, I might 
predict, initiatives that, like other Saskatchewan initiatives 
across the past four years, will be copied by other provinces. 
And I'm glad that other provinces will follow our lead. I'm glad 
what Saskatchewan does today, other provinces will do 
tomorrow. I'm glad that the vitality and the verve of the 
Saskatchewan people is infectious. 
 
It's exciting to stand before all of you today and anticipate the 
future with you. And that future is already under way. Within a 
few weeks the world's fair in Vancouver will open its doors, 
and for the first time Saskatchewan will have its own individual 
pavilion at such an exposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, the whole world will see what 
Saskatchewan has to offer. The Employment Development 
Agency and the $600-million employment development fund 
are this very day creating new jobs for our residents in a fully 
co-ordinated way. No other province in Canada has launched 
such a comprehensive plan of job creation. 
 
Construction is under way at the Co-op heavy oil upgrader. At 
$600 million it's the largest industrial project in Regina's 
history. And it came into reality because of 
  



 
March 18, 1986 

 

25 
 

co-operation between the Saskatchewan government and 
talented and dedicated individuals in the co-op movement. 
 
And we are close to agreement on the $3 billion Lloydminster 
upgrader, a project that will create thousands of jobs and inject 
hundreds of millions of dollars into our growing economy. 
 
We have led the way for free trade agreement with the United 
States. This agreement will create millions of new jobs across 
Canada in coming years and provide Saskatchewan people with 
new markets and new opportunities for their products and for 
their services. This is one of the boldest, most imaginative 
moves ever made by a provincial government. 
 
We have revived the oil industry into record breaking 
investment and exploration. One thousand wells drilled was a 
record; 2,000 wells drilled, yet another record, and that record 
will be broken. Such activities mean jobs and business for those 
in our cities and those in our urban centres. 
 
We pulled together the task force on rural development to bring 
opportunity and justice to rural municipalities and rural people. 
We brought clean, fresh water to Saskatchewan's capital city, 
ending years and years of total neglect in this area. 
 
We put the financial resources of the province behind health 
care, behind education, behind agriculture, behind industrial 
expansion, and behind our young people, in a commitment 
never achieved before. We instituted tourist promotion 
campaigns and programs to bring this clean and lucrative 
industry to our province. It's an industry that uses what virtually 
every service business has to offer in one way or another. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have done so much to put our province 
and the Saskatchewan people in a position where they can take 
advantage of the future, and now we are about to do more. We 
are about to bring more industry to our province. We are about 
to bring more stability and growth to our agricultural sector and 
repay Saskatchewan farmers for their years of dedication and 
hard work on behalf of our province. We are about to give more 
protection and security to our province's young people. We are 
about to continue our commitment to bring government and 
government services closer to the people and to make 
government more open and more responsive to the people of 
our province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, for many years Saskatchewan had a 
government that concentrated on the urban centres of this 
province and increasingly ignored the rural areas. But in a 
province such as Saskatchewan, the urban centres are dependent 
on the health and vitality of the rural areas for their own 
survival. If our rural areas are allowed to decline, then before 
too long our urban centres will decline also. 
 
Saskatchewan is, I contend, a closely-knit province in which the 
urban centres and the rural centres are mutually dependent on 
each other for their prosperity and for their security. If 
Saskatchewan as a whole is to 

thrive, rural Saskatchewan must thrive too. Rural Saskatchewan 
must have all the services and advantages of the larger urban 
centres. The planned transfer of the crop insurance corporation 
to Melville and the agricultural credit corporation to Swift 
Current, as well as plans to create locally-based rural economic 
development corporations, are major endeavours that show that 
this government is committed to rural Saskatchewan as it is 
committed to residents in urban centres. 
 
It has been said in life that it isn't only the big things that 
matter; it's the little things that matter, too. Big initiatives 
always grab newspaper headlines, but small or seemingly small 
initiatives can better the lives of hundreds, perhaps thousands, 
of residents. 
 
This is why I was pleased to hear in the Speech from the Throne 
that the government — the Saskatchewan government and the 
Saskatchewan people — are to embark on a five-year program 
to rid rural Saskatchewan of party lines and give rural residents 
individual telephone line service. This is being done not only 
for social reasons, but it is a recognition that in rural areas 
farmers, small-business men and women — indeed, everyone 
— deserves and needs the protection and convenience offered 
by individual line service. 
 
I recall that just four years ago it was forbidden — that's right; 
in a democracy, Mr. Deputy Speaker — it was forbidden to go 
out and buy your own telephone. Within the past four years the 
Saskatchewan government and the Saskatchewan people 
changed all that. Now we are moving further in the advance of 
telephone service by expanding individual line telephones 
where only party lines existed before. It's a commendable 
advance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and as I mentioned earlier, one 
of those seemingly little endeavours that really aren't so little 
when they apply to you. 
 
Our government is also taking initiatives to develop television 
services to small communities. Smaller communities all over 
North America have been short-changed when it came to 
television services. New technology, coupled with the will to do 
it, now means that there are no excuses for not extending 
television services to all areas, particularly in the fields of 
business and agriculture, and these services will have 
educational benefits as well. 
 
No government in Saskatchewan's history has worked closer 
with municipalities, both rural and urban, than has the current 
government. New financial initiatives have been given to urban 
and rural municipal governments, and more initiatives are to be 
taken. I'm glad to see that the Saskatchewan government and 
the Saskatchewan people will, by working with the federal 
government, be negotiating a new financial assistance package 
to replace the current municipal water and sewer infrastructure 
throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
I must commend the government also for its plans to protect 
municipalities, hospitals, and school boards from sky-rocketing 
liability insurance costs. Rapidly rising insurance costs are 
threatening the financial stability of such institutions, and it 
shows a lot of foresight on the 
  



 
March 18, 1986 

 

26 
 

provincial government's part that it is acting on this worry 
before the proverbial horse has escaped from the barn. 
 
You know, laws are supposed to protect people, not hinder 
them. That's one reason our government in the past four years 
has abolished some 1,300 outdated regulations that frustrated 
people in their daily lives. It's a pleasure to see that this program 
of regulatory reform is to be continued. I might add that, in my 
opinion, governments that trust and have confidence in the 
people they represent do not try and quash their lives by 
clamping down laws and regulations on everything that moves 
or seems to move. 
 
This government believes in the basic common sense and 
decency of the people it represents. It doesn't believe in putting 
a straight-jacket of bureaucracy around their bodies and their 
heads. Fewer laws, trustful people — that's my belief. And it is 
also the belief both of this government and of the province's 
men and women. 
 
The Saskatchewan government believes in the family. Our 
mortgage rebate program shows that. But more, we believe in 
the traditions that guided family life in this province generation 
after generation. And that's one reason a Film and Video 
Classification Act was introduced at the last session of this 
legislature. We believe in decency, and we believe in faith. I'm 
proud to see that the laws respecting custody and management 
of property of children will be updated and modernized under 
the child custody and guardianship Act. 
 
Another major worry will be relieved with the introduction of 
the child abduction Act. And yet more worries will be eased by 
a new program to educate young Saskatchewanians about the 
dangers of drugs and alcohol abuse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that young people are the corner-stone of 
this province's future. That's why the current Saskatchewan 
government is now spending more on education and health than 
any other government before it and, on a per capita basis, more 
than any other government in Canada. 
 
We have to protect our young people. We have to inspire them. 
We have to educate them. We have to create opportunities for 
them. They also deserve justice. I doubt if any other 
government in our nation has bettered the Saskatchewan 
government on its initiatives and innovations on behalf of 
young people. 
 
(1615) 
 
The latest move, including a commitment to improve financial 
assistance to students, continues this proud and just record of 
commitment to Saskatchewan youth. It's a record that is 
unblemished, and it is a record that is worthy of support from 
all corners of this House. Saskatchewan young people deserve 
the greatest commitment possible from their government, and 
they deserve the greatest respect from every member of this 
legislature. 
 
I believe that in areas designed to enhance the lives of our 
young people, every member of this House should work 

for quick passage of these new initiatives. I have confidence in 
the decency and wisdom of all members to know that this will 
be so. 
 
One of the major issues of the past decade has been pension 
plan reform. Some of us recall when our grandparents or our 
parents had to retire on inadequate pensions or even on 
non-existent pensions. Both federally and provincially, major 
improvements have been made to ensure that senior citizens no 
longer face destitution when they retire. But as they say, 
although much has been done, much remains to be done. 
 
In this area, Saskatchewan is again about to lead the way by 
establishing a vehicle for a voluntary Saskatchewan pension 
plan for home-makers, part-time employees, and small-business 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Klein: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know from my own 
experience just how much a pension scheme is needed. Indeed 
it has been talked about across this nation for years, but nothing 
has been done about it — nothing until now, that is. I'm proud 
that it is a government of which I am a part that has undertaken 
to rectify this situation. This initiative is typical of the vision of 
this government, and I know that Saskatchewan home-makers, 
part-time workers, and small-business people will look upon 
this initiative as a major endeavour to ease their burdens of 
worries significantly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe I have now covered many of the points 
one might place under the heading of protection in our 
government's latest legislative program. There are more, and 
they too are commendable. But I feel that other members of this 
House may wish to concentrate on them, and I see no reason for 
labouring over points that can adequately be addressed by my 
colleagues. 
 
I would like to say though . . . The member from Regina North 
East, Mr. Deputy Speaker, chooses to speak from his chair. I 
understand that he moved from Humboldt to Regina North East. 
That's quite a move, and I don't know that everybody should be 
proud of that. 
 
I would like to say though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that while a 
government should offer protection to the people it serves, it 
should not suffocate them. I think a certain brand of politicians 
learned at the provincial election, and will learn again, that there 
is a difference between providing protection, and suffocation. 
 
The current government provides protection where it is needed. 
It does not try to strangle initiative where it is needed. It does 
not try to strangle initiative and thwart residents with policies 
and programs that are not needed. Certainly it does not extract 
unnecessary taxes from their pockets for unnecessary programs. 
 
Now we come to opportunity. Let me start off a little sadly. I 
was appalled to see over the last few decades some one million 
Saskatchewan residents, one million of our native sons and 
daughters, having to leave this province to seek opportunity 
elsewhere. One million persons. And that's just about the 
number of people who live in Saskatchewan today. Half of our 
population had to 
  



 
March 18, 1986 

 

27 
 

flee because of lack of opportunity. What a condemnation of 
past governments! What a shame! What a disgrace! 
 
However, times have changed. In the past four years 
Saskatchewan's population has grown, and it has grown because 
not only do residents no longer have to leave Saskatchewan, but 
because those who were forced out of Saskatchewan prior to 
1982 are coming back, and Canadians from other provinces are 
coming here, and they're coming here because they have heard 
of the new opportunities that exist in Saskatchewan. That 
opportunity is marked by the 92 per cent employment rate that I 
mentioned earlier; by the oil industry that breaks record after 
record in investment and exploration, and whose royalties now 
provide fully one-quarter of all government revenues; by 
dynamic small-business people who are creating new 
businesses and new jobs at every opportunity; and by huge 
projects such as the $600 million Co-op upgrader in Regina. 
 
Yes, there is opportunity in Saskatchewan that make our 
cousins in Alberta envious. Prior to 1982, it used to be said that 
God had blessed Alberta because of the progressive government 
that province had elected. Now, since 1982, it seems that God is 
smiling on Saskatchewan. I wonder if that is at least partly due 
to the fact that we now have a similarly progressive government 
in our province. I wouldn't be at all surprised, knowing the 
mysterious and wondrous way in which he works. 
 
Opportunity abounds in this province today. It abounds because 
the Saskatchewan people have been free to search for their own 
destiny, no longer being directed to dance to the fiddler's tune 
of socialism. And I see some members squirm when I mention 
socialism. And might they well squirm, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And they'll certainly squirm at the next provincial election 
before that's over. 
 
However, I told myself on arising from my seat today that I'd 
try to keep on the high road during this speech; leave the low 
road to the members of the opposition, which is typical. Let me 
talk about opportunity and not about the failures of the 
members in opposite benches. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, not only do we have the highest 
year-by-year employment rate in Canada here in Saskatchewan, 
but we have also created over 30,000 new jobs. We've done so 
despite recession, despite drought and tough times, generally. 
 
 We have established an Employment Development Agency 
and an employment development fund. We have seen to it that 
thousands of Saskatchewan students have good summer jobs. 
We stretched out the arm of assistance to residents wanting to 
create and build small businesses. We have searched the world 
in order to bring new investment and new jobs to 
Saskatchewan. We have poured hundreds and hundreds of 
millions of dollars into education in order to give our young 
people the skills and abilities they need to gain satisfying and 
well-paying jobs for themselves, or even to create their own 
small business. 
 
Opportunity. Perhaps that's a new way that we should 

actually be spelling Saskatchewan. 
 
I am pleased to see that in the coming months our government 
is going to continue its successful job creation and business 
development programs of the past several years. I'm particularly 
pleased to see that programs, to enable those unfortunate 
residents on social welfare to gain skills, will be both continued 
and expanded. 
 
In the past, previous governments tended to throw money — 
and small pittances of money they were — at those on welfare, 
and then told them to go away and hide. Don't let us see you, 
the politicians on the left cried; don't embarrass us; go away. 
But not this government The current Saskatchewan government 
believes that everyone has a right to enjoy the fruits of our 
society. We believe that people must be given the opportunity 
to gain the skills to enable them to build successful and happy 
lives. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, no man or woman wants to be on welfare. 
They want to get off welfare. Sadly, prior to 1982, there were 
no real vehicles to enable them to move from social assistance 
to self assistance. And now there are. And I'm proud of the 
compassion and common-sense way our government has moved 
in this area. Opportunity is not only for those at the top, but also 
for those at the bottom. Opportunity must allow people to move 
from the bottom towards the top. That's what good government 
is all about, and today that's what Saskatchewan is all about. 
 
I see nothing wrong in people having good jobs. I see nothing 
wrong in people owning their own homes. I see nothing wrong 
in people owning their own farms. I see nothing wrong in 
people owning their own small businesses. In our province 
today we see increasing opportunity in all these areas. And that 
increasing opportunity has come about because the 
Saskatchewan government and the Saskatchewan people have 
worked together to bring it about. More opportunities are about 
to be created, and some of those opportunities are outlined in 
the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Within the past four years fewer and fewer strikes have taken 
place in Saskatchewan. There's a new attitude among 
government, business, and labour. There is an atmosphere of 
co-operation, not confrontation. No one wants to go on strike. 
No common-sense worker wants to lose pay by indulging in a 
labour dispute. However, some union leaders, backed by some 
politicians out to advance their own cause, force strikes upon 
decent, hard-working employees. But strikes in Saskatchewan 
are becoming a thing of the past. Workers are feeling more 
secure. Employees are seeing more opportunity for fulfilling 
their dreams. 
 
Saskatchewan residents, always sensible with their money, are 
finding new opportunities to keep more of it and to invest more 
of it for the future. In the past four years this Saskatchewan 
government has created a wide range of new investment 
opportunities for our residents. And it's a pleasure to see that 
our government is planning to expand the range of investment 
vehicles for 
  



 
March 18, 1986 

 

28 
 

Saskatchewan people to invest in job-creating capital ventures. 
 
The latest initiative — to have discussions with labour unions 
and employee associations concerning how such investments 
might be structured — is both visionary and commendable. It's 
another example of the growing co-operation between 
government, business, and labour. 
 
Today more than ever before, all people in Saskatchewan are 
working together to provide opportunity for the people they 
represent and for each other. We have some of the best labour 
leaders in Canada right here in Saskatchewan. We have union 
officials who want to see the lives of people they represent 
enhanced and enriched. We have union leaders who want to 
help employees increase productivity and profitability so that 
companies can pass on some of those increases to their 
employees. And I commend such union leaders. I'm sure they 
will be more than willing to give their advice and expertise to 
our government in creating some of these new investment 
vehicles. 
 
In this same area, it excites me to see that the young 
entrepreneur program is about to be expanded. Again I must 
stress that our young people are the foundation of our future. It 
is the young entrepreneur of today who will create the jobs and 
prosperity of tomorrow. Whether young entrepreneurs are in the 
fields of tourism, manufacturing, retailing, they deserve both 
our moral support and the support of a wide range of 
government programs covering their fields. 
 
Some of the most successful companies and some of the most 
successful innovations in the world have been by young people. 
I can think of Apple computer, for one, that has literally become 
a household name throughout the entire world. And I simply 
have to admire the ingenuity and tenacity of today's young 
people. I've met so many people in Saskatchewan who seem to 
be a lot smarter than I was at their age, and I'm really not 
ashamed to admit that. 
 
So I believe that this government must, as it is doing, give every 
encouragement and opportunity to Saskatchewan's younger 
people, whether it is to provide them with better schools and 
educational facilities for them, as we are; or to provide 
opportunities for them in agriculture, as we are; or to enable 
them to turn their entrepreneurial dreams into reality. We must 
do it. 
 
I contend that every single dollar that we invest in our young 
people — whether in education, in sports, or for them to build 
careers — is an investment for the future. We simply must 
continue this commitment to Saskatchewan youth. 
 
But life is not solely composed of work, Mr. Speaker — even 
though a lot of us get a lot of enjoyment from work, whether 
that be a student studying in school, or someone building a new 
enterprise — but life, as they say, is also made for play. 
Throughout its tenure this government has dedicated itself to 
enhancing the quality of life for the residents of Saskatchewan. 
More funds than ever before have been committed not only to 
health care but to sports, to recreation, and to culture. We 
believe that 

Saskatchewan residents want to enjoy their leisure time. 
 
This is one of the reasons that in the Speech from the Throne 
the establishment of five new provincial parks and a wilderness 
park has been announced. In this day and age with so many 
pressures being put on individuals, places where we can relax 
are becoming increasingly important. 
 
The establishment of the five new provincial parks and the 
province's first-ever wilderness park will also help to preserve 
large areas of Saskatchewan from unnecessary industrial 
encroachment, and protect the environment. To my mind the 
creation of these new parks should have taken place a long time 
ago. But as members of this House well know, when the initial 
opportunity to create them came upon us in the late 1960s, that 
opportunity was ignored, and it was ignored by government in 
the days through the 1970s — a disgrace that is now to be 
rectified. 
 
(1630) 
 
Opportunity, Mr. Speaker. What a word. Throughout this throne 
speech document I see opportunity for youth, opportunity for 
farmers, opportunity for employment, opportunity for business 
creation, and opportunity for leisure. It is a great word, Mr. 
Speaker, and one that fits in well with the promise of 
Saskatchewan and the energy of our residents. 
 
However, while I could comment on and outline many other 
initiatives that might well be classified as opportunity in this 
document, I believe in leaving something for other members of 
this House. So I'll pass on from opportunity to participation. 
 
For many years, we in this province had a government that 
didn't want the Saskatchewan people to participate in anything. 
Leave us alone, said the government of the day. Just vote for us 
at election time. Let us run your lives and you for the next four 
years, but don't try and participate and don't expect us to be 
accountable. That's how the previous government of 
Saskatchewan operated. But you know, it didn't take the people 
of Saskatchewan long to get tired of being courted at election 
time and tossed out the previous rascals and they elected a 
government they could trust, and a government that trusted 
them. 
 
Quite frankly, I think we are all better off with that decision. 
Well, maybe 10 or 12, 10 or 11 members of this House are 
worse off for it, but they have simply reaped the rewards for 
their unjust actions. Vengeance came swiftly at the ballot box 
for these people, Mr. Speaker, and it will come swiftly at the 
ballot box once again. Maybe in a few weeks, maybe in a few 
months, but it will surely come. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, the previous administration didn't want 
residents to participate in the government of this province or in 
its agencies or in its Crown corporations. The previous 
administration sat at the government table and greedily gorged 
itself on the riches of this province and hid behind the walls of 
secrecy until the voters decided to give it a hefty case of 
indigestion and tear 
  



 
March 18, 1986 

 

29 
 

down those walls. 
 
This administration opened up government to the people, and 
what happened? Nothing bad happened, Mr. Speaker. 
Saskatchewan residents didn't run wild in the streets. They 
responded to the opening of government with respect and with 
interest. They welcomed the opportunity. There's that 
marvellous word again, Mr. Speaker. They welcomed the 
opportunity to participate in the government of this province. 
 
Before 1982, the Saskatchewan people were told that utility 
rates would be set by the government, and if the people of 
Saskatchewan didn't like those rates they didn't need to pay 
them. They could go without utilities. Some choice. Some 
choice. The previous government decided it could use utility 
rate hikes to line its pockets and hide its deficits in a shell game 
of hidden accounting procedures, but this government put a stop 
to that charade. 
 
We established the Public Utilities Review Commission and 
gave it the authority to reject unwarranted utility rate hikes. We 
said that Saskatchewan people deserved the protection — a 
second chance, if you like — against unnecessary utility rate 
hikes, whether they be for power, telephones, or for something 
else, and we set up an independent commission to give residents 
that protection. 
 
Some people said, how can you run a government like this? 
Others said, isn't it going to be embarrassing for you when this 
commission rejects an increase? Well the past four years have 
shown that it is possible to run an open and responsive 
government. Even though increases have been rejected, it hasn't 
been embarrassing to either the government or the utilities 
concerned. Again, we trust the Saskatchewan people and they 
trust us. And now we are going to trust them even more. This 
trust is shown in our plans for a freedom of information and 
privacy Act and the establishment of a code of conduct to 
govern the activities of elected officials. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I heard from the members of the opposition 
just a little bit of noise. I didn't see any of our government 
members squirm, and that tells me something and it should tell 
the voters something too. I see no reason whatsoever why a 
government should try to hide its activities from the people it 
represents. A government that has something to hide, a 
government that lives in secret shame, would cringe at the 
thought of a freedom of information and privacy Act and an 
ethics code for elected officials. But this government wants 
residents to test it, to believe in it, and to see how it operates on 
their behalf. 
 
We want voters to look inside their government, and I stress — 
their government. We want voters to be a part of the ongoing 
process of government, not just on an election by election basis, 
not just on year by year or a month by month or a week by 
week basis. No, we want them to be an active part of 
government whenever they want to be an active part of 
government. We have given this province back to the people, 
Mr. Speaker, and over the past four years we have demonstrated 
this in many, many ways. This new initiative is another 
example of our major commitment to open government. 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to say here and now that no ethical 
member of this House would ever speak against the Bills 
governing freedom of information and conduct, and when the 
legislation is before this House it will be fascinating to see if 
any member does stand up and talk against that Bill. And if we 
have such members in this House, I hope that every voter will 
take note of their names and take note also of the political party 
to which they belong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have now spent some considerable time 
reviewing portions of our government's legislative record and of 
its proposed initiatives. There are points on which I have not 
touched, both of our past record and of future intentions. But I 
believe I have stressed the government's general character and 
intentions since I rose from my seat. 
 
Again, we believe in opportunity for Saskatchewan residents in 
all areas of life, whether it be opportunity for health care, 
opportunity for education, opportunity for work or leisure. We 
believe in protection for the residents of Saskatchewan, whether 
that protection be from interest rates or other plights beyond 
their control. And we believe residents have a right to 
participate fully in their government's endeavours. 
 
This demonstrates our commitment to Saskatchewan and our 
commitment to the Saskatchewan people. It's a commitment of 
which I am proud. It's a commitment that will grow in the years 
ahead — and I stress years. My pride in this commitment 
causes me to move with honour, Mr. Speaker, and seconded by 
the member for Humboldt: 
 

That an humble address be presented to His Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor as follows: 
 
May it please Your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty's dutiful and loyal subjects, the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 
session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 
gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 
address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Domotor: — As we commence the fifth session of the 
20th legislature, I would like to start my remarks by stating that 
the Speech from the Throne has covered a large area of 
concerns that this government has committed itself to. 
 
As MLA for the Humboldt constituency I can say that the 
people of Humboldt are proud, industrious, and visionary; and 
that is why they supported Premier Devine and this government 
in the 1982 provincial election — to resurrect free enterprise 
and bring in a breath of fresh air. I can assure this House that 
the voters of Humboldt constituency will give their support 
again in the 
  



 
March 18, 1986 

 

30 
 

upcoming election. 
 
In listening to the words of the member for Regina North, one 
of his points stayed with me. That point was commitment. The 
member spoke much of commitment and it was indeed 
refreshing to hear him use this term a few times. It's a term that 
in a very real way describes the past four years in 
Saskatchewan. They have been four years of commitment to the 
Saskatchewan people; four years of determined effort by the 
government to give the Saskatchewan people the kind of 
government they so much deserve and want. 
  
Sadly, Mr. Speaker, this kind of commitment was a long time 
coming. This is especially true when one considers rural 
Saskatchewan. Prior to 1982, Saskatchewan had a government 
that ran roughshod over the people of this province. It had a 
government that wanted to control the Saskatchewan people 
financially, socially, and emotionally. It had a government that 
was committed, not to the people of Saskatchewan, but to itself. 
It had a government that robbed the Saskatchewan people of 
their heritage and their dreams. 
 
Mr. Speaker, between the years of 1971 and 1982 some 10,000 
good, decent, hard-working Saskatchewan farm families were 
driven off their land by the former government. Ten thousand of 
our province's farm families were forced into destitution. 
Hundreds of small-business men and women in rural 
communities were forced into bankruptcy by policies of the 
previous government, the remaining members who now occupy 
the opposition benches in the House. Rural communities with 
long traditions disappeared under the socialist master plan 
designed by the previous government. That is what the word 
commitment means to the previous government, a commitment 
to big brother. 
 
What heartens me is that in the past four years we have been the 
kind of government that has helped to undo all the mistakes the 
previous government perpetrated on Saskatchewan people. We 
have seen a government that has committed itself to the 
enhancement of Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan people, rather 
than a government that ravaged the province and the people. 
 
The previous government decided it couldn't afford decent 
health care for Saskatchewan people. It wanted to buy potash 
mines. It told those who complained to stop bellyaching, 
because potash mines were more important than top-notch 
cancer treatment facilities. 
 
Our government committed itself to Saskatchewan's health care 
system and is now spending more than $1 billion a year on 
health care. No other government in Saskatchewan's history has 
spent so much. Just this month $100 million in new money has 
been allocated to health care, including a new $16 million 
cancer treatment facility. Just to give you an example, in my 
constituency there's over $4 million in Humboldt and over $1 
million in Watrous. They will be having a new hospital in 
Watrous, which they have been looking for for a long time. 
 
The previous government decided it couldn't afford to give 
young people first-rate educational opportunities. 

This government boosted educational funding to the highest 
level in the province's history. We've said Saskatchewan 
students deserve the best educational system money could buy, 
and we are providing it for them. Just to give you an example, 
alone in the Humboldt constituency there's millions of dollars 
spent in renovating and building new schools. 
 
The previous government said the day of the family farm was 
over. State farming was all that mattered. This government 
established a farm purchase program and under this program 
some 5,000 young starting-out farmers are now on the road to 
owning their own farm with 8 per cent low money. 
 
When drought and grasshopper plague hit Saskatchewan 
farmers this past year, the Saskatchewan government, together 
with the federal government, rushed in emergency programs 
that put some $500 million or half a billion dollars into farmers’ 
pockets. 
 
We know from past experience that the previous government 
would have stood by and let thousands of Saskatchewan 
farmers and dozens of rural communities go under rather than 
offer a hand of help. And why not? Fewer family farms means 
bigger state farms; fewer individual farmers means more people 
working with the government. 
 
We believe in government working for the people. Actions say 
more than words. We have seen the actions of the previous 
government, and now we hear the words of the opposition 
members. We believe in health care, and we believe in 
educational opportunity. If they were elected again to office, it 
would be the same iron fist that they had before. It would be the 
same kowtowing to the big union leaders of eastern Canada. It 
would be the death of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I don't wish to dwell on the past, Mr. Speaker. In 1982, the 
citizens of Saskatchewan opted for change; they voted for a 
brighter future. The future is where Saskatchewan and the 
Saskatchewan people will live: a return to free enterprise, where 
individuals can live without government involvement. 
 
(1645) 
 
It's been said that over the decades of rule by the party that sits 
in the opposition benches — and they should make themselves 
comfortable, for they will be sitting there a long time — some 1 
million Saskatchewan residents were forced out of our 
province. What a lot of people do not realize is that 1 million 
residents came from rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, why? Well the previous government ignored rural 
Saskatchewan. They refused to give adequate funding for rural 
municipalities. The previous government refused to fund 
hospitals and nursing homes in rural areas. The previous 
government refused to provide adequate funding for schools in 
rural communities. Indeed the game plan seemed to be that rural 
Saskatchewan was going to be reduced and more centred into 
the urban centres. 
  



 
March 18, 1986 

 

31 
 

This government, Mr. Speaker, believes that rural 
Saskatchewan is the backbone of Saskatchewan. Rural 
Saskatchewan is very much the muscle of our province. Rural 
families, rural people are essential in Saskatchewan today and 
in the future. Rural Saskatchewan deserves the best that modern 
society and technology can offer. If rural Saskatchewan dies, 
Saskatchewan itself dies. Let me repeat that: if rural 
Saskatchewan dies, Saskatchewan itself dies. In other words, 
with a thriving rural Saskatchewan we mean a thriving 
province. 
 
So any government — any committed government — must do 
all it can to support rural Saskatchewan. It must do it not just 
for reasons of decency but for common-sense purposes. If we 
let rural Saskatchewan decline, as did members in the 
opposition benches, then with it Saskatchewan itself declines. 
 
I might say here that Canada, our great nation of the North, 
can't let Saskatchewan decline. The national economy couldn't 
exist without the billions of dollars our farm industry brings 
into Canada. And eastern manufacturing couldn't exist without 
the billions and billions of dollars that decade after decade, 
Saskatchewan farmers pour into the manufacturers of 
everything from tractors to television sets, etc. 
 
Saskatchewan’s health is of vital importance to Canada and 
Canadians everywhere. And this government understands that 
even if the previous government in all its smugness didn't, we 
do not have to go cap in hand to the East. The East depends on 
us to keep its industry moving. 
 
A government in Saskatchewan that ignores rural Saskatchewan 
is at peril. A government of Saskatchewan that recognizes the 
importance of rural Saskatchewan, recognizes the traditions of 
the past and sees the challenges and opportunities on the 
horizons of the future. 
 
Let's look closely at some of the initiatives for rural 
Saskatchewan outlined in the throne speech: protection to 
municipalities, hospital, and school boards from dramatically 
escalating liability insurance costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the current government, and the future 
government I might add, has perceived a potential problem 
before it is upon us and has acted. This government is not going 
to sit by and see Saskatchewan municipalities go to the wall. 
 
Moves to provide small business against high interest rates. 
Most business in rural Saskatchewan is small business — 
family-owned stores and operations. Already we have nine and 
five-eighths per cent small-business loans, now recognizing that 
small-business men and women need to be protected against 
unstable interest rates, just as our home owners under our 
mortgage rebate program. This is a commendable advance. 
 
Installation of a province-wide buried cable system to provide 
dependable electrical service to 86,000 rural customers. This 
will eliminate the dangers of above-ground systems. Why 
should rural Saskatchewan be less well served than urban 
Saskatchewan? There's no 

reason at all. The current government recognizes this. And even 
though the previous government decreed that rural 
Saskatchewan should be satisfied with second or third best, we 
in this government know that rural communities deserve 
first-rate service. Again, this is more evidence of our 
commitment. 
 
We have the initiation of a five-year program to provide 
individual-line telephone service to subscribers in rural areas. 
Party lines in this age of technology are a thing of the past. If 
any of you have been on a party line and you have 10 or 12 on 
there and you have to get parts, you know what it's like. 
 
Rural Saskatchewan lives in the present and the future. Rural 
Saskatchewan people deserve a telephone system and service of 
the same standard as those in urban areas. This program will 
ensure that such a standard is achieved. 
 
There's a provision of immediate up-to-date information for 
farmers, relating to chemical prices. Farm input costs are the 
greatest burden that our farmers have to shoulder. A 
government that can service business and industry in urban 
centres with world trade statistics can surely provide our 
farmers with essential information. After all, agriculture is still 
our biggest industry no matter what the opposition and previous 
government think. 
 
Creation of locally based world economic development 
corporations to assist rural communities in identifying and 
initiating their own opportunities for economic growth and 
development. The previous government was prepared to let 
rural Saskatchewan die, yet the economy of rural Saskatchewan 
is the heart and blood of our province. When rural 
Saskatchewan thrives economically, all of Saskatchewan thrives 
economically. Every economic advance that rural Saskatchewan 
makes enhances and enriches the lives of every single 
Saskatchewan resident. As our cities become clogged up, viable 
economies and rural municipalities will become increasingly 
essential if we are to avoid the urban plight of eastern Canada. 
The economic development corporations will be a major thrust 
in the right direction. 
 
There's also the establishment of five new provincial parks and 
Saskatchewan's first wilderness park. Tourism in Saskatchewan 
rests in rural parks and the North of our province. These new 
parks, so essential to preserve our natural land and increase 
leisure opportunities for our residents, will add to the economic 
strength of rural Saskatchewan. If we can attract more tourists, 
we can create new services and jobs in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
There was also mention of a development of a provincial 
educational, cultural, and public interest television network; an 
extension of commercial television service to small 
communities and surrounding areas. Once more, I stress that in 
this day and age there's no reason why technological advances 
do not let us provide rural residents with the same standard of 
service in all areas as are being enjoyed by urban residents. 
Rural residents have a right to all commercial television 
channels in operation. Educational television will assist not just 
young people in rural areas, but be of vital economic and social 
importance to adults. 
  



 
March 18, 1986 

 

32 
 

We'll also see legislation to encourage livestock production 
through the use of investment tax credits on production 
facilities. This government has already undertaken many 
initiatives to encourage livestock production and diversify the 
agricultural economy. This is yet another move in the right 
direction. 
 
Intensified tourism and marketing activities, including new 
policies governing signs on highways, will be initiated. I've 
already mentioned the benefits of tourism to rural 
Saskatchewan. Tourism is a clean industry very much in 
keeping with rural Saskatchewan. Tourism promotion means 
jobs and dollars for rural communities. It is a growth industry, 
and one that will have direct benefits for rural regions. 
 
There's a continuation of the Indian economic development 
program. This will encourage further full participation of the 
province's native population in the economy. Saskatchewan's 
native people have demonstrated time after time that they are 
first-rate entrepreneurs. We have all felt gratified by the success 
story of Saskatchewan native business men and women. 
 
Every government initiative for and on behalf of our native 
people undertaken by this government in the past four years has 
been well received. Our native people are energetic, innovative, 
and visionary. We can depend on Saskatchewan native people, 
and they know that they can depend on this government. 
 
There's increased assistance for irrigation and other water 
conservation projects. No government in Saskatchewan's 
history has a better record of agricultural initiatives than this 
current government. We have a Premier who is a farmer. Many 
of our MLAs are farmers. We have introduced program after 
program to enhance farming in our province. 
  
We recognize that the Leader of the Opposition is not a farmer, 
and therefore his emphasis never was in that direction. This 
government is determined to keep its faith with Saskatchewan 
farmers year after year. There is more evidence of that 
commitment. 
 
There's also development of alternative uses for grain, including 
feed and oxygenated fuels. Here I think we'll be in the vanguard 
of the future. With world grain price stocks spilling over, with 
the European Economic Community bulging with food it can 
neither eat nor sell, I think we might have to investigate new 
uses for grain. I might add here that just last year we established 
a $200 million agricultural research fund to increase research 
and development initiatives. Again this is more evidence that 
we are looking to the future for our farmers rather than trying to 
live in a past that no longer exists. 
 
There's expansion of traditional markets for grain through 
representation by the government to have agriculture 
commodities discussed in the next round of GATT negotiations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at provincial premiers' conferences, at 
federal-provincial conferences, at international meetings, 
everywhere and every time this government could speak up for 
our farmers, it has spoken up for them. 

We have worked and worked to focus attention on just how 
important Saskatchewan's agricultural output is to this nation. 
This new initiative will add substantially through thrust we have 
already undertaken on behalf of our farmers, rural 
Saskatchewan and Canada. 
 
There will be continued decentralization of the public service 
through the transfer of the crop insurance corporation to 
Melville and the agricultural credit corporation to Swift 
Current. Crown corporations and government agencies that 
serve farmers and rural Saskatchewan are better able to serve 
both farmers and rural Saskatchewan when they live and work 
amongst the people that they serve. As well, decentralization 
will help give firmer economic and social bases to rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There will be a Saskatchewan agricultural commercial equity 
corporation Act, another vehicle to allow Saskatchewan people 
to invest in Saskatchewan strengths. Why should Saskatchewan 
enterprises starve for funds while eastern Canadian big business 
can find investment the world over? Saskatchewan is a good 
place to invest in, and what better to invest in than agriculture? 
We predict that the new Saskatchewan agricultural and 
commercial equity corporation will become a major investment 
vehicle for both Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan 
agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on by pointing out initiatives that this 
government has taken on behalf of our farmers and rural 
Saskatchewan since 1982 and elaborate greatly on our 
initiatives for the future, but I think that I have given a good 
general run-down on our plans. There are some initiatives in 
this throne speech for rural Saskatchewan that the former 
government could not conjure up in 11 years. We have given 
away a lot of things and we've helped a lot of people. 
 
For more than one decade, between 1971 and 1982, we saw a 
government in operation in Saskatchewan that through inaction, 
almost helped engineer the decline of rural Saskatchewan. It 
was an awful sight. Everything our parents, grandparents, and 
great-grandparents had built up, the previous government 
blithely disregarded. The previous administration simply did 
not listen to the people; they did not help those that they were 
elected to serve. 
 
That is why the opposition is where it is, Mr. Speaker. They 
neglected rural Saskatchewan. Rural people are determined to 
keep their towns and villages alive, keep their farms in 
economically viable shape, keep rural schools operating, and 
keep rural small business alive. They are not going to cave in as 
easily as the government of the day previously thought. They 
didn't cave in and they fought to protect those interests, and this 
will continue in the future. 
 
That started back in 1982, in the spring, April 26th. And we can 
assure this House again that if the election were called 
tomorrow, that the people in rural Saskatchewan will vote again 
the present government. 
 
Since 1982, rural Saskatchewan has been flourishing. I 
mentioned earlier 5,000 young farmers are now in 
  



 
March 18, 1986 

 

33 
 

the farm purchase program. In other provinces farmers are 
going bankrupt; farms are disappearing. In Saskatchewan, since 
1982, thousands of new farm owners have come into existence. 
 
I want to add to this point about young farmers. If rural 
Saskatchewan is to continue to flourish, it needs a bigger vision 
of young people. We have been able to enable young 
Saskatchewan people to stay on their farms and to live in rural 
areas. Unless we provide opportunities for them to do so, they 
will be forced into the urban areas, and then slowly and surely 
rural Saskatchewan will die. We must therefore keep rural 
Saskatchewan young and vigorous, and programs like the farm 
purchase program enable us to do so. 
 
I might say that any move to enhance agriculture in our 
province puts a firmer foundation under rural Saskatchewan. 
And I again stress that when rural Saskatchewan is strong, 
Saskatchewan benefits. The recent announcement of the new 
$78 million agriculture college will add to the long-term 
strength of agriculture in our province and will be able to give 
us the future to build on. 
 
Through the Speech from the Throne I notice time and time 
again the themes of protection, participation, and opportunity. 
The member from Regina North did an excellent job of 
explaining these themes. I would like to comment on them too. 
 
To me, Saskatchewan is like a family. Our province is like a 
home. In a family, the mother and father ensure that their 
children are protected against adversity; that children, as they 
grow up, fully participate in family affairs; and that they are 
given the opportunity to live healthy, productive lives. How 
does a family do all this? The parents ensure that their children 
have good health care. In Saskatchewan, our province as a 
whole now has excellent health care. The decline in our health 
system between 1971 and 1982 has been halted and reversed. 
No kind of loving parent would allow anybody to decrease or to 
allow anything less than that. 
 
A family sees that it is fed with good, wholesome food. What 
type of parents would starve the bodies of their children. No 
good, decent parents would. But that’s what the Saskatchewan 
government did to the Saskatchewan people between 1971 and 
1982. It frustrated and failed agriculture production in this 
province. It drove families off their farms and undermined the 
agriculture foundation of Saskatchewan by ignoring the needs 
of our farmers. 
 
A family sees that its children receive a first-rate education. 
What type of parents would skimp on the education quality of 
their children.? No good, decent parents would. They would 
provide the best education money could buy. However, between 
1971 and 1982 the previous Saskatchewan government refused 
to invest in education. It refused to invest in the youth of this 
province. While educational systems in other provinces were 
being upgraded to meet new demands and challenges of the 
technological age, the previous government let funding slip 
more and more behind. Now education is at a full-time high in 
Saskatchewan. More opportunities are being provided. 
Opportunities exist in 

all areas. 
 
Education and jobs. Between 1975 and 1982, when the rest of 
Canada was enjoying boom years of prosperity, unemployment 
in Saskatchewan actually climbed 114 per cent. That's a 
frightening nightmare figure, but it's true. Throughout the years 
1975 to 1982, some 150,000 Saskatchewan residents tasted 
unemployment. 
 
What's the situation now, Mr. Speaker? Unemployment in 
Saskatchewan, on a year-to-year basis, is the lowest in the 
nation. Our employment rate, at 92 per cent, is the highest in the 
nation. Over 30,000 new jobs have been created. There are 
thousands of new summer job opportunities for students. 
 
The oil industry, forced out of Saskatchewan by the previous 
administration, is booming and creating jobs and businesses, 
particularly in rural areas. Small-business entrepreneurs are 
creating new services every week. Opportunity abounds in this 
province today, and initiatives in the Speech from the Throne 
will ensure that new opportunities will continue to be created. 
 
Participation. The former administration didn't trust 
Saskatchewan residents to participate in the government of the 
province, but times have changed. The current Saskatchewan 
government respects and trusts the residents of Saskatchewan. It 
doesn't want their support only at election time. It wants their 
advice and support throughout the weeks, months, and years of 
its administration. The current government doesn't want to 
gobble up people's farms and buy up potash mines. The current 
Saskatchewan government wants people of Saskatchewan to 
benefit from the province's resources. The fact that the people 
of our province do want to participate is demonstrated by the 
huge success of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and the 
Saskoil offerings. Saskatchewan people will invest in our 
province if they are given the opportunity to do so. 
 
(1700) 
 
The former administration operated in secrecy. They didn't want 
residents to know what it was doing or why it was doing it. 
Imagine if parents hid everything from their children. But the 
former administration didn't regard the Saskatchewan people as 
part of family. To tell you the truth, in the past, government and 
the people was more like a master-slave relationship than a 
participatory democracy. 
 
This has all changed, and a new freedom of information and 
privacy Act and a new code of conduct for elected officials will 
ensure that residents have a right to know what their 
government is doing. 
 
I started off my comments to you by talking about 
commitments. And I think that all the points I've mentioned to 
you show that this government is committed to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and that this government has responded to that 
commitment time and time again. 
 
A government is not some monolithic political body. A 
government is very much a part of the people it 
  



 
March 18, 1986 

 

34 
 

represents. And it must be flexible in its dealings with these 
people. It must win their trust every day. I believe the initiatives 
contained in the Speech from the Throne will demonstrate that 
the trust this government has built up with the people of 
Saskatchewan in the past four years will continue to increase in 
coming years. 
 
In closing, might say I say that it's been an honour for me to 
second the Speech from the Throne, and I wish to thank you, 
Mr. Speaker, for the time allotted and available. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity 
to rise and speak on the throne speech. It is a real honour to do 
that. This is in fact a historic document, and I'd like to tell you 
why it is a historic document. 
 
First of all, it's the fifth throne speech of this legislature, and I 
predict the last throne speech of a Conservative government for 
the next 50 years — like the last one they gave when they were 
in power from 1929 to 1934. A historic document, Mr. Speaker, 
because this government is one that has put the province in a 
fiscal position that would have been unheard of four years ago. 
 
The throne speech dealt with none of the issues that we have 
heard as we have travelled around the province for the last two 
weeks. What people are telling us very clearly is that the issues 
are massive tax increases at the federal level and the provincial 
level by Conservative governments. 
 
They're telling us that the second main issue is unemployment 
— unemployment that has sky-rocketed from four and a half 
per cent in 1982 to 8 per cent this year, and among the young 
people, among young people under 25, unemployment rates of 
15 per cent. And I'll tell you that in the North, where statistics 
don't show up because many of them are done by telephone, the 
unemployment rate is between 80 and 100 per cent. 
 
And I say to you that a throne speech that comes forward and 
looks backward and brags about the fact that the province is 
doing so well when we have a $2 billion deficit, we have 
massive record increases in taxes, record unemployment, 
63,000 people on welfare, the biggest growth industry is in the 
food bank area, I say to you, Mr. Speaker, this is a government 
that is out of touch with reality and these birds should be turfed 
out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I listened with a great deal of interest 
when the member for Regina South or Regina North, or I'm not 
sure where he's from, got up in his place and talked about 
business in Saskatchewan. Well there's a houseboat sitting 
down on Albert Street that used to be up on Lac La Ronge . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, it's a new one. Well they've 
taken them all out of there. 
 
The last throne speech this same man was standing in his place 
bragging about this business incentive he had in northern 
Saskatchewan. Now they've moved all the boats out. I think he's 
going to use that for a campaign 

committee room when he hits the hustings in Regina South, out 
of the old houseboat that he had taken up there to try to open a 
new business. 
  
But I use that only as an example, Mr. Speaker, of the total 
failure in every area that this government has attempted to work 
on. Every area they've touched has blown up in their face — 
every area. If you look at the small business, manufacturers, 
MacLeod stores, Robinsons, going broke, going out of business 
across the province, Ipsco laying off record numbers of 
workers, and the litany goes on and on and on. And I say to you 
that what we should be doing when we conclude this debate is 
allowing the people of the province to make their decision on 
whether or not they want four more years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Because I'll tell you when you have a 
Premier that won't stand up for Saskatchewan when it comes to 
dealing with Ottawa, when you have a government that won't 
deal fairly with working people, when you have a government 
that has fallen out of favour even with their own friends, with 
the business community, I say it's time for an election and we 
should be having it now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I have a large number, great 
number of points that I want to raise. I know that the time is 
late. I will carry on tomorrow. I therefore ask leave to adjourn 
the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:08 p.m. 
 
 


