




















































March 24, 1986 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 March 24, 1986 
 

133 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Klein, seconded by Mr. 
Domotor, and the amendment thereto moved by Hon. Mr. 
Blakeney. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To continue where I 
left off at 5 o'clock, Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, some of the 
members opposite were talking about what we should be doing 
for farmers and how difficult it is on the farms today. And I 
think what they should be doing is more than talking. We know 
what the problems are. And what do they do? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Six per cent money . . . 
 
Mr. Lusney: — The member for Kelvington-Wadena here says 
6 per cent money. Well as I said before, 6 per cent money is 
fine, but all you're doing is putting another debt load on that 
individual that needs something more than another debt load. 
He has financial problems now, and certainly the one thing he 
doesn't need is more debt. And that's what this government is 
offering — more debt for the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Instead of looking at possibly getting after the federal 
government and telling them we've got to have more for our 
wheat — instead of suggesting that it should go down —this 
government does nothing more than study and study, and 
review and look, and continue to delay. They send out a 
committee to look into farm input costs. 
 
And the member for Kelvington-Wadena was a member on that 
committee, and he was going to try to come up with a solution 
to our expensive chemicals. But, Mr. Speaker, that same 
member sells those chemicals. And that's almost the same like 
telling a banker to go and study how to get the interest rates 
down, when he's the same guy that sets them. That's what we 
have here. He sells the chemicals, and then he's going around 
trying to study how we can get the price down. 
 
And why would it be that difficult, Mr. Speaker, for him to 
come up with a solution to it? Well when you're selling the 
produce, when you've got the company that gives you a holiday 
at their expense . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, a point of order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — State your point of order. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, the member 
for Pelly just stated that a chemical company gave me a trip. I 
would like him to retract that statement, Mr. Speaker. At no 
time did a company ever give me a trip. It was an earned trip, 
Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I don't find that the member has a point of 

order that's well taken. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know the member's 
a little upset, a little upset over that point, but the Premier 
himself said that the member was over in Venezuela, and they 
were over there on behalf of a chemical company; they deal in 
chemicals. And that's not something that's unusual. There are 
many chemical companies that provide vacations or trips for 
their dealers. They do that. 
 
And that, I say, is wrong, Mr. Speaker. Because when the 
farmer has to pay the price for that chemical that it is today, and 
they can afford to send someone to another country on a 
vacation — whether it's Venezuela, or Australia, or any place 
else — then I think they are taking too much money from the 
farmer. Because that's who paying for all those trips. 
 
And what we should be looking at is trying to get that chemical 
down. We should be looking at getting fertilizers down, at 
getting the price of fuel down. That, Mr. Speaker, is what 
should be happening. 
 
But to this point, after spending thousands of dollars on that 
study, I have yet to see a report from that group that is going to 
tell us how we are going to get farm input costs down. That, 
Mr. Speaker, has not happened as yet. 
 
They talk about some of the great programs — 21 cents a gallon 
for fuel that they are going to be rebating to farmers. And it's 
going to be so cheap now; we're going to get real cheap fuel. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to inform the members opposite that 
last year the oil companies were providing a subsidy to the 
farmer, if you want to call it that, but it wasn't a subsidy. What 
they were doing is giving him a discount, because the farmers 
was paying way more than that oil was worth and the province 
wasn't charging any royalties on it. So the oil companies could 
afford to give a little back to the farmer. So they'd give him a 
discount, anywhere from 25 to 35 cents a gallon. 
 
And what happens now? This government says that they're 
going to rebate 21 cents a gallon, and the oil companies cut off 
their discounts. So most of the farmers are going to be getting 
their fuel for more this year than what it cost them last year, 
even with the 21 cents that the government is going to be 
rebating. That's what's going to happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Want us to take it off, Lorne? Do you 
want us to take it off? 
 
Mr. Lusney: — And some of the members say that I want them 
to take it off. No, Mr. Speaker, what I'm saying, the 21 cents is 
less than what the companies were offering last year, and if this 
government is serious about bringing down the cost of fuel, 
they should be bringing it up to 30 or 40 or 50 cents, or else tell 
the oil companies, if they could afford to have that discount on 
last year, then it should stay on this year, on top of that 21 cents 
that the government is going to rebate. They should have both 
of those in there then. They shouldn't be allowed to take that 
discount off this year, because they still aren't charging, the 
government isn't charging the oil companies any 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

 

134 
 

royalty. 
 
And unless the government is prepared to say to the oil 
companies, that if you're going to take that discount off, you're 
going to have to start paying some royalties for that oil, then 
anything they do is meaningless, Mr. Speaker, totally 
meaningless. It is not going to help any of the farmers. 
 
And I know that some of the members opposite are upset. They 
keep saying that we have no farm policy. Well, Mr. Speaker, we 
put forward, I think, a fairly good farm policy and some fairly 
good programs that, I think, the farmers are going to accept. 
And the only difference is, Mr. Speaker, that I think the farmers 
also know that we're going to deliver. 
 
When we make a promise, we keep it. Unlike the government 
opposite who made all kinds of promises, complained about 
everything you could think of. Before they were saying we 
spent too much money on government advertising, on 
advertising Crown corporations, and you name it. 
 
And what have they done? They've spent way more than we 
spent in advertising. And now they come up with a nice glossy 
ad, went out in the paper in every household, that's going to cost 
the taxpayers of this province a small fortune. And the taxpayer 
has to pay for it. And it's getting awful close to an election. Yes, 
it's nice colour on both sides. And the taxpayer has to pay for it. 
And the taxpayer is going to be paying for it. Sponsored by the 
Government of Saskatchewan. And that, Mr. Speaker, is how 
they are spending the taxpayers' dollars in advertising, trying to 
buy some votes shortly before an election. And they think that 
that glossy piece of paper is going to buy them the votes, and 
that they're going to win this election again. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
I think they're going to be somewhat disappointed because that 
glossy poster is not going to buy them that many votes. I think 
the people of Saskatchewan are a little more intelligent than that 
and they aren’t bought off that easy. 
 
The other day when the Premier was speaking in this House, he 
said that what they did was take off the tax on gasoline and that 
everybody was getting such cheap gasoline today that if the 
NDP were in, in his words, and in Hansard, he said that if the 
NDP were in power, gasoline would cost us 60 cents a litre — 
60 cents a litre — and he said they took off 40 cents a gallon. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when I look at some of the prices and 40 
cents a gallon at what the price is today, 40 cents a litre in 
Regina, I don't know how he comes up with saying, even if it 
was 40 cents a gallon more, how he'd get 60 cents a litre out of 
it. 
 
But it's true with this party, whether it's the Premier of any other 
minister or any other member on that side of the House, they 
don't have to be very factual. They can just throw out a figure 
even though there is no sense to it all. And they want people to 
believe it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after hearing some of the comments of the 
Premier the other day, over the weekend I picked out some bills 
of mine from 1982, a couple of bills from service stations — 
January of 1982. And he was saying 

that the price was so high at that time, and when he got in 
power everything became so low, and one can think back of the 
last few years as to what we paid for fuel. What we paid for fuel 
only about six months ago, and not even that — just a month or 
two ago back in Kamsack, it was 48 cents a litre. In Regina I 
think it was around 44 cents a litre. Now it's down to 40 cents in 
Regina; it's still 44 back at home. But in January of '82 before 
the Conservatives came to power . . . I have one bill from the 
highway service — it was 38 cents a litre. Thirty eight cents a 
litre. That's expensive fuel. 
 
In January of '82 before the Conservatives came into power, at 
the Turbo just on East Albert here, Victoria, 2445 Victoria 
Avenue East, it was 34.8 cents a litre, and it was that expensive 
gas that the NDP had at that time. And the Conservatives are 
trying to say that somehow when they came into power fuel got 
so cheap. Well I wish I was paying 34 cents a litre for it right 
now. I wish we would have been paying that for it the last two 
or three years because that's wasn't the case. That wasn't the 
case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But yet, somehow, the members opposite are trying to convince 
the public that everything that they did was so much cheaper 
and so much better, but the public aren't buying it. They just 
aren't buying because they know better. They have invoices 
also. They know what the price was four years ago; they know 
what it is now. And we've got $12-a-barrel oil right now, and 
what are we paying for it? We're still up there at 40 and 44 
cents a litre for gasoline. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Premier keeps saying that somehow he 
brought this price of gasoline down so low. Well if that's what 
he calls bringing it down real low then, Mr. Speaker, I think 
he'd better go and try to sell that to the people of Saskatchewan 
because they're not likely to believe him. 
 
Some of the members are also talking about how we put our 
Crown corporations into debt. And you notice they're not 
talking about what they propose to be doing. I don't hear 
anything about what they're going to do for the people of 
Saskatchewan in the next two months, or three months, or six 
months. They're not saying anything about that. They keep 
talking about the NDP government that was in four years ago. 
But they don't want to talk about themselves, and I can 
understand why. Why would you want to talk about your 
programs which were so terrible. 
 
They talk about how we put the Crown corporations in debt. 
And, Mr. Speaker, all we have to do is go back a few years, go 
back to '81, and look what the debt was for the Crown 
corporations at that time. And I think if you did check back, and 
that's in their own documentation, you look at what there was. It 
was about 2.4 billion in the Crown corps at that time under the 
administration of the NDP. In '84, which was a little over a year 
ago, in '84 it was $4 billion. They doubled the debt of the 
Crown corporations. And they say we were the ones that put 
them in debt. 
 
(1915) 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

 

135 
 

Go to the total debt of the province, Mr. Speaker. Let's have a 
look at that one and see what happened with that. The total debt 
in '82 when we were in power, the last time that we were in 
power, we had a total debt of about 3 billion, a little over $3 
billion in the province of Saskatchewan. That's total debt. Under 
the PC government, what is the total debt going to be now that 
the people have to shoulder the expense on, pay the interest on, 
and try to pay back somehow? A little over 7 billion. That is 
where we are today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And here we have this government and its members saying that 
it was the NDP that put us in debt. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think 
when the people of Saskatchewan take a look at some of those 
figures, they will realize that the people that put us in debt to 
the point where we are today is the present administration. 
That's who did it. 
 
They made a lot of other promises in '82 which it would have 
been nice if they had kept some of them. The former minister of 
Highways was talking about all these four-lane highways that 
he was going to build. They were going to have four-lane 
highways on No. 1 and on the Yellowhead. Unfortunately that 
minister is no longer with us. He's not the minister of Highways 
any more, and he hasn't built any of those four-lane highways. 
We're still waiting for them. 
 
What has he done instead? Whether it's the former minister or 
the present Minister of Highways, they aren't much different. 
The former minister was selling off all the highway equipment. 
The present Highways minister is the guy that does the selling. 
So there isn't much difference. 
 
They got rid of all the equipment. They cut down the budget for 
highways and they didn't build very many roads, Mr. Speaker. 
And everyone in this province knows that, because they have to 
drive over all those roads. And I was talking to a guy the other 
day that was telling me when he was going down to Saskatoon 
last summer, what did he see? There was a guy on the highway, 
patching the highway off a half-ton truck with some asphalt in 
the back, trying to fill holes — Alberta plates. And that's the 
unfortunate part. 
 
We have a lot of the people that were doing the work in this 
province that did have Alberta plates on their vehicles. We 
weren't using Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan youth in 
this province to do the work. We were getting Alberta 
contractors in with Alberta people doing the work. And our 
people, our youth in Saskatchewan were sitting unemployed. 
That is what was happening, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This year we hear more promises. Well it seems, Mr. Speaker, 
that in this election year there's going to be a lot of highways 
built and it doesn't matter who asks for a road or where, they get 
a letter saying, yes, we are certainly going to look at putting this 
into our permanent program and get it built. They are prepared 
to build every road in the province this year, especially a couple 
of weeks or so, or months, before an election. They are prepared 
to promise anything anyone wants. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't think the people are going to 

believe that. I don't think they are going to believe those kinds 
of promises because there were none of them kept in the last 
four years and they certainly aren't going to believe any 
promises on the eve of an election. 
 
They've done the same thing, Mr. Speaker, with STC. We had a 
good transportation company in this province, one that's been in 
since 1946, and it's provided a good service to the people of 
Saskatchewan. But what has happened since this administration 
has been in power? They got rid of some nice new buses that 
we had. And the members opposite laugh; the members 
opposite laugh because they got rid of some buses, some buses 
that had virtually no miles on them. They got rid of them, 
traded the new ones in for a bunch of used buses that they can't 
keep on the road. That is what they bought. And one could be 
suspicious of what that kind of deal was when you see someone 
trading in new buses and buying used ones. One would wonder 
why you would be buying used buses in a public transportation 
company. They could have fixed up those new buses to put 
them on any route in this province but they didn't do that. 
 
I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this government gave those 
buses away for half of their value, if not less — if not less. And 
I would like them to show . . . If they say that's not true, let 
them table the documents. Let them table the agreement that 
they had with Murray Hill and then we would know what those 
buses brought. But I say we will never see that documentation 
because they know very well that it would show exactly what 
happened. We'll never see that and I know they're not going to 
ever table that. But one day the people of Saskatchewan will 
find out what went on with some of those deals. Because 
they've purchased buses after that, and they've paid anywhere 
from 150 to $200,000 for used buses that another company 
traded in because they didn't want to run those buses any more. 
They brought some more of those buses from Murray Hill. 
They bring them in to Saskatchewan and what do they have to 
do? Some they can't even put on the road without fixing, and 
some will go on the road for two or three weeks. They've got to 
put transmissions in them and so forth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no responsible government that would 
ever operate a public utility that way. They wouldn't operate a 
transportation system in any other province that way. Even the 
private operators got rid of those buses because they wanted to 
provide a better service for their customers. And what happens? 
Saskatchewan buys a bunch of junk. We had better buses of our 
own that they traded in than some of the stuff they bought. But 
that is the way this government operated. That is the way they 
operated, Mr. Speaker, and that wasn't only in that area. It 
seems they ran the whole government that way. 
 
One can look at some of the things they say about health care, 
and they certainly like to brag about health care. They like to 
brag about health care. But, Mr. Speaker, most of the things 
they brag about, and some of the members mentioned it tonight, 
they brag about all the nursing homes that there are to help the 
senior citizens. They're saying they're going to help all the 
senior citizens. 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

 

136 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I would only like to ask them — and I know 
that people know better — I would like to ask those members: 
did they build all those nursing homes? I would say not. I would 
say those nursing homes were in there long before they got into 
power. They were in there long before they got into power. I 
can use my constituency, I can use Kamsack, I can use 
Norquay, and if I could go right close to Canora, those were all 
there before these guys got into power. So they didn't build any 
nursing homes in that area. All of those senior citizens were in 
the nursing homes that needed them. There's no doubt that there 
is need for more. There is certainly need for more. But all this 
government is doing is talking about it. 
 
Again, they've talked about it for four years. They've talked 
about it for four years, and now if anybody applies for an 
nursing home, they say, yes, we'll give it to you. To me that can 
only mean one thing. There's got to be an election very soon, 
because they are promising nursing homes in every place that 
wants them. And, Mr. Speaker, I would then suggest that all 
that is another empty promise, because it is not likely that 
they're going to be there long enough before they call an 
election to come through with some of those promises. 
 
They are promising everything, but they are not likely to be in 
this House long enough to bring down that budget and to go 
through with that budget and build and do everything that they 
will be saying. That, Mr. Speaker, is what is going to happen. 
 
They talk about all the work they're doing in the hospitals and 
how they're improving the hospital service. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
we've heard from the nurses, we've heard from a lot of patients 
as to what the conditions are in the hospitals today. And some 
of the members say, have I been a patient lately and how would 
I like to be one. Well, Mr. Speaker, with the kind of hospital 
care that these people are providing, I certainly don't think I 
want to be in a hospital because I know some people that were 
in there and I know how they were treated. 
 
I know that there is a shortage of nurses. There aren't enough 
nurses on staff to be able to look after the patients properly. 
And yet they are saying that they are doing so much for health 
care. Well, Mr. Speaker, they should go to some of these 
hospitals and talk to some of the staff and find out just how 
good it is in there, because they certainly have not been 
providing the kind of care that is necessary. 
 
Every year they make cut-backs in funding to the local 
hospitals, and I can use Canora hospital as an example . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . And somebody said, I would. Well, I 
certainly will, because last year — it's a 50-bed hospital — the 
Minister of Health cut back the funding to Canora hospital to 36 
beds. This year they have been informed that they will be cut 
back to 30 beds. A 50-bed hospital that is full, and they cut it 
back to 30-bed funding. And the hospital went into debt last 
year, and they say they certainly cannot operate, being funded at 
30 beds this year. And why can't they do it? Because they need 
some nursing home space. They've got some long-stay patients 
in there. And what does the Department of Health tell the board 
when they come to see them? They tell them, well you better 
release these long-stay patients, 

get them out of the hospital, and if you have to readmit them 
again that'll make it look better for the hospital. 
 
Well that doesn't make a lot of sense, Mr. Speaker, If 
somebody's in there and they're sick, they're being told to get 
them out of there and then bring them back in so you can put on 
paper that they're going in and out. One would think that the 
minister of the department would be able to go into that hospital 
and have a look to see how many beds are being utilized on a 
permanent basis and fund them accordingly. But that, Mr. 
Speaker, they certainly are not doing. That's one hospital that 
has that problem, and I would suggest there's probably more 
that have a similar problem. And yet they continue to say that 
they are doing so much in the field of health care. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, I doubt very much that people are going to believe 
that. 
 
One of the members opposite this evening in his speech was 
saying that the NDP are like badgers and pigeons because we 
seem to like holes in the ground and tall buildings. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I might suggest to that member that those 
holes in the ground that he's referring to, those potash mines, 
used to bring some revenue for this province. They used to be 
able to provide decent health care. And now what do we have? 
They're trying to get rid of those holes in the ground that were 
providing revenue. They are trying to destroy all of that. They 
are trying to destroy all of that. They are selling it off. And that, 
Mr. Speaker, is their answer for a better province and a better 
economy — sell off everything that you've got. 
 
And we wee what they did in some of the areas. They sold off 
highway equipment. They got rid of some new STC buses. 
They sold a coal mine. They sold the drag-line and then lease it 
back, and they're buying back the coal from a private company 
from Alberta. They sold some potash equipment and they lease 
it back. Now, Mr. Speaker, I don't know how many business 
men with any intelligence whatsoever would operate on that 
basis. They wouldn't. 
 
They talk about private sector administration. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I wish that they would go to some of these companies 
and get a little bit of advice on how you run a business, because 
you certainly don't do it by selling off property or equipment 
and then leasing it back. That certainly does not save you any 
money. But somehow they're going to try to sell that to the 
public, that that is supposed to save money. 
 
(1930) 
 
In the long run, that is going to destroy this province. And that 
is what this government is doing. They have been doing it for 
four years, and if they re-elected they'll continue doing that. 
That seems to be their philosophy . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . 
 
You are not going to be back in here. You're not going to be 
back in here, so I know you won't have to worry about it. And I 
can say, Mr. Speaker, that certainly this government is not 
going to be able to destroy this province after they call the 
election. When they get the 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

 

137 
 

courage to call that election, they certainly will not be 
destroying this province any more, because the people of this 
province say that they certainly cannot afford four more years 
of what we have seen in the last four years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the members were talking about our 
accounting system in the past, and I know they've tried to make 
it appear as though somehow things weren't as good before as 
they are right now. They're trying to make themselves look a lot 
better. Well, Mr. Speaker, I know it's difficult for them to do. 
They've had some problems even tabling this auditor's report, 
and they certainly don't want to table public accounts for us, 
and I don't think we'll see them. They probably won't table 
those accounts before they call the election. Because if they did, 
the public would have access to many of the figures that are in 
there and the public would know exactly what this government 
has been doing in the last four years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even the auditor himself says that there is 
something wrong in this government. They've changed their 
accounting, they've changed their method of moving money 
around the government, to a revolving fund. They've changed it, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And just picking out a few areas of this report, it talks about one 
department that submitted all their figures to the auditor, and he 
pointed out some discrepancy in it. When he pointed that out to 
the department, guess what they did? And the auditor puts that 
in his report. 
 
When informed of the errors, officials of the department chose 
to adjust the records and financial statements of the fund to 
reflect the correct contributions receivable amount. They didn't 
look for what the problem was or how that came about. They 
just changed things around, changed the numbers, made sure it 
balances, and then turned it back to the auditor. That is how this 
government has been operating, Mr. Speaker. And even the 
auditor said that that isn't not right. 
 
In a couple of other areas he says the same thing. He says the 
processing of incorrect or unauthorized information greatly 
increases the risk that a material error or fraud may occur. And 
it seems to have happened. He says payments of $464,000 on 
some projects were made without evidence of adequate 
authority. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that would make one wonder just what is 
happening within some of these departments. Even the auditor 
says that there is a risk of fraud when they operate the way they 
have been. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this is the way this government has been 
going for four years. They keep always referring to the NDP 
and saying that we're against everything. We're against 
companies; we're against the rich. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, private companies have been operating in 
this province for many years under the NDP and under the 
Liberals. And they will continue to operate in this province. But 
I'll tell you, if the private companies ever had problems, they've 
certainly had them under this administration. You hear more 
and more of them criticizing the government and how they 
operate, because these people don't deal honestly with anyone. 

They don't deal honestly with anyone. That's why even the 
private companies say that they can't deal with the 
Conservatives. They're not honest. They don't deal fairly. And 
they think that somehow that is the right way to go. 
 
We certainly aren't against private enterprise in this province. 
It's been there. We're not against anyone that is prepared to 
work. And, as one of the members said that we're jealous of 
people who have, in his words, who have worked hard and 
saved and have got ahead — well, Mr. Speaker, I'll tell you, we 
certainly aren't jealous of anyone who's worked hard and saved 
and got ahead. In fact, I would commend anyone that has done 
that. 
 
But what is this government doing for any of those companies 
that have worked hard in this province? Are they giving them a 
fair deal? Mr. Speaker, I would suggest not. 
 
When you look at some of the private contractors in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, who have tried to get contracts, what do 
they see? They are asked for proposals. There are no more fair 
and honest tenders. This government would pick and choose 
who they wanted in. 
 
Most of the time it was companies from outside the province. 
That is what they did. There is no fairness, there is no honesty, 
there's no integrity in this government. And the people are 
starting to see that. 
 
The only ones they seem to be fair to . . . And I wouldn't say 
fair. They're very generous, yes; they're generous to themselves. 
They're generous to people like Peter Pocklington. That, Mr. 
Speaker, if you want to call it anything — I wouldn't say it's 
fraud, but I'll tell you that has to be the biggest give-away in the 
history of this province. 
 
When someone can come in from Alberta and walk into the 
Premier's office, or whoever he walked in to, and then walk out 
of here with $10 million of taxpayers' money, and on top of 
that, get another $26 million in loans of taxpayers' money, 
guaranteed by the taxpayer, well I'll tell you, I think there's a lot 
of business people in this province that wish they had the same 
opportunity to come to this government and say, look, give me 
a grant and give me the loan; guarantee it and I'll start up a 
business here. 
 
I think anybody would do that if he didn't have to put any 
money into it. And that's exactly what's happened here. Peter 
Pocklington comes in and he doesn't have to put any money in. 
This government says, the taxpayer will give it all to you. 
They'll put up the money, and you can just take the credit for it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think people see through that too. They are 
not going to be fooled that easily. They will not be fooled by 
this government any more. I say if they have the courage, they 
should call that election and let the people decide. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — They keep talking about us having some kind 
of hidden agenda, because what we do is . . . What 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

 

138 
 

we've done in the last few days is said what we think should be 
done in this province, what we need, what the people of this 
province need. We have been saying that. And some of the 
members come up and they say, well what they're saying 
doesn't really mean anything. They've got some hidden agenda 
somewhere. Well, Mr. Speaker, we don't deal the way the 
Tories do. We don't operate the way they do. When we say 
something, we mean what we say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — And there is no hidden agenda. But I could see 
why some of you would be suspicious of that because if you 
operate in that manner, then you would be suspicious of 
someone else doing that. And I can understand why they would 
be suspicious of someone else. But, Mr. Speaker, these people 
are used to a better government than what has been happening 
in Sask Forest Products, where you see people getting a high 
salary, getting their grocery bills paid, getting laundry paid, 
getting their cabin rented, getting flights back from the province 
to their home, whether it's in Vancouver; or what's happened 
recently at Westank-Willock. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when you see the kind of things that some 
people can get away with in this province, at taxpayers' expense 
then it starts looking more and more like a government that's 
recently been defeated. The government of Ferdinand Marco in 
the Philippines is not all that far off from what we've seen in 
this province for the last four years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — And I say, Mr. Speaker, the people of this 
province will not tolerate that kind of a government. And when 
they call the election, they will certainly let this government 
know what they believe to be true and what kind of government 
they want. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know many of my colleagues have things they'd 
like to say. But I'd have to say, Mr. Speaker, seeing the things 
I've seen, hearing what I hear from this government saying, I 
find it very difficult to be able to support that throne speech that 
they put forward in this House. But I certainly am going to 
support the amendment that we put forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think it is with 
pleasure that I enter into this debate tonight. After listening to 
the member from Pelly, I was beginning to wonder precisely 
what it was, and I had to indeed remind myself that it was on 
the throne speech which was last Monday. Perhaps I would do 
well to remind the member from Pelly that that in fact is what 
the debate is on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the traditions of the House go, throne speech 
debate included, the past few days have held few surprises, 
including tonight. The hon. member from Regina North has on 
several occasions spoken with a great deal of sincerity and 
eloquence. As the mover of this throne speech, he once again 
put his best foot forward, 

and I would like to congratulate him and the seconder from the 
constituency of Humboldt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps the most moving speech given in my few 
four years in this House was delivered by the member from 
Rosthern. Not only was it what I considered to be out of the 
norm as to what I usually hear, particularly from the opposition, 
but more importantly, Mr. Speaker, it was from the heart. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that more words spoken in this House 
should be exactly that, and that is from the heart. I want to 
thank the member from Rosthern not only for his words of 
wisdom, but for his many contributions to the betterment of this 
institution that we so neatly call parliament. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I observed and listened to another speaker, 
namely the hon. member from Athabasca. He came to this 
Assembly in 1982, and it was he who spoke for . . . I'm sorry, 
Cumberland. Thank you. It was he who spoke for the first time 
that I am aware of in his native tongue in this Assembly. And I 
would suggest to this institution that he will not be the last. We 
on this side of the House extend our best wishes to him in his 
future endeavours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I've touched on what I think are some notable, 
positive moments in this Assembly this week. Obviously, all is 
not positive, and we heard a lot of negatives just before me. 
 
I continue to hear from the opposition the usual doom and 
gloom, the fear tactics, the put-downs, and the pitting of one 
group against another, or one individual against another 
individual. I would suggest, after listening to tonight, that the 
hon. member from Rosthern over the last decade has had much 
more of patience than what I will ever have in this House. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Speaker, each member in this Assembly holds a personal 
vision of democracy, and they hold a set of goals, and they 
usually act accordingly. The throne speech in the last few days 
in fact, lays out what I would call a vision, a vision of this 
province, a vision of its people — the economy, our social 
framework, and in fact, the future of this province. It provided 
without a doubt a broadening path that carefully leads 
Saskatchewan into the world of the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while much has been done to prepare 
Saskatchewan for the future, there remains so much more to do. 
The past four years have seen an emphasis on people and their 
families. That’s a very sharp contrast from 1971 to 1981 when 
the emphasis was on the family of Crown corporations. This 
was a period of time that saw government grow at an alarming 
rate. Not only were the Crown corporations growing, but the 
size of government was growing. And yet while all that was 
happening, there were some very contradictory other things 
happening that, in fact, did state it was contradictory. For 
example, as the government grew, people assumed the province 
was growing. Well we created bigger and more Crowns. We 
bought up more land and we saw a continued migration 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

 

139 
 

of our people, namely our youth, and it is that fact that was 
contradictory to the growth of government. While the 
government was growing, our population was not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our young people left this province in droves. And 
why did they leave? I would suggest to you they saw no vision 
that would affect them personally. They saw no protection and 
they saw no opportunity, no opportunity to own their own farm; 
very little opportunity or encouragement for small business. 
They had a lot of encouragement if you wanted to be on 
welfare, but there was no encouragement to get off of welfare. 
And sad but true, Mr. Speaker, they saw a leadership that cared 
more about regulating and legislating. And why did they see 
that? 
 
In simple terms, Mr. Speaker, the leadership of socialism is one 
of control for the state — not the people, the state. Who cares 
about the individual? Who cares about the hopes and dreams of 
the farmer, the worker, the housewife? How about the 
aspirations of the young business woman? How about the 
dreams of a 15-year-old or perhaps the pain of the separated 
family or the battered family or the dignity of each member of 
that family? Well, Mr. Speaker, in that decade our people — 
they listened and they observed and they left this province. 
 
In 1982, the province changed government and, in fact, changed 
leadership. And, Mr. Speaker, it was not long and people were 
moving back to Saskatchewan. And in fact, over the last four 
years we have enjoyed a growth in our population, and we have 
reached our 1 million mark, and a long time coming it was. 
 
Young people from British Columbia, Alberta, Quebec, Ontario 
came to Saskatchewan. Some came home and some came for 
the first time. Now why, at a time when other provinces were 
seeing recession and the world was seeing recession? What they 
saw, Mr. Speaker, was a vision, a vision that spoke of the 
talents of each individual — a vision of less government, of 
bureaucratic red tape; a vision of less, fewer laws that did 
indeed protect the rights of people. They saw a new leader who 
spoke to the people of Saskatchewan, the business men and the 
business women, the farmers, the housewives, and the workers. 
They saw a leadership that said we must care for our elderly. 
 
I sat tonight and I listened to the member from Pelly say that, 
indeed, the nursing homes were there. I want to remind the 
member from Pelly that in 1982 when I was Minister of Social 
Services we in fact had very few nursing homes, government 
sponsored, in this province that year. What we did have was a 
letter, dated 1978, I believe, stating that there was a moratorium 
on the construction of nursing homes. That moratorium, that 
letter stating that, had been delivered to me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They also saw, when they came back to Saskatchewan within 
our leadership, a province that cared about its youth. In fact 
with a new government and a leadership, we created some 
recognition that government can't do it all. That message has 
still to go through the eight sitting across the way. 
 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, are renowned for 

 their common sense. And most of them would tell you that the 
day government is big enough to give it all to you is the day 
that government is big enough to take it all away. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this throne speech is one of a partnership, and I for one 
welcome the opportunity to work with people in creating 
opportunities for all ages and walks of life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the directions in this throne speech impact very 
much so on my constituency, Swift Current. The potential 
impact is very positive for my constituency and it will set a 
good foundation for the city's future growth. Mr. Speaker, I live 
in what I call the heart of the great south-west. Immediately 
surrounding my constituency is the constituency of Morse. 
These two constituencies share the great south-west with Maple 
Creek and the constituency of Shaunavon. And many of us also 
consider a portion of the Assiniboia-Gravelbourg to be in the 
south-west corner. We in that corner, Mr. Speaker, know the 
harshness of the elements, but we also know what it is like to 
have a neighbour and a good friend. 
 
This constituency lies in the midst of farming, ranching, oil and 
gas enterprises. It is a city that is very aggressive, hard-working, 
and we have very innovative people. It is also a city, Mr. 
Speaker, that has an approximate population of senior citizens 
of 18 per cent, relatively high within this province. We have an 
education system that is second to none. We have a hospital that 
is in fairly good shape, regardless of what the opposition say. 
We have a level 4 that services the entire region and nursing 
homes. 
 
The cities in the south-west have been through drought. We've 
been through grasshoppers, soil erosion. The wind blows almost 
every day. And now, Mr. Speaker, we face a downward trend 
with the price of oil. All of this, and our people still remain a 
people of optimism and pride in their area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have reason for optimism. With the throne 
speech came the announcement of further government 
decentralization. The agriculture credit corporation is to be 
moved to the city of Swift Current. We welcome this news and 
the approximate 23 jobs that will go with it. My opposition 
across the way have stated some opposition to it. It's 
inconvenient, has been what I’ve heard, it's too far removed 
from the people. In fact, Mr. Speaker, nothing could be further 
removed from the truth. 
 
With the advances in technology and communications, there is 
absolutely no reason, Mr. Speaker, why even more 
decentralization cannot take place in this province. Besides the 
direct jobs it will create, there are certainly indirect spin-offs 
that come with any such development. It also brings 
government closer to the people, and that is a fact that people 
should remember more often than what they do. It should 
always be uppermost in the minds of good government. 
 
Agriculture policies of this government, Mr. Speaker, have 
greatly assisted my constituency as they have others. While 
there has been protection for those in rough times, there has 
also been cash advances. That in turn has helped our small 
businesses within our community and the general activity that 
comes about in any given 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

 

140 
 

community. 
 
The farmers living in Swift Current have welcomed the news of 
the natural gas distribution program. And believe it or not, they 
can hardly believe it or not that they are finally getting their 
telephone lines into the 1980s and '90s. Mr. Speaker, what 
might seem small to some means a great deal to many, and that 
is the program to put hydro lines underground. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been approximately three years since 
discussion first began on a first ever Saskatchewan pension 
plan. It's a discussion that began with home-makers, 
home-makers whose work and contributions are so often 
undervalued. Granted, there’s been a lot of lip service paid by 
many, with such comments as, you can't put a value on their 
work. The full-time caring of our children is the most important 
contribution that anyone can make. And yes, while all that's 
true, perhaps the time has come that we have given something 
tangible for the recognition of the home-maker. 
 
The finalization of a Saskatchewan pension plan, I'm pleased to 
see, also includes part-time workers, because approximately 70 
per cent of part-time workers in this province are female. It also 
includes small-business employees. The opposition has charged 
it's not enough and it should be mandatory. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
that's not important. What is important is the opportunity and 
the opportunity to choose, to contribute, and to be recognized 
for your contribution. That is what the people most affected tell 
me. 
 
My constituency has over 800 businesses, all but a few dozen 
are classified as small business. The number of people this 
could possibly affect is absolutely overwhelming, and in all of 
this there is a simple message. We care about your future, and 
we think you should have a choice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, school boards, city council, our hospital and 
others have also welcomed the news in the throne speech that 
the province will be taking a first step in the growing concern of 
recognizing our problems with liability insurance, just as the 
farmers and ranchers will feel a measure of protection with the 
announcement of assistance for grasshoppers and drought. Mr. 
Speaker, you are probably aware that Swift Current and area is 
designated for severe hopper problems this year. And so indeed 
it is welcome, the news of assistance being planned early. 
 
The initiatives and directions of the throne speech are positive 
for my constituency. Over the last four years we have fared 
relatively well under this government. We have seen an increase 
in such areas as our hospital base grant of over a quarter million 
dollars more. We have seen the feasibility study for the Union 
Hospital there. We have also seen equipment worth almost 
$200,000 come into the community for health services. Along 
with that, Mr. Speaker, we have seen the Chinook urban 
parkway agreement reached, a very significant benefit for a 
small city in the south-west. Along with that, Mr. Speaker, the 
mortgage interest reduction program, the benefits for my 
constituency add up to approximately $1.3 million. 

If I look at other areas such as the crisis centre, some provincial 
involvement with our tourist centre, and our down-town 
redevelopment, we in fact have been on the move over the last 
four years. 
 
We have also, Mr. Speaker, been blessed with the Department 
of Health giving us an air conditioner for our regional 4 
hospital, which for 20 years has suffered through extreme heat 
and no relief from it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I have spoken of my constituency, there are 
two other areas that I would like to touch on tonight, namely 
education and the status of women. 
 
This government has given a commitment to education like no 
other government before it in this province. As with any 
initiative by government, there is a reason. And the emphasis on 
education as a pillar of Saskatchewan's foundation should not 
go unnoticed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, governments world over cannot ignore, nor can 
they continue to think of education as only a social policy. It is 
much more. And in fact I would suggest if societies are to grow 
and flourish, they too must think of education in economic and 
social terms. All governments must clearly say, as this 
government has done, education is in fact an investment in the 
future. Without it, there are no returns for the individual or for 
society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have worked long and we have worked hard to 
put into place mechanisms that will strengthen our education 
system, that will challenge our young people for excellence in 
education, and in fact we have worked hard to provide more 
dollars for the system. 
 
Considering what happened to the NDP days, we have made 
some very positive gains. In 1975 we saw this province paying 
approximately 56 per cent of operational grants. By 1981, Mr. 
Speaker, that had dropped to approximately 49 per cent. That 
drop put a burden on local taxpayers, and if that wasn't enough, 
the government of the day put blame on the school boards. 
Today, Mr. Speaker, the provincial share is approximately 54 
per cent. We have been on an upward trend. 
 
(2000) 
 
Within our education system we have recognized our teachers 
with a first-time ever dental plan in this province. And a first 
one in Canada, Mr. Speaker, was the 30-year-and-out or the 
early retirement. 
 
Last April saw the creation of the education development fund 
in consultation with school boards. The total amount of dollars 
to be allocated, Mr. Speaker, was 150 million; 10 million were 
for the first year. Today, Mr. Speaker, the expenditures of the 
fund is being allocated by consultation in divisions, and it is 
being done in a spirit of collaboration and co-operation. 
 
This year, Mr. Speaker, is the second year, and it will see $35 
million into the fund for school boards. Such areas as the 
improvement of the basic skills, guidance, career counselling, 
education for the gifted, library resources, and the updating of 
technology will be areas that we'll 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

 

141 
 

see money spent on. Mr. Speaker, the results of this 
commitment will hold our province through the next decade or 
more. 
 
The development of a provincial educational and cultural 
television network will enhance the opportunities, particularly 
for our sparsely populated rural areas. 
 
Our youth cannot be ignored. They are, in fact, our future. And 
they deserve that consideration. 
 
I sat here tonight and I listened to the member for Pelly criticize 
and chastise this government for a poster brochure . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . And if the member for Regina 
Centre would listen, he would do well too. The criticism was 
that moneys are being spent on this posture brochure. The 
brochure is targeted at our young people for their education and 
for their work opportunities. 
 
You know, I can remember a day when the member for Pelly or 
the member for Regina Centre didn't blink an eye when they 
allocated $6 million for advertising to Crown corporations. And 
yet, there's absolutely no consideration given to the moneys 
being spent on our young people. Mr. Speaker, that says 
something about party policies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I ran for public office in '82, I, like 
everybody else in here, had a vision. And I also had a vision as 
a woman, a vision that eventually the barriers in what is often 
thought as a male domain would be no longer there and women 
would in fact be represented equally in the political process. 
Women would be thought of as contributing to solutions, not 
just isolating them as a problem. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we've made a start, and this government has 
indeed made some gains. While everyone knows there are five 
female members on the government side, it is sometimes a fact 
that is forgotten. We also have two ministers in cabinet, the first 
time ever in the history of the province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, today we have a style of leadership in this 
province that opens the doors of opportunity for women with 
understanding. Women in this province have waited for a long 
time for such things as the enforcement of maintenance 
payments, the skills development program instead of only the 
option of welfare. They have waited a long time for recognition 
through the home-makers' pension. And they have waited a 
long time for a commitment by any government for greater 
public participation in such areas as boards and commissions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's interesting to note, when we took office in '82 
there were approximately 9 per cent of women represented on 
boards and commissions. Mr. Speaker, four years later we are 
up to 29 per cent, and we are going to go higher. Now you tell 
me what happened to the 40 years of socialism. 
 
We have also put into place, Mr. Speaker, a pro-active 
management program to give women in the public service the 
same opportunity as their male colleagues. We have encouraged 
our women to exercise their many 

abilities, including their abilities in small business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to note that the Department of 
Tourism and Small Business has been very active in putting on 
seminars for women, along with the federal government. When 
I look at statistics, I would suggest that they have been 
extremely successful, not only in the interest, but in 
encouraging women to actually get into it. The stats across 
Canada show approximately 43, 44 per cent of women owning 
small businesses, and it's interesting to note that in 1985 that 49 
per cent of women own or manage small businesses in 
Saskatchewan, well above the national average. 
 
Mr. Speaker, women don't ask for a lot. They don't ask for 
government to do it all. They simply want choices. And once 
given those choices, they want the respect and the opportunity 
for the choice they make. I made a choice in '81 to run for the 
PCs, and I probably will again in '86, Mr. Speaker, because it is 
a government that is open to all, both male and female. It is a 
government that understands, but more importantly, it is a 
government that is positive in its actions, and that is precisely 
how I see this throne speech before this Assembly in debate 
tonight. It's positive. It sets a firm foundation for the future. 
And I, for one, Mr. Speaker, will be supporting the motion. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a pleasure for 
me to stand before you and speak to this Assembly. I would like 
to say, before I get into my speaking notes, Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to pass a message, if I may, at this time to the 
member for Rosthern and the other members that will not be 
running on this government side of the House. I would like to 
say, they have helped to create a lot of the programs that we've 
seen over the last four years. The member for Rosthern is 
probably one of our more senior-type members, and we're going 
to miss him very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I had the pleasure of sitting on a legislative committee with 
him, and I'm sure it will go down in history for the province of 
Saskatchewan as we see the fire college and others develop in 
this province, and I would hope that when such a building does 
become a reality, that they do take a look at it, and maybe, who 
knows, they may name it after the member for Rosthern. 
 
So with that, on to the people that are still going to be here, Mr. 
Speaker, and help us direct this province with positive policy, 
such as the member for Melfort, our new Minister of Highways, 
or the member from The Battlefords, our new Minister of 
Finance. Mr. Speaker, individuals such as my colleagues that 
I've named from a few different ridings are the type of people 
that are going to carry this province into a more realistic place 
for young people to stay home at and to come back to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 35,000 jobs — 35,000 jobs. I want everybody to 
listen. Thirty-five thousand jobs, Mr. Speaker, have been 
created under this government in the last four years —35,000 
jobs. And the members opposite, the NDP, say we have done 
nothing. Thirty-five thousand jobs created in the province of 
Saskatchewan, when they called . . . when the members 
opposite called our time today, the time we're in today, a time 
of doom and gloom 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

 

142 
 

or a time of depression. 
 
I'll accept that. We didn't have excellent times in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We did not have what you could call a type of 
year, an excellent type of year, where agriculture wasn't 
suffering or education programs had to be revamped to keep up 
with the changes and technologies and various technologies that 
were coming in to the province, and drought. And you know, 
you just . . . The mineral sales have dropped off. You know, we 
just never really had an excellent year of governing. But we saw 
the hard time through, Mr. Speaker. We saw them through. And 
the members opposite are over there saying we haven't done 
anything. 
 
I want to say something there. The member from Athabasca had 
stated here, Mr. Speaker, that we will be in close to $2 billion in 
a deficit in the province of Saskatchewan after the next public 
documents are tabled. Well, Mr. Speaker, they ask us what we 
have to show for running a deficit in the province of 
Saskatchewan. I'll tell them what we have to show for running a 
deficit in the province of Saskatchewan, and I will use my 
riding for an example, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My riding, Mr. Speaker, has had, if you want to get into the 
aspect of health — instead of eroding health, Mr. Speaker, we 
have brought about a resurgence within the health system, Mr. 
Speaker. We have begun to build our hospitals, instead of close 
them down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — We have begun to decentralize the medicare 
system in the province of Saskatchewan, without centralizing it 
where our families, our older people and our younger people, 
had to drive for therapeutic . . . for therapy and for — pardon 
me, Mr. Speaker — for therapy treatment and for . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, and they said it, therapeutic abortion. 
They were the ones, they were the ones that had created it. They 
were the ones. They would like to see the clinics on every 
corner. But, Mr. Speaker, people would have to travel to the 
cities, miles, 60, 100, 150 miles to the city for treatment, 
because they were closing down rural Saskatchewan hospitals. 
Rural Saskatchewan hospitals, Mr. Speaker. They were even 
. . . They had a moratorium on hospitals. They had a 
moratorium on nursing homes. And our people from rural 
Saskatchewan were having to travel to strange surroundings to 
have their health needs looked after. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they're the righteous ones. The NDP are the 
righteous ones. They're the ones that can do no wrong. They're 
the ones they say, are the only ones. They're the only one that 
means anything to Saskatchewan, they say. 
 
But I want to warn the people in the province, in this province, 
the province of Saskatchewan, that if there is ever an NDP 
government back in this province they will realize what they 
have done within just a short period of time. 
 
I would like to make an example within the health care, from 
what the Minister of Health and I have been able to do for my 
particular riding over the past number of years. 

And it's still to come and there is still more to come. 
 
I have had three, three hospitals built in my riding —promised 
for years by the NDP administration, promised around every 
election time, Mr. Speaker. And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
when I ran for office, when I ran to stand in this legislature to 
represent my constituents, I did not say that I'm going to give 
you a hospital, and not deliver. 
 
I went to each one of those communities and I said I would 
deliver. And I would deliver before another election. And I 
delivered. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — I went into nursing home agreements. I went 
into . . . Nurses in the hospitals, nurses in the hospitals — the 
hon. member from Shaunavon says, I have a shortage of nurses 
in my hospital. Well, Mr. Speaker, for the information to the 
member from Shaunavon, I want to indicate to him that I have a 
very, very good rapport with the nurses' representation from my 
constituency of Lloydminster, Maidstone, and Cut Knife. And 
as of yet, I have not had one of their association, one member 
from their association come into my office or any one of the 
meetings that I have been at, Mr. Speaker, indicate to me, face 
to face, that there's a shortage; that our patients are suffering. 
 
I've had countless meetings with our health representatives out 
in my riding, Mr. Speaker, and I want you to know, and I want 
the rest of the province to know that the members opposite are 
lying when they say that my . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I would ask the member to refrain from using 
that kind of language in the House. I would ask you to withdraw 
that statement. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I hope that you'll 
accept my apology for using that word. I sometimes get carried 
away. But I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that they're about as 
far from the truth as the truth can be. That is . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — I cannot imagine these people, the members 
opposite, the members and candidates of the NDP, marching 
across the province of Saskatchewan being able to go into the 
communities that are offering the health care service throughout 
this province and agitate the whole system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you a little story. They tie 
themselves around the Bob Whites or the Larry Browns or other 
individuals like that in this province, and what do we get? We 
get follower, followers — little sheep on their side that are 
working within these organizations. These are the people that 
seem to want to take the time to cry. These are the people that 
want to take the time to, instead of doing their job and doing it 
right, they're the ones that have the time to come into the city of 
Regina here to 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

 

143 
 

march, to march, because anyone that is busy doing their work, 
busy doing their job, has not got the time to come into Regina 
and march. Mr. Speaker, those kind of people, they're too 
honest. They just want to be left alone. They want to do their 
job and they don't want aggravation. And there is a good two, 
four, six, eight, nine aggravations. 
 
I want to say though, that when you go into the . . . When I 
travel my riding, Mr. Speaker, and I talk to the people, they're 
pleased. They're pleased about having the hospitals built. 
They're pleased about having the nursing homes. But I want to 
say this. Now this is ironic. This is so ironic. It was just pointed 
out to me here the other day that the candidate that is running 
for the NDP in my riding is now running around trying to take 
credit for all the buildings I've built. I could not believe . . . 
(inaudible) . . . He's saying, oh, back in 1976 we promised the 
hospital in Lloydminster. We have 1976. There was an election 
in 1982 and he still hadn't delivered. He still hadn't delivered. 
He was saying about how he promised a hospital in Cut Knife. 
Well, 1982 came along and that hadn't been delivered either, or 
the one in Maidstone. 
 
Then we get into the nursing homes. Well you know, they didn't 
even want to talk nursing homes. They had the moratorium on 
the nursing homes. I delivered a nursing home into the city of 
Lloydminster, and I put that nursing home in the city of 
Lloydminster actually two years before they really were 
expecting it. But I knew it was on the hot plate. I knew they 
were beginning to move it forward. I knew the building was 
becoming a problem for them. The fire marshal’s report wasn't 
good. So, Mr. Speaker, instead of taking a chance or instead of 
spending a lot of money revamping that old building, which 
was a fire hazard that they had never corrected . . . Mr. Speaker, 
I felt for those people because if there would have been a fire 
that . . . A fire would have raced through that type of a building 
as quick as it would have through these mobile homes. That’s 
the type of fire rating that old building probably had there. So 
we built it. We built it. And these people are now enjoying a 
brand-new home, larger rooms, beautiful decor, brighter 
atmosphere. And they're happy; they're singing. You go in 
there. They have their get-togethers. They're happy. They're just 
really enthused about having their new home. 
 
Then I go over to Cut Knife, Saskatchewan. Cut Knife never 
did have a nursing home. They never did even think of having 
it, I must admit, up until our term in government. But I want to 
tell you something. The people in the community of Cut Knife 
invited me in, Mr. Speaker; invited me into their community to 
see if there was anything I could do to give them a nursing 
home in their community because they were forced to drive and 
visit 50 times two, which is 100 miles a day, to go and visit 
their parents or their grandparents. They were forced, Mr. 
Speaker, to leave their community —miles. And then when you 
want to talk about it, when you're driving that many miles 
you've got that much more risk . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well, members of the opposition says, why are they voting 
against me. Well, Mr. Speaker, I will challenge the member 
opposite to drop his candidacy in his Regina riding and come 
out and challenge me in my riding because, mister, you will be 
as fast out as you were in. 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you something that the 
members of the NDP, the NDP candidates, must think — that 
the people of Saskatchewan are probably as low as low can be, 
because whenever I hear them talk I hear them referring to the 
people of Saskatchewan as ordinary people, some sort of animal 
out there that's ordinary. Well, Mr. Speaker, what about them? 
What about me? Do they not call me ordinary? Do they not call 
themselves ordinary? Are they above it all? 
 
I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that that just doesn't wash any 
more. The younger people and the older people have seen 
through that. They've seen through all this hodgepodge which 
they've been feeding us for years and years, trying to play on 
this motherhood and apple pie stuff when they didn't have it 
here. They had it up here, but they didn't have it here. They 
didn't have it in their heart. They didn't care! They didn't care, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
There isn't one of those members over there that, other than the 
fact of running and winning in the next election, they don't care 
if they do anything for anybody out there. They don't! Because, 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at it just in the aspect of health 
care itself, they stand there and they speak to us in this 
Assembly, and they speak out of one side of the mouth. And 
they say, well, Mr. Speaker, this government is mismanaging 
and we are running a terrible deficit; we'll never see daylight. 
 
But I'll tell you something. I'll tell you something, Mr. Speaker. 
When I go across this province and I see new hospitals being 
erected, and I see new nursing homes being erected, and I see 
new schools being erected, and I see private enterprise taking 
over and they're erecting their building — and they say 2 billion 
deficit. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if we didn't have that 2 billion deficit in this 
province, there wouldn't be the 35,000 new jobs during hard 
times; there would not be 35,000 jobs created in the province of 
Saskatchewan. There would not be these hospitals. There would 
not be the education facilities, etc., etc. You can go right down 
the line; you can list it. 
 
We would not have any type of an economy in this province if 
we were led and being undermined in this province with the 
mentality of the NDP and the NDP Party. Those people stand 
for nothing. If you do nothing, which they've done — and I can 
prove it in my riding — that's exactly what they stand for, is 
nothing. 
 
You know, I don't mind criticism, Mr. Speaker. Criticism builds 
on character; it builds on character and it builds things. Positive 
criticism is an amazing fact that, when you travel through your 
own individual ridings, you'll find that the criticisms, the 
positive criticism that you listen to, like the farmers may be 
talking to you, or accountant, or restaurant waitress, or someone 
giving you, saying, well, can't government do this, or why don't 
you guys do that, you're not doing this, and you're not doing 
that. And you ask them, well, what would you do, what would 
you do? That's what I call open government, and that's what I've 
been doing the last almost four years, Mr. Speaker. I've been 
listening to the people in my 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

 

144 
 

riding. And that's where I say is . . . I will apologize to no one 
for what has happened in my riding. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Two billion dollars in the hole. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Shaunavon 
again brings up the 2 billion in the hole. Well, I want to tell you 
something. Let's just work a little bit into the energy sector, and 
let's go into potash, for instance. Well, you know, Mr. Speaker, 
under their administration, under the NDP administration a few 
years ago, a few years back, we had potash mines being built. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, that's not right. Not one was built 
under the NDP. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Not under the NDP, but they were 
expropriated under the NDP — bought out under the NDP. 
Bought out. That money, the money that they used, that the 
NDP used to purchase those potash mines, Mr. Speaker, if they 
would have used a little bit of common sense, instead of using 
that money, using those public funds and putting them into 
potash mines . . . And instead of leaving the private sector do 
what they do best within that industry, no, they had to take this 
money and they had to put it into those potash mines just by the 
millions — the millions, literally the millions. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what has happened is, in easy figuring —
anybody can figure it. Just take out a pencil and paper and get 
the investments, the millions of dollars investments in those 
potash mines, turn it around, and if they would have taken that 
money and put it in some, you know, just in investments at 10 
per cent, 10 per cent, drawing an interest rate of 10 percent, 
we'd have had well over $2 billion in the heritage fund by now. 
We would have had over 2 billion, in fact in easy figuring — 
you could probably sit down and figure it out — I think it 
comes out to about $2.6 billion in our heritage fund, if they'd 
have just invested that money at 10 per cent instead of buying 
potash mines. 
 
(2030) 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — We wouldn't have had a deficit in the 
province of Saskatchewan. A publicized deficit, Mr. Speaker, a 
publicized deficit, not a hidden one. We never carried a hidden 
one. That's why they're out there speaking, oh boy, there's a real 
deficit here. We got a terrible deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have not . . . If they're such honest birds, if 
they're such honest birds, I have not, I have not seen any of 
them stand in this House and publicly bring in any Crown 
corporation books to say, well we ran this Crown at a deficit 
and we ran this Crown, and that and that and that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's why I wonder sometimes about what this is 
all about, what this Assembly is all about. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP talk about being so righteous, you know. 
They talk about being honest. But I'll tell you something, and 
I'll warn every person in the province of Saskatchewan not to 
turn your back on one of 

those people, especially not one of those that are sitting in this 
House, because I have not heard much of the truth being spoken 
in this House over a period of four years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have no idea what's happening, with their 
mentality, with their way of thinking. But I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that when the member opposite, the member from 
Athabasca, when he was speaking, some couple, few days ago, 
he mentioned the fact about all these oil give-aways that our 
government has . . . all these oil breaks that we've given the 
mega oil companies. Well there again, you see, I listened to him 
and then I listened to the Leader of the Opposition, and the 
stories do not quite jibe. The stories do not quite jibe. One 
speaking that we're giving all the oil companies these massive 
breaks, and they're doing nothing for us in the province of 
Saskatchewan; no job creating, no nothing. 
 
And then you hear the Leader of the Opposition, he says, well 
— and he's speaking to the people, the ordinary people, that 
work within the oilfield areas — and he says, well, yes, that's 
not so bad. That's not so bad, and I guess we . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
So now where is it coming from? Who's saying what? The 
leader is saying, yes, that's a good idea. We'll have to think 
about keeping that thing going like that. And the other fellow is 
saying, let's cut, let's cut, let's not do that. They don't even want 
the upgrader; they don't even want the upgrader in my 
constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There's not one of those individuals over there, not one of those 
NDP individuals over there that are committed to this project in 
the Lloydminster area, in the heavy oilfields —none of them. 
Anything that they've stated in this Assembly, anything, Mr. 
Speaker, that they stated in regards to the oil policy that we 
have developed in the province of Saskatchewan in the last four 
years, anything they said was a total negative and a total 
opposite to what we were trying to do but to create jobs and 
everything else. 
 
What they would sooner see, Mr. Speaker, is big government, 
big bureaucracy — no incentive to the people. They have no 
incentives into the people out there so as that they can work, 
they can go out on their own and make it for themselves — no 
incentives. 
 
These fellows have stood in this House, condemned my leader, 
and in not so nice words, they've called him names. I haven't sat 
in this House here and called their leader any insubordinate type 
of name or anything like that, but they've gotten away with it by 
doing it in this House. 
 
And I want to tell you something. When I look at leaders, at 
leaders of provincial political parties, when I look at that, and I 
look at where the Premier of our province came, and then I look 
at where the Leader of the Opposition came from, Mr. Speaker 
— I think probably he was an in-rooted . . . a growth we found 
from down East. The Leader of the Opposition was some sort of 
a growth that we found from down East and brought him here 
as a bureaucrat and in the prime of this province. And from a 
bureaucrat he goes into being a political leader — some great 
giant. 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

 

145 
 

Well I look at the Premier we have today — a farm boy, 
Saskatchewan-born, Saskatchewan-raised, 
Saskatchewan-educated, farmer, grass-root, right here from the 
province, right here in the prairie, home-grown. And those guys 
want to measure him up against each other. They want to try 
and balance them. That's their big job. That's the NDP's job 
today, boys, to try and balance that little leader right here, you 
know, get him up there a little higher than ours. 
 
Well I want to tell you something. Well I'll tell you something. I 
would sooner vote for a farmer as a leader in this province than 
I would for a bureaucrat as a leader in this province, as a 
professional. I would, and I'll challenge any one of you guys to 
say different. I'll challenge any one of you to stand up in this 
House and say you would not sooner see a Saskatchewan-born 
farmer versus an eastern bureaucrat coming in here to be our 
premier. Yes, I'll challenge any one of you guys. 
 
We build, Mr. Speaker, we build. Through our leader we build 
honesty, integrity, grass-root type of government. We don't 
believe in big government, big bureaucracy. The NDP do, and 
they've got a leader to prove it. Any bureaucrat can build a 
bureaucracy. But a business man knows how to operate a 
business, and our leader is just that kind of an individual. He's a 
business man, and he's operated this province through rough 
times — through rough times. And he's brought it through; he's 
brought it through the tough times, and I'll tell you something. 
It's the first time in years, it's the first time in years we can 
actually say, Mr. Speaker, that we had a man of such calibre in 
our province. 
 
I want to say that we've probably maybe in a lot of cases —and 
maybe it is against the philosophy of some of my far 
right-winger colleagues, but it would set well with some of my 
more left-wing colleagues, sir — but I think we've outsocialized 
the socialists. Because in four years, in four years, Mr. Speaker, 
we've had to spend many, many, many millions, millions of 
dollars on trying to keep the economy of this province flowing, 
and people together, families together. And, Mr. Speaker, these 
are just a few reasons why I don't apologize, I do not apologize 
for the past years, for the deficit. I do not apologize, because 
everything we've done as a government has been above-board, 
has been out there to be highly scrutinized by the public. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with looking and looking at education, 
looking at the young, preparing them for new jobs, for the jobs 
to be; looking at the senior citizens across this province; 
looking at the business people in this province, the 
small-business people which I call big business; looking at the 
expansions we've seen throughout the province in the bad times; 
looking at all these, I can only say to you, Mr. Speaker, that 
you've tolerated a lot of nonsense by listening to the opposition 
over the last four years, by listening to them, their doom and 
gloom stuff. 
 
But I want to thank you for taking the time to bend an ear 
towards us government back-benchers when we get up and 
speak. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I know there's many more of 
my buddy colleagues who would like to 

speak so I'd just like to say that I will be supporting the throne 
speech. Thank you very kindly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — That's a tough act to follow. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, that will indeed, Mr. Speaker. That is 
a chilling act to follow, but I shall try. 
 
I want to, on a note that is conciliatory and non-partisan, I want 
to say good-bye to a couple of members. I may say I hope that I 
am able to say good-bye to a goodly number of members in this 
House. It appears that a couple, however, will be departing in 
any event. One is the member from Rosthern who has been on 
public accounts. I've had the pleasure to work with him. There 
were times when I wished he had been less partisan in his 
approach, but I don't think anybody worked harder or whose 
attendance was better. It has been a pleasure working with that 
member. 
 
I want to say good-bye as well to my seat mate. I have had the 
pleasure of getting to know the member from Cumberland and 
it has been a real pleasure. I also know the New Democratic 
Party candidate in that riding who I expect will win, and I 
expect most members of the House expect will win. He is able 
and conscientious. I have every confidence that he will fulfil the 
role which I'm sure the next election will bring to him. 
 
(2045) 
 
Having said that, however, this House and northern people are 
gong to be poorer for the absence of the present member from 
Cumberland. He has understood their lives, their problems and 
has attempted, and I think with a good deal of proficiency and 
compassion, to bring those problems to the attention of the 
government. With any government who were a bit more 
sensitive than this government, he may have achieved some 
success. 
 
I want to make a comment about the gentlemen on my left, the 
members of the WCC. I wish, Mr. Speaker, they were present 
when I was saying this. I think what has happened is most 
unfortunate. I deny no one the right to cross the floor. Everyone 
that I talk to, members of the public believe that if you cross the 
floor you ought to resign your seat and establish your 
legitimacy. I don't happen to believe that. That would make it 
virtually impossible to cross the floor for the very reason that 
when you do it, you do it in controversy. That isn't always a 
very good atmosphere in which to get re-elected. But while 
defending their right to cross the floor, I'm critical of the system 
which allows them to pick up a third party grant. These two 
members have in effect crawled into a hollow shell of a party. 
They don't pretend to support the principles of that party. They 
admit quite openly they did it to get $140,000. I, Mr. Speaker, 
don't think that's an appropriate use of the rules of this House. 
 
I am mollified somewhat by the fact that it apparently isn't 
going to carry on very long. We are apparently facing a general 
election. That makes the whole thing . . . That removes some of 
the bad taste in my mouth, since I don't expect either one of 
them will be back; and if they are, 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

 

146 
 

then they've a perfect right in what they're requesting. 
 
But I do think the abuse of the system — and I cannot describe 
it any other terms — the abuse of the system by these two 
members who crawled into a hollow shell of a party, which they 
don't pretend to believe in, for the sole purpose of picking 
$140,000 should not be repeated, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And I say, Mr. Speaker, that after the 
election, in an atmosphere which may be both more sane and 
more civilized, I think this House is going to have to deal with 
the problem which those two gentlemen have brought to our 
attention in such an unfortunate fashion. 
 
I want to make one other comment, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
congratulate our Clerk Assistant, Gwenn Ronyk, on an addition 
to the family. I think we are all delighted at this and wish her 
the very best. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to make a comment, Mr. Speaker, 
about the deficit. I want to express alarm — I guess I can't put it 
in any other fashion — at the manner in which this government 
has handled the province's finances. 
 
While the deficit is not as large in absolute terms or even the 
per capita terms, and while the deficit does not consume as 
large a portion of the budget in paying the interest as the federal 
deficit, nevertheless, the rapidity with which this deficit is 
growing is a cause for alarm. 
 
This province's credit rating has been lowered twice in the last 
two years. We are going to be very, very fortunate if it isn't 
lowered again this year, Mr. Speaker. To have this province’s 
credit rating lowered three times in three years ought to be a 
cause for alarm. What it means is that the international experts 
are saying to us what I think many of the people in this province 
already understand, that this is too much — this is just too 
much. 
 
We are facing an accumulated deficit, I gather, of about $1.4 
billion — $1.45 billion, if the various figures which the 
Minister of Finance gives us from time to time can be believed. 
Heaven only knows what it's going to be at the end of the next 
fiscal year when we see the budget Wednesday night. I think 
most people expect that the real deficit will be well over $2 
billion. That's $2,000 for every man, woman, and child in this 
province. That's all been accumulated in a space of four years. 
That, Mr. Speaker, is just simply not an acceptable way to run a 
government. 
 
The deficit, if it is the size which I predict it will be, it will be, 
Mr. Speaker, the largest per capita deficit west of the Maritimes 
— that in a province which four years ago had no deficit at all. 
Now that, Mr. Speaker, ought to be a cause for alarm. This is 
not simply a philosophical argument about to what extent 
borrowings ought to finance ongoing operations. This is a 
discussion about a 

government which has proved to be completely and utterly 
irresponsible with the public purse. I hear people saying, Mr. 
Speaker, that if something isn't done we'll all be broke. It's a bit 
alarmist, but it's not a lot alarmist. It is not a lot. That in fact is 
what the bond dealers are saying as well. If you do not do 
something about your deficit, you are going to be broke. Ah ha, 
we'll see what it is next year. I say to the member from 
Saskatoon Centre, we'll just see what it is next year. I will make 
a prediction that the real deficit of this province next on per 
capita terms will be higher than it is in Manitoba. And their 
deficit, their cumulative deficit was accumulated over many 
years. This problem has arisen over four years. To be fair, it is 
partially a result of a deteriorating economy. But to be fair as 
well, this deficit comes about because of a highly irresponsible 
election campaign. A highly irresponsible campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am . . . Well I can say to the member from 
Saskatoon Mayfair, whether or not I wished we had been in 
power over the last four years, I'll tell you there's a lot of people 
in Saskatchewan wish we had been in office over the last four 
years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — There's a lot of people wished, and I say to 
the member from Lloydminster, there is a lot of people who 
wished that the bureaucrat, as you incorrectly styled him, had 
been in charge of this province’s affairs, who is, I think, a 
skilled administrator. There's a lot of people that wished they 
had had a skilled administrator at the helm rather than a 
cheer-leader. And that is what, unfortunately, the last election 
brought us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whatever party forms the next government after 
the election, this deficit is going to have to be dealt with. I just 
wish members opposite would be a little more responsible in 
their communications with the public. In suggesting that they 
don't have to worry about the deficit, they are denying reality. 
Whoever forms the government after the next election is going 
to have to deal with it. 
 
I want to make some comments as well, Mr. Speaker, about free 
trade. I want to state what I believe to be the position of the 
New Democratic Party. As is the case . . . Well I'm glad the 
member from Kindersley is paying attention. As is the case, I 
think, with all political parties, there are varying views about a 
subject this complex. It is partially because of the sheer 
complexity of the question; partially because of the 
emotionalism of the question. I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
what we are four-square against. This party stands four-square 
against the kind of free trade, the unrestricted free trade 
espoused by the Premier. Mr. Speaker, we do not believe that a 
completely free trade, with all things moving unencumbered 
between the borders, is in the best interest of this country. I 
know for a fact that most Americans don't believe it's in the best 
interests of their country. What the Premier advocates is some 
sort of a nirvana in which all goods move free and everyone's 
wealthier. I say, Mr. Speaker, that if the Premier had been . . . 
had received a Canadian rather than an American education, he 
might have profited by the experience of some others who have 
advocated it. 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

 

147 
 

I would remind the Premier that one of Canada's greatest Prime 
Ministers, Sir Wilfred Laurier, lost not one but two elections on 
this issue. He lost an election in 1891, and then 20 years later 
when he'd forgotten the lessons of history, he lost another one 
in 1911 on the issue of reciprocity. And I say to the Premier of 
Saskatchewan, if you want to make the free trade that you 
believe to be an election issue, then you're going to lose the 
1986 election. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that while . . . Canadians, I think, have an 
ambivalent relationship with Americans. I think most 
Canadians appreciate the fact that we live next to a benevolent 
neighbour, whose sheer size could render us impotent in the 
face of the American colossus as Afghanistan or 
Czechoslovakia is in the face of the Soviet colossus. 
 
This is not the way we have been treated. We have been treated, 
Mr. Speaker, with dignity and we have flourished as a 
neighbour of the American nation. I think most Canadians 
genuinely appreciate that. And most Canadians genuinely 
would not trade the Americans as a neighbour for any other. 
 
Having said all that, Canadians do not want to be Americans, 
and they're nervous about any government which runs the risk 
of that happening. Free trade, with the loss of so many 
institutions which are important to this nation, Mr. Speaker, is 
an anathema. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The CBC. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, if you . . . The member from 
Kindersley seems to believe that the CBC is some kind of 
useless appendage. I say, Mr. Speaker, that this country has 
developed a communication system which is the envy of most 
nations in the world who understand it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Integral to that, and the feat is all the 
greater because it has been done over one of the most sparsely 
settled countries in the world, integral to that communication 
system is the CBC. While all of us, Mr. Speaker, are able to 
criticize the public network, nevertheless this would be a very 
different and a very much poorer nation without the public 
broadcasting system. 
 
I will mention, as well, the wheat board. If the kind of free trade 
which is espoused by the Premier, as he does in absolute terms, 
were accepted, such institutions as the wheat board would also 
go by the way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of the New Democratic Party, members 
of this caucus, believe that there may be much to be gained by a 
freer trade between the U.S. and Canada. There are many areas 
where we may benefit by a freer trade. I mentioned short-line 
machinery as an area in which we've done very well. There are, 
no doubt, areas where they might benefit from freer trade. And I 
would hope, Mr. Speaker, that both sides would make an effort 
to find those areas where it is of mutual advantage and stop 
clouding the issue with rhetoric, which alarms people and does 
no justice at all to the issue. 

So I say, Mr. Speaker, we are in favour of a freer trade where it 
is to our mutual advantage. We reject out of hand the free trade 
as it's described in absolute terms. I also think that one might be 
critical of the approach which this government has and the 
Ottawa government has taken, with respect to free trade. Both 
have, I think, done a very poor job of bargaining. 
 
A rancher in Coronach, I thought, put it to me rather well. He 
said that, and this is almost a direct quote, when you're horse 
trading with the Yanks, you're dealing with some shrewd 
traders. You don't give away anything that you don't have to. 
You don't walk up to them and say, this is a great horse; how 
much is it? You have a look at the horse first of all, and if you 
think it's a good horse you keep that to yourself. And you try to 
get it for as fair a price as you can. Because you don't have to 
worry about the Yanks looking after themselves. 
 
And what he was describing, I think, is accurate. I think that is 
the way the Mulroney government approached this issue. They 
have approached it with . . . Conservatives in this country have 
approached this issue by saying, it's a great thing. We can do 
nothing but benefit. What's it going to cost us? That is just a 
very poor way to enter into negotiations. 
 
The rancher in Coronach is right. It is a terrible way to buy a 
horse. And it is an equally poor way to enter into a negotiation 
for something as complex as free trade. 
 
The government, I think, did not adequately examine the issue 
to determine to what extent it is in our best interest and to what 
extent it isn't. Having failed to examine the animal, they then 
embraced it in glowing terms. 
 
(2100) 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that the best we could hope for is that those 
who are doing the negotiating on our behalf will learn as they 
go along. They've proved to the benefit of most thoughtful 
observers that they didn't learn very much and didn't know very 
much about the subject when they entered into the discussion. 
 
I want to make some comments, Mr. Speaker, about the 
workers' compensation. I'm interested to know that the Minister 
of Labour may be following me. I hope he will find time to 
address some of the problems which have arisen with respect to 
workers' compensation. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, is an old movie. I recall, in the dying days of 
the Thatcher regime, a problem which recurred again and again 
and again was workers' compensation. The reasons, which I 
never understood . . . At least one of the members opposite is 
reading some useful literature. Mr. Speaker, I see one of them 
opposite reading an NDP pamphlet, so one of them is going to 
get something out of the evening. Mr. Speaker, in the dying 
years of the Thatcher government, for reasons that I never 
understood, the adjustment of the claims of injured workers got 
more and more niggardly. More and more just claims were 
denied. And it was a problem, and it was one of the very serious 
problems which we had to deal 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

 

148 
 

with after 1971. 
 
We see the same phenomenon starting again, Mr. Speaker. I see 
a very large number of complaints, Mr. Speaker. The volume of 
complaints which I have received from injured workers over the 
last few months may well be the largest single source of 
complaints. Some of them are undeniably . . . have legitimate 
complaints. 
 
One of the things the Workers' Compensation Board is doing is 
to deem people capable of earning a certain amount of income. 
They deem a worker to be capable of earning a certain income. 
And it is done arbitrarily. There is no appeal from the system. 
The worker has no real right of redress, and then he loses that 
amount. 
 
Some injured workmen, Mr. Speaker, have taken to publicizing 
their complaints in what I think is a novel but a very illustrative 
fashion. In the March 4th edition of The Regina Shopper the 
following advertisement appears: 
 

Job wanted. Saskatchewan injured work association requires 
employment for a male, early 50s. Education: public school 
graduate. Previous experience: landscaping and excavating 
contractor. Physical restrictions: specialist reports cannot 
bend forward or sideways; sitting and walking time limited. 
Job requirement: minimum, eight hours per day at 6.70. 

 
The ad was put in the paper, not that the person who it describes 
— whom I happen to know on a first-name basis . . . The ad 
was put in the paper, not because there was any hope that 
anyone would answer such an advertisement, of a man whose 
sitting and walking time is limited, who cannot bend forward or 
sideways. Obviously, a public school graduate with those 
qualifications has no hope of getting a job. 
 
That's all he actually meant to illustrate, and that accurately 
describes him, I might say. Someone whose physical qualities 
are such as that has no hope of getting a job — would have, I 
think, very little hope of getting a job if there were a zero 
unemployment rate and jobs were going begging. 
 
It is even more preposterous to suggest that in this atmosphere a 
person such as this can get a job. And yet out of his allowance 
from the workers' compensation is deducted a sum equal to 
eight hours per day at $7.60. That's deducted from his work, 
from his allowance, because he is deemed capable of earning 
that. He is patently not capable of earning that. And I say, Mr. 
Speaker, that any system which would treat fellow human 
beings in such a harsh fashion should make us all ashamed. 
 
I want to read another ad for another job wanted: 
 

Saskatchewan injured work association requires employment 
for a male. Age: early 50s. Education: public school graduate. 
Specialist reports 30 per cent compression fracture, T9 
vertebrae. Degenerative bone disease with little movement in 
cervical area. Cannot bend forward or sideways. Sitting time 
limited. 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, the advertisement was put in The 
Regina Shopper, not that this person had any hope of getting a 
job, but because they wanted to illustrate how absurd it was and 
that workmen who have injuries such as that should be deemed 
capable of earning $6 . . . The member from Prince Albert looks 
puzzled, as well he should be. Such a system makes no sense 
whatsoever. It would make no sense if it were suggested that 
he's capable of earning the minimum wage. But to suggest that 
such a person is capable of $6.70 is patently ridiculous. 
 
I pick, Mr. Speaker, one illustration of the manner in which 
injured workmen have been denied what is justly and fairly 
theirs. This is not tax dollars that they go begging for. This is 
something which they . . . This is money which in a sense 
belongs to them. As I think all members will know —and the 
member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake ought to —many, many 
decades ago, when the workmen's compensation legislation was 
introduced, each side gave up something. Workers gave up the 
right to sue their employers; the employers gained freedom 
from legal suits but in turn had to pay into a fund to provide 
compensation. So it is something that they earned; it is 
something that really in every sense belongs to them. 
 
The fund in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is solvent. There is no 
reason to be denying these claims on the basis of the amount in 
the fund. I simply cannot figure out why this government is 
being so harsh — cruel is not too strong a word — so cruel to a 
group of people who have no means of defending themselves 
except to carry on the type of campaign which they are and 
which I hope brings some fruit. 
 
I can say to injured workmen and to others across the province 
that in the upcoming general election, if there is a change in 
government, injured workmen are going to be treated 
differently. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — We will see to it, Mr. Speaker, that the 
money which is in the fund is made available to them. We will 
not be hoarding it for whatever ulterior purpose the government 
may have. We will see that they get fair and reasonable 
allowance and we'll see that they are treated with dignity. We 
will see, Mr. Speaker that the contract which was entered into 
so many decades ago is honoured. 
 
I want to make a comment, Mr. Speaker, about the health care 
system . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member wants 
to know something about Crown corporations. He needs to 
learn a bit. Given his performance as minister of Finance, he 
needs to learn a bit about corporations and finance. I can well 
understand why the member from Kindersley wants to learn 
something. He's no doubt smarting from his obvious lack of 
knowledge about public finance. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Is that the guy with the most intelligent 
budget? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Indeed it was. Someone asked if that 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

 

149 
 

was the author of the province's most intelligent budget. He was 
the author. After that budget, Mr. Speaker, I can well 
understand why the member from Kindersley wants a lesson in 
public administration. 
 
I say to the member from Kindersley that we are a little pressed 
at the moment, getting ready for what appears to be a general 
election. However, you're going to have a lot more time after 
the election, and I think these lessons could well be absorbed 
after the election when you're going to have all kinds of free 
time — all kinds of time to spend on your studies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, about 40 per cent of my constituency, by our 
calculations — by no scientific survey, but by our calculations 
— about 40 per cent of my constituency is on welfare. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to say something about the plight of people 
who are on welfare. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we received some rumours that welfare reform 
was coming in the spring of 1984. What we heard turned out to 
be substantially accurate. I said to the person who told me, I just 
don't believe it. I just don't believe anyone would do something 
that irresponsible. As it turned out, they did. And during the 
spring of 1984 we debated welfare reform. 
 
I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, when the federal election came and I 
began to canvass in earnest every evening, I began to 
understand what welfare reform meant. As I met one hungry 
face after another in my riding, then I began to understand what 
welfare means. Welfare means stark hunger for people on 
welfare. 
 
I see members opposite grinning. I say to you, if you want to 
dispute it, I'd be happy to engage in that debate. I just make one 
request: that you come on a tour with me of my riding before 
you enter the debate. You don’t have to make any admissions; 
you don't have to do anything. You simply have to come and 
have a look for yourself. And then, Mr. Speaker, when that 
happens, they won't be quite as ready to deny the fact of hunger. 
Of course hunger exists in this city. Go down, Mr. Speaker, and 
look at the food bank. Just have a look at the load they are 
asked to carry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is supposedly a Christian society, one of the 
teachings of which is that we should love our brother. I have 
always believed, Mr. Speaker, that charity was an important 
part of our faith. And I cannot believe, Mr. Speaker, that the 
type of situation which we have in this province where people 
are unnecessarily denied enough to eat, I simply cannot believe 
that that is in accordance with anyone's religious faith. I simply 
can't believe that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I can only assume that members opposite are ignorant; I can 
only assume that they are ignorant of what welfare reform has 
actually done to people. It has caused hunger. 
 
It is no secret, Mr. Speaker, that the rate of property crimes 
increased drastically within a few months after welfare reform 
was brought in. And I would think the reasons for that are fairly 
obvious. Policemen tell me that they now have incidents of 
thefts of nothing but food. The police tell me that there are 
thefts of nothing but food. Mr. 

Speaker, one of the most tragic victims of this government's 
insensitivity, its inability to manage public affairs, and its total 
incompetence, one of the most tragic victims are those who are 
on welfare, the people who are most susceptible and least able 
to defend themselves. I say, Mr. Speaker, that I simply can't 
believe if members opposite knew what welfare reform had 
done to those on welfare that present policies would continue in 
effect. 
 
I am waiting with some considerable interest to find out what 
was meant in the throne speech by the suggestion that work 
would be found for people on welfare. If, indeed, meaningful 
employment can be found, then that is a giant step forward. It's 
going to be fairly challenging because this government hasn't 
managed to find work for a wide variety of people, including 
those on welfare. 
 
With an 8 per cent unemployment, it is not easy to believe that 
this government is going to find work for everybody on welfare. 
If it means, Mr. Speaker, that this province is going to have 
chain gangs, the sort of pick and shovel gangs that existed in the 
'30s, whereby people did meaningless work simply to punish 
them for a problem which they didn't create and which they 
can't solve, then I say, Mr. Speaker, that that again ought to be 
beneath the dignity of any political party in this province. So as 
I say, I wait with bated breath to find out what was meant. It 
may have been simply a bit of red neckism. They may have 
simply been taking a swipe at people on welfare because their 
polls tell them that's good politics. People don't have a lot of 
sympathy for people on welfare. The general public believe it's 
their fault. 
 
I pray, Mr. Speaker, that that's all it was. It was simply a bit of 
red neckism on the part of this government. I hope that there is 
no serious suggestion and no serious policy that people who are 
on welfare are going to be given meaningless work to do solely 
to punish them for a problem which is not their creation. 
 
As is the case with many members opposite, members of this 
caucus have been travelling around the province. Mr. Speaker, 
one of the problems which we run into everywhere is health 
care. The Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, who I think is doing 
an excellent job of publicizing a problem that they are 
genuinely concerned about . . . They didn't in any sense create 
the problem which is what members opposite obviously think. 
The problem, Mr. Speaker, was there long before the nurses 
began to articulate the problem as eloquently as they have. 
 
(2115) 
 
This province has a level of staff care in hospitals which is 
downright dangerous. We have all heard the stories of people 
falling and injuring themselves because there was no one to 
help them, of people being unable to get help when they need it. 
So far . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I say to the member from 
Prince Albert-Duck Lake, if he denies that’s the case, you might 
try talking to some of the people in your riding. The member 
from Regina North West and I had the opportunity to do that 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You're going to go back 
tomorrow. Well, tomorrow's none too soon to get back to your 
riding and do some work. The member from Regina North East 
and I 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

 

150 
 

did that, and I'll tell you the problem is as prevalent in your 
riding as it is everywhere else. The level of health care and the 
level of staffing in our hospitals, Mr. Speaker, has reached a 
dangerous level. 
 
Quite apart from the main problem that people are not getting 
the sort of health care that they deserve, and which 
Saskatchewan people demand, I will admit that in the area of 
health care, Saskatchewan people are more demanding than 
other provinces. Some of the situations which exist in other 
provinces people of Saskatchewan won't accept. Nor should 
they. People of Saskatchewan were the first ones to understand 
that we didn't have to accept or put up with second-rate health 
care. We didn't have to put up with health care that was 
available to some people and not to others. 
 
People of this province were the first ones to make a decision 
that we could collectively, together, provide a high standard of 
health care for all. So if there are worse horror stories at 
Montreal or in some other community, as I gather there are, that 
doesn't make much of an impression on Saskatchewan people. 
Saskatchewan people will tell you that they have higher 
standards, and they demand something better than Conservative 
governments in other provinces dish out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, apart from the fact that people aren't getting the 
kind of health care which they deserve, we risk a tragedy. The 
level of health care in our hospitals is dangerous, and something 
very serious is going to occur if this government doesn't do 
something about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do not yet know what, if anything, the 
announcement made by the Minister of Health about a month 
ago, or three weeks ago, is actually going to mean to hospitals. 
He hasn't given any details, nor was he . . . and he was every bit 
as reticent when he was in the House the other day when we 
were trying to get some details out of him as to exactly what it 
meant. 
 
There are, Mr. Speaker, a number of cynical people who might 
be called realists, as well, who believe that what was announced 
is nothing more than was announced previously. And that this is 
simply the reannouncement of a program that was announced in 
the last budget. It was about $50 million, as I recall it, for 
additional staff care in the previous budget. There are those who 
believe that this may well be nothing but a reannouncement of 
the same issue. 
 
I see the member from Saskatoon Centre is a bit sensitive. You 
well ought to be with the kind of riding which you have; you 
ought well to be sensitive about it, Mr. Speaker. A little late to 
get sensitive about it. You should have got sensitive about it 
when you were in cabinet and had some influence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the level of health care that this government has 
provided is simply not adequate. It is certainly not accepted. 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses is doing an excellent job of 
articulating the problem, but, Mr. Speaker, they are simply 
telling the public something they already know. And that is that 
the level of health care is just simply not adequate. 

Mr. Speaker, I have a number of other comments which I'd 
wanted to make. In fairness, the members opposite did attempt 
to co-operate, with some interference from their own benches, 
they did attempt to co-operate in getting myself on time, and I 
will not take up any more of the members opposite's time. I 
think it's obvious, Mr. Speaker, from what I've said, that I will 
be voting against the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, it was interesting to hear 
the throne speech read to us the other day. It was lengthy, and 
that's because it was so full of important information and 
changes and policies that this government is going to 
implement. 
 
But first of all, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to break a rule and I 
think, if you'll be patient, it's justifiable. I want to use the names 
of members who are retiring because I think their names could 
be read. If you stop me I'll stick to their constituencies, but I 
don't think it will be quite as significant. I think at least the 
name of Ralph Katzman should be mentioned. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order please. Naming members by their name 
is not allowed in the Chamber, even at this time. I'd ask the 
member to refrain. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, I will still honour these members, 
Mr. Speaker, but according to the technicality of the rules. The 
member for Rosthern has served long and well here. He has 
been a credit to this Assembly. He has shown that any person, 
no matter what their occupation, can come here and serve well. 
 
The same applies to the member for Moosomin. He is a farmer 
by background, and he's come here and spoke like a statesman. 
And the member for Cumberland has come here and 
represented his people well, and has given us their point of 
view. 
 
I also want to mention the member for Regina South has served 
long, and has represented the city when there was very little 
representation for large parts of this city. 
 
I want to mention the former minister of highways who did a 
very good job and worked very long and hard. These are all 
people who are retiring voluntarily, including the member for 
Saskatoon Eastview and the member for Saskatoon Fairview 
and the member for Regina Wascana. All of these people are 
retiring voluntarily. I want to thank them for serving their 
province and giving a sacrifice to their families to benefit this 
province. 
 
Now there will be other members who may retire not so 
voluntarily, and we can get into a debate on which side of the 
House they are on. But I'm sure there will be few on this side of 
the House, Mr. Speaker, because this government is a 
government for the people. The members opposite say, we are 
for the people, but they don't represent all of the people. They 
say, we are for this special interest group; we are for that special 
interest group. They are always for a minority, but minorities, 
while they have to be taken care of, do not build a province. 
Minorities do not lead a province, and 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

 

151 
 

minorities do not always create jobs, so one has to be 
compassionate and help the special interest groups that they 
represent. They will always represent a minority. This 
government has to represent the general population of this 
province and take into account all issues. Therefore, most of the 
members on this side will be back, and those that are not back 
will be replaced, and I expect we'll have many, many members 
on this side. 
 
Now I have a great deal of experience with the NDP, and if 
anyone knows their mentality it certainly is myself. And what 
really concerns me is that they try to spread their mentality to 
the general population. That mentality spreads like a disease 
and is definitely not good for this province because, if anything, 
their mentality can be described in a nutshell — it's a loser 
attitude. Their attitude is that, oh, I'm working, but someone 
else is getting money; or I don't have to work because someone 
else will take care of me; or oh, I am poor, so somebody should 
hand me money. Their attitude is not that everyone should do 
their part to the best of their ability, but no, we are the 
downtrodden NDP and you have to follow us because we are 
being downtrodden by the great majority. What majority? So 
they go around saying to people, you are poor, you are poor, 
you are poor. And after a while the people become poor in 
spirit. Certainly there are some poor people, but to spread such 
a loser attitude among this province has been a disservice to this 
province for over 45 years. 
 
I remember their party, and it was truly a paranoid attitude, like, 
somebody is out to get us — someone is out to get us. And I 
remember the words, the only words that John Diefenbaker ever 
spoke to me, when he gave me my law degree, he said, do well, 
young man. He didn't say, you are poor, somebody will take 
care of you. He didn't say, loaf, the government will feed you. 
He said, do well, young man. And then in contrast in the NDP 
Party there was sort of a paranoid attitude. Somebody is out to 
get us — somebody is out to get us. Spreading fear and a 
negative attitude, and it did nothing to build this province. And 
while the population of Alberta doubled under the Social Credit 
and the Conservatives, the population of Saskatchewan stayed 
the same for 35 or 40 years. The population of British Columbia 
more than doubled, but the population of Saskatchewan stayed 
the same. It was a problem of attitude. The population of 
Manitoba with the attitude they have recently displayed has also 
stayed the same for years and years. And that's the problem. It's 
a matter of attitude. 
 
Tell me, members opposite . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . My 
name is Schmidt and I have a German background. Tell me 
why that in East Germany, if all they have is sports and very 
few consumer goods, and West Germany with the same people 
and the same blood and the same religion and the same 
language is twice as prosperous. It is because they do not have a 
losing attitude in the West. They have a losing attitude in the 
East. And these people represent a losing attitude. And the 
province is never going to go ahead. It was going to crawl for 
ever and ever with their type of attitude. 
 
Now in contrast, the Progressive Conservative party has a 
winning attitude, and the attitude is such that if you are capable 
doing something for yourself, you should do 

something for yourself, and that you can go out and change the 
world, rather than the world controlling you. And you can go 
out and build, and when you build, you build jobs. And jobs is 
what people want, not hand-outs. So therefore I suggest to the 
people of this province that you have to have a winning attitude, 
a Progressive Conservative attitude, rather than a losing attitude 
as exemplified by the NDP. 
 
And not only do they have a losing attitude, but they can't add. 
They can subtract; they can subtract from the well-being of this 
province, but they can't add. And therefore they say, well what 
about the deficit? The deficit is getting out of control. And we 
have a solution for deficit, they say. The NDP solution: spend 
more money. They don't tell you about their hidden agenda. 
Tax, tax, tax. Their motto is: double the taxes, triple the taxes. 
And they did just that. 
 
From 1971 to 1982, the NDP doubled the taxes in this province, 
and if they are re-elected, they will triple the taxes without any 
qualms of conscience whatsoever. Because they can't add. And 
they have only three choices. They say we don't want a deficit, 
increased spending. Then give us the third one. Tell us how 
you're going to raise taxes. Tell us how you're going to tax 
people on unemployment. Tell us how you're going to tax on 
gasoline. Tell us how you're going to tax . . . 
 
Your party even wants to put on currency restrictions in this 
country so that Canadians cannot trade across the border. Not 
only are you against trade, you want to put currency 
restrictions. You want to have people not even allowed to take 
their children to Disneyland. That is the losing attitude that you 
people represent. You want everyone equal — you want 
everyone equally poor. I don't believe in that kind of equality. I 
believe that everyone should have a chance, a chance to 
improve themselves and a chance to build up a future. That is 
the philosophy of our party. 
 
(2130) 
 
And what is really disappointing is that, according to you 
people, we have a class system in this country. And that is quite 
true; we do have a class system. We have an affluent class, and 
we have a middle class, and we have a poor class. But I can tell 
you who you represent: the unrealistic people that I call a 
whining class. 
 
You represent everyone in this province who wants to whine 
about something rather than work to build this province. So 
every time this government comes up with something positive, 
you start your whining. And then you spread your whining 
across the province, and you implore everyone, whine with us; 
whine about this and whine about that; never build anything. 
 
Oh, we got to whine about the deficit, and we got to whine 
about the taxes, and we got whine about the increase. But 
nobody ever talks about work. That's a dirty word in the NDP. 
Nobody ever talks about work. Nobody ever talks about saving 
money. Nobody ever talks about building anything. We will 
share; we will all whine together to the poor-house —that's your 
philosophy. 
  



 
March 24, 1986 

 

152 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I have a lengthy 
discussion here. And the members opposite are losing their 
concentration, and I'm sure that they have to regenerate 
themselves. And you know, even whining takes energy, and the 
whining party has to get out and whine. So for that reason, Mr. 
Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:31 p.m. 
 
 
 


