




















































April 14, 1986 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 14, 1986 
 

585 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, when we left off at 5 we were 
asking the minister some questions about liquor advertising and 
the changes in policy that came about after the ’82 election. And 
the minister will know full well that the relaxation of the laws 
affecting booze advertising in the province followed, I think, 
relatively quickly upon the election of the Conservative 
government in 1982. 
 
And the question that I want to ask the minister: if he can give 
me the date when that change occurred. We’ll start there, and 
then I’ve got some questions that will follow. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — November ’83 is the date that is brought to 
my attention. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — So it’s November of 1983 when the change 
occurred. And what changes actually took place then? It was 
allowed on TV, on in-province TV stations. What other changes 
took place in terms of allowing liquor advertising in the 
province? Can you outline briefly the changes that were 
undertaken then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, speaking . . . As you well 
know, we were not the department that regulated this at all. But 
it was basically that beer and wine would be advertised and the 
ad shall not be that that encourages use or abuse of liquor; the 
advertisement shall not contain family scenes or minors or 
involve the operation of motor vehicles; the advertisement shall 
not contain endorsements by a celebrity; and manufacturers shall 
devote 15 per cent of their total advertising to educational 
messages which promote public awareness of provincial liquor 
laws, moderation and responsible use of alcohol, and the 
consequences of drinking and driving. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could as well 
tell me, when the changes were brought about, and governments 
make changes like this, there’s usually lobby groups that come 
forward and offer up their opinion as to why the changes should 
occur. And I understand the people who produce alcohol and sell 
it and make fantastic profits on the sales of alcohol would be 
pushing for it; the people who do the advertising, as the former 
minister of Energy would well imagine, would want to have it 
expanded. What other groups in the province were pushing for 
an expansion of the booze advertising at the time the changes 
were made in 1983? Can you give me a list of the . . . Were there 
nurses or health people, anyone pushing for that kind of a 
change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I wouldn’t be able to tell you who the 
lobbying groups were, because of course I wasn’t the minister 
responsible for making the decisions or doing the negotiations 
with the television stations. You’d have to ask that to the 
appropriate minister, who’s the minister in charge of the Liquor 
Board. I don’t know who the lobbyist  

groups would be. To me, as minister, I didn’t have lobby groups 
coming to me. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I wonder, as Minister of Health, in 
your discussions with other cabinet colleagues and in particular 
the minister who would be in charge of making the decisions, did 
you make an argument against liquor advertising at the time? I 
kind of think that any minister of Health would argue against the 
expansion of a liquor market or the pushing of a narcotic or a 
booze or cigarettes. I’m sure that any minister of Health would 
argue against it. There must have been countering arguments to 
say, look, we should be expanding it. 
 
What were the arguments within your government that said we 
should be expanding alcohol advertising? And what groups were 
you made aware of, or did you sort of ignore the whole issue and 
then just plan to deal with the results of it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The member opposite knows real well that 
one does not disclose what goes on in cabinet or in caucus. Those 
are conversations and discussions that take place and there’s such 
things as confidentiality, that we don’t discuss what goes on. 
Maybe they did when they were in government, but certainly we 
do not. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I’ll tell you, we did have very open 
debates on such things as liquor advertising. And it was a public 
policy that we were opposed to it. And I can well understand why 
the minister is hedging on this one. 
 
But I would like to ask you, as Minister of Health, what your 
position is on liquor advertising. Are you in favour of it, or 
opposed to it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly when I look at, consumption 
is down; there’s no indication to show that consumption has gone 
up, in fact it has gone down; accidents are down; there’s some 
positive advertisement that there never was before. 
 
Safe Grads, and I see schools, and I congratulate Shellbrook, 
Cochrane again, schools that are electing to have complete 
liquor-free graduations. 
 
And I indicated to the alcohol commission that we would be 
monitoring the use of alcohol, and especially by minors. And I 
must say that any of the evidence indicates that the advertising 
did not bring about an increase in consumption. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I would like to ask the minister again, 
because he refuses to answer the question, what your position as 
Health minister is on alcohol advertising. Are you in favour of 
the expanded advertising on TV of beer and wine? Or are you on 
the side of nurses and health care givers who say that it’s a bad 
idea? 
 
What I would like you to do is to stand here and explain to the 
Assembly what your position is. Are you in favour of advertising 
alcohol, or are you opposed to it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — All I can say, that if consumption patterns 
are going down, traffic accidents are going  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

 

586 
 

down, and the positive ads are having an impact — and the 
alcohol commission indicate to me that that is happening in 
Saskatchewan — then I must say that I do not see any adverse 
consequences coming from the change in policy. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — So then, Mr. Minister, people who are 
listening closely to direction from this government — and I say 
this is a discussion that is going on across Canada and across the 
United States, dealing with liquor advertising — you would fit 
into the column of expanding liquor advertising, and you see no 
problem with it. I want to get that clear. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, Mr. Chairman. I indicated that what I 
had seen in the area of the country that I’m responsible for health 
care, that consumption is going down, accidents are going down, 
that people are being subjected to positive type of 
advertisements; then I must say that I don’t think the situation in 
Saskatchewan has deteriorated. In fact, I believe it has gone the 
other way. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, the minister is certainly not jumping 
up with his answer to the question of whether or not he supports 
the expanded liquor advertising in the province, and for the 
fourth time I will ask you to go on record either in support of or 
opposed to liquor advertising. Because that’s what many people 
in the country are asking, is whether it’s the government policy 
and the minister is clean on this issue, or you’re in there with the 
rest of them promoting the consumption of alcohol. 
 
And I would ask you clearly once again: are you in favour of the 
expanded advertising program in the area of alcohol, or are you 
opposed to it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, once again I indicate that 
when you see that the consumption is going down, that there are 
educational ads that there never were before, that the stations are 
putting on more than the 15 per cent, that the impact upon young 
people is that they are electing to have expanded Safe Grad 
projects, that the Christmas advertising in alcohol is having a 
tremendous impact upon driving procedures — accidents are 
down — then I think what we’re doing in Saskatchewan is 
probably quite acceptable. And I cite as an instance for that, Mr. 
Chairman, the fact that the federal government of Canada are 
following almost to a T Saskatchewan’s lead. You don’t see any 
sports celebrities, you don’t see moving vehicles, things of this 
nature. There are strict guide-lines in Saskatchewan. 
 
And when I see, Mr. Chairman, that the rest of Canada is 
following the lead of Saskatchewan, then I think that indicates to 
me and the other people of Saskatchewan that many of the bogy 
men that the member opposite would like to raise, the same old 
scare tactics, the same old negativism that has been with that 
party since 1971, continues to persist. But when you look at the 
facts, when the consumption of raw spirits is less than it was in 
1978 when they were the government, then I think the policies 
that we have instituted are certainly taking effect. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I wonder if the minister could inform 
the Assembly whether he has the same approach  

to the advertising of cigarettes. Do you feel that if cigarette 
advertising were expanded that it would have the same impact of 
reducing the number of cigarettes smoked by people in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I explained about the cigarettes before 
supper. I’m proud to say that again Saskatchewan is the leader in 
Canada on non-smoking initiatives. We have certainly reduced 
smoking, I believe, more than any other province. I see others are 
following the lead. 
 
I cited before supper about the by-law that is presently before the 
city of Vancouver. And certainly there’s been a great reduction 
in the use of tobacco. I’ve had many discussions with young 
people. I cite again the schools that we’re all very proud of. I 
think I personally have signed in the neighbourhood of 15 to 
1,800 non-smoking certificates, ministerial commendations, to 
people congratulating them on taking this step to better ensure 
their health for the future. 
 
So I think there have been a number of things that have happened 
in Saskatchewan that have reduced the smoking amongst our 
population. And although I don’t profess to be a prophet, Mr. 
Chairman, I think that in the future we’re going to see a great deal 
more of this. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder if the minister could answer the 
question that was put to him: whether or not if a cigarette lobby 
approaches you to do expanded advertising in the province 
whether you will agree with it the way you did with liquor 
advertising. You say on the part of liquor advertising that you 
don’t believe that it has increased consumption. And there would 
be many people in the advertising who would argue that point 
with you because basically companies advertise to increase 
consumption of whatever product they’re advertising. 
 
But on the other hand if you’re serious about believing that it 
hasn’t increased consumption, would you allow cigarette 
companies to expand their advertising in the province in the same 
way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I believe that our initiatives in 
non-smoking are meeting the needs of Saskatchewan. I see a lot 
of development in the future on this. I don’t think . . . Maybe the 
members opposite . . . It may well be when he’s suggesting that 
I encourage advertising of cigarettes, maybe that’s what he stands 
for. I remember — and they’ve standing in their place for some 
time this afternoon — talking there in a pious nature about liquor 
advertising. 
 
I would just remind you, Mr. Chairman, and the members of this 
Assembly, that it was that government, when they were in power, 
opened the malt plant, as I believe. A malt plant is a plant to 
produce beer. That’s what it’s for. And I believe they were the 
ones that did it. I don’t know how much of a financial success it 
was. I think it was like many of their other ventures, rather a 
dismal failure. But I mean there’s a bit of hypocrisy when you 
have a member on the opposite side standing up and making great 
protestation about advertising, when consumption is coming 
down, while at the same time develop malt plants. 
 
  



 
April 14, 1986 

 

587 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I wonder if the minister could inform 
the House whether or not they closed that malt plant that was so 
terrible when we were in government. Obviously not. 
 
What we’re talking about here is promoting the consumption of 
alcohol. And we have a government that sanctimoniously talks 
about defending the principles of the family and trying to reduce 
the amount of alcohol consumed in the province and at the same 
time, in 1983 they opened the door to the advertising of beer and 
wine. 
 
I say to you that there are many people in the province who 
simply don’t believe you when you say that it doesn’t increase 
consumption. They don’t believe it. 
 
Well obviously, any company that has an advertising program 
will do it to increase the consumption. And because Coca-Cola’s 
consumption goes down 5 per cent when they’re advertising 
heavy doesn’t mean that they quit advertising. Obviously they 
will believe that their consumption would have went down 
further had they not advertised. Any of you who have 2 cents’ 
worth of business knowledge — and I agree there aren’t many of 
you who have, watching how you manage the economy of the 
province — I’ll say to you very clearly that the . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
Well the former minister of Energy is the one to be shouting 
about being in business, because the oil industry under his 
administration has gone on the rocks. It’s finished. 
 
And when I say to the Minister of Health that, when it comes to 
advertising liquor, your record stands in stark contrast to what 
you were promising during the election campaign, and is yet 
another example of the hypocrisy of you people across the way: 
where you promised very clearly that you were concerned about 
the consumption of alcohol, you have moved very quickly in the 
opposite direction to try to fill the pockets of your friends in the 
industry. And I say that anyone who will pick up the donations 
to the Conservative Party can find those same groups of people 
who have benefited . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Name them. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — . . . from advertising, and they’re clear to 
the members opposite. And the Minister of Justice, who is 
particularly yappy from his seat tonight, should look in the books 
and find it out if he doesn’t know. And I challenge him to stand 
in his place and deny it. We hear a lot from these individuals from 
their seats, but they never get involved in the debate. 
 
And I say to the Minister of Health that, when you look at who 
has benefited from this advertising, there are two groups: one, the 
advertising companies; and secondly, the people who have been 
doing the advertising, that is, the producers of beer and wine. And 
I say to you: is that a good enough reason to encourage young 
people to consume alcohol? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I think, when you see consumption 
going down, then certainly people are  

benefiting. You know, I watch with amazement here when the 
members opposite are so apt to criticize a stance taken by this 
government which says no alcohol advertisement should contain 
life-style connotations, nor should it be endorsed by any type of 
a celebrity, and there should no use of moving motor vehicles. 
 
And furthermore to this, when I see the federal government of 
this country, when I see the federal government of this country 
endorsing Saskatchewan’s position and trying to have that 
accepted by the CRTC (Canadian Radio-television and 
Telecommunications Commission) as the standard across 
Canada, then I must say that I believe Saskatchewan is, again, a 
leader in this field in the type of educational ads. Because why 
else would the federal government want to take, almost to the T, 
our program and try and have it instituted across the nation? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister may 
believe that other provinces and the federal government will fall 
for this encouragement of alcohol consumption, and they may, 
given the fact that we have a Conservative government in Ottawa 
and in a number of provinces. But I don’t believe that the people 
of the province here in Saskatchewan are encourage by the fact 
the fact that alcohol advertising has increased dramatically since 
1983 under your administration. 
 
The minister must know that when he was making the decision 
to move in this direction — and he will indicate that he doesn’t 
know any groups who supported the move in that direction — 
obviously knows one thing and that is the only people who 
supported him were the advertising companies and the people 
who manufactured the alcohol. 
 
I would ask the minister here again whether he can indicate any 
other group who came to you as minister and asked you to expand 
alcohol advertising before you made that move as a government 
in 1983. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — As I said previously, I was not the minister 
that was negotiating with the television stations and so on. I 
suppose if there were groups that were lobbying they would be 
lobbying that minister and the question would be more properly 
addressed to him. 
 
However, it seems again rather interesting — and I’d say more 
than interesting; I’d say rather hypocritical — hypocritical, for 
the member opposite to stand up in his sanctimonious way and 
question about liquor advertising that has a legitimate 
educational component showing the danger of alcohol, when the 
party that he belongs to, the party in Manitoba . . . You know 
what they’ll do, Mr. Chairman? They’ll give you home delivery, 
home delivery from the liquor stores. That’s the stance of the 
NDP in Manitoba. 
 
Now you try and tell me who is promoting liquor, the one that’ll 
bring it to your home — home delivery advertised in the paper; 
dial-a-bottle is the name of the program. Dial up and get your 40 
for tonight, Manitoba style, NDP delivered. That is their policy. 
We have 15 per cent educational advertising to show the people 
the dangers of consumption, once again . . . (inaudible) . . . the 
leader in  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

 

588 
 

Canada, the program that the federal government is copying to a 
T. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister almost sounds like he was 
over in Manitoba tonight with the answers he’s giving, because 
he’s being very hesitant in giving any answers to the questions. 
And I say, this is the fifth or sixth day that we have tried to get 
answers out of this minister, and he refuses on every issue. He’s 
refused on every issue, whether it’s the funding of medicare in 
the province or whether it’s the chiropractors or whether it’s the 
issue of alcohol advertising and who was pushing them to move 
in that direction. 
 
And I say to you, talking about Alberta or Manitoba — I think 
only when you need it do you talk about other provinces. When 
we wanted to know what the rate was for chiropractors in other 
provinces you couldn’t answer the question, and the Chair at that 
time ruled that you didn’t have to answer. Now all of a sudden 
you know what’s going on in every other province. It just seems 
a little bit unbelievable that you, as minister, would stand here 
and not have answers for these very, very straightforward 
questions; one of them being about liquor advertising — who was 
pushing you in this direction, to move to extend and to move 
quickly after the election to increase alcohol advertising. 
 
And you will know, as many others will know in this Assembly, 
that other jurisdictions throughout the United States . . . In fact, 
there are now congressional committees and senate committees 
that are dealing with and trying to struggle with the issue of 
alcohol advertising in the United States. And every indication is 
that they’re moving to a different drummer than you are here in 
the province of Saskatchewan, because their studies have 
indicated clearly that alcohol advertising is leading to many 
serious problems. It’s leading to alcohol consumption among 
younger and younger groups of people, and that indication is here 
in the province as well — that the ads are aimed at young people 
in their formative years where brand identification and earlier 
consumption is encouraged. 
 
And you can tell me all you want about the fact that you have a 
commitment from the breweries not to advertise using young 
people. But I’ll tell you that anyone watching those ads, of young 
people enjoying themselves with beer surrounding them, will not 
believe you for a moment. And the indications are that alcohol 
advertising is leading to ever-increasing social problems in the 
family; ever-increasing social problems in the schools and 
universities. 
 
And I say to you that you’re moving to a different drummer when 
you say that advertising isn’t a major component of the increased 
problem. And you will have to prove to many other people, 
including many of the states in the United States, who are saying 
that you are moving in the wrong direction. 
 
And you won’t get away with this idea that your ads against 
alcohol, the 15 per cent, are something new. They were there 
when we were in government, and they’re there in every 
province. You can look at the Aware ads. And the Safe Grad was 
well established many years ago,  

and for you to try to take credit for those programs at the same 
time as you’re saying they equal off or balance off the positive 
advertising for booze, is simply not credible. 
 
What has changed since ’82 is the positive promotion of alcohol 
for the first time in this province, and that’s what you have done. 
You haven’t set in place the anti-alcohol ads, because they were 
there long before you were, as was Safe Grad. So for you to try 
to take credit for those is simply not credible and adds to the 
problem you have with making yourself believable to the people 
of the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, once again, let me indicate 
to you and to this House, I find it a lot easier to defend a program 
that is being copied by other jurisdictions in Canada. 
 
You can stand where you want on your side of the House with 
the old NDP dial-a-crock program in Manitoba. That’s what you 
got — dial-a-crock. If you’re thirsty tonight, pick up the phone, 
phone the liquor board, and they will deliver the crock to you — 
dial-a-crock Manitoba NDP program. Now if that is what you 
want, you stand up and you say so. 
 
But I’ll stand here and say that where there’s 15 per cent 
educational ads on the television that were never there before, 
when the per capita consumption of spirits is going down, where 
beer per capita consumption is also decreasing, where we’re the 
fifth lowest in per capita sales of alcohol in general — I don’t say 
that our programs are so dangerous to the public. I think 
Manitoba NDP dial-a-crock is far more dangerous. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I want 
to renew the comments of my colleague, the member for 
Shaunavon, with respect to the electronic advertising of beer and 
wine. I think that none of that evidence in the United States or 
elsewhere suggests that this type of advertising does anything 
other than increase consumption. All one’s ordinary instincts 
underline that. No one would reasonable believe that a whole 
industry would undertake to advertise, unless the objective was 
to increase sales. It is remarkably difficult to think of any other 
industry which advertises in order to reduce sales, as is your 
argument. No, I don’t believe that, and I don’t think you believe 
that. We all know why consumption has gone down, and that’s 
because unemployment has gone up and disposable incomes 
have effectively gone down. 
 
I think there is no question that when disposable incomes goes 
down, spending goes down. That’s almost trite to say that. And 
spending also on alcohol goes down — not by everybody, 
obviously, because some people who are in difficulties abuse 
alcohol. And I think that these times are characterized by greater 
abuse of alcohol and lower consumption of alcohol. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Really cut down on bingo. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I’m sure that the member 
for Saskatoon Eastview, as his swan song, will want to give us a 
little dissertation on bingo. But right now we’re dealing with the 
Health estimates, and we’re  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

 

589 
 

dealing with the consumption of alcohol, which is a number one 
health problem in Canada and Saskatchewan. And we’re dealing 
with those things, which, at least in our view, encourage the 
consumption of alcohol, and one of those is the electronic 
advertising of beer and wine. 
 
And if members opposite suggest that those very, very effective 
ads for beer and wine do not have any effect, have no appeal to 
the viewer, then I think they are unusually naive or they’re 
turning a blind eye to facts that they know. 
 
And I want to ask the same question that my colleague did but 
which I didn’t hear answered: what pressures were placed upon 
your government, and by whom, to agree almost surreptitiously 
to the electronic advertising of beer and wine? You have people 
in this House who know that issues with respect to beer and wine 
were always decided in this House and not by cabinet, that it was 
the norm to have any substantial changes in policy discussed in 
the legislature. You violated that custom. I’m not saying . . . You 
varied that custom, then. You varied that custom by deciding that 
we were going, for the first time since, I believe, the 1930s, to 
have electronic advertising of alcoholic beverages. You decided 
it by dark of night. You did not have any discussion in the 
legislature before you made that decision. My simple question is 
this: who put the arm on you? Who twisted your arm to have you 
agree to that very substantial change in policy? 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the Leader of 
the Opposition would do well to have a caucus with his members 
on their whole discussion of advertising. You weren’t in the 
House, but your member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg came up 
with the brilliant deduction before supper that first and foremost 
it was hard times that caused people to drink. That was his first 
statement. Later on he came on and said, no, it was more when 
the farmers had more money, they drank more. I’m still confused 
which way he was coming from. 
 
Secondly, when confronted with the statements that evidence 
indicates, as I will show to you, that in 1983-84 . . . Alcohol 
consumption dropped by 3 per cent between ’83-84 and ’84-85. 
And compared to 11 other jurisdictions in 1983-84, 
Saskatchewan had the lowest per capita sales of beer and the fifth 
lowest per capita sales of alcohol in general. When given those 
statements, your member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg stood up 
and said, well it’s down because they’re making it at home. Well 
if they’re making it at home, then what impact do the beer ads 
have on them? You know, do they rush off when they see a beer 
ad and start brewing up a pot? I don’t know. That seems to be 
philosophy over there. 
 
As far as the lobbies, as I indicated to the member from 
Shaunavon, there were no lobbies towards me. I would ask you 
to direct your question to the minister that brought in the Bill. He 
was the minister that handled it for our government. And as far 
as I was the Minister of Health, I can say that to the best of my 
recollections there were no lobbies. 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, you 
are again suggesting to this House that there was a Bill. You 
know there was no Bill. You know that this was not done by 
legislation. You know that it was done by order in council, and 
that was the point of my earlier remarks. 
 
You wouldn’t have the courage to bring this in and debate it as a 
Bill. You would need, as you did, to do it by dark of night, do it 
in the cabinet chambers. And it was announced, done and 
announced before anyone in the legislature had any opportunity 
to say a word. And so far as I am aware, no legislation has been 
brought in to confirm it. It is still being done by order in council 
— point number one. 
 
Second one, with respect to your earlier argument that the 
advertising does not increase sales, let’s take Labatt’s for a 
moment. Are you suggesting that Labatt’s is undertaking a very 
substantial advertising program, the result of which is to reduce 
sales? And have you had any representation from Labatt’s to 
change the policy so that they won’t have to advertise and their 
sales will go up? Have you had any such representations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well the member opposite in his great 
brilliance says, and what about Labatt’s? Certainly Labatt’s 
advertise so that they get their share of the market. Ford 
advertises. GM advertises. They want to sell their cars. Labatt's 
want to sell the beer they have. 
 
But if you would listen to what I’m saying, that overall 
consumption, be it by Labatt’s, or Molson’s, or I don’t know if 
the old malt plant that the NDP started is in the game or not, if 
it’s their beer or not — it could easily be — but the overall 
consumption of beer has dropped. Dropped — that means it’s 
gone down. 
 
So I don’t know your concept of advertising, but when you say, 
let’s take Labatt’s, certainly Labatt’s is fighting for their share of 
what is a shrinking market. That’s what’s happening. So when I 
see that happening, when consumption is going down both in 
beer and in spirits, then how can you have the audacity to stand 
in this House and try and make some kind of a case that 
consumption is going up? That’s what you’re trying to say. 
 
And while we’re on the topic, I remember sitting over exactly 
where you are, and you were sitting over here, and I could 
remember whaling on you time after time, and I’d like another 
chance to do it, to ask you to try and tax some of the pornography 
in this province. You wouldn’t move on that one bit, not one bit. 
You wouldn’t even take the skin flicks off the shelves where the 
kids can get them; you wouldn’t do that. I asked you to remove 
the tax on children’s clothes. No, sir, not one bit of compassion, 
not one bit when you were the premier of the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — If I may, would the minister replying please 
stay on Health estimates. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I wouldn’t mind having a debate  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

 

590 
 

on children’s clothing or whatever the minister wants to talk 
about, other than the Health estimates, since he very obviously 
doesn’t want to talk about them. 
 
The member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake was, from his seat, 
saying, name them, name them, name the people who have 
contributed to the Progressive Conservative Party who might be 
profiting from liquor ads. That’s what he was saying. And he 
doesn’t deny it. 
 
And I’ll take him at his word, and I’ll name a few. And I’m 
quoting from the election return for the calendar year 1982, filed 
by one Terry Leier — and that’s a name that might be familiar to 
some of you — who was the chief official agent for the 
Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan, and he 
indicated where the Progressive Conservative Party had got its 
money in the year 1982. And some people may recall that that 
was an election year. 
 
And I want to give to the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake 
the information that he asked, and I want to give it to the minister, 
and ask him whether he doesn’t think it had something to do with 
the decision to have liquor advertising — the item under debate. 
 
And I note that Labatt’s Brewery contributed $12,500. And I see 
Hiram Walker & Sons donated $12,000. And I note that the 
Molson companies contributed $8,000; and Carling O’Keefe 
contributed $8,500; and the Distillers Corporation contributed 
$3,000; and Schenley Canada — you’ll know that name, the 
member for Saskatoon-Sutherland — contributed $2,000; and 
Corby Distillers contributed $2,000; and FBM Distillery Co. Ltd. 
contributed $2,000; London Winery, $500; Gilbey Canada, $500. 
 
The members opposite are saying, do the distillers make beer? 
No, the distillers don’t make beer, but most of them distribute 
wine, most of them distribute wine. 
 
With respect to media, CFTO TV Toronto, and this one is very, 
very interesting. Can you imagine why CFTO Toronto would 
contribute to a Saskatchewan provincial election? Can you think 
of any reason why the flagship station of the CTV network would 
contribute $5,000 to a Saskatchewan provincial election? And is 
your thinking on what the reason might be, is it in any way 
improved by the fact that within six months of taking office, beer 
and wine ads were permitted on the CTV network in 
Saskatchewan? And CFQC Broadcasting, $2,500. This is the 
Bassett-Eaton station. The Toronto owned Basset-Eaton station 
is contributing that kind of money. 
 
Now I say again to you, Mr. Minister, do you deny, do you deny 
that these contributions may just have influenced your mind 
when you were deciding that beer and wine should be advertised 
on radio and television, for the first time since the 1930s in this 
province? Are you denying that those contributions had their 
effect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not saying that those 
contributions . . . I don’t know if those contributions are correct 
or not. I’ve long since learned to know that the information 
quoted by the people on the other side of the House is most often 
inaccurate. 

 
So be that as it may, Mr. Chairman, I couldn’t say if those had 
any impact or not. But I can tell you that those as well as many, 
many, many other companies of all walks of life donated to us in 
1982, because they wanted to put you exactly where you’re 
sitting. 
 
And they will donate again. And they will donate again, because 
they just simply don’t like the policies, the anti-business type of 
government that you had, the passion with nationalization with 
Crown corporations. They didn’t like that in ’82. They don’t like 
that in ’86. 
 
And I can tell you, whenever the election writ is dropped, those 
same companies will come to the support of the PC government, 
to keep you and your dwarfs sitting right where they belong on 
that side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I have 
no doubt that you are in part right. I have no doubt that the Bank 
of Nova Scotia and the Royal Bank of Canada and some of the 
others will be lined up there again, as they were in 1982. I don’t 
imagine Pioneer Trust will be among them. I see the chairman 
becoming restless. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I invite members to look at the material which 
was filed, and they will see that their own party got well over half 
of its contributions from corporations. 
 
But we’ll move on to another subject. We’ll move on to another 
subject and ask the minister whether or not he has any proposals 
for launching, in a major way, something like the Aware program 
which had as its purpose advertisements to warn of the dangers 
of the consumption of alcohol, and a government sponsored 
program as well as and in addition to that small program operated 
by either the advertising industry or the brewing industry, and 
I’m not sure which. 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, certainly, we’re always exploring 
new initiatives in advertising and ways that we can reach the 
public. I think the very fact that we have doubled the air time for 
the Christmas alcohol advertisements, and I’m sure you have 
been made aware of the research that I did on that, and the 
popularity of those — 90 per cent of the people being polled 
indicated that this should be done again. 
 
Another one of the nature in this type of advertising was the 
non-smoking rock video that won national awards for its 
performance and has been used by other provinces across 
Canada. A Saskatchewan production right here in Saskatchewan 
with kids from Regina and surrounding area — 
Saskatchewan-produced, non-smoking rock videos. 
 
So sure, we’re looking at various ways, and if you have a 
suggestion of a type of promotion that you think would be 
advantageous, I’d welcome you to make it, because we are 
always looking for ideas as to how to reach the public on all types 
of better life-styles and better health  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

 

591 
 

initiatives. 
 
Certainly, as I said before supper, I see the people out there 
running through the park, jogging, people going to aerobics. I 
think there’s a whole move of people that . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, I’m more at the walking stage than the 
jogging, to be honest with you. There are many people who 
certainly are taking these initiatives, and anything that 
government can do to try and encourage that — as I say we’re 
doing with the 15 per cent advertising — I think those are 
initiatives that we’d like to follow-up. So, if you have a 
suggestion, I would certainly take it under consideration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I 
certainly have one suggestion. I wonder if you could see if the 
brewery people can keep their ads off the Charlie Brown 
Christmas show. That, I think, is a constructive suggestion, 
because I had a number of letters from people with respect to that 
particular incident. This was following many protestations from 
your government that these were not shown at times when young 
people might view them. I would have thought the Charlie Brown 
Christmas show qualified as a show that young people might 
watch, and I don’t think anyone denies that the ads were there. 
 
Have you any assurances from the brewing and the wine industry 
that they will . . . or more from the media, that they will be a little 
more selective in the times they show these ads and that they will 
not try to group them at times when young people, quite young 
people, will be watching them in large numbers? And certainly I 
look at sporting events like Roughrider games. Young teenagers 
habitually watch those types of athletic performances on 
televisions and listen to them on radio. Now, what are you saying 
about the times during which those ads are going to be aired? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I didn’t watch the Charlie Brown 
Christmas show, but I don’t debate with you whether it was 
shown at that time or not. You’re addressing your comments 
basically to the wrong minister, because I do not have any 
ongoing negotiations with the television stations or the brewery 
companies. The minister in charge of Saskatchewan Liquor 
Board is the minister who does that. But certainly I share your 
concern and I would use whatever influence I have to try and 
have those shown in non-prime-time viewing. 
 
As I could indicate to you the stance taken by the federal 
government, which is a copy of the Saskatchewan program, does 
have that type of stipulation to it as the approach of the CRTC is 
that these type of ads should not take place at anywhere it looks 
at prime-time viewing time. So therefore, it wouldn’t be there to 
influence in any way, shape, or form anyone who might be of the 
age level to want to watch Charlie Brown or something of that 
nature. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: —  Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’ll 
turn to another topic. We may have an opportunity to re-open our 
discussion with respect to the consumption of alcoholic 
beverages. 
 
But I want now to talk about occupational therapists and  

the supply of occupational therapists in the province. Could the 
minister give us any indication of the approximate number of 
occupational therapists who are practising their profession in the 
province; and having got that number, I will ask a few questions 
following up from it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I know that there’s 71 OTs registered in 
the province. If you would want to know how many are actively 
employed, we’ll try and get that information for you. But if you 
want to go on with your line of questioning, my officials will look 
for the actual employment. But 71 registered in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, you 
will be aware of the view, which I think is a sound view, that if 
we were to have an effective home care program and an effective 
nursing home program where people may leave a nursing home 
as well as enter it, then we need a supply of occupational 
therapists, quite apart from what are slightly more normal uses 
for the services of occupational therapists in rehabilitative 
medicine, either through injuries or through cardiac accidents or 
whatever. I think that it is generally conceded that if we are to 
keep people active, then physiotherapists, occupational 
therapists, are both necessary. 
 
It is reported to me, Mr. Minister, that there’s a significant 
shortage of occupational therapists, and I would like you to 
comment on whether you think the supply of occupational 
therapists is adequate, whether there are vacancies for 
occupational therapists in nursing homes or other rehabilitative 
centres, or in the department or in the home care program. Could 
you us a comment on the supply of occupational therapists and 
what areas of health care generally are lacking occupational 
therapists which could be usefully used. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes. Certainly I would concur that 
occupational therapists will play an important part in the 
development of health care services in the future in this province, 
and are at this time. Certainly we feel that responsibility, and last 
fall 10 new bursaries were awarded for students to study 
occupational therapy. At the present time I have consultations 
going on for a community therapy program. There’s money in 
this year’s budget for that, that we’ll have a better nucleus of 
therapists in each of the health regions throughout the province. 
 
I have visited probably the best school of occupational therapy in 
Canada, at Dalhousie University, and saw the way they develop 
their school, along with the then minister of Advanced Education 
and Manpower. Certainly I’m interested at some time to develop 
a school here in the province of Saskatchewan. I don’t think 
anyone argues or disputes the value of an adequate number of 
occupational therapists. 
 
So in answer to your question, we do have a few vacancies at this 
time, but we’ve provided more bursaries and are looking at 
developing what could be called a community therapy program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, you 
will be aware that the occupational therapists’  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

 

592 
 

organization in Saskatchewan is pressing for the establishment of 
a college at the university. I believe that that is their request for 
the education of occupational therapists as one of the health 
professions. Can you tell me whether or not your department is 
urging upon the Department of Advanced Education or the 
universities the establishment of a school or college of 
occupational therapy at either of the universities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — As lately as April the 2nd my deputy has 
been meeting with the universities regarding this. We’ve met 
with the society of occupational therapists and formed a 
committee with them on it, and Advanced Education. But as late 
as April the 2nd there have been discussions between the deans 
of the university and the deputy minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, would 
you outline what arrangements there are for educating 
occupational therapists now? In particular, I take it that your 
department has some arrangements with schools or colleges of 
occupational therapy outside the province, and that you have 
arrangements whereby bursaries are available for Saskatchewan 
students who may take their education. And would you outline 
what those are? And I have a couple of follow-up questions 
dealing with the obligation of the student to return to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We at the present time have agreements 
with the University of Alberta and the University of Manitoba 
where we purchase spaces at those respective universities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, can you 
advise about how many spaces you have, and what financial 
assistance, broadly speaking, is available to students who might 
wish to go to the University of Alberta, the University of 
Manitoba, to pursue a course in occupational therapy? And I 
simply want to know whether it is reasonably accessible, or 
whether there would be a very substantial advantage if there was 
a school in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Advanced Education purchased the spots, 
and there are five in Alberta and four in Manitoba. And the 
Department of Health . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — How many did you say? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Five in Alberta and four in Manitoba. And 
the Department of Health provides the bursaries for them, which 
cover their books and educational costs and living costs, I 
believe. And then there is a return commitment for them to come 
back and serve. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, are all 
of the bursaries taken up now? In the last couple of years have 
they have been all taken up, or have they not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — They indicate that there’s nine people on 
bursary in 1985-86. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, have you 
got figures as to about what the shortfall would be now? If you 
had your choice and could by waving a wand  

have occupational therapists, about how many would we need in 
order to staff the health system as you would like to see it staffed 
and as you would have reasonable funds for? I’m not talking 
about any wish list, but if you could fill the vacancies, which you 
would reasonably want to fill, how many would you need? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — In the discussions and from the programs 
I’ve visited in other areas, my best estimate — with the confines 
that you’re putting on it of finance — I think we could employ 
the graduates of a school of 20, as they turn about. And with 
attrition and with people getting married and leaving the 
work-force and so on, that perhaps we could use 20 a year 
coming into Saskatchewan, for the foreseeable future as I see it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, have 
you pursued the opportunity of getting more spaces at Alberta 
and Manitoba so that our number of new entries could be closer 
to the optimum figure of 20, which you have indicated? It seems 
that if we have this shortfall, as I’m told we have and as people 
urge upon me that we have, and if there are schools in our 
neighbouring provinces, then until such time as we have one in 
Saskatchewan, there might be some merit in increasing the 
number above nine. And I wonder whether this option has been 
pursued. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes. We’re under the understanding that 
Alberta are having what would be an accelerated program, and 
there is a possibility to purchase a few more seats there. We have 
a committee and we’re in discussion with Advanced Education, 
seeing if we can pursue that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, with 
respect to physiotherapists, do you feel that the supply is 
reasonably adequate for the needs of the health system generally? 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well we find that we’re graduating about 
20 a year, and with that turnover, the situation has improved as 
we keep graduating them through. We feel that we can certainly 
employ the 20 per year that will come out of the school of 
physiotherapy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, it may 
well be that some of my colleagues would want to pursue that, 
but I will move to dentists and the supply of dentists — that’s 
what I’m talking about. And it would be my observation that 
there were some years ago a significant shortage of dentists in 
Saskatchewan. And it would be my observation that that is 
probably no longer the case in the major urban centres of 
Saskatchewan, but that it is still the case in smaller urban centres 
and rural areas. And I wonder if — I will say excluding the cities 
— you feel that the supply of dentists is adequate in order to do 
the job that is asked of them by Saskatchewan citizens. Is there 
an effective demand for more dentists? Do you have to wait a 
long time to get an appointment with a dentist in Humboldt or in 
Kindersley or some centre like that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Our ratio of dentists to population is higher 
in Saskatchewan than in many other areas, and to  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

 

593 
 

that effect, we closed the borders to the importation of American 
dentists some time ago. The ratio in rural Saskatchewan is better 
than it was some time ago. It’s improved. I won’t say it’s perfect, 
but I will say that it is steadily improving, and indication would 
show that we are about at the maximum of the number of dentists 
that we wold need — perhaps a little more deployment into the 
rural areas, but it has been improving steadily each year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I have 
one other little line of questions and then I will defer to one of 
my colleagues. This has to do with the registration of health 
professions, and more particularly the certified nursing assistants 
— how did you know that, Mr. Minister? Obviously you are 
receiving representations, as are we with respect to certified 
nursing assistants. 
 
You will know that the pattern across Canada is for that particular 
profession, sometimes called certified nursing assistants, 
sometimes called licensed practical nursing, and names similar 
to that — people who have training in nursing but training of 
shorter duration than registered nurses or registered psychiatric 
nurses — the pattern across Canada is for that profession to have 
separate licensing, and that is not the pattern in Saskatchewan 
where they are covered by the legislation covering registered 
nurses. 
 
The certified nursing assistants have been pressing for legislation 
and have, I know, been pressing the government to agree to such 
legislation. And I want the minister to advise whether or not the 
government is prepared to either introduce or, alternatively, to 
support legislation which might be introduced to provide a 
separate Act for the certified nursing assistants. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — What we’re looking at and there are other 
models in the country. We wouldn’t take, let’s say, the Alberta 
model and impose it here. We’d like to build a Saskatchewan 
one, but rather that coming with a number of individual Acts, 
we’re looking at an umbrella health professions Act under which 
the CNAs would fit in. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I have 
no reason to believe that such an arrangement would not be 
satisfactory to a number of professions, including the certified 
nursing assistants. There are matters of principle with respect to 
establishing professional bodies. Two, it seems to me, appear 
most important, that is the discipline provisions as they relate to 
the governing body of the profession having the right to 
discipline its members, and here we’re concerned not only with 
respect to the protection of the public, but also concerned with 
protecting the members of the profession from arbitrary action 
by their own profession. I think that that is the area number one. 
 
And area number two seems to me to deal with the adequacy of 
the educational programs and the certification of the necessary 
educational programs for the profession and for entrance to the 
profession. And I’m aware, as I’m sure others are, of the Alberta 
model, which on the face of it appears to allow the professions to 
have a substantial measure of autonomy, but still have other  

groups having some say in the exercise of the educational 
function or the certification of educational program function and 
the discipline function. 
 
And what I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, is: at what stage are your 
discussions or your studies with respect to introducing umbrella 
legislation, and when might we expect to see it? And if it’s not 
going to be for a good while, are you thinking of introducing 
legislation to cover certified nursing assistants in the interim? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There’s ongoing discussions in developing 
this type of legislation. No, we wouldn’t be looking at 
independent Act. We would look at an umbrella Act, and we will 
try and have it in place as quickly as we can. 
 
As I say, I don’t want to just take Alberta or take Ontario or 
whoever. I think we want to sit down and see if there are 
components to it that we can build something superior to what 
they have right here in Saskatchewan. But it would be an 
umbrella type of legislation with no separate legislation coming 
first. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, can 
you give us a little more idea of what you’re talking about with 
respect to umbrella legislation? The Alberta one, while it 
purports to be umbrella, the umbrella doesn’t cover very much, 
because there was in effect grandfathering legislation and 
grandfathering provisions, and not many of the health 
professions have opted to be under the umbrella legislation so far 
as I’m aware. Can you bring us up to date on what types of 
models you’re looking at for umbrella legislation; is there 
anywhere else, other than Alberta; and what is your thinking on 
permitting these bodies to have an appropriate measure of 
independence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I suppose one of the areas that we have 
people . . . Ontario are doing a lot of work on this, and we have 
people in contact with Ontario to see just the way they are 
developing their model. What we’re looking at though is 
something . . . There’s a number of health professions out there 
that I believe would fit in under this. And just to give you an 
example of a couple of other groups that would be requesting 
legislation, and we would see them falling into this pattern of the 
umbrella health care legislation, would be — we’ve talked about 
the nursing assistants — but also audiologist and speech 
pathologists, for example. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I have a number of 
questions about nursing staff that I want to get into here in a few 
moments. But first of all I want to ask the minister about a 
problem that has been raised to me dealing with the University 
Hospital in Saskatoon. And basically it’s the transport of sick 
pediatric patients — neonatal and others — where they are 
explaining to a number of people and have proposed to the 
department that a program be brought forward and funded 
properly by the department for the care and transport, or for the 
care in transport, of neonatal and pediatric patients. 
 
For example at the University Hospital in Saskatoon they 
explained to me that 73 per cent of the pediatric patients come 
from outside of the city of Saskatoon, and that in the  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

 

594 
 

world we now live in, of transportation and moving patients 
quickly, one of the areas that has got left behind in many ways is 
the transport of neonatal and the very young. 
 
And I’m not arguing that we haven’t done some wonderful new 
things for the encouragement of life in that area and the saving 
of lives of the very young, but in the area of transport of them, 
for example, and I use as an example in the southwest corner — 
Shaunavon for example — if there’s an infant born premature, 
moving that infant from Shaunavon to the University Hospital in 
Saskatoon is not well-defined as to the approach, and to the 
individual who goes out with the aircraft, and the very 
much-needed care that that individual will need from the time it 
leaves the airport in Shaunavon or leaves the hospital in 
Shaunavon, for example, until it gets to the University Hospital 
in Saskatoon. 
 
I’m wondering at this time if you can outline any plans within the 
department that you have for expanding or increasing the care of 
the neonatal in transport, or I will call it pediatric transport of the 
seriously ill, when they are moving from outside of the cities of 
Regina and Saskatoon to the base hospitals. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly, when there’s a need for a 
neonatal transfer, there’s a transfer team goes out from either 
Regina or from Saskatoon from the University Hospital to the 
area where the pick-up would be. And, depending on the 
situation, transfer will be by air or road ambulance, depending on 
the facilities of an airport, or what may be there. 
 
We have, as of recently, equipped the Cheyenne for the transfer 
rather than the Navajo, and I think that makes some difference 
because of the height that the Cheyenne can fly at. 
 
(2015) 
 
The Navajo previously being unpressurized could not go as high, 
and I understand there were some dangers with that type of 
situation. But now we have equipped one of the Cheyennes as the 
air ambulance, I think those type of dangers will be eliminated in 
the future. 
 
I should point out also that there is money in this year’s budget 
for improved neonatal transfer also. Those discussions are being 
worked out with the base hospitals in the global review that’s 
taking place at this time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder if the minister could give some 
detail on what is being offered to the base hospitals. 
 
As I understand it, at the present time, there isn’t a permanent 
staff in place for the transfer of neonatals and pediatric patients. 
And what happens is that when staff is needed, they are pulled 
off of the ward, and at times it creates a shortage in the hospital 
and as well may cause serious situations in the hospital. And from 
time to time the properly trained staff are not available to go out 
on these trips out of the city or away from the base hospital. 
 
The other thing that has been brought to my attention is that 
equipment, such as blood pressure monitors and  

suction apparatus and that sort of thing, is not available on the 
plane for neonatal and pediatric care. And I’m wondering, can 
you outline what you’re proposing to be available in this area to 
the base hospitals. Because they may be aware of it, but very 
recently in talking to some of the people who are delivering the 
service, they were not aware, and it may be something that’s 
coming through the system. 
 
But if you would outline for us here today, some of them may be 
watching or we can send it out to them so that they will not be as 
concerned about the fact that the death rate in transport is where 
many of the problems now exist of the 73 per cent. 
 
It’s not at the regional or rural hospital, and it’s not at the base 
hospital, but it’s in transport where we’re losing a large 
percentage of those who are not making it, are lost in transport. 
And I wonder if you could outline for us some of the steps that 
have been taken in this budget to alleviate that problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Let’s say . . . We’re focusing on the 
University Hospital. Let’s take that one for example. The 
neonatal transport team is basically made up of a resident — a 
resident, which of course, as you know, is a doctor in training at 
the hospital. 
 
We are expanding that to perhaps where it will be another one or 
two residents, so that there would be more than the one person. 
So I think that will be certainly a well received addition. 
 
The other thing is with the equipment and so on. Those initiatives 
are taking place at this time. As you know, the Cheyenne gives 
us that capacity to go higher and go faster, and also there’s more 
room in the cabin, as I understand. So I think many of the things 
that you’re alluding to are in this budget, being addressed at the 
present time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The question that I wanted to ask as well, 
is when you’re saying, the resident that is on staff, are you saying 
that there will now be a permanent person who will not be pulled 
off of the ward in the hospital, who will be assigned only for this 
type of transport? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There will be a team of them that will be 
trained there. There will be three people, so therefore there will 
always be the assurance that there will be one trained person on 
neonatal resuscitation or whatever techniques they use. And 
those people will be available at all times for neonatal transport. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And what about nursing staff in the area of 
24-hour nursing coverage that is needed in these areas? Have you 
done anything to beef up that area? Or what do we now have in 
place and what will the increase be? This as well in the transport 
area. You have a resident, as I understand it, as well as a nursing 
staff or transport nurse. 
 
Can you tell me how many people you will now be funding, for 
example at the University Hospital, for both of those areas, one 
being the physician and the other being the transport nurse? 
 
  



 
April 14, 1986 

 

595 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes. The transport nurse will be available 
on the 24-hour. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How many nurses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well it’s staffed all the time, for 24-hour 
nursing service on that transport team. Always has been so. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I think we’re not getting at the answer to 
the question. What I’m saying: are you setting up a team who 
will be responsible only for this area? That hasn’t been the case 
up till now. What we have been doing, both with the physician 
and with the transport nurse, is pulling them off the ward. And if 
it’s on the midnight shift, oftentimes that isn’t appropriate, 
because we already have a shortage of nurses at the hospital. 
 
And I want you to be clear on this. If you’re setting up a separate 
team, then I would like to know that. But you’re not explaining 
it very well, if that’s what you’re doing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, there are neonatal people that will be 
available if there should be a call. They are specially trained to 
go on that call. I mean, they wouldn’t just do that because there 
would be times there’d be nothing to do, so they work at other 
functions in the neonatal unit. 
 
But certainly when there’s a neonatal transfer then there will be 
people who are specifically trained to be there and monitor that 
transfer, right from the point of pick-up to delivery to the unit at 
the University Hospital. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And this year’s budget you say will 
increase the number, for example, in the pediatrics intensive care, 
to take care of both the nursing and the resident component in 
order to take care of that so it’s permanent team. Or are you 
saying that it will exist as it has in the past? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes. Under the global review that’s taking 
place, certainly the concerns that you’re alluding to will be 
looked after. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well if you could be a little more precise. 
Could you tell me, for example at the University Hospital, what 
the increase in component will be in the pediatrics intensive care 
unit to take care of the transport of neonatals? How many will be 
allocated to that unit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I can’t be specific at this time because the 
consultation is going on with the University Hospital at the 
present time, so just as soon as we have worked out the numbers 
with them, I’d be glad to let you know. But I give you the 
assurance that it will certainly be looked after satisfactorily. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I don’t like to say, there you go again, 
but after asking question for close to five days, and when we get 
down to the answer, there never is an answer, and then it’s in 
negotiations and, we’ll tell you when we solve the problem. And 
I guess after four years — or now more than four years — of this 
kind of stonewalling within the health system, is one of the  

reasons why we have chiropractors mad at the government; why 
we heard, I believe it was the president of the SMA over the 
weekend saying, look, I hear the minister saying he wants 
meetings all the time, but believe it or not, we can’t get meetings 
with him — and he’s not saying this in a private meeting, he’s 
saying it to the press and the media; why we have nurses rallying 
on the steps of the legislature last week for the first time in the 
history of the province; and why pharmacists are mad at you as 
well. And one of the reasons is that we can never get any answers, 
and nor can they. 
 
And we have seen it over and over again, at meetings that we go 
to. The nurses tell you they have a problem with the evening 
shifts at rural hospitals, and you tell them that the problem has 
been going away over the last four years. And they tell you, no, 
it’s getting much worse. And you ignore their complaints. And 
for that reason we have a great deal of difficulty in believing your 
commitments that you’re going to fight for and, in fact, that 
you’re going to get increased staffing for these areas. And I just 
want to make the point that I hope that in the area of pediatrics at 
the University Hospital, and especially in the area of neonatal 
transport, that your commitment is worth more than it has been 
in other areas — and that the transport nurse and the residents 
that we need to move these young people around are set in place. 
Because they’re not there now. Hospitals are saying the system 
that is set up at the present time, with the nursing shortage when 
you’re pulling nurses and residents off of the ward to go out on 
these missions, that they put the hospital in jeopardy and 
oftentimes they don’t have properly trained people to go with the 
aircraft. And it’s causing a good number of problems. I don’t say 
that I don’t believe you, but in many areas we have waited and 
waited and what happens is something quite different than what 
we hear in estimates. 
 
The other question I wanted to ask was about a Michael 
McCafferty who worked, I believe, in the Premier’s office and is 
now working in your department. I wonder . . . This is one of the 
staff people, I believe, that were cut from Premier Devine’s staff 
which was at a record high, and then we were going to . . . And I 
may be wrong, and you can fill me in if I am. But can you tell 
me: is Michael McCafferty on staff with the Department of 
Health at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — He’s communications liaison in the health 
education and promotion branch. I believe he came from the 
caucus and not from the Premier’s office. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — What did you say his position was and how 
much is his salary, if you can give me that as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Communications liaison officer in the 
health promotion and education branch, and we’ll have the salary 
for you in a minute. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Can you tell me as well what date did he 
get that appointment and was there a competition? And if so, can 
you tell me the date of the advertisement of the competition and 
who applied when the position was open? 
 
(2030) 
 
  



 
April 14, 1986 

 

596 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — He was appointed by order in council; his 
salary is $42,000; and I don’t have the exact date, but February 
of this year. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — So when Michael left the caucus office he 
went into the Department of Health, and was appointed by 
cabinet, and there was no competition. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That’s correct: an order in council 
appointment. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — And who was the minister who signed the 
order in council? Can you just tell me . . . Did you put through 
the order in council, or was it done by another minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — In all likelihood it was me, but I’d have to 
look at the document to say for sure. Sometimes I cannot be 
present, and a back-up minister will sign an order in council 
pertaining to health care. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — So you feel comfortable with the 
appointment of Michael McCafferty to that position at 42,000 
without a competition. And I raise that because I have had 
concerns expressed to me about the appointment — the way it 
was done, and at a time when there is a shortage of staff in the 
department. And I give you the version that I hear, and you can 
argue your side of it. 
 
But many employees, when somebody is dropped in who is of a 
political nature into a department to do what is seen to be political 
advertising at a time when there’s budget restraints — that many 
people feel upset and slighted about it who have to work around 
that individual. And I’m not making that judgement. I’m just 
passing on to you concerns that have been expressed about this 
individual whose qualifications were not competed against by 
other people who may have been better than Mr. McCafferty at 
advertising, but may not have had the  right political membership, 
is the terms that have been used. 
 
And I’m wondering, at a time of trying to build the morale of the 
department at this time — and I understand coming this close to 
an election why you may need someone in there to do your 
political advertising — but I think that it’s unfair, one, to the 
employees who have to work around that individual, and 
secondly, to the taxpayers who are being called on to pay for 
42,000 a year for an individual who had been paid by the 
Conservative caucus. 
 
And you may explain why this person has expertise in every area. 
But when he’s dropped into the department without a 
competition, many people’s eyebrows will be raised because they 
will see it as a political appointment and, being done, another 
42,000 a year at taxpayers’ expense. And obviously I would 
assume that his position in caucus has been refilled with another 
political person. And this is one way that the public can see 
political people being put into a department for political reasons. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No. Michael McCafferty’s research skills 
go back at least 12 years. He’s a very competent researcher and 
is working in the Health department. He’s doing nothing of a 
political nature whatsoever. 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I was almost sure that you would 
make that comment, that a person who worked as a political 
researcher in the caucus office would have no political motives. 
I was sure that would be your argument. 
 
My argument would be that obviously he is being put there in 
gearing up for the election and giving you another staff person 
for the PC operation, and this is what people in the Health 
department are telling us as well. And I suppose I would be 
disappointed if your line would have changed. When the Premier 
moved his people out of his area of Executive Council, the word 
was then that many of them were moved into departments and 
being paid by the taxpayer but being called a different title. 
 
And I’ll tell you, this doesn’t do a great deal for the morale within 
your department. And the fact that they are writing letters and 
sending notes and talking to the opposition about the fact 
obviously means very clearly that it’s causing you problems. 
Because there are people in the department who have been there 
for many years, working diligently in the Department of Health 
and earning much less than this individual. And he has been 
dropped in at 42,000 a year, and there are people who are arguing 
that he should have had to compete for the position. 
 
Now this may be an unheard-of way of Conservatives getting 
jobs in the province at this time — competing for them — but in 
many provinces, at that level in the Department of Health, 
competition is the way it should be happening. And I would say 
to you that Mr. McCafferty, if his qualifications are there, why 
wouldn’t you have opened a competition and allowed him to 
compete for that spot? I just put that to you: why would not a 
competition have solved your problem? If he was qualified, he 
would have won the competition, and you wouldn’t have this 
problem of morale in that area of your department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I don’t think there’s a very big morale 
problem in the Department of Health. I want to tell you that there 
are some excellent people in that department — many of them. 
They’ve worked with me for four years, and I support each and 
every one of them. So I would put the morale in the Department 
of Health against the morale of anything else in this city, and I 
tell you, it’ll come out ahead. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I would just ask once again the 
question of: I wonder why the individual, if he was qualified for 
the position, why there wasn’t a competition so other 
Saskatchewan young people could compete for it. And I just ask 
you . . . 
 
I agree that you have many people in your department who are 
well qualified. One could argue whether or not the number of 
deputies you have had since you became minister — and I’m not 
being critical of your present deputy. I give him a great deal of 
respect for putting up with some of the things that are going on 
in the department, which he has to deal with, because of a lack of 
funding and lack of nursing staff and doctors angry and nurses 
rallying on the steps of the legislature. But I don’t believe that’s 
his fault. I believe that’s a part of the problem of the 
government’s policy. 
 
  



 
April 14, 1986 

 

597 
 

 
But I say to you quite seriously, why wouldn’t you have opened 
that position up for competition if you felt that Michael 
McCafferty was qualified to do the job? Why would you have 
not let other Saskatchewan people compete for the position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well the choice was to appoint by OC. It’s 
nothing new to government; it’s been done many times. And if 
you want to spend two or three nights, we can go through all the 
OCs and family relations that were put into place in the previous 
government. I’d just as soon not do that, but we can certainly 
supply that list, and it might be very interesting for the people of 
Saskatchewan to hear about it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I just . . . I don’t want to belabour the 
point, but I would just ask you again why, in your area where you 
have control . . . And I know you have been critical in the past of 
order in council appointments. 
 
The public see what is happening, and they see someone being 
transferred from the Tory caucus to the Department of Health at 
42,000 a year. And that saves the Tory caucus office $42,000, 
and they believe that the Department of Health is picking up a 
political position. And you can argue that that isn’t what’s 
happening, but you can probably understand as well the public’s 
concern and the people in Health’s concern, who express to us 
that they don’t believe it should be happening. 
 
And all I would say to you is: why in this case was an order in 
council used and not a competition if the person was qualified? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly there was no addition to the 
staff component there. There was a position open; this person 
was available; we chose to appoint him by OC. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I would just ask one other question. 
Was it . . . The person who left that position, can you give me the 
name and title of the individual who left when the position 
became vacant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It’s a new branch that was established 
within the department within the last year. We’re in the process 
of staffing it up. This was a position that was decided to be put 
in there, and we filled it with Michael McCafferty. There may be 
other positions coming into this department. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — How many people would be involved in 
that area? You say it’s a new branch or a new area in the 
department. What area would that be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It’s a communications and health education 
branch — 17.5 personnel. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, the communication branch . . . Are 
you saying that there wasn’t a communication branch there 
before? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We’ve pulled a number of areas that were 
previously there together under this. There’s the  

health promotion, health education, the library, nutritionist. All 
of these were brought in under what we call health education and 
communication. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Who’s the supervisor in the area of the 17 
people? Who is the supervisor in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Audrey Roadhouse. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wanted to ask another question about the 
position. Are there any perks that go with it? Is there an 
automobile or an expense account or any perks that would . . . Do 
they have access to the CVA pool? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No. No special perks. Of course, I suppose 
any government employee would have access to the CVA pool if 
the nature of his work would take him out. But Mr. McCafferty’s 
work will not be requiring him to use a CVA vehicle. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, if I may return to the 100 
million Health fund that you announced, I think it was back in 
February, for a moment, and I’d like to ask a few questions. 
 
Towards the end of February I know that the Regina General 
Hospital had expressed some concern about some of the needs 
that existed there with regard to staffing, and I wonder whether 
you have been able to, through your consultations that you say 
you’ve been having, meet some of those needs. 
 
And one of the areas that was raised was that there was a need 
for five nurses to the neonatal intensive care unit and some 
back-up staff. And I know that my colleague raised it with regard 
to the University Hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
Can you tell me whether this area has been addressed, and if so, 
in what way it has been addressed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I think the hon. member must realize 
that the fund comes into place as of April 1 of ’86. 
 
The meetings are going on this week, and I’m advised that this is 
the fastest that this type of review of staffing has ever taken place. 
So I couldn’t give you the exact positions tonight. Certainly I can 
tell you that the negotiations are . . . Not negotiations. Review, I 
think, would be a better word, that is going on, is taking place 
with the major base hospitals right now. 
 
Just as soon as . . . Well Regina General Hospital have been 
meeting today, in fact, on this, so as soon as we have it worked 
out, I’d be glad to provide that information to you. But at this 
point in time, I can’t. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I will accept that, and I guess maybe on 
Wednesday I can ask you the questions again. Maybe by that time 
you might be able to provide them to us. 
 
Did I hear correctly, hear you say that the fund came into effect 
on April 1st? Okay. So it comes into effect on April the 1st. But 
you must have started these negotiations back in the 1st of 
March? 
 
  



 
April 14, 1986 

 

598 
 

(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We did have consultation and negotiation 
with the hospitals in ascertaining the type of program that we 
would have to come forward to meet the staffing needs as we and 
they felt they should be addressed. That has been going on for 
some time. But the $100 million program kicked into effect at the 
1st of April. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. I guess the point that needs to 
be made there is that since it begins in the 1st of April, which is 
in this fiscal year that we’re considering the estimates of, and the 
staff will not be in place until some time through the year, the 
announcement of whatever amount of money you have 
announced obviously isn’t going to be spent to that extent 
because there isn’t going to be a full year in which these positions 
will be filled. 
 
I recall when we were together at the nurses’ forum in the Regina 
Inn, some time ago, Mr. Lingenfelter and I and yourself, as well 
as others . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the member from 
Shaunavon. Sorry, Mr. Chairman. You indicated at that time in 
answer to a question from someone from the floor, or was it one 
of the nurses on the panel, I’m not sure, that you agreed with the 
concern of the nurses that there needed to be some consultation 
of the working people, the nurses, in allocating of the new staff 
positions. Can you tell me what procedure is being used in order 
to be able to make sure that that consultation takes place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The allocation of the funding internally in 
the hospitals certainly involves a supervisor of nursing. So, 
therefore, I would imagine their channels of communication are 
open, that there should be input from the supervisor of nursing as 
to the deployment of these persons that would best satisfy the 
nursing component of the hospital. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I know that process, Mr. Minister, and I 
guess . . . Well, I’ll ask you the question: have you satisfied 
yourself, or have your officials — I wouldn’t expect you to be 
involved in each one of these operations in each individual 
hospital — but through your officials have you satisfied yourself 
that those consultations that you describe are adequate, because 
the nurses seem to be indicating that they’re not quite confident 
that indeed adequate consultation takes place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — My deputy has had discussions with all the 
base hospitals, with the concern that I’ve expressed, and with the 
executive director of the regional hospitals and all of our 
consultants, who will be dealing with the smaller hospitals, have 
been instructed, and it’s public record. You’ve heard me say it 
many times. My concern is that I'm putting a lot of positions into 
the hospital — $100 million — I think you must agree is a good 
sum of money in any man’s language. There has been concerns 
about bedside nursing. I have said publicly that I want to see 
positions at the bedside, and I believe when my officials are thus 
instructed, as well as the consultant, we’re going to see that come 
about. It’s been very evident and very clear that that is our 
concern. 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, the reason I have 
asked these questions, and I don’t want to press too long on it, is 
that I think probably no one knows better the problems that exist 
than people who are there on the floor. I mean, if you want to 
know what shortcomings there are in a ward in a hospital, be it a 
base hospital or a regional or some of our local rural hospitals, I 
think that the people who are best capable of advising anyone on 
the pressures that are there are the support staff and the nurses. I 
hope that what you are saying, indeed, has transpired and 
continues to transpire, because I think that those people are on 
the floor during the day and during the night, during all kinds of 
trying situations, and believe me I think they have made it very 
clear that the situation in recent years have been extremely trying. 
 
I mean some of the stories that we have heard and that you have 
heard would lead one to believe, without any shadow of a doubt, 
that something had to be done. My regret is that something was 
not considered to be necessary to be done by your government 
until there came upon us the eve of an election. You say that $100 
million will do a great deal, but I think, if I remember your 
announcement, it’s $100 million over five years. 
 
So let us not take that $100 million as if it’s a total solution, 
because I’m not convinced that it is. I don’t think that the 
deliverers in the health care system are convinced that it is. 
You’re going to find that some of the positions which are going 
to be filled with this new funding are positions which already 
existed, and that the net increase of positions will not be as great 
as what you think, or what you would like to suggest it might be. 
I say that, and I think time will prove — whether you’re the 
government or whether we’re the government — the time will 
prove within a short period of time that your announcement will 
not meet the need because it will not do all of the things that you 
have suggested it will do. 
 
Now, another concern that I know that has been expressed to you 
is the way that bedside nursing staff is allocated. Now I do not 
pretend to be an expert on the formula, and it’s been some time 
since I was in your particular chair . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Pat Smith would have the formula. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — She might. But I know there has been a 
concern expressed by people about what they call the formula 
that is used to finance bedside nursing staff. How have you 
responded to the suggestion, and how are you using some of the 
suggestions, if you are at all, in making the new allocations under 
your new fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, just to set the record a bit straight 
again, the member opposite says that he doesn’t think $100 
million is that significant. He questions as to whether it will 
satisfy the need. Well I’ll just say one thing and rest my case 
there. One hundred million dollars and a five-year patient care 
improvement program will go a lot further to addressing the need 
than the 5 per cent cut brought in in ’76 by your government. 
Let’s not forget that. We’re talking about staffing. Let’s not 
forget about the 5 per cent cut that came in on the 1st of July ’76, 
at a time when the government opposite decided that buying 
potash mines was more important than staffing the  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

 

599 
 

hospitals of this province. Let’s not forget that, certainly. 
 
Let me indicate to you that I have been in discussion with the 
boards, board chairmen, the executive directors — my deputy has 
— and I’m sure that we can implement and use those positions 
in the best manner possible. And I encourage, I encourage the 
nurses to make their suggestions known, through the channels 
that are available to them with the director of nursing who will 
have, I’m sure, some input into, and considerable input into the 
deployment of personnel within the hospital that they would 
represent. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I might just add to 
the minister in what he wants obviously to get into a debate on, 
I’m not sure what we’d achieve by doing that, that back in 1975 
or ’76 or ’77 up to 1982, we did not have 6,000 people on a 
waiting list in the city of Saskatoon and an equal or even a greater 
amount in the city of Regina. So for you to stand up, Mr. 
Minister, and boast proudly about your achievements in health 
care, I think the statistics which are your own statistics, not 
necessarily only my statistics, put a lie to your claim that there 
has been such significant improvement. 
 
But rather than debate, let me come back to the question because 
you failed to answer the question, Mr. Minister. Are you, in 
allocating the positions which you claim will be provided under 
this additional funding, applying any other criteria or any other 
formula other than the one that’s always existed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I think probably one of the systems 
that you’re referring to is the NISS (Nursing Information 
Systems of Saskatchewan) system that we have been talking 
about with the nurses for some time and presently we’re 
evaluating that system. Some areas are perhaps looking at maybe 
implementing it. But with the $100 million component, it’s safe 
to say that when that is put into place, our system will be staffed 
as well as any other system in Canada. We’ll meet the Canadian 
standards with that. I think that’s a very good achievement. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to raise 
the issue of nursing staff in our rural hospitals. And it’s an issue 
that we have heard over and over again as our candidates have 
met with Saskatchewan Union of Nurses at meetings throughout 
the province, and they’ve had a number of them — all-candidates 
meetings in Estevan and in Saskatoon and Regina and a number 
of other places — where they have been outlining very clearly 
and articulately that there is a severe shortage of nursing staff at 
our base hospitals — where nurses no longer do nursing, but are 
basically fillers out of forms and runners here and there to deal 
with emergencies, because they don’t have time to do the nursing 
that they are trained to do. 
 
But in the constituency of Shaunavon, what we have found is that 
in none of the hospitals have we had an increase in nursing staff. 
And I hear you say that you have increased a number of positions 
at different hospitals around the province. And I hear the nurses 
say clearly to us, that you haven’t. And there’s a very great 
discrepancy between the people who work in the hospitals and 
between the Minister of Health. 
 

 
And I wonder if you could, for us, give us the list of hospitals 
where there has been an increase in nursing staff component in 
the past four years. Can you give me the hospitals that have more 
nurses on staff now than they had when you took over? I wonder 
if you would. You must have those numbers available, and if you 
would give me the list, read them out to me, then we’ll have a 
little discussion on where these increases have taken place. 
 
Because I don’t know about other members of this Assembly, but 
I do know that the member for Regina North East and myself, 
who have met with the nursing staff at a number of a meetings, 
are telling us that the increases you talked about, whether they 
are at 500 as you say at some meetings or 300 at others, they say 
all they can find is 20 new nursing positions at the bedside. That’s 
what they tell us, 20 positions. 
 
And we would like to tonight, if we could in the hour that’s left, 
get to the bottom of this, to find out where these increases have 
been. And we would like to go hospital by hospital to find out 
who is telling the truth, the nurses who work in the hospitals, who 
say there has been an increase of 20 at the bedside, or whether 
it’s the Minister of Health, who says there is 300 or 500 increase 
in staff since he has become minister. 
 
And if you could give me the list of hospitals where there’s been 
an increase in bedside nursing staff component in the past four 
years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, I’d be pleased to do that. I 
did this about two nights ago, but I’ll go through the list again for 
the member. He may have lost the figures I gave him. 
 
The total for the small community hospitals is 44.68 increase. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where are they at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I’ll have to get you the little 
hospitals. That’s grouped together. 
 
The total for the large community hospitals is 34.44; the total for 
the regional hospitals is 55.44; the total for the base hospitals is 
229.01; for the total for general hospitals of 363.57. Add on the 
Wascana of 2.04, which gives you a grand total of 365.61. 
 
This is graduate nurses in nursing services increase from March 
31, 1982 to January 31, 1986. 
 
(2100) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I would like to ask the minister: are these 
filled positions or are they positions on the books, or are they 
nurses increase in actual staff? 
 
What we are having a great deal of difficulty in believing is that 
SUN and June Blau and the nurses are not accurate when they 
give the list of positions, for example, at the  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

 

600 
 

base hospitals. And I’m not talking about additions, but talking 
about the existing facilities that were there in 1982 and how many 
nursing positions have increased in each of those wards. And 
we’ll go through that. 
 
I want to be clear, though, about the filled positions and the 
vacant positions in the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — This is the Saskatchewan Hospital Services 
Plan general and rehabilitation hospitals actual full-time 
equivalent staff, graduate nurses, in nursing services, increase or 
decrease from March 31, ’82 to January 31 of ’86. 
 
These figures that I’ve read to you have been compiled by the 
hospitals. Now if you want to question the hospital boards it 
seems that that is something . . . You seem to be questioning the 
authenticity of the hospital boards, and so on . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well you’re questioning the boards. This figure 
came right from the boards. Now you’re questioning it. That’s 
you. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Give me the list. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There they are — right there. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where are they? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I’ll read them off to you. Certainly. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Send them over. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I won’t send them over. I’ll read them off. 
Take them down. Take notes. Just sit down and take notes . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I think the people out there 
where the hospital is would like to hear. They have every right. 
They’re watching the television. Why would I want to keep it a 
secret from them? You might want to, but I certainly don’t. 
 
Let’s start with Estevan, 4.16; Humboldt, 6.76; Lloydminster, 
2.55; Melfort, 10.45; Melville, 6.44; Nipawin, 3.16; Weyburn, 
0.92; for a total of 34.44. 
 
Now let’s go to the regional ones. Moose Jaw Providence, 4.90; 
Moose Jaw Union, 5.13; North Battleford, 15.76; P.A. Holy 
Family, 7.62; P.A. Victoria, 6.31; Swift Current, 7.14; Yorkton, 
8.58; Regina General, 65.13; Regina Pasqua, 21.97; Regina 
Plains, 21.05; Saskatoon City, 18.95; Saskatoon University, 
79.62; for a total of 229.01. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, you can quote all the figures 
you want. The fact of the matter is that the problems in the health 
care delivery system have been severe. It’s one thing to talk about 
what you could call approved positions and something else to talk 
about positions that have always been filled on a continuing 
basis. And quite frankly, I just don’t believe you. And neither 
does the public believe you that these positions have been filled 
to such an extent that it has done anything to improve the 
situation in the health care delivery system. 
 
I told you a minute ago about the 6,000 and more people  

on the waiting lists in the hospitals in Saskatoon. That has grown, 
Mr. Minister. That has something like tripled in the last four 
years. So even though you may have, as you say, increased the 
staff components, something has gone wrong because there is a 
failure in meeting the need. Now I might remind you, sir, that the 
staff component in the hospital consists not only of nurses but it 
consists of other staff as well. And I’m going to give you some 
specific examples. 
 
Let me give you the example of the Regina General Hospital 
which I happen to have some numbers on. And this is the support 
staff. And you cannot consider how you have met the problem in 
the hospitals until you recognize the fact that everybody in the 
hospital is a team working together to deliver a service. Well 
here’s what you have done with your glorious policies at the 
Regina General Hospital. In 1982, Mr. Minister, there were 795 
support staff in the Regina General Hospital. This is in October 
of 1982. On March 1st of 1986, there were 718 support staff in 
the Regina General Hospital — a reduction of 77 people in that 
hospital on staff. 
 
That is a tremendous reduction in staff considering that the 
patient load and the kind of patient load has been changing in that 
there are patients now who are in our hospital and occupy 
hospital beds who are much more severe cases, who have longer 
periods of stay, and need a lot more care. What’s your answer? 
You reduce the staff. 
 
Mr. Minister, there were 134 part-time staff in October of 1982. 
And on March 1st of 1986 there were 183 part-time staff — 
another reduction. So in support staff in October of 1982, in total 
part-time and full-time, there were 929 staff; by March the 1st of 
1986, just a little bit more than a month ago, there were 901 
permanent and part-time support staff. 
 
Now I would like you to stand up in this House and say that that 
has been an increase in support staff at the Regina General 
Hospital. And if these figures you have to accept, and if you 
accept them, I would like you to tell us why, and how you can 
justify, such a reduction of staff in a hospital as major as the 
Regina General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Let’s look at the Regina General for a 
moment. And again the members opposite . . . I want to make this 
very, very clear. The decisions of running the Regina General 
Hospital are made by the Regina General Hospital board. And it 
has become very evident to me that the members opposite are 
attacking the board. 
 
Now I want to tell you what the Regina General Hospital board 
has been doing. While they have been reducing some of the 
support staff, in that same period of time they have improved the 
registered nursing component by 65.13. That board has made a 
decision to put more nurses into the hospital and perhaps reduce 
some of the support staff. 
 
But let us look at the Regina General Hospital from another point 
of view. These are all hospitals in Regina — the Regina waiting 
list, a very interesting thing to look at. In June 1975, the year 
when they were deciding they should cut the staff back, there 
were 3,282 people waiting to get into Regina hospitals — 3,282 
people. November  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

 

601 
 

of ’86, there were 2,511 people waiting to get into Regina 
hospitals — a considerable reduction in waiting lists here in 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I somewhat question those 
figures, and I’m sure that . . . I question them a lot, because I 
think that the real figures are not those. And you know it, sir. You 
know it. 
 
Now did I . . . I heard you say that you have increased over four 
years. In four years you have increased the nursing component of 
the Regina General, or at least announced it, by 64. Well even if 
you have, that does not make up for the 77 permanent position 
and support staff which you have cut. So even when you consider 
that increase, and then consider the support staff which is lost, 
there is a net loss of personnel in the Regina General Hospital, 
and you can’t deny it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The figures of the waiting list — and I 
would say it’s from the Graham Clarkson report of 1975; that’s 
when he indicated the list of 3,282. And I made an error here. It 
isn’t November, but it’s right now that the waiting list is 2,511 in 
Regina hospitals. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the minister a 
couple of questions about the area of rural hospitals. Where the 
argument is being made, and I think appropriately so, that on 
shifts in the small rural hospital we have one nursing staff on 
duty. And this problem is growing with an increasing number of 
rural hospitals where they have one person on staff on the late 
shift. 
 
And what happens from time to time, as you will be well aware, 
when an emergency comes up or if there is an emergency 
admission, and the problems associated with the one person on 
staff trying to take care of the number of people on the ward, as 
well as do the emergency work, you will realize very quickly the 
dilemma the nursing staff find themselves in. If they are called 
on to use the telephone to call the doctor and try to admit 
someone, as well as take care of patients on the ward, you find 
that there is a real dilemma which occurs. Now this problem has 
been around for some time, but is one that the Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses is now saying is growing, and growing at leaps 
and bounds. 
 
Now here again, we have a problem of who to believe. We 
choose to believe the nurses because they’re telling us it’s a 
growing problem. And yet at the meeting in Regina, we heard 
you explain how there are less hospitals in fact that have this 
problem associated with them. 
 
And I would like you to tell us whether or not funding is included 
in this budget, which would allow all of the rural hospitals to 
have a minimum of two nursing staff on at any one time. This is 
basically what we’re calling for, and what the nursing staff is 
calling for, and many doctors in the province are saying is needed 
to solve the problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly, in discussions just recently with 
the SHA — that would be Hewitt Helmsing, the executive 
director; and Bernie McCallion, the president — they indicate 
that there have been approximately 60 hospitals that have 
rectified this situation. So we are considering, to see what we can 
do,  

to see how many more of them are suffering from the situation 
as you outlined. We will be looking at this. I can’t say for sure if 
we can rectify every one in this coming year, but certainly 60 of 
them — that’s from the SHA — have been rectified at this time. 
And we are seeing what can be done for the other ones. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Will you give me a number on the hospitals 
where this problem exists at the present time? Because as we 
have heard very clearly from the nurses that it is occurring in a 
large number of areas. And even in the city hospitals on some of 
the wards, it exists from time to time when the lack of staffing in 
the evenings or in the night is causing a great deal of concern, 
both to the patients and to the security of the hospital where you 
may have, oh, for example, an emergency where a stabbing 
occurs and the individual who is stabbed comes to the hospital 
along with a number of other people, and the nurses who are 
doing the admitting aren’t sure whether the assailant is with the 
crowd, and it causes a great deal of confusion and concern, both 
about the safety of the other patients in the hospital as well as the 
safety of the people who are working on that ward. 
 
And I hear you saying again, another area you’ve taken care of 
and there’s no problem. But what amazes me, at a time when 
you’ve taken care of all of the problems in health, we have the 
doctors going on strike, as I have mentioned earlier, where we 
have the chiropractors who are talking in unkind terms about the 
minister and his lack of consultation with them before changes to 
the Act occurred which ruled out extra-billing for them, we have 
nurses rallying and demonstrating on the steps of the legislature. 
And what people are saying in the health care area is quite 
different than what the minister is saying. He’s saying there’s no 
problems and he’s taken care of everything. And on the other 
hand, we have health care workers who are saying, we simply 
can’t afford four more years of Grant Devine, or Premier Devine, 
and this Minister of Health. Obviously we have a difficulty of 
credibility. 
 
(2115) 
 
What I would say to you is: how many hospitals does this 
problem exist at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We believe approximately about 40. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Then I would ask the other question: is 
there money in the budget this year to deal with that problem at 
the 40 hospitals where they’re having a problem with 
understaffing and the problem that is associated with having only 
one nurse on staff for those late shifts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly there’s money in the five-year 
plan to address staffing in, I would imagine, every hospital in 
Saskatchewan in this immediate year. As I said, we are in 
consultation with the hospitals right now, and I think that is the 
correct thing to be doing, because after all, they run the hospitals. 
I come up with the funding to put forth the staffing components, 
and I believe that $100 million is a very good figure — a strong 
commitment to that type of staff enrichment. 
 
  



 
April 14, 1986 

 

602 
 

We will be having discussion and dialogue, and I’m sure that 
over the period of the patient care enrichment, the problems that 
are alluded to will certainly be rectified. I can say that a good 
number of them will be fixed up this year, and I want to give the 
hospital boards credit for the 60 that have been fixed to date. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Can you give a commitment then today 
that in your budget you will have moneys available to those 40 
hospital boards so they can staff up so a minimum of two nurses 
will be on staff at any time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I can say that over the five-year program, 
because it is spread over five years of patient care enrichment, 
that certainly many of these things, and I hope all of them, will 
be rectified. A good number of them will be this year. 
 
The number of positions that we’re putting in this year is, I think, 
very credible. And certainly many of these things will be 
addressed. But to say that each and every one would be, I can’t 
say that with a degree of certainty. I can feel that over the length 
of the program they will be. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — You’re saying that the five-year plan is 
going to solve all the problems. And of course what you’re saying 
is, trust us and after the next election, if you elect us, we’ll solve 
the problems we’ve created for the last four years. And that takes 
a great leap in faith for the people of the province, especially in 
the rural areas where you have done nothing to solve their 
problems of staff shortages, to say to the Minister of Health, look, 
right after the next election we’re going to solve your shortages. 
And I hear the minister saying not that there is money in the 
budget for the increase in staffing, but instead what we’re hearing 
is, right after the next election we’re going to solve that problem. 
 
But I want to get clear on the issue of the 40 hospitals where the 
problems exist. How many of them this year will be taken care 
of? I don’t want to know how many you are going to take care of 
if you’re in power for ever, because I simply don’t believe you’re 
going to be in there very long. But in this year’s budget, of the 
40 hospitals, how many will have an increase in funding to staff 
up their hospitals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, Mr. Chairman, when I look 
at the figures of what we’re putting in this year, 331 positions as 
enrichment and 21 for operating new facilities in the hospitals — 
352 new nursing positions; and in the special care homes, 130 for 
enrichment and 200 for operating new facilities — 330 new 
positions. So I can’t say that every one will be addressed, but I 
think that is a substantial commitment. 
 
And I couldn’t stand here and state at this time anyways, because 
we don’t dictate to them and say like the government opposite 
when they were in government used to do, send out a directive 
saying, you shall be cut by 5 per cent. We don’t do that. We sit 
down with the hospitals, as I said we’re doing today, sitting down 
with the hospitals and saying, look, what staffing component can 
we come up with that will satisfy the needs. 
 
I have made it very clear I want to see those at the bedside.  

And we will work with each and every hospital in Saskatchewan 
in that type of matter. As I said, the consultants have been 
instructed to go out and have discussions with the boards who 
decide the staff in their hospital. 
 
So those consultations are going on with SHSP at this time, and 
certainly we will continue that. But to stand here and say, this 
hospital will get 0.2 or 0.5 — that isn’t the way we do it. We go 
out and meet with them, and in concert and in consultation, we 
arrive at a figure that is acceptable. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, Mr. Minister, 
I listened carefully when you listed off the positions that you 
were increasing by the 300 and some you were talking about. Not 
one of the 40 hospitals were mentioned that have only one person 
on. I happen to know the severity of that situation. I’ve raised this 
with you in previous Health estimates. 
 
When the small hospital in Coronach, where they have the coal 
mine down there and have the power plant, we suggested to you, 
what are you going to do about that position that hospital is still 
on when they have a night shift with one person? The same thing 
applies to Lafleche; all the hospitals in that area that are down to 
the one person on at a time. 
 
Those 40 hospitals are still there. You’ve listed these numbers. 
Not one of those little hospitals were included. And I don’t 
believe you’re serious about helping. Then you can stand back 
up and say, oh 350 . . . a grand plan we’ve got is going to do some 
good. It’s not doing any good for those little hospitals, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
I think you haven’t named one of those that’s going to improve 
their lot and improve their position, especially when an 
emergency arises. And if we wouldn’t have faithful people, like 
at Lafleche where the administrator is on duty 24 hours a day — 
he’s always there, him or his wife, and they go there when they’re 
needed. If it’s a car accident or whatever, they have to go. And 
there’s only one person on, and sometimes that person has 
trouble even getting to a phone, like my colleague suggested, if 
an emergency or an accident happens or something in the 
vicinity. 
 
So I think it’s imperative on you to make an extra position 
available. Maybe it’s only a nurse’s aid in some of those cases. 
That doesn’t have to be two RNs; I’m not asking for that. But I 
think it should be two people. It should be two people. And you 
have no intentions of improving the lots of the small hospitals 
across Saskatchewan. You like to talk, and you like to put out a 
. . . (inaudible) . . . oh our 100 million’s going to do it. But you 
have no intentions of affecting those small hospitals. 
 
I’d like to know from you, precisely on those 40 hospitals, what 
your intentions or what your plan is that is going to affect how 
many people are on duty there during the night? What is your 
plan to solve that problem? Are you making more money 
available? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well that’s exactly what we’re doing, as I 
said previously, is we’re meeting with the hospitals  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

 

603 
 

now. It’s in process. 
 
And you can scoff at a hundred million dollar patient care 
improvement program. You know, you can make fun of it. But I 
will just say again, it’s a heck of a lot better than a five per cent 
cut, and that’s what you’re known for, was a five per cent cut . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . That’s correct. That is the truth. July 
the 1, ’76 — do you want me to read the letter again? I will do it. 
I will duplicate it and give you a copy. So don’t sit there and try 
and deny it. It’s the actual fact. 
 
So I would think our program is going to go a long way to 
addressing many of these needs, and the consultation, as I say, is 
taking place with the hospitals at this time. 
 
Mr. Engel: — There’s no hope in store for the small hospitals 
that we’ve been discussing at this time, that the nurses have 
raised with us, or are saying the severity of the situation that’s 
placed on them and the responsibility that’s placed on them, 
when only one person’s on during the night — only one person 
at a time. And I’m saying to you, Mr. Minister, you have no 
intentions of helping out those small hospitals or encouraging or 
expanding on their facilities. 
 
Another hospital that has some problems is a place like 
Gravelbourg. Before you were Minister of Health, there were 
plans in place that that hospital would start a remodelling 
program that would bring their service on one floor. You know, 
the multiple level floor that they have there. They had plans in 
place. Last year I asked you: when are you going to consider that 
project? 
 
Gravelbourg still isn’t on your five-year list. You haven’t even 
got it on your five-year plan. What are they supposed to look 
forward to with you and these grandiose numbers? There’s 
nothing there to look forward to with your administration. 
 
You don’t care about rural Saskatchewan and the small hospitals 
out there. You have a few you concentrate on, and those are the 
areas you want to work at. And I’d like to see you have a plan in 
place that would affect the health delivery system that some of 
these hospitals in our smaller towns could provide the service that 
would take the pressure off the regional hospitals and the city 
hospitals. You could be delivering a service in the rural area that 
would make the difference, that would even alleviate the pressure 
they’re facing in the cities. And we’re not getting any staffing 
there. I didn’t hear Gravelbourg on your list of those that are 
increasing their patient load. 
 
I came in to see officials in your department. I had a good 
hearing. But nothing has changed. They still haven’t got the extra 
staff they asked for. And I think that’s something you should 
consider very seriously, especially when there’s a unique plant 
that has patients’ levels on various levels or floors, where it takes 
more staff to consider that kind of delivery of health care, rather 
than if you’re doing it on one floor. If you’re not going to help 
them with a remodelling job, at least give them the extra staff 
component they require to look after properly and do what they 
feel they should do. 
 
And so, just to make a flying trip through and have a  

political meeting down in Gravelbourg didn’t do the job for you 
down there, sir. I want to say they’re disappointed. They’re 
disappointed in your delivery and the service you’re providing 
there. 
 
But what I’m saying now: of the small hospitals that are down 
there, that have only one in there, will you take another look at 
it, and will you provide them that additional position that they 
could hire an aide or somebody that will be there with the RN 
that’s on during the night? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I don’t have to take another look at 
it. I just said, we’re sitting down and negotiating and dealing with 
the hospitals and reviewing it right now. I was down in 
Gravelbourg. We went to the hospital. There was about 30 people 
that went over to the hospital and went all through it. You know 
the one they thing they told me: get rid of him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well I can tell you, Mr. Minister, what I can tell 
you, Mr. Minister, when you were pointing, when you were 
pointing at who they were supposed to get rid of, that’s not what 
they told me about it. Because the Gravelbourg people weren’t 
too happy for you coming down and trying to make an 
announcement and calling it a political meeting and selling 
tickets and telling people: you come to our political meeting and 
we’ll make a little announcement for you. Well I’ll tell you they 
were very disappointed in the announcement that you made, Mr. 
Minister. I’ll put that on record. And they’ll say: we’ve got his 
number, because it’s just political games he’s playing with us. 
And there is no sincerity there. No sincerity there as to what 
you're going to do for us. 
 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, your days in that position 
are numbered if that’s the way you’re going to respond to the 
problems that people in rural Saskatchewan are facing. The 
question I have for you: are you going to consider two positions? 
Are you going to consider two positions in the Lafleche hospital, 
for example? Let’s take one hospital at a time. Lafleche hospital 
where they have only one position on during the night, are you 
going to consider a second position there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I don’t think it would be right for me 
to sit here and allocate staff without discussion with the hospitals. 
I’ll have my officials meeting with the hospitals throughout 
Saskatchewan, and certainly we’ll look at the needs. And of the 
bodies that are available, we will try and put those into places 
where they can do the best work for the province of 
Saskatchewan and satisfy needs that are there. And that’s the 
commitment I make in Gravelbourg, Lafleche, Moosomin, 
Carrot River; many of them may fit into that package. 
 
Certainly, I think from the figures I read out, between 1982 and 
’86, the 365.61 positions indicate that that has been ongoing over 
the last four years and with the $100 million commitment there 
will be much more of it in the next five years. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Not one of the hospitals we’ve been suggesting 
and we’ve been talking about are on that list.  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

 

604 
 

Since you’ve been in office in 1982, not one can expect any 
improvement from you as far as the future is concerned. How 
many of those new positions that you’re talking about, how many 
of those are positions that have been filled since ’85? How many 
new positions have you granted in one year? What are your plans 
for the coming year? How many of those 350 are this year’s 
increased spaces? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — We put in 95 last year. These are the figures 
from March 31, ’82 to January 31, ’86. So none of them are this 
year. This will be the new $100 million program that will be 
where the positions will be coming from as we are doing the 
discussions and negotiations and review with the hospitals now. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Engel: — So what you’re saying is that since you were 
Minister of Health you’ve filled 352 additional positions, and 
what you’re saying is that you’ve got another 100 million now 
that are going to be available. How much of that $100 million is 
going to be spent this coming year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Twelve point nine million in hospitals. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Of that 12.9 million increased positions in 
hospitals, how many do you anticipate will be spent in hospitals 
that have less than 25 beds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Until we finish our negotiations and 
discussions and review with the hospitals, I can’t give you that 
figure at this time because we’re sitting down and working with 
some of them right at this present time. So we don’t know if 
we’re going to put 40 here or 30 there or 20. It’s only right to go 
and talk to the hospitals. And that’s what we’re doing. That’s 
what we will continue to do. 
 
Mr. Engel: — So there’s no guarantee that when you’re through 
negotiating, you’ve got a $100 million carrot there, and you’re 
going to talk to these 300-and-some hospitals; there’s no 
guarantee how that money is going to be meted out, or that you’re 
going to spend the 12 million. Are you going to spend the 12 
million. Are you going to consider the hospitals that have only 
one on — those 40 positions — are you going to give them some 
serious consideration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly. Within the total program, we’re 
going to be discussing this with the hospitals. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Of the 40 hospitals that have only one on at a time, 
will you make a commitment tonight saying that 20 of them will 
get a second staff person? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, you don’t understand the process that 
we’re going through. I can’t do that. I make the commitment that 
with this program that we have, that we’re going to be 
addressing, I’ve talked to the SHA about this; we’re going to be 
addressing the needs in the hospitals, but I don’t want to mislead 
anyone. I couldn’t say that I’m going to deal with 20, or I’m 
going to deal 10, or 35, or 32 of them. I can say that over the 
course of this enrichment program we’re going to be dealing with 
all the hospitals and seeing if we can use those funds to address 
the needs that they have there. 

Mr. Engel: — When it comes to getting your attention, Mr. 
Minister, when it comes to getting your attention, a place like 
Coronach or Rockglen or Lafleche have a lot more trouble 
getting your ear than major city hospitals do. 
 
And what I’m saying to you tonight is: you’re saying you got 
about $12 million for these hospitals for increased positions this 
coming year. Of that $12 million, will you at least say that 20 of 
those hospitals will have that problem alleviated where they have 
one person on at night — just 20. Only 20 positions out of $12 
million. It’s peanuts, but it’s half the hospitals that are on with 
one at a time. Why not at least make a commitment that those 20 
will get one person each? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I make the commitment that we’ll deal with 
all the hospitals in Saskatchewan with the same manner of sitting 
down and consulting with each and every one of those. That is 
our intent. We have a five-year program in which hope to rectify 
their staffing needs during that period of time. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well, Mr. Minister, if you have a commitment to 
satisfy that need and cover off that problem that’s serious, will 
you now say that you’re going to deal with it, because those 
hospitals don’t enter into the competition when you’re dealing 
with only $12 million. Regina could use the whole amount to 
cover off the waiting list and the care that’s needed. Regina could 
eat it all up. 
 
So all I’m saying to you, Mr. Minister, is that there’s some rural 
hospitals out there that have a serious problem. The ones that 
nurses have been raising is the ones where they’re on one at a 
time during the night. That one position we’re saying: make a 
commitment that at least 20 of them — at least half of them this 
first year, you’re saying over five years you’re going to do all 40 
— at least get a start and prove that you mean business and give 
it a commitment that those will get some help so that some of 
them know it’s worth asking you for that additional service. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think some of the guidelines that we want 
to be dealing with the hospitals — so that we have to be 
consistent in how we deal with them — there has to be uniformity 
and fairness, and that’s the commitment that I make, that we do 
that. 
 
Mr. Engel: — One more time, Mr. Chairman. Do you admit that 
that . . . You admitted that there’s a problem in those 40 hospitals. 
You admitted that. Now we’re saying to you: prove that you’re a 
man and show some leadership. You haven’t all night; you 
haven’t all afternoon. You haven’t stood up and said that. For 
five days we haven’t got a commitment or an answer from you. 
 
On this one issue, Mr. Minister, that is bothering . . . Over half 
the hospitals in my riding have that problem — all but two. All 
but two hospitals in my constituency have that problem where 
there’s only one on at night. Would you say that in all of 
Saskatchewan, in the 40 you have, you’ll make a start? If you’re 
not going to do 20, will you do 15,  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

 

605 
 

Mr. Minister? Will you do at least 15? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, the start has already been 
made. We’re in consultation and discussion with the hospitals, 
and we will try to do what we can to address those needs. And I 
feel very confident, with 350-some nursing positions going into 
the hospitals, many of the needs will be met this year. And 
certainly, as we implement the remainder of the five-year staffing 
enrichment program, I think the remainder of them will be 
rectified also. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well you sound an awful lot like Gordon Grant 
did, that used to be the minister of Health here in Saskatchewan 
when we had the last right-wing government. The commitment 
that these small hospitals are getting sounds very, very much like 
that of Gordon Grant. And you know what the mayor of 
Gravelbourg said about him when he was a physician in 
Lafleche? He said, “Methinketh you are sticking a knife in my 
back and turning it a little.” That was his words. 
 
Those were the words he said about that minister of Health, and 
methinks the same thing is true of this minister of Health. If you 
won’t give a commitment of any kind that you’re going to help 
those hospitals with the lot they’re facing, methinketh you’ve got 
a knife in their back, and you’re going to make them bleed a little. 
 
I’m wondering, how secure are those little hospitals? How 
serious are you about care down there if you’re not prepared to 
make a commitment for them. I’m telling you that I stood up to 
that man in 1967; I stood up to that man in 1971, and those are 
the grounds I was elected on. 
 
If you want to stand up in this Assembly and tell the people of 
Saskatchewan that you heard in Gravelbourg from 20 people that 
you’ve got to get rid of this guy, I want to tell you, you’re 
treading on very, very thin ice, because I don’t believe that. When 
it comes to protecting and defending and taking care of and 
fighting for the needs of my hospitals, I am not ashamed of my 
track record. 
 
I want to ask you one more time: if you won’t give a commitment 
for 20, if you won’t give a commitment for 15, why not at least 
give a commitment for one-fifth of them. Come across with 10. 
Come across with 10 and say that over the next four years we’re 
going to do all of them — you said so — that’s a problem; we’re 
going to take care of it. Let’s prove it and say that tonight you’re 
going to tell us 10 of them are going to get their first — 10 of 
them are going to get the help so there’s not only one on duty at 
night; that you’re going to make a reasonable start; that the 
commitment you mean is serious, and that some of them can look 
forward to with hope, saying we’re going to get our extra buck. 
We’re going to get enough money to have that second person on. 
 
Give us that commitment that you at least are confident and 
honest in the answer and that this year, this year, because we 
know you’re afraid to call an election — there’s not going to be 
an election — so we have to deal with this year’s problem. We 
have to deal with the problem that’s facing us this year because 
we’re going to have to live with you throughout this coming year. 
 

So will you give us a commitment that 10 of those 40 hospitals 
will get the second staff member? Or are you saying that that 
$100 million promise there was just an election promise. We’ll 
throw a number out there and make the people happy and say, 
we’re expanding by $12 million this coming year. Give the same 
commitment for those 40 hospitals, and I’ll know you have 
something serious about you — some honesty, some integrity, 
something we can trust. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, there goes Mr. Consistency again. 
When he stood to rise to question me he said, well there isn’t 
going to be an election; there won’t be an election. Before he sits 
down he says, it’s just an election promise, just an election 
promise. I mean, could you for once tonight get one thing 
straight? You would be a lot easier to deal with if you could. 
 
But I will give you my commitment. I will give you the 
commitment to rural hospitals in Saskatchewan. First of all, I’ll 
tell you that we instituted a rural medical practice study which 
many communities are looking together at amalgamating and 
trying to bring together a practice where they can have two or 
three hospitals work together. They can work together and have 
the doctor in one town and in the second town and in a third town 
cover the other hospitals. Therefore, then those hospitals will stay 
as they are, but they will have constant medical practice on the 
weekends, and one doctor could cover for the other. 
 
I will tell you what else we’re doing for small hospitals in 
Saskatchewan, and this is far different than anything else that 
happened. They were crying out for this. For 11 years they cried 
out for some kind of indication that their viability would 
continue, and we have instituted integrated facilities. 
 
And I’ll just tell you some of the small hospitals, and I challenge 
you to go to these towns and ask them are they not happy with 
the action that’s taken place? I’d ask you to go up in to the 
member from Meadow Lake’s seat. Go to Goodsoil; try that one 
for example — they’re getting an integrated facility. The sod was 
turned just the other day in Goodsoil. Go down to Lampman. 
Lampman are getting an integrated facility this year. Lucky Lake, 
another area with an integrated facility. Nokomis, they’re getting 
an integrated facility this year. Rabbit Lake, another integrated 
facility, and Rose Valley. Those are the ones for this year. 
 
And for ’87-88, and they’re into their planning stages now, places 
like: Cabri are getting an integrated facility; Leoville, Loon Lake, 
Montmartre, Theodore — all of these small hospitals that are 
being moved into integrated facilities; ’86-87 — Dinsmore, 
Fillmore — and there was a horror story. 
 
Let me tell you of the disservice and the friction that was caused 
between the towns of Fillmore and Stoughton when they were in 
government. They couldn’t get anything. They would have to tell 
them, well you couldn’t go first or you can’t go first. When I took 
over as Minister of Health there was a regular animosity out 
there. Today, let me tell you that Stoughton has a brand-new 
nursing home, and Fillmore are getting a brand new integrated  
  



 
April 14, 1986 

 

606 
 

facility. Couple that with Gainsborough and Mankota for the year 
’86-87. 
 
And let’s go to ’88-89 and you’ll see Craik and Eatonia and Kyle 
and Midale. Now there’s some of the commitments to small-town 
hospitals throughout Saskatchewan from this government; 
couple that with the rural medical practice and you’re going to 
see an insurance and a great improvement of medical services to 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — The town of Coronach had a hospital that was 
serving their needs when there were 300 people, Mr. Minister. 
The town of Coronach has grown to 1,200. They’re still in the 
same little hospital. Plans were drawn; a site was purchased; the 
lot was there in 1981. How come they’re not on your five-year 
plan for an integrated system? They were ready to go in 1981 for 
construction in ’82, and you got elected and turned them down. 
How come that hospital isn’t on your five-year list, or are you 
going to integrate that service with three hospitals around there 
and close one down? What are your plans? What are your plans, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
How come Coronach’s not on your list? How come Lafleche isn’t 
on your list? How come Gravelbourg isn’t on your list? Those 
hospitals had plans, had approvals by your good officials in 
Health saying that they need the improvements; they were ready 
to go, and all of a sudden there’s no money for them. They’re not 
even on your five-year list. 
 
And you’re trying to tell me that you haven’t got a vendetta 
against small hospitals? Which one of them are you going to 
close? Or are you going to do like Gordon Grant did when he was 
Minister of Health, and pulled the rug out from under Hodgeville; 
pulled the rug out from under Willow Bunch; pulled the rug out 
from under Mossbank — is that what your intentions are? 
 
What are you going to do at Rockglen? Are you going to close it, 
or are you going to fix it up? What are you going to do at 
Coronach? What are you going to do at Lafleche? What are you 
going to do at Gravelbourg? Are you going to build them, or are 
you going to make them wait? 
 
They spent their money on blueprints; they spent their money on 
their studies, and they don’t even get on your five-year list. 
Where are you at? How come you see some and don’t see others? 
I have some hospitals there; I’ve been raising this issue. This is 
the fifth time, Mr. Minister, we’ve been debating those very 
hospitals. You’ve yet to spend a buck. Who am I supposed to 
believe? 
 
We were discussing when you were sitting over here where 
McLeod’s sitting now, when you were Minister of Health — the 
member for Meadow Lake — when you were sitting over where 
the member from Meadow Lake’s sitting. 
 
(2145) 
 
The first time we talked about it, we talked about the  

hospital at Lafleche and their desire to provide some service for 
senior citizens. We talked about it before you thought of 
integrated systems, before there was a combination of health and 
social services. You finally got it together, and I complimented 
you. 
 
How come you still haven’t done anything? Those people don’t 
believe you any more, Mr. Minister. People across the South 
don’t believe that you exist. They don’t think there’s a Minister 
of Health. 
 
I asked you tonight, and I’m consistent. I started with 20 hospitals 
— you wouldn’t look at it. I went down to 15 — you wouldn’t 
look at it. I went down to 10 — you wouldn’t give us a 
commitment. I’ll tell you what: will you promise one of my 
hospitals that you’ll do it? Just one. Give us a commitment that 
one more of those 40 will get an extra staff member. How about 
that? I can’t go smaller than that otherwise it’s going backwards 
like it’s been going ever since you’ve been a minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I will give the same commitment. I have 
visited some of the hospitals he’s talking about; those people 
have been in to see me. I will give the same commitment, as I 
will to anyone else in Saskatchewan, that they will be dealt with 
fairly, the same as every other hospital, equitably, and we are 
looking at that process at this time and in consultation with them 
— each and every hospital. We have a five-year plan. 
 
I know it just annoys them terrible — the people who cut staffing. 
Don’t ever forget that people. They were the ones that cut the 
staffing in the hospitals of Saskatchewan. We’re the ones that are 
building on that. And a considerable amount of money is going 
to build up the staffing components — $100 million. That $100 
million will be applied equitably and fairly across Saskatchewan 
hospitals. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:47 p.m. 
 


