


















































April 1, 1986 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 1, 1986 
 

261 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — I hereby present and lay on the Table a petition on 
behalf of Ms. Zazelenchuk – Of Orest Olekshy, Phillip 
Eriksson, and Dennis Pehach, of the city of Saskatoon, in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Shand Power Plant 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a 
question to the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation, the Deputy Premier. And my question is 
this: will the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation, the Deputy Premier . . . my question is this: will 
the minister undertake to table today in this Assembly all 
studies, both economic and environmental, prepared by the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation prior to your decision to 
proceed with the $500 million Shand power plant project? Will 
you table that documentation? If so, when might we expect to 
get it? If not, why would you not table it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I think those kinds of 
questions are more properly directed in Crown Corporations 
Committee and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Isn’t that a 
wonderful vehicle that you folks invented way back when? 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that those questions are more 
appropriately directed into Crown Corporations Committee. 
And while you’re directing them, you might also direct some 
questions as to the mining studies that were done at Coronach, 
and the decisions that were made by your administration when 
they developed the mine in Coronach. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I direct a question to 
the minister in charge of Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Mr. 
Minister, I am not asking about what may have happened in 
some past year, which is the function of the Crown 
Corporations Committee. I am asking about the decisions on 
which you based your decision to construct the Shand plant. I’m 
asking about the recent announcement of the Shand plant and 
the studies on which you based that decision. 
 
My short question is this: do you have studies which support the 
decision to go for Shand rather than any other option? If you 
have those studies, will you make them public? And if not, why 
not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The short answer, Mr. Speaker, is: 
management at Sask Power obviously made their decisions 
based on information that was available to them, and I expect 
that there were engineering studies, etc., etc., etc., and I expect 
that the basis for those decisions will be obvious to all in due 
course. 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. What I 
am asking about is whether or not the power users have got the 
best deal? That is what we want to know, and we want, not the 
minister’s assurances, but the engineer’s studies and the 
analyst’s studies which will show that this is the least-cost 
option. I ask you again, Mr. Minister, do such studies exist, and 
if so, will you make them available? And if not, why not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m positive, Mr. Speaker, that Sask 
Power management would not be making decisions that 
weren’t, number one, based on fact, and number two, Mr. 
Speaker, decisions that weren't the best deal for Saskatchewan. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can give the Leader of the Opposition the 
assurance that the briefings that were given to me and others by 
management of Sask Power would show that there is very little 
difference in the economics of Coronach over Shand – very 
little – a matter of nickels, I might say. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, the Shand project had some other 
benefits that would flow from it, not the least of which was a 
savings of $82 million that would come to power because of a 
belief that technology is just over the horizon that would not 
require this $82 million scrubber to be part of the Coronach 
installation. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, there is opportunity for water 
management – for irrigation, for recreation, for industrial water 
– in the south-east corner. I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the 
people in south-east Saskatchewan who pay power rates are in 
favour of this project. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s contrast to the 
people of Saskatchewan’s view of members opposite who want 
to stop the bacon plant in North Battleford, who want to stop 
the Shand project and the Rafferty project and the Alameda 
project. They want to stop the Weyerhaeuser deal. We’re for 
building in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They are the people 
who want to tear it down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. You say 
that you have no doubt that the decision was based upon facts, 
and I have no doubt you’re right. What I want to know is 
whether they were economic facts, environmental facts, or 
political facts? And if they were economic facts and 
environmental facts, why won’t you put them on the Table? 
And if you won’t put them on the Table, aren’t I entitled to 
believe that they weren’t environmental or economic, but 
political facts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I expect that you would say that 
anyway, just as you tell a different story in the country as it 
relates to your oil royalty story. You have a different story for 
the folks of Estevan than you do for the people in Regina or the 
people of Prince Albert or wherever. So I expect you will say 
whatever you want to say no matter what’s presented or put 
before you. 
 
The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that the project is based on, not only 
economic fact, but on co-operation between 
  



 
April 1, 1986 

262 
 

governments across the border, between town and country, 
between Crown and private. It’s based, Mr. Speaker, on an 
abundance of common sense. It works. It’s respected. It’s 
popular, and, as I say, so is the bacon plant, so is the 
Weyerhaeuser deal, and also are all of those other things that 
the NDP would like to tear down. 
 
The NDP, Mr. Speaker, they really are a little sensitive. They 
see us as successful in building Saskatchewan, and they don’t 
like that, Mr. Speaker, so they’re a little sensitive, and I can 
understand why. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, a supplemental to the Deputy 
Premier, the minister in charge of Sask Power. Is the minister 
aware of the comments that have been made by SPC’s chief 
engineer, Mr. Roy Smith, where he told the news media that 
SPC hopes to reduce the sulphur dioxide emissions from the 
project, the Shand power plant, by injecting lime into the 
burning process, and he says if this is successful it would avoid 
the cost of the scrubbers at the Shand plant. He says that tests 
have been conducted at the Boundary Dam station – indicate 
that the process will work. 
 
Can the minister — and will he table those test results that have 
been done, later today, and if not why will you not, in fact, table 
those? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I think I can get those test results. I’ll 
have to check with the management at power. There have been 
quite a few tests done on Estevan coal and Coronach coal as it 
relates to lime injection of fluidized lime, or combustion bed, or 
some of those other technical things that I don’t know anything 
about. And not all of the tests have been done in Canada. A lot 
of them have been done in some American research facilities 
and utilities down there. I don’t know how quickly I can get 
those test results, but I’m quite sure I can get them for the hon. 
member. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A new question to the minister. Mr. Minister, 
your chief engineer tells reporters, and I quote: “If it works, 
Shand will be the first plant to use such a process in North 
America. If some reason it doesn’t, then Sask Power could be 
forced to construct scrubbers.” So I say, Mr. Minister, you have 
ruled out a third unit at Coronach, in large part, because you 
claim that to install the scrubbers would cost additional money 
to control the sulphur dioxide emission, but now your own chief 
engineer is admitting that only – there is a hope to avoid having 
to put in scrubbers at the plant down at Shand. 
 
And so what I’m saying to you, Mr. Minister, can you . . . you 
must have them and should be able to give us a firm 
commitment that you will, in fact, provide us with the details of 
the testing as to the feasibility of the alternate method. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I hate to call into question 
the accuracy of that particular article. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, 
that there will be no requirement for scrubbers at the Shand 
project. The testing that has been going on, as I recall, would 
indicate that the chemistry of the coal at Estevan lends itself to 
the lime injection 

technology, whereas the chemistry of the coal at Coronach does 
not. I expect that the scrubber he’s talking about is the scrubber 
that would be associated with the Coronach project. However, I 
can’t speak for the chief engineer. But I remember, Mr. 
Speaker, when I was being briefed on this particular project, 
that the chief engineer was not talking as had been reported in 
that particular article. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a supplement to the minister 
in charge of Sask Power. And I want to ask the minister about 
comments made by the former president of the PC party and the 
man now heading up the project in Estevan and trying to get the 
Premier re-elected in a tough seat, George Hill. The quote that I 
read from in the Star-Phoenix of this past week indicates: 
 

Politics dictated that Sask Power consider an Estevan 
location for its proposed new 500 million power plant, a 
high-ranking Conservative official admits – (referring to 
George Hill). 

 
Now I would ask you, Mr. Minister, whether or not you can 
guarantee the power users in the province that this little project 
to try to get a desperate Premier re-elected isn’t going to cost 
the taxpayers and power users thousands of dollars per family 
over the next 20 years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — As it relates to the cost, Mr. Speaker, 
of this particular project and the burden that it would place on 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, I will tell you this, 
that the decisions based on the economics at Sask Power, I will 
stand by, as will management of Sask Power stand by. 
 
This is not just a power generating facility. It is a recreation 
facility; it is a tourism and industrial and agriculture . . . all of 
those things are a part of the opportunity that we are capturing 
here, Mr. Speaker. And I would say that the cost, the cost of 
those opportunities, Mr. Speaker, will be very, very beneficial 
to all Saskatchewan people over the long haul, and the cost in 
no way will come close to Crazy Al’s discount store and all of 
the promises that we’ve heard over . . . 
 
I’m just quoting from a newspaper article, Mr. Speaker, and I 
think it’s almost as credible as the one that he’s quoting from. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a final supplementary to the 
minister. Mr. Minister, you will remember the ill-fated night in 
1980 when the now member from Estevan was defeated in a 
by-election. And I want to ask you the question, Mr. Minister: 
is this not a desperate attempt by the campaign manager, 
George Hill, in Estevan, to try to get that individual re-elected 
in using taxpayers’ money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, you will remember, you 
will remember no doubt, the ill-fated night in 1982 when the 
people of Saskatchewan blew those guys out of the office and 
intend that they should stay out of office for all time, Mr. 
Speaker, and I expect that’s exactly what will happen. 
  



 
April 1, 1986 

263 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Conflict of Interest Guide-lines 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to address a 
question to the Premier, and it deals with the recent public 
comments made by the member from Prince Albert – the hon. 
member from Prince Albert – the one that recently . . . well, the 
member from Prince Albert. 
 
In the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix of yesterday, the MLA is quoted 
as saying that he is looking forward to reinvesting in the 
Redberry Lake resort development, because he says he had a 
chat with you and you’ve promised him that the new conflict of 
interest guide-lines for the MLA will allow such an investment. 
 
So I’m asking you, Mr. Premier: can you tell the Assembly 
exactly what promises you made to induce that member to run 
again, and can you confirm that the conflict of interest 
guide-lines will indeed be so loose that the MLAs and 
legislative secretaries will be able to become involved in the 
business activities which they have preferred government 
knowledge, inside track on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure the hon. 
member that the guide-lines that will be produced for the 
province of Saskatchewan will be tighter than they are today for 
elected officials. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Supplement, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, you’ve 
had almost a year now, and you had the embarrassment of one 
of your members in your caucus which you suspended as a 
legislative secretary. Why have you been sitting on your hands 
and not brought forth the conflict of interest and filed them with 
the legislature so that we could review them, so any doubt of 
further involvement and conflict, as being started up by the 
members as he indicates that he is going to do – why haven’t 
your brought forth the conflict of interest? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the guide-lines will be 
tabled in the very near future, perhaps within the next couple of 
days. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Will the Premier state categorically whether or 
not his new conflict of interest guide-lines will allow the 
member of Prince Albert, as he has indicated, the right to invest 
in and to lobby on behalf of a tourist resort development where 
the government is directly involved, at the Redberry Lake? Are 
you saying that you have discussed it with the member from 
Prince Albert, and that you and he have an agreement that if 
he’s re-elected after the next election, that he can go ahead and 
use the inside information and reinvest in Redberry 
developments? Is that what you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I have no agreements with 
any members of the legislature on either side of the House with 
respect to guide-lines. The new guide-lines will be put into 
place, and when they’re there, everybody will be subject to the 
same rules. 
 

Cost of Government Advertising 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

question to the Premier and it deals with the public accounts of 
1984 and 1985 which were recently, although very belatedly, 
tabled. Those accounts show that your government paid out 
more than $8.5 million to two advertising firms in that year: 
Dome Advertising and Roberts & Poole Communications. And 
that’s not your total government advertising bill, Mr. Premier. 
It’s just the payments to your two main advertising agencies 
from government departments — $8.5 million from government 
departments alone. That means that advertising by the Crown 
corporations will at least double that figure to about $17 million 
in that year of 1984, 1985. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Premier: how do you justify spending $17 
million a year on government advertising? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll confirm the numbers; I 
don’t have them with me. But I will say that the advertising that 
we do with respect, say, for example, Lights on for Life, is 
designed to save lives, as opposed to advertising the power 
corporation or SGI or a Crown corporation to say that you must 
purchase from a monopoly. And that’s the kind of things that 
people in 1982 said we don’t want any more of. But they said, if 
it has to do with education, it has to do with opportunities, it’s 
information or safety, that’s the kinds of things that government 
should do. 
 
The other day I believe that the Deputy Premier was asked a 
question with respect to education programs and a brochure we 
had out and government advertising. A brochure. Do you know 
what? People read that brochure, and they got the address, and 
they got the telephone number where they can apply for new 
jobs in Opportunities ’86, and the kinds of information you 
should have. 
 
Now when you design a brochure like that, you want people to 
read it and you want young people to have those opportunities. 
When you want to make sure that people can drive in safety, 
particularly on thousands and thousands of miles of road here in 
Saskatchewan, Lights on for Life deserves to have advertising. 
And we’re proud of that and will continue to have that kind of 
advertising because it informs people and it saves lives. It also 
saves the taxpayers money because there’s less accidents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 
need the Premier to confirm it. It’s confirmed in here, the 
Public Accounts which were tabled. There’s no doubt about 
that. It’s clear. It’s his own public accounts of his government. 
 
Is he trying to tell this House that he can justify the expenditure 
of $17 million somehow for things like “Lights on for Life”? I 
want to ask him: what about the advertising that was done in the 
pamphlet that was mailed out to farmers, strictly for political 
purposes? 
 
And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, in my supplementary question, 
how can the Premier justify the kind of political advertising 
which we have seen in 1984-85 to the tune of $17 million while 
the Premier promised in the campaign of 1982 – very sincerely, 
I might add – “We will cease 
  



 
April 1, 1986 

264 
 

all advertising for Crown corporations except advertising which 
promotes specific productions and programs offered by the 
corporation where a monopoly does not exist.” Can the Premier 
explain why he has failed to keep that promise? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, what monopoly is there? 
We have programs for farmers that are going to provide 6 per 
cent money – a billion dollars – to people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. These are in elevators or in RM offices so that 
farmers can pick up the information and say, this is the kind of 
program I can get in livestock that wasn’t there under the NDP. 
Here’s the kind of program I can get on a rural gas distribution 
program that wasn’t there with the NDP. Here’s the kind of 6 
per cent interest rate protection that wasn’t there under the 
NDP. Here’s a cash advance for livestock that wasn’t under the 
NDP. Do you know what, Mr. Speaker? That’s information so 
that they can survive under economic conditions, and the reason 
that they turfed out the other people to start with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. 
Supplementary to the Premier. Will the Premier not admit that 
$17 million was the figure for 1984-85 and that for the year 
which ended yesterday of 1985-86 that the government 
advertising bill will top $20 million of taxpayers’ money that 
could have been better spent on providing some of the services 
such as staff badly needed in our hospitals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, if you want, I’ll compare 
our expenditures with the members opposite at any time when it 
comes to health care. With respect to agriculture, with respect to 
new nursing homes, with respect to economic activity in job 
creation, Mr. Speaker, I’ll compare them. If the hon. member 
wants to compare dollar for dollar, I’ll take education, I’ll take 
budget and information programs that allow people to take 
advantage of various opportunities in the province is precisely 
what the government should be spending on, not the 
Saskatchewan family of Crown corporations created by the 
NDP that said this big bureaucracy was a family and the one we 
should bow down to. In our administration in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the people are in control. The 
people come first, the government second. The people across 
had it the other way around. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I’m quite 
prepared to compare the $6 million bill for advertising in 1982 
which that leader of the opposition, now Premier, attacked 
because he said . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 6 million. He 
said it was excessive. Now he is trying to tell the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan that 17 million in ’84-85 and well over 20 
million in 1985-86 is not excessive. 
 
I want to ask, Mr. Speaker, in a supplementary to the Premier. I 
asked a question in this House of the Deputy Premier last week 
in which I asked how much was spent in the last six weeks on 
government advertising, mainly 

 political advertising. I asked if it was 3 million to $5 million. 
The Deputy Premier did not confirm it. 
 
Can I ask the Premier today whether he will confirm that in the 
last six weeks 3 to $5 million has been spent in government 
advertising prior to an election campaign? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to advertising, 
I want to say on this booklet that farmers appreciate that. 
Farmers aren’t the only people that appreciate it. Here’s a letter 
to the Premier: 
 

Dear Mr. Premier: I wish to thank you for your letter of 
February 28th and for the booklet about agriculture 
assistance programs in Saskatchewan. I’ve read a good 
many government documents, condensed or 
uncondensed, and I find this one very impressive in 
respect of the information it gives and of the way the 
information is organized. Yours truly, Alexander 
Farrell, Reader’s Digest Editor. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if Reader’s Digest magazine, and the editor, 
says this is one of the best and most informational pieces of 
document that he’s seen on agriculture ever, in terms of 
information provided, and farmers like it, Mr. Speaker, the only 
people that don’t like it are the NDP. It’s good information. It 
provides solid information. And when the Reader’s Digest and 
the farmers both like it, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that’s a 
bouquet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILL 
 

Bill No. 12 – An Act respecting Property Improvement 
Grants 

 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting Property Improvement Grants. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 13 – An Act to amend The Income Tax Act. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Income Tax Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 14 – An Act to amend The Education and Health 
Tax Act for the Purpose of repealing Provisions Imposing a 

Sales Tax on Used Vehicles 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to 
amend The Education and Health Tax Act for the Purpose of 
repealing Provisions Imposing a Sales Tax on Used Vehicles. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 15 – An Act respecting the Application in 
Saskatchewan of the United Nations Convention on the 

  



 
April 1, 1986 

265 
 

Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards 
 
Hon. Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting the Application in Saskatchewan of the United 
Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of 
Foreign Arbitral Awards. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the committee of finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the Minister of 
Finance in what I believe is an excellent budget, and coming 
from one, Mr. Speaker, who has done one or two of these 
budgets, I believe that the Minister of Finance has in fact done a 
very, very credible job. Where you could measure that, I 
suppose, Mr. Speaker, is if you look at the editorials of the 
newspapers across the province, whether it’s the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix, the Leader-Post, or most other newspapers; what 
those people are saying is, job well done, Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we also hear from talking to members across 
the province, by our caucus, of members of the various interest 
groups, what they’re saying is, job well done, Minister of 
Finance. And as we talk to the people across the province, Mr. 
Speaker, what the people in the province are saying is, job well 
done. 
 
What I want to concentrate on, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, as 
one who has done one of these, or two, before, I always sit back 
and perhaps judge how well a budget is being received by the 
population by simply looking at the response and the reaction of 
the Leader of the Opposition. If the Leader of the Opposition 
stammers and stumbles, that means the budget is going over 
pretty good. You get a pretty good read the first night. And 
watching the Leader of the Opposition responding to this 
budget, Mr. Speaker, he stumbled and stammered more than 
I’ve ever seen, Mr. Speaker. That was the first good sign. 
 
What I would like to concentrate on in my remarks today, Mr. 
Speaker, are four points, four points addressed in this budget, 
four points being addressed by this government. One is in the 
field of agriculture; two is in the field of the Saskatchewan 
pension plan; three is the area of small business that this budget 
certainly concentrated on; and number four is the building and 
the building blocks and opportunity that this budget provides 
for. 
 
Let me turn to the first issue. The first issue, Mr. Speaker, 

that I saw in this budget, and certainly the programs of this 
particular administration – that’s in the field of agriculture. 
Now Saskatchewan agriculture and Saskatchewan farmers have 
been on fairly difficult times, Mr. Speaker, over the last three 
and four years; difficult, difficult commodity prices, Mr. 
Speaker, wheat prices are down – difficult, difficult problems. 
On top of that, over the last couple of years they have not had 
the rains or, in other parts of the province, they’ve had too 
much rain. Last year as well, we were almost devastated in a 
goodly part of this province with grasshoppers. Difficult times, 
Mr. Speaker, for the farmers of this province. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, more than any other 
government in the past, this government listened, listened to the 
farmers of Saskatchewan. The Premier, various ministers, the 
various caucus of this administration went to those farmers and 
listened and listened for their responses. And, Mr. Speaker, this 
government has responded to agriculture, responded in a way 
never, ever seen before in this province. This budget alone, I 
think, adds over 100 per cent increase to the budget for the 
Department of Agriculture, and certainly far larger than that 
over the last four years of this administration. 
 
Some have been critical of the funding to agriculture by this 
administration, and perhaps they are people living in the cities, 
perhaps very often the members opposite. We have responded, 
Mr. Speaker, with a 6 per cent operating loan for the farmer – 
very, very well received – almost a billion dollars out there. 
And the people of my constituency, whether Tory, Liberal, or 
NDP, have basically said, that was a program that this province 
needed; that was a program that made a lot of sense, and 
certainly a program that is very helpful to the farmer facing 
fairly significant costs of putting his crop in this spring. 
 
They’re also favourable to the farm purchase program brought 
in four years ago and added to in each year after that. They’re 
favourable to rebating the royalties of the oil industry back to 
agriculture, and again reducing the price of gasoline and diesel 
in this province by 21 cents a gallon. 
 
They’re thankful for the response of this government, both last 
year and again this year, that we are prepared to stand and assist 
the farmer in the event of pests or grasshoppers. They are 
thankful, Mr. Speaker, for the response that we’ve been able to 
do to the cattle industry, to the hog industry, and our ability to 
stand up as a government and say, look, this can no longer 
happen that this particular and very important industry should 
be allowed to slowly be whittled away and moved down to the 
eastern part of this country. We stand behind that cattle 
producer and behind that hog producer. 
 
They’re also thankful, Mr. Speaker, for the new processing 
industries we’re looking at, the bacon plant, some of the new 
technologies being looked at in agriculture, and believe that is 
the way that we must move forward. They are also very 
thankful, Mr. Speaker, for the commitment that this government 
makes to research and development in the field of agriculture. 
Whether it’s the building of the agriculture college, almost $80 
million in the city of Saskatoon; while of advantage to the city 
of 
  



 
April 1, 1986 

266 
 

Saskatoon, it’s of great advantage to farmers and agriculture 
throughout this entire province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I hear the people out in my constituency 
saying is, the Tories are good for the farmers; the Tories have 
responded to the farmers. 
 
I think it must be remembered, Mr. Speaker, when we respond 
to the farmer it’s more than simply responding to the farmer, 
because when the farmers of Saskatchewan have money, they 
spend it, and they spend it primarily in this province. They 
spend it in the small towns, and they spend it in the cities. You 
talk to a business man in down-town Kindersley, or talk to a 
business man in down-town Regina, and what do you hear? Put 
money to the farmers and those farners will spend it, and they 
will spend it on Saskatchewan products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps equally as important is the fact that our 
Premier has taken on the very difficult job of responding to the 
serious, clearly the most pressing problem in Saskatchewan 
today, and that’s the farm problem. And our Premier responded 
to it by taking that job on himself; taking that job on himself, 
Mr. Speaker, and clearly I think we were proud on this side of 
the House, and I think most of Saskatchewan was proud of the 
way our Premier, at the last first ministers’ meeting, responded 
not only for our farmers, but responded for farmers across this 
entire country and took agriculture to a place on the national 
agenda that it had not seen since the days of John Diefenbaker. 
And we’re proud of that too, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I say to you, the Tories have stood . . . this administration has 
stood where we belong, and that is in the field of agriculture. 
And I think we can be proud of it. 
 
You might ask yourself though, Mr. Speaker, you might ask 
yourself what is the alternative, what is the alternative of the 
members opposite. While they can be critical of this program 
and this program and this program, what do they really offer in 
return? Mr. Speaker, they offer in return the land bank. That is 
what we would have under an NDP administration, government 
owning the land, running the farms. Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
believe rural Saskatchewan believes in land bank. I don’t 
believe that is the way of the future. And I hope for the day 
when the farmers of Saskatchewan will have the opportunity of 
telling us exactly that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second part of the budget which I thought was 
very good and showed, I believe, a new direction on the one 
hand, but showed a philosophical difference between the two 
political parties in this House on the second, and that is the 
Saskatchewan pension plan. 
 
The Saskatchewan pension plan has come to grips, has dealt for 
the first time in this country – perhaps the first time in North 
America – with the question that has been around and has been 
faced by governments time and time again, and that is the case 
of a housewife, at home, opting for that option, to raise her 
family and stay in the home and be a home-maker. Why should 
that person not have also an opportunity to participate in many 
of the saving devices that we see in our society today, and that 
for the 

most part has not been available. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new pension plan will respond to that problem 
and allow that home-maker, allow that parent to equally put 
money away so that when they reach 65 they can have the 
dignity that many of the other people, whether they are in the 
work-force or whatever they might be, that they can also have 
the dignity of having an income and having an income 
generated by themselves. And I believe that is very, very 
fundamental and very, very important. 
 
Now the members opposite have announced a program that 
would be a guaranteed annual income for senior citizens. All 
senior citizens age 65, as I understand the program, would get X 
amount of money, X amount of dollars. What this does, Mr. 
Speaker, it seems to me, is say to people this: don’t worry about 
saving during your early years; don’t worry about saving money 
before age 60 because we will look after you. 
 
Our programs says to people: we want to, with you, with the 
initiative that you would take, assist you in building some 
security that you have a sense of ownership of; that you believe 
in; that you have saved; that you have put together; and it’s 
yours, Mr. Speaker. It’s not something that somebody can 
decide to take away at a budget each and every year or to set in 
a budget each and every year. It’s something that you have 
contributed to, whether you take that money from a variety of 
sources, that you can put money in and assist and build 
something for yourself. 
 
And it seems to me that’s what Saskatchewan is about. 
Certainly that is what divides, perhaps as much as any, the 
members of this government and the members of the NDP. We 
stand for that sense of individual initiative, of doing something 
for yourself however small it can be, a program that provides 
that sense of principle, sense of ownership that I believe is so 
important. 
 
(1445) 
 
The second dimension of that pension program addresses 
another, I think, crying need in this province. If you look at the 
number of jobs being created, not only here but across Canada 
and across North America, those jobs are being created by small 
business – small business very often comprising of perhaps no 
more than five employees. 
 
One of the problems that both the business man and the person 
working in that small business has had is the inability to have 
his own pension plan in a meaningful way; his own pension 
plan that can be contributed to by himself, and perhaps the 
business, and perhaps government. One of the problems with it 
is, for a small business like that to fit into some kind of a 
pension program, it becomes very expensive because for five 
employees it becomes very, very difficult to administer. 
 
We, Mr. Speaker, will address that question when the Minister 
of Finance comes down with further details with regard to the 
Saskatchewan pension plan. But I can tell you it’s going to be 
well received. It’s going to be well received by small business; 
people that we understand; people that we listen to; people that 
we regard. 
  



 
April 1, 1986 

267 
 

It’s going to be received by those people, and it’s going to be 
received by the thousands and thousands of people working in 
those small businesses – people, Mr. Speaker, that, after the 
farmer, are the backbone of the economy of this province; 
people that have not had pensions; people that have said, I don’t 
want to go work for government, but if I go work for 
government, I can get a pension. 
 
Now surely in a society, Mr. Speaker, we should be 
encouraging our people to stay with those small businesses, to 
work in those small businesses, and allow them a mechanism 
that will treat them at least as well as their brothers that work in 
larger corporations or government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me deal then with the third element of the 
budget, and that is small business. Anybody that looks at the 
statistic in a realistic and meaningful way on job creating in this 
country will have to come to one conclusion: the new jobs are 
being built by small business – small business again hiring 
perhaps five people, on average, at best. 
 
Those are the people, Mr. Speaker, that take their savings and 
take it to risk. Those are the people that are prepared to work 
late into the night to make sure their venture goes. Those are the 
people that work with their wife and family, perhaps to run the 
books, to make it go. Those are the people that have an idea or 
have some initiative or innovation and make it go, Mr. Speaker. 
And those are the people that should be encouraged to build this 
economy. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government has responded in this 
budget to those people. I believe that we have provided the 
climate by which small business can flourish in this province 
today and well into the future. That, Mr. Speaker, I believe is 
very important. 
 
We have responded to those people by saying, you will have 
some assistance, you small business – small business, Mr. 
Speaker – with loans of $100,000. We will provide you with 
assistance, and you in turn will provide us with more jobs and 
provide us with more revenues because more people are 
working. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is well received by the business people 
across Saskatchewan – 8 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 8 per cent for 
small business – well received, Mr. Speaker. Farmers and small 
business. 
 
The member from Regina North East, former member from 
Humboldt, says, what about bankruptcies? Well, Mr. Speaker, 
that is really what you hear from the members opposite. They 
can talk about bankruptcies. Don’t start a small business 
because you might fail; don’t start a small business because you 
might fail; don’t worry about employment. They’re against 
small business. 
 
The reality of the member opposite, if he would stand in his 
place following me and tell the people of Saskatchewan what he 
believes about small business, the member opposite will try to, 
in his flaky way, Mr. Speaker, talk about business. The reality is 
the NDP do 

not believe in risk for the individual, they don’t believe in profit 
for the individual, and certainly they don’t believe in a reward 
for people that take a risk. 
 
As a result, what they do, Mr. Speaker, and what they believe 
in, is this: if he makes a profit, big as he might be, small as he 
might be, we will tax it. That’s what they tell small business: 
we will tax it. And if we can’t tax it enough, and it still makes 
money, we’ll nationalize it and we will have another Crown 
corporation. That’s what they stand for in small business. 
 
What do they understand in small business? If, Mr. Speaker, 
they understood small business, would they not have responded 
in a way to assist the small-business person with lower interest 
rates, especially at a . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — And a strong economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — A strong economy says the vocal 
member from Regina North East. Twenty-two per cent interest 
rates – small business in 1982 in my constituency, I’ll tell you, 
the small-business guy didn’t say thank you for the strong 
economy, Mr. Minister, at that point in time. He asked for help. 
He asked for help, but that was not on the agenda of the NDP, 
and, Mr. Speaker, nor is it now on the agenda of the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other thing that we have done for small 
business in this province, besides the many points raised in that 
budget, is we have also tried to put together a series of fairly 
significant projects in this province, projects that we have taken 
care, and projects that we believe it’s important that we allow 
small business to have a chance to deal with those particular 
major projects, to participate in contracts that perhaps otherwise 
would have been too large. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think of the new power Rafferty dam project in 
Estevan – thousands of jobs, thousands of dollars spinning off 
to small business. Projects the members opposite are against. 
 
The upgrader in Regina, the NewGrade upgrader in Regina, 
working in conjunction with CCIL and Federated Co-op, we 
have made it a concerted effort that small business in the city of 
Regina, in the province of Saskatchewan, will have an 
opportunity to participate in those projects. 
 
The new forest strategy, Mr. Speaker, says it all with regards to 
small business and the opportunity for small business, whether 
it is assisting in the building of the new paper plant, or number 
two, if it’s the small business, the small cutter and his family – a 
local small business – has an opportunity to participate in the 
harvesting of the forest, in the harvesting of the forest that 
before was cast away. Another project the members opposite 
stand against. 
 
Our projects in the area of high technology, Mr. Speaker, and 
the number of new high technology companies that this 
province has been able to generate over the last four and five 
years is very, very positive. Again, projects that we are very, 
very proud of. 
  



 
April 1, 1986 

268 
 

Mr. Speaker, I think perhaps if you look at all of these, the areas 
of dollars into agriculture does more for small business than 
perhaps many of the projects the government can undertake. 
Mr. Speaker, again I believe that this budget responded to the 
interests and the purpose of small business in Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me turn to the final point, Mr. Speaker, and that brings me 
to the question that this budget continues, Mr. Speaker, to build 
and to build on our future — a very, very important point of 
what we believe is important. 
 
Now let me go and list what this budget does, what previous 
policies of this government has done. What we said in coming 
to office is we believe that the tourism industry is an important 
industry in this province, important because it’s something that 
has been neglected for years, but an area that we believe can be 
brought to life. And, Mr. Speaker, we have responded to 
tourism, and the numbers and the statistics will bear that fact 
out. The increase of over 25 per cent for the last two and three 
years of the number of visitors, the number of tourists to our 
province, the number of new facilities being built, Mr. Speaker, 
and we must continue on that. That must not be allowed to be 
halted, to stop. 
 
One of the areas in tourism that our administration is looking 
forward to this year is Expo ’86, a project that was jumped on 
very early by our administration as a good idea. And those 
members opposite said, oh, you’re wasting money. I recall the 
questions in this House day after day after day: don’t participate 
in Expo ’86; Saskatchewan should not participate; stand up with 
your brothers in Manitoba, and be and tell it the way it is, and 
boycott Expo. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the business of Saskatchewan will be incredible 
this year with the number of tourists coming through from 
eastern Canada, from other parts of eastern United States, 
travelling through our province, many for the first time – an 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker, for our people to get out and show 
them what Saskatchewan can do; for the people of North 
Battleford or Prince Albert or Saskatoon or Yorkton or Swift 
Current or Moosomin, Moose Jaw, have an opportunity and a 
crack at some tourists for the first time, Mr. Speaker. And I 
believe those people will be up to that challenge. 
 
Number two: we build, Mr. Speaker, in the oil industry. Now 
perhaps nothing has been more criticized than our policy as it 
relates to the oil industry by the members opposite. Mr. 
Speaker, the oil industry has responded in a way that no one in 
their wildest dreams would have expected. Mr. Speaker, it has 
produced revenue for this province; it has produced thousands 
and thousands of jobs – 12,000, by our count. And many of 
those happened in my riding, in Kindersley, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And while today that industry is looking at troubled times; it’s 
looking at a loss of the price of oil of almost one-half – and 
that’s hard for them to swallow, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 
difficult for them to cope with . . . But, Mr. Speaker, I am 
confident that price will respond, and I am confident that 
industry will stay intact and stay in place. And once that price 
starts to come back, that industry will respond in the way it has 
over the last four years. 

But what about the members opposite? They would have us 
believe, and they would go to a place like Kindersley and tell 
the people of Kindersley: we will help you; we will tax that 
industry by another $300 million. And you know what would 
happen, Mr. Speaker? That industry would die. That industry in 
Saskatchewan would die, and the people in the oil patch 
understand that. 
 
Now if you can make the oil industry go, Mr. Speaker, you can 
build upgraders. And the upgrader in Regina, the new upgrader 
in Regina, is a product of that oil policy over the last four years: 
a project that for the first time ever, Mr. Speaker, will allow us 
in Saskatchewan to find, to produce, and to manufacture and 
refine our own oil in Saskatchewan. We no longer have to ship 
that into United States – 60 per cent of our oil – subject to the 
world market, subject to the Ayatollah Khomeini or the sheikhs 
of the various parts of the Middle East. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, that project is going to go forward. And 
that’s a project that all Saskatchewan should be proud of, a 
project that the members opposite would have us destroy by 
simply destroying the oil industry, Mr. Speaker. And I think 
that is terribly dangerous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the third area is: we have responded to the forest 
industry and the demands of the forest industry. And that has 
been a very difficult problem over the last four years for this 
administration – I think, for any administration. 
 
We were caught with difficult pulp prices for the last three or 
four, probably five years – five years, because it was even 
during the previous administration’s time. And they couldn’t 
produce a forest policy. And we wrestled with that problem for 
a fair period of time. 
 
But now, working together with the various ministers, the 
various departments of government, the Crown corporations, 
and the industry, we have struck what many regard as a very, 
very good deal for the forest; a very, very good deal for the 
small contractors, Mr. Speaker; a very, very good deal for the 
people that work in Prince Albert, in PAPCO. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a project of a good corporate citizen – again, 
something that makes the NDP turn brown; they don’t like 
them, Mr. Speaker. But that is a positive step – a positive step 
forward, Mr. Speaker – and, I think, a step that has been 
favoured by many people in the province of Saskatchewan, 
certainly the people in the northern area of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just refer to a few more. Let’s look at the 
uranium industry in this province. This government has said to 
the uranium industry, we will stand behind you. We will stand 
with you because the uranium industry – even though the 
commodity prices are low, even though you’re not making a 
great deal of money – what that industry does is provide hope 
for northern people and provide hope for many of the people 
across Saskatchewan who can supply that particular industry. It 
also, Mr. Speaker, provides potential revenue for the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
  



 
April 1, 1986 

269 
 

And we will stand for the uranium industry, Mr. Speaker. 
Properly controlled, properly managed, it is an industry that we 
should not turn our backs on. That’s an industry the members 
opposite have turned their backs on, have responded to Peter 
Prebble and a small group of radicals and said, no, we as a party 
would shut it down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does that build a future? Does that build on our 
strengths in the province of Saskatchewan? I don’t think so, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(1500) 
 
But let me close, Mr. Speaker, really . . . But in the end, if 
you’re going to build, if you’re going to provide a future for the 
province of Saskatchewan, there is no place that you can begin, 
there is no place that you can really respond more, than the field 
of agriculture. If you don’t respond to agriculture, if you don’t 
build an agriculture, how are you going to build this province, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
And you must continue, Mr. Speaker, to do new things in 
agriculture. If it means participating in the GATT agreements, 
the provinces for the first time have an opportunity to be at the 
table of the GATT. NDP are against that. For the first time we 
are able to build plants that will start to process our hogs – a 
new plant. The NDP are against it. 
 
We’re looking for new varieties of wheat. The NDP say, you 
don’t need that. Mr. Speaker, we’re building a new university 
college of agriculture. The NDP say, that was not our priority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whether you live in the town, or whether you live 
in a city, or whether you live on the farm, agriculture is what 
Saskatchewan’s economy is all about. Mr. Speaker, this budget 
responded to agriculture. This budget responded to agriculture 
in a way that a provincial government has never responded to 
that industry before. That, Mr. Speaker, is good for all of 
Saskatchewan. That is good for all people in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, and I believe the people of Saskatchewan understand 
that. 
 
Let me close by simply saying: what is the alternative, Mr. 
Speaker? What is the alternative to the Minister of Finance’s 
budget? The members opposite with their newly found sense of 
give-aways . . . I forget what they call it in the paper here – 
crazy Al’s shopping centre, or something. Come to crazy Al’s – 
that’s the newest program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I think more important than that, because I think people see 
through that very quickly . . . Especially the same people that 
were critical of those programs four short years ago are now 
saying, here we’ve seen the light, my friends. Now we have 
some new programs of our own. 
 
Those are seen through, Mr. Speaker. I’ll tell you why. They’re 
seen through because people know that you really don’t believe 
it. And people have a way of seeing that in your eyes, and 
seeing that in your conscience. You were against gas tax 
assistance. You were against mortgage assistance. Why now, in 
the dying days of this 

legislative session, have you all of a sudden had a change of 
heart? You will not be able to look people in the eye and 
fundamentally say that, I believe in that particular program that 
our leader has advanced for us. You won’t be able to say it 
because you don’t believe it. 
 
And number two, Mr. Speaker, is the people of this province 
want a government prepared to build; a government prepared to 
look forward, not a government that looks backwards and says 
bring back the old program. Mr. Speaker, this particular time 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan want to know what 
you will do, what you are for, and how you would build – not 
what you are against and what you would tear down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is no more. There is no better way to 
symbolize that than look at the two leaders that talk across this 
floor daily in this House. One, a man that has been in politics 
perhaps 30 years, a man that has spent his lifetime in 
government and done nothing else, a man who is heading 
towards the old age pension, and a man who wants to restore his 
faith; and a man, Mr. Speaker, who is young, who is a farmer, 
who is dynamic, who wants to go forward, and wants to dream 
and to build. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is the difference. One leader wants to go 
forward, the other leader wants to go backwards. And, Mr. 
Speaker, whenever the Premier decides, the people of this 
province are going to have a chance. Elect me, will say the 
NDP, and I’ll take you back to yesterday. Elect me, will say our 
Premier, and I will take you forward to tomorrow. That is what 
this budget is about; that is why I endorse this budget 
wholeheartedly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to be 
able to join in this budget debate because I think it’s necessary 
to actually tell the story as it is and point out that this budget is, 
as I will describe it later, not far from being a bit of a fraud. 
 
Now I’m kind of pleased to be able to follow the member from 
Kindersley, the former minister of finance. This is the man who 
was the architect of last year’s most intelligent budget. Surely 
anyone who would prepare the most intelligent budget is one 
worthy to follow in this debate. 
 
But I want to say to the members of this House and to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that in his remarks somehow he failed even in a 
fleeting moment to refer to that most intelligent budget, and I’m 
wondering why. I agree, I think he said at some point in time, 
the Saskatchewan people are able and willing and capable to 
face up to any challenge. And yes, they certainly are. 
 
I think Saskatchewan people can do again what they have done 
in the past and take this province and build it to what they want 
it to be. But they have to be given the chance, and they have not 
been given a chance and an opportunity to do that by this 
Conservative government. All of the opportunities that they 
might have had, this government has gone out of its way to take 
away from them because they would not emphasize this ability 
of the co-operative spirit that Saskatchewan people have, and 
their belief that they cannot depend on somebody 
  



 
April 1, 1986 

270 
 

from outside to come and do it for them, but that they together – 
working together and co-operatively – can do it themselves for 
themselves, and for their children, and for their families. They 
have done it before, and they will do it again under an NDP 
government as soon as these people over there dare to call an 
election. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, why did the former minister of finance 
refuse to refer to his budget? Well, I’ll tell you. He said 
something about what the previous policies of this government 
has done. Then he listed some examples which lack some 
credibility. 
 
But let me tell you what the people of Saskatchewan see that 
the policies of this government has done, and what this budget 
reinforces – this new budget. It has increased the number of 
people on welfare to over 60,000, a record in Saskatchewan 
history. The policies of this Conservative government have 
increased unemployment to over 40,000 people. Every year 
there has been an increase in unemployment. 
 
The policies of this government have caused services to become 
deteriorated. The policies of this government, in the most 
intelligent budget, put on a new flat tax which was nothing 
more than a tax grab by this Conservative government and took 
out of the pockets of Saskatchewan consumers about $100 
million, which could have, and would have been spent in those 
small businesses that the member from Kindersley spoke of — 
$100 million in the flat tax which again made the low- and 
middle-income people pay more, while those who have the 
ability to fill in tax loopholes saved even more and got 
wealthier on it. 
 
Why didn’t the member from Kindersley talk about the sales 
tax on used vehicles? Oh, I know he would have said, but we 
removed it, we made a mistake. But I would have wanted him 
to say, why is he and this Premier and this government making 
60,000 people – 60,000 people who paid this sales tax on used 
cars and trucks – pay the price. Why are they being punished 
for this government’s mistake? Why have they not in this 
budget said they will return that sales tax that those people for 
eight months paid? Not a great deal of money in total, but to 
many of them, in their particular income situation, a great deal 
of money. Would that have been so difficult to do? No. But 
they wouldn’t do it. Why did he not refer to that? 
 
Why didn’t he refer to the greatest property tax increase in my 
memory – the removal of the property improvement grant in his 
last budget. No mention of that in this new budget for this 
coming fiscal year. Another $80 million taken out of the 
consumer’s pocket, out of families’ pockets, which would have 
been spent in the small–business places of Saskatchewan, in the 
cities and the towns and the villages. 
 
You want to help small-business people have the money in the 
economy circulating, and the small-business man will thrive 
because he relies on that cash register ringing as people 
purchase the goods that he sells and supplies. This government 
has made it less possible for people to do that, and the budget 
that we are now debating even does more of that. 
 
Now I know, Mr. Speaker, that last year’s budget was 

labelled the most intelligent budget, but I say to you that it 
turned out to be a nightmare and this year’s budget speech 
continues with the measures of the last budget – does nothing 
about those grievous things that were done – and that nightmare 
is now becoming a horror story. Ask the middle- and 
low-income people out there who are filling out their income 
tax returns this month, and they’ll tell you the price that they 
have to pay. Between the federal Conservatives and the 
provincial Conservatives, they both have got their hands in the 
people’s pockets up to their elbows and taking away much 
needed income that hard-working people are making and should 
have been able to spend on their families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now I listened with care to the member’s 
comments on the pension plan. The problem that I’m finding is 
that he fails to recognize that, as was mentioned by the Leader 
of the Opposition the other day, as meritorious as a pension 
plan might be, it will not help anybody in the next 20 to 30 
years. And so this government chooses in its usual way to 
ignore the people who are indeed in need now. 
 
The New Democratic Party has a proposal which will help 
those people between the ages of 60 and 65 who need some 
form of assistance in the form of a guaranteed income, and we 
will provide that as soon as they call an election and there’s a 
change of government, and we are on that side of the House and 
they are on this side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Why should those people between the 
ages of 60 and 65 today and tomorrow and the next year and the 
year after that be ignored while they wait for 30 years for this 
government’s plan, which we have not seen any single bit about 
yet, come into force. 
 
I want to ask the question, and I wish the Minister of Finance 
would listen: if they really do have a pension plan, why has it 
not been tabled in this House? I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, 
because on the eve of an election, which the member from 
Kindersley referred to, they make a bunch of announcements, 
knowing that, if they happen to get elected, most of them will 
never see the light of day. 
 
Now the history of this government and this party since 1982 
shows that, and I’ll make some reference to it in the remarks 
that I have to make later. There is no guarantee under a 
Conservative government that what they say will actually be 
what they do – no guarantee at all. The people of Saskatchewan 
have learned it; they know it, and they’re not going to take that 
chance again. 
 
Oh, we keep hearing members opposite talk about the oil 
upgrader in Regina. And you know what the people in Regina 
North East said, Mr. Speaker, during the by-election campaign? 
They said, “The upgrader is fine; get rid of Devine.” 
 
But the thing I find of particular interest, even though this 
upgrader which we welcomed was announced in great hoop-la 
just before the call of an by-election, there is yet to 
  



 
April 1, 1986 

271 
 

be a shovelful of dirt moved on that construction site, and it was 
starting immediately back in October. What’s happened? Where 
is it? 
 
I say to the government opposite that, as is the case with this 
budget, their whole credibility is beginning to wane badly day 
after day. If there was any slight motion in the construction of 
that upgrader, which I wish was going already, it would look 
like a burst of speed. But people are still waiting, in spite of 
those promises. 
 
(1515) 
 
Now the member from Kindersley also made some reference to 
small businesses. I have said, well I think in simple terms there 
is a response to the record of this government with regard to 
small business, and it comes in the April Saturday Night 
edition. It’s called “Hard Times,” and it quotes in here: 
 

Like Brian Mulroney, Grant Devine was elected on a 
Tory landslide, but his term has been plagued by bad 
management, and Saskatchewan voters may be ready to 
restore the NDP. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And if there is anything that 
small-business people know better than anything else, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s good management. And they recognize in this 
government, through successive budgets since 1982, and 
reinforced again in this one, that this government are not good 
managers. They have brought this province from prosperity to a 
deficit which one would never have been able to imagine could 
be possible four years ago. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the budget and the speech by the Minister of 
Finance indeed does have a major highlight. I’ll admit to that. 
That highlight is how little credibility this Devine government 
really has. That’s the highlight of the budget speech. After four 
years of this government, and five budgets which have all been 
ones of disappointment, ones of promises made in large 
numbers only to be broken soon afterwards, the people of this 
province just don’t believe this government any more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And you know, it wouldn’t have 
mattered what kind of a budget the Minister of Finance 
presented, Saskatchewan people would have not believed it 
anyway because they know that what this budget says is not the 
real story. They have been misled, and they have been 
disappointed too many times. 
 
Let me just begin for a little while and talk about the nature of 
the speech itself. It was probably the longest budget speech ever 
given in this House. It was probably the most politically 
partisan budget speech ever given in the House. One would 
have thought that in a statement of economic and fiscal policy 
there should have been some degree of statesmanship. That 
disappeared with this budget for the first time. And yet it was 
probably also the most backward-looking budget document ever 
produced in this legislature. And I ask why. 

As I go around the province and my constituency in the city of 
Regina, people are asking why. Well I’ll tell you why, and they 
know it. Because the minister had nothing to say. And because 
this government in that budget document had nothing to say, 
they had to make it as long as possible, because any teacher will 
tell you, or any psychologist would tell you that when speakers 
or writers have nothing to say, they try to make up for it in 
length and volume. They ramble around. And that’s what the 
Minister of Finance was desperately trying to do on budget 
night. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker? Also because the government is trying 
desperately to cover up the mess that it has created. It’s hoping 
that concerns about a staggering deficit, about high and unfair 
taxes, about bad management by the government are going to 
be deflected by political rhetoric. Well I suggest to those 
members over there, it will not work. It will not work. 
 
Saskatchewan people have already decided that they can’t 
afford another four years of this Devine government. They 
know it. They have made that decision, and nothing will change 
it. Because they know that to re-elect his government would be 
like the gambler playing the tables of Las Vegas. And we all 
know how many people who go down there come back winners 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Not too many. The member from 
Regina North, now the fugitive in Regina South, has been there. 
He knows not many come back. Not many people win there, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I can tell you that with a Conservative government in 
Saskatchewan and a Conservative government in Ottawa, many 
people in Saskatchewan don’t win. Most of them don’t win. Oh 
yes, a few do. We’ve talked about it; it’s been talked about in 
the press; we talked about in this legislature. A few win. 
 
As the Leader of the Opposition said the other day, the Peter 
Pocklington he wins. You know the millionaire from Alberta, 
the former candidate for the Conservative national leadership – 
he won. He got $10 million. Manalta Coal, they win. They’re 
winners. They have a $145 million guarantee to buy up our coal 
mines at the Saskatchewan taxpayers’ guarantee. 
 
There is fellow, a company by the name of Weyerhaeuser now, 
which the member from Kindersley talked about. Well they’re 
going to get $248 million with no repayment terms. And even 
the Premier admits that. And when we ask: okay, maybe it’s a 
good deal. Maybe it will do good. But table the document so 
that we can see. This government refused to do it because they 
know that the minute they table those documents, if indeed 
there is an agreement, all of their arguments are going to get 
blown out of the water — $248 million that the Saskatchewan 
people, through guarantees, are putting up. 
 
Oh, the bankers and the bond dealers, they’re going to gain. 
They’re winners. But the average Saskatchewan citizen under 
this government, and under this budget, does not win. And the 
average Saskatchewan citizen and family has decided that after 
this next election they can’t afford to take a Las Vegas gamble 
on this government 
  



 
April 1, 1986 

272 
 

again. And they’re going to boot them out. 
 
Now the Minister of Finance also said that Saskatchewan 
residents enjoy one of the lowest tax burdens in this country. 
And I say that if it was not so serious it would almost have been 
laughable to hear him say that. Once again, he is not credible. 
And let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, why he is not credible. And I 
invite the member from Rosemont, the member from Rosemont 
who provides $200 a month to people on welfare to get some 
rent in this city – I invite him to look on page 56 of the budget 
speech, and here's what he'll find. This is the government and 
the minister who talks about the low taxes of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Well here’s the page. It comes right out of the budget 
documents, and I’ve brought it with me. And what happens to a 
taxpayer of two adults and two children with an income of 
30,000 per annum under this government that has supposedly 
reduced taxes? Well he is the third-highest income tax payer in 
Canada. The only provinces in which people of 30,000, family 
of four, pay higher provincial income tax is Quebec, with 
$2,185, and Newfoundland with $2,072. And might I add, 
they’re not very far ahead, because in Saskatchewan that same 
family will pay $2,011 of provincial income tax. And the 
Minister of Finance has the gumption to stand up in this House 
and talk about how we are among the lowest-taxed people in 
this country. And I say, who is he trying to kid? 
 
And I say, let him go around the city of Regina and just meet 
some people who this month have filled out their income tax 
returns and have found out what this great reform, so-called, 
that they supposedly have in this flat tax, has done to those 
people. And I’m sure he would come running back here and ask 
if he could remake his speech. 
 
It’s because of this kind of, as our leader said, flimflam – I 
would use stronger words – it’s because of this kind of 
flimflam, and using of selected figures rather than the real ones, 
that the credibility of this government and the Minister of 
Finance are gone. And people know that what they say is not 
what they do. And people know that they no longer can be 
trusted. That flat tax was a major tax increase, just as the 
removal of the property improvement grant was. It was not a 
reform; it was a means by which this government could reach 
deeper into the pockets of the low- and middle-income people 
and take more money so that they could give it to Peter 
Pocklington. 
 
And the one thing that people are also beginning to discover, 
that this year is only half of what they’re going to pay next year. 
And that was a nice little trick, because the 1985 flat tax is 
based only on half a year. So I say to the taxpayer of 
Saskatchewan who’s filling out his income tax return: watch 
out, because next year, if this government is returned, it won’t 
be the amount you paid this year; you multiply it by two, and 
it’s going to be twice as much. And that’s what these people 
call tax reform. 
 
I submit, Mr. Speaker, that this budget fails to deal with a very 
serious problem of an unfair tax system which has been made 
more unfair by the policies of this government. And let me just 
extend this further and show 

you how having a Conservative government here in 
Saskatchewan and one in Ottawa makes it even worse. 
 
Let me give the example of a person pumping gas for Shell Oil. 
Well this person who’s pumping gas for Shell Oil, I might say, 
Mr. Speaker, and it’s important to take note, paid more income 
taxes in 1982 than Shell Oil paid with its profits of $302 million 
and assets of $4.7 billion – all because of federal government, 
Conservative government policies and Liberal government 
policies. And the teller working for the Royal Bank of Canada 
paid more income tax that same year than the bank, though the 
Royal had profits of well over $300 million. 
 
Now I ask you: is that a fair tax system? Is that a fair tax 
system? And what has Mr. Wilson’s Conservative budget and 
this Minister of Finance’s — Saskatchewan – what have they 
done to this unbelievably unfair situation? They did little to 
correct that unfairness in our tax system. 
 
Instead, the Conservatives hit the average income earner again 
with more taxes. And since September of 1984, when the 
Mulroney government was elected, they have increased family 
taxes by some $1,305 a year. And these people in this province 
have dumped more taxes through the flat tax and the removal of 
the property improvement tax on top of that. And this is what 
they call tax reform. 
 
The provincial government is doing the same as the federal 
government, and I say that this province cannot afford a 
Conservative government in Ottawa and a Conservative 
government in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And it’s not being original on my part, 
because it’s been said before, but the line is, that nobody has 
doubts about any more: a Tory is a Tory is a Tory is a Tory, 
whether it’s in Ottawa or Saskatchewan. And if you have them 
in both places, you pay the price twice as much. 
 
And the grievous thing about this is that in spite of this tax grab 
of low- and middle-income people, we still have a deficit that’s 
unbelievably large. And what do we have to show for it? Well 
we have highways that are falling apart because they have not 
provided enough funds in the last four years to maintain them at 
an adequate level. We have hospitals that don’t have enough 
nurses and other staff in them to provide the kind of care that 
they are used to providing. 
 
It’s like buying a house. When I buy a house, or anybody in 
Saskatchewan buys a house, they take out a mortgage. And for 
that mortgage, they know they have to pay it back, but at least 
they have a house. Well to the tune of $2 billion, over $2 
billion, this government has mortgaged the province of 
Saskatchewan, and the crime of it all is that there is nothing to 
show for it. That is what’s so wrong, Mr. Speaker; that’s what’s 
so wrong. 
 
Now the other reason why this government has lost its 
credibility, and all across the province people are saying, what 
is this budget; nobody believe it – it’s because their record on 
their promises is so bad. 
  



 
April 1, 1986 

273 
 

I mean, I just use one example. It was raised in the House the 
other day. I have here a pamphlet that has the Premier’s picture 
on it which was distributed to everybody in Saskatchewan in 
1982. And what did it say? It said – sincerely – that if a 
Conservative government was elected, there would be the 
complete elimination of the sales tax in its first term of office. 
Now this is a government that said it meant what it was saying. 
 
Here is similar campaign literature from the member from 
Sutherland. It says, “Schoenhals for Saskatoon Sutherland.” 
What did he promise? He promised to reduce provincial income 
tax by 10 per cent. What’s the result? A flat tax. Income tax 
went up. He promised to remove the 5 per cent E&H tax – they 
all said in the first term. What’s happened? We had a sales tax 
on used vehicles which they then removed but 60,000 people 
had to pay for their mistake, be punished for their mistake. And 
they won’t even have the goodwill or the intestinal fortitude to 
go so far as to return that money which those people so unfairly 
paid. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Kindersley mentioned 
something about leadership Well you know what leadership is 
and everybody expects it to be? Leadership is going to the 
people that one wishes to represent and say, here is what we 
stand for; here is what we will do if you elect us – and then after 
that delivering on those promises. If that’s a measure of 
leadership, Mr. Speaker, then this government has failed 
miserably, because on those promises it has not delivered. 
 
And so what do they do instead? In question period today we 
raised the matter of government advertising – well over $20 
million this year, and I submit it’s approaching $30 million – 
political advertising, money which could have been spent on 
other more important things. 
 
Why the advertising? Because they’re desperately trying now to 
rebuild an image which is tarnished, an image that nobody 
wants to have anything to do with. But I say that that image 
building has failed. It’s failed. It’s failed like everything else 
that this government has tried. And let me just give some 
examples further of this lack of leadership. 
 
(1530) 
 
I recall, back in 1982, the Conservatives were promising that 
there would be a freezing of utility rates. Well, what have we 
seen? We’ve seen Saskatchewan Power Corporation electrical, 
farm and residential rates increase by an average of 38 per cent. 
We’ve seen SaskTel basic rates increase by 21 per cent. We’ve 
seen the SGI deductible change from $350 to $500, an increase 
of 43 per cent. These are the fellows that were going to freeze 
utility rates. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker. They promised that they would 
have Public Utilities Review Commission and this Public 
Utilities Commission was going to oversee all changes in those 
kinds of rates. 
 
Well now, Mr. Speaker, what do they? They establish this 
commission, and when it makes a recommendation, because 
they said it’s going to be arm’s-length distance 

from government, what do they? They interfere. They interfere 
with decisions of the commission. 
 
Here’s an article from the Leader-Post of March 1, 1986 – very 
recent – in which it says: 
 

On Dec. 18, cabinet reversed a 1984 PURC decision that 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance’s (SGI) auto 
reserve fund would not exceed $38.5 million. 

 
Oh, yes. In the hands of this Conservative Devine government, 
if an independent agency recommends something that suits their 
purposes, that’s all right. But if it recommends something that 
does not suit their purposes, they have to interfere for their own 
political reasons. PURC did the same thing with regard to the 
increase in the deductible for cars, from 350 to 500. What did 
this government do with this independent agency in which there 
was going to be no longer political interference? They 
interfered. 
 
And so now in the throne speech that we’ve just finished 
debating, they mention something about a freedom of 
information Act. Well, on the eve of an election, kind of a 
deathbed repentance. If this government is elected, I suggest we 
will never see the light of day of that either. 
 
Now let me just conclude this by mentioning why this 
government interferes with the PURC rulings on the 38.5 
million in the reserve fund. You know why? Because they want 
to build it up for some political reasons. And here’s what the 
effect of that is. I have here a memorandum from the 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance office. This memorandum 
has been sent out to the Hafford Senior Citizens Centre. It’s for 
insurance premiums for the centre. Last year the Hafford senior 
citizens paid $80 in premium for their centre. Do you know, 
Mr. Speaker, what they are being told that they have to pay by 
this government’s new policies in SGI? Not the $80 that they 
paid last year, but $250 in insurance premium. Two hundred . . . 
I haven’t figured out the percentage of that, Mr. Speaker, and I 
am a little afraid to because I know it’s so atrocious. But it’s 
certainly something like 187 per cent. 
 
This is this government’s attitude toward keeping costs down 
for Saskatchewan taxpayers. And Saskatchewan, I submit, Mr. 
Speaker, will no longer have any part of it. 
 
Now this government talks about being a compassionate 
government. And they have talked in both the budget debate of 
the other day, and I think the Minister of Finance made 
reference to it, and in the throne speech debate, about what they 
call decentralization of government services. And we don’t 
object to that. In the previous government, before 1982, we did 
provide decentralization of government services. There’s no one 
in Saskatchewan who will disagree with that. But the element 
that one has to consider is the fairness with which employees 
who are transferred . . . have to be taken into consideration. 
How are they dealt with? Are they dealt with fairly? 
 
Well, let me give you an example of how fairly this government 
has dealt with those employees in the crop 
  



 
April 1, 1986 

274 
 

insurance corporation and the agricultural development 
corporation. When the employees asked: what will our status 
be? the Minister of Agriculture, who happens to be the Premier, 
sent his officials down to meet with them, and you know what 
they were told? They were told, those employees – mostly 
women who are married and whose husbands work in the city 
and cannot move – they were told you have three options: you 
move, you resign, or you get fired. That’s the compassion of 
this government. 
 
Fairness would demand, Mr. Speaker, that those people be 
given an option at some other governmental positions that exist. 
They are not given that option, even though some people in the 
political side of this government are pretending that they are, 
and I would hope that they will reconsider, that this government 
and the Premier will reconsider this dictum that they have given 
to these employees. 
 
There are people there who have worked for 17 years. As a 
matter of fact, I know of one who’s been there for 24 years. 
They cannot just pick up and leave and lose all their benefits. 
They should be given the chance to transfer to open positions in 
the government so that they can continue to have those benefits. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the member from Kindersley talked about 
the budget. He didn’t talk about the most intelligent budget of a 
year ago. Well I want to say that if a New Democratic 
government is elected after the next election, that all the 
damage that was done by this government opposite in the last 
budget will be undone. People know it will be undone because 
they know that the New Democratic Party and our leader can be 
trusted to deliver, because the record will show that. 
 
And so the flat tax will be repealed. It will be gone. The 
property tax relief for home owners and business people and 
farmers will be restored; and the money collected under the 
unfair sales tax on used vehicles will be refunded. That’s what 
this budget should have done: provide to the people the dollar 
that they can spend so that they can get the goods that they need 
to raise their families with, and so that they can spend it in 
small business places and also keep the small business places 
thriving. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if I may turn to another subject for a little 
while and say that in four years this government has led this 
province to the brink of economic nightmare. And I invite the 
members opposite, the member for Wolseley, to stop being 
fooled by the cabinet and look at the real facts. I ask the 
members in the back benches, the private members: ask your 
cabinet what their facts really are. 
 
I invite them to look at the Finance minister’s own figures. I 
will not use my figures. I’m going to use the Finance minister’s 
figures, which show out of the finance book, that in 1982 and 
1983, there was a deficit of $227 million. You know what it is 
in 1986, 1987? $547 million for this one year if you include the 
$158 which is hidden — $158 million which is hidden – so our 
accumulated deficit is well over $2 billion. And that doesn’t 
even take into account things like the $100 million which have 
been borrowed for the agriculture and commercial equity 
corporation. This is not a budget. This is what some 

people have called a “fudge-it.” It’s flimflam. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I submit to you that it is almost fraudulent. 
 
And even though that the Minister of Finance stood in this 
House and said a deficit of $389 million, he knew that that’s not 
what it was. He knew that it was well over $600 million when 
you take into consideration all of the other borrowings that this 
government is going to be doing. And I ask: why conceal that? 
Why not lay it out so the Saskatchewan citizen and taxpayer 
will know? Because, Mr. Speaker, he knows that they would 
ask for an explanation, and this government can’t provide it. 
 
Let’s take a look at the record. Let’s look, for example, at the 
province’s equity, and this comes out of page 31 of the budget 
speech. What’s happened to the province’s equity? We all know 
what equity is: it’s the value of assets less the debt due to 
borrowing. Well in 1982 the equity of this province was $1.091 
billion. Quite impressive. In 1987 the equity for this province 
will be minus $740 million. That’s what this government has 
accomplished in four years. A province with an equity of 
$1.091 billion in 1982, down to minus $740 million in 1987, 
and that’s not a record that I suggest, Mr. Speaker, anybody can 
be proud of, not even this government. 
 
Let me deal for just a minute with another part that came out in 
the budget which this expensive advertising that we saw in all 
that the newspapers didn’t talk about. Let’s talk about the total 
debt of the province. You know what this budget tells us about 
the total debt of the province? Well in 1982 the total debt of the 
province was a modest $3.3 billion — $3.3 billion. After four 
years of this government . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
I’ll tell the member from Prince Albert what he might believe is 
modest. Do you know what the debt is — $8.7 billion. This 
government, with its great policies, has brought the debt of this 
province from $3.3 billion to $8.7 billion in four short years – 
almost triple. And I say Saskatchewan people can’t afford 
another four years of that kind of performance. That’s an 
example of terrible mismanagement. That’s an example of 
leadership that practically does not exist. 
 
We can do better in Saskatchewan. We have done better in 
Saskatchewan, and we will do better in Saskatchewan when 
they call an election and this New Democratic Party is the 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I could dwell at some 
length about the record of the government, but I think it is 
well-known. I think the important thing beyond that is that this 
budget does nothing more than reinforce that bad record. It 
punishes working people so that this government can reward 
their friends. It punishes low- and middle-income people so that 
this government can reward the out-of-province, huge 
corporations like the Pocklington’s with the taxpayers’ money 
that they are collecting. And I say it doesn’t have to be this way. 
And Saskatchewan people know that it doesn’t have to be this 
way. 
 
Now one of the many examples of how indecisive this 
  



 
April 1, 1986 

275 
 

government has been, Mr. Speaker, involves municipalities and 
hospitals; it involves school-boards; and it involves others. It’s 
to do with the whole question of liability insurance. 
 
Many months ago it was known by the government and 
Saskatchewan municipalities that the premiums for liability 
insurance were going out of hand. It was known that insurance 
companies who provide liability insurance were taking 
advantage of the incidences that were happening in Bhopal, and 
the Iran-Iraqi war, and airplanes going down and people dying 
in them – that insurance companies were taking advantage of 
those to begin to gouge people who had to buy liability 
insurance in parts of the world where that kind of risk did not 
exist, and Saskatchewan is one of them. 
 
Over a year ago this government knew that that was happening, 
and for a whole year they have sat around and done nothing 
about it. And all the best they can do in the throne speech and in 
the budget speech is say, we’re going to consider some solution. 
 
Well we’re still waiting for the Minister of Urban Affairs or the 
minister in charge of SGI to announce the solution. It’s a little 
late because, for example, the Regina Separate School Board – 
headline, “Insurance to Rise at Least Double” – they’re 
spending $100,000 for liability insurance this year. 
 
We have here the City of Saskatoon, municipal insurance needs, 
with a bill of over $1 million for their liability insurance. You 
know what it was last year? It was $370,000. And this 
government sits on their hands and says, we’re going to study it. 
And they’ve been studying it for a year, and now when the 
session is on they still don’t have a solution. 
 
(1545) 
 
Now that, Mr. Speaker, is not an example of leadership. That is 
an example of neglect. That is an example of a government that 
knows the problem is being created, and does not have the 
foresight or the desire to look ahead and deal with it before it 
affects people as seriously as this liability insurance problem is 
affecting too many people. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, you were once affiliated with 
school-boards, and you know what kind of problem that creates. 
And I suggest to you that a New Democratic government, if it 
had been the government of this province, would have dealt 
with this a long time ago, and we would have considered all the 
options. 
 
And what is wrong with considering the option of having SGI 
be the provider of the insurance, liability insurance, of school-
boards and municipalities and hospitals, and that the province 
become the reinsurer? Because we have to, as taxpayers, pick 
up the risk anyway, ultimately, if there is a disaster. And instead 
of making municipalities which are hard-pressed to meet those 
premiums pay those kind of atrocious premiums, the 
government should have acted and done something about it, and 
it did not. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this budget, like this government, as I said 
in my opening remarks, lacks credibility. It is a 

budget that reflects four years of promises made and promises 
not kept. The numbers in this budget are not accurate and the 
rhetoric is not real. This budget, like this government, and like 
this Premier, shows no leadership. During difficult times, one of 
the essential ingredients is strong decisive leadership, and we 
don’t have it in Saskatchewan today. 
 
The budget is long on rhetoric but nothing else. Leadership, I 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, is not made of rhetoric. It is not made of 
beating one’s chest and saying, I’m in control. Leadership is 
made of doing the kinds of things which are the right things for 
the right time, and not waiting until it’s too late to deal with 
them. The Conservative Party, this Conservative government, 
has become so obsessed with pork barrel and patronage that it 
has lost sight of what governing is all about. 
 
The New Democratic Party is ready to change that. Our party 
has the leadership that is proven. It has got a leadership that 
people know they can trust, and that’s why the people of 
Saskatchewan in growing numbers are saying to the Minister of 
Health and the Minister of Advanced Education and the 
Premier, we have had enough, and we will not have another 
four years of your kind of government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the board of directors of any company handled 
the money that shareholders put in that company the way this 
government has handled the money of the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan and the assets of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, 
those board of directors would be sued for fraud. There is no 
doubt about it. 
 
And that’s what this budget does. It’s very close to that kind of 
a situation. Their open-for-business policies have failed. The 
member from Kindersley talked about small business. Well I 
suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that everyone knows that business 
in Saskatchewan has not prospered under this government. 
 
And what we hear, in spite of that failure of the 
open-for-business policy, we hear the Minister of Finance say 
the open-for-business policy is working and will be continued. 
And I say, if that’s phase two, heaven help us in the next four 
years if this government is ever returned. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I, as I know my colleagues, having 
examined the budget with some care and finding the kind of 
sham and flimflam that it is, are not able to support it. It is not 
the kind of budget that Saskatchewan people expected to hear. 
It is not the kind of budget that meets the needs of the people 
who are saying what their needs are. It should have been better; 
it is not good enough; and it does not deserve to get passed in 
this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome the 
opportunity to engage in this very important budget debate. And 
it is a very important debate, Mr. Speaker, because it is 
undoubtedly leading up to an election, and the people of this 
province will have the opportunity decide whether or not they 
want to go forward with the policies of a Progressive 
Conservative government, or whether or not they want to go 
back to the old policies 
  



 
April 1, 1986 

276 
 

and the old ways of the former administration. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a very important choice. And as I 
speak about the budget today, Mr. Speaker, I want to draw 
attention to those two choices. And I want to do so by 
responding to the member from Regina North East who I see is 
just leaving his seat. Perhaps he would like to stay around and 
listen to a few of the comments. He harangued for almost an 
hour and engaged, Mr. Speaker, in distortions, the like of which 
I have not seen in a long time in this session. 
 
I think perhaps the best way to respond to the comments from 
the member from Regina North East would be to quote, Mr. 
Speaker, not a federal politician, not a provincial politician, not 
a member of a political party, but someone who is an observer 
of the Saskatchewan scene. And I refer, Mr. Speaker, to the 
editorialist of the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. And what does the 
editorialist of the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix say, Mr. Speaker? 
Does he say this was a damaging budget? Does he say it was an 
irresponsible budget? Does he say, Mr. Speaker, that it was not 
the right budget for Saskatchewan at this time, Mr. Speaker? 
No, he doesn’t say any of those things. Mr. Speaker, here is 
what the editorialist of the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix says, “The 
budget was a responsible budget.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The budget was a responsible budget. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to contrast that with the comments 
that an editorialist from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix had to say 
about the promises that are being offered by the Leader of the 
Opposition at present, as we lead up to an election, contrast the 
words “responsible budget” which to me, Mr. Speaker, means 
leadership; it means management; it means confidence; it 
means we can respect where this government is taking 
Saskatchewan, because they have the reins under control. That’s 
what responsible means, Mr. Speaker. Contrast that to the 
comments that an editorialist had to describe the promises 
offered by the Leader of the Opposition. “Promise, promise the 
moon,” Mr. Speaker. Promise the moon. That is what the 
Leader of the Opposition is doing as we lead up to an election, 
promising the moon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province don’t want the moon 
promised to them, they want a responsible budget, and that, Mr. 
Speaker, is what they got on budget night. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I think we can see how 
responsible this budget is. If we were for a moment to compare 
it to the kind of budget that we likely would have received had 
the members opposite been in power, and then we will see a 
clear indication. We will have the opportunity to clearly 
compare what this government stands for and where we are 
taking this province and what the former administration would 
do to this province if they were back in power. 
 
I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, the first thing we would have 
seen had the former people been in power and been 

delivering the budget, we would have seen literally tens of 
millions of dollars being expropriated to pay for more farm land 
being purchased under an NDP government. That’s exactly 
what we have seen, Mr. Speaker. We would have seen the land 
bank expanded dramatically. And we know that’s the case, Mr. 
Speaker, because that’s exactly what happened. That’s exactly 
what happened when the member who just spoke on his feet 
indicated his comments about this particular budget. When he 
was minister of Finance the land bank increased dramatically, 
and every years funds were allocated, taxpayers’ money, for the 
government to buy and own farm land. 
 
And I ask the people of this province, those who are watching 
this telecast this afternoon: do you want the risk of an NDP 
government back in power which is going to take tens of 
millions of your dollars and use them to buy farm land? That 
would not create one job, Mr. Speaker. It would drive down 
land prices. And I can recall in 1982 when I walked the streets 
and knocked on doors and asked people what they thought 
about the government owning land, they said, that’s not what 
Saskatchewan is all about. That’s not why my forefathers came 
to this province. 
 
I suggest to the people of this province that were an NDP 
government back in power, we would see a return again to the 
land bank, and that is not something that I want to see, or that 
my grandparents want to see, or that the young farmers of this 
province want to see, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that had an NDP budget been 
delivered last week, we would have seen millions of dollars in 
that budget being allocated to buy real estate in the middle of 
the city of Regina for an NDP government to own. And I want 
to tell you why that would be the case, Mr. Speaker. Because 
when they were in power they poured millions of dollars to buy 
real estate in the city of Regina. And unfortunately, Mr. 
Speaker, today we are saddled – we are still saddled – with 
some of the expenditures of that government. And I wonder 
how many people in the province today know that that 
government used their tax dollars, their tax dollars – millions of 
their tax dollars – to buy ownership in down-town real estate 
transactions, Mr. Speaker, in shopping malls in the city of 
Regina. I question, Mr. Speaker, whether or not that is what the 
people of this province want. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, I want to draw to your attention, and to 
the attention of the people of the province, some of the 
suggestions that are coming forward from NDP candidates in 
the next election. In my own constituency of Regina Rosemont, 
the NDP candidate is suggesting that if they were back in power 
what they should do, Mr. Speaker, is take taxpayers’ money and 
set up a government-owned construction company. A 
government-owned construction company! 
 
Now what would that company do, Mr. Speaker? What would 
that company do? I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that that company 
would bid on all of the construction projects in this province. 
That company, Mr. Speaker, would undercut all of the private 
contractors, all of the small-business contractors. And, Mr. 
Speaker, you can be 
  



 
April 1, 1986 

277 
 

assured that if an NDP government were back in power that 
Crown construction corporation would be given the jobs. And 
what would be the result, Mr. Speaker? The result would be that 
the small contractor in this province, the people that employ 
hundreds and thousands of small people in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, who work in those businesses – they would be gone, 
Mr. Speaker. The NDP instead would once again be building 
their shrine of big government. 
 
And should anyone wonder, Mr. Speaker, if that is the case, I 
would be happy to provide any member of this Assembly or any 
citizen of this province with the document of the NDP 
candidate from Regina Rosemont, which said we want a 
government-owned construction company which is going to 
compete against the construction companies that already exist 
in this province. 
 
What kind of risk, Mr. Speaker, what kind of a risk is 
Saskatchewan going to have if an NDP government were back 
in power? 
 
Mr. Speaker, that same candidate from Regina Rosemont, that 
same NDP candidate who is going to oppose me in the next 
election, what else does he say, Mr. Speaker? What else does he 
say? 
 
Not only does he say that we should have budgets which set up 
government-owned construction companies, but he says the 
Government of Saskatchewan should take over all of the 
privately owned potash mines in the province, Mr. Speaker. The 
government already owns 50 per cent – but that’s not enough. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, an NDP government, if they were bringing 
down a budget, we might very well see funds expropriated from 
the taxpayer to take over all of the potash mines in the province. 
 
Not only are they going to fight against the small-business 
contractor, but now they’re going to run out of this province all 
of the privately owned potash companies. And once again, Mr. 
Speaker, this province will have a reputation of driving business 
away – not of attracting investment, not of being on the side of 
ventures that create business, but driving them away. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the risks are simply too great. I don’t want to see 
Saskatchewan once again have that reputation. I don’t want to 
see the small contractor driven out of business. I don’t want to 
see our tax dollars expropriated to take over businesses and, in 
so doing, not have one new job created, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1600) 
 
Those are the risks, Mr. Speaker. If that were an NDP budget 
that had been delivered last week, I suggest to you that we 
would have seen a category of revenue that would have seen an 
ever-increasing amount of money coming back to the 
government through an ever-escalating gas tax, Mr. Speaker, an 
ever-escalating gas tax. 
 
Today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, today in the city of Regina the 
citizens of the capital city of this province enjoy the 

lowest gasoline prices in the Dominion of Canada. The lowest 
gasoline prices in the Dominion of Canada, and one of the 
primary reasons is because this province no longer has a gas 
tax, Mr. Speaker – no longer has a gas tax. Mr. Speaker, if we 
had seen an NDP budget brought down last week, that would 
not be the case. They believed in a gas tax, Mr. Speaker, and I 
suspect we would very well see that gas tax back again. That is 
one of the risks that come with an NDP party. 
 
But what are the other risks, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I recall that 
not that long ago the NDP party in Saskatchewan invited the 
Finance minister from the province of Manitoba, an NDP 
Finance minister, to come to this province and to talk about the 
programs of that particular government. 
 
We all know, Mr. Speaker, that one of the means that the NDP 
government in Manitoba uses to raise revenue is an employee 
tax. I’m seriously concerned, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that if he 
members opposite were to ever form government in this 
province, that one of the new taxes that we would see here 
would be an employee tax – a tax that would hurt small 
business; a tax, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that would indeed put 
some small businesses out of operation. An employee tax, Mr. 
Speaker, ever escalating gas taxes, taking over more potash 
mines, setting up government-owned construction companies, 
spending millions of dollars to buy land bank for the 
government to own, spending millions of dollars for the 
government to own real estate in shopping malls. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if those are the kinds of things 
that the people of Saskatchewan really want. Well I would 
suggest to the people of this province, I would suggest to my 
constituents that if we were ever to see that happen in this 
province, that it would take a long time, Mr. Speaker, to return 
to the forward-looking progressive visionary policies that we 
presently have in place today. 
 
When I think, Mr. Speaker, of what the members opposite have 
talked about during the last few weeks, we have to ask 
ourselves – and I think, Mr. Speaker, this is the real question 
that comes of this budget. The real question that comes out of 
this budget is: who best can build the future of Saskatchewan? 
Who best can build the future of Saskatchewan? And when I 
see the members opposite saying that, we are opposed to the 
Gainers plant in North Battleford, we are opposed to a project, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is going to create literally hundreds of 
jobs in North Battleford and in the surrounding region . . .  But 
the NDP members opposite are opposed to Gainers. 
 
But is that all they are opposed to, Mr. Deputy Speaker? We 
hear the members opposite saying and being very critical of the 
recently announced major initiative in the city of Prince Albert 
– opposed, Mr. Speaker, to an initiative which is going to create 
literally hundreds and hundreds of jobs in Prince Albert and in 
northern Saskatchewan. But they are opposed to it. They are 
opposed to it because someone from outside of the province is 
going to come here because they have confidence and they’re 
going to invest hundreds of millions of dollars here. But they 
are opposed because they don’t have a Crown corporation that 
can do it. 
  



 
April 1, 1986 

278 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what does the editorialist of the 
Leader-Post have to say about this particular project? They say, 
Mr. Speaker, that enticing such a world-renowned corporate 
entity to come to Saskatchewan, they say it has all the 
appearance of being a coup for Saskatchewan; all of the 
appearance of being a major success for Saskatchewan; all of 
the appearance of building for the future; all of the appearance 
of creating jobs and opportunity for literally hundreds and 
hundreds of people in the province. But the members opposite, 
what is their response? Do they say, that’s good for the 
province? Do they say, yes, it really was a major coup? No, Mr. 
Speaker, they stand opposed to it. They stand opposed. 
 
So now we have them opposed to the bacon plant in North 
Battleford. Now we have them opposed to the paper mill in 
Prince Albert. And what else do we have them opposed to, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? Having spent $600 million of our money to 
buy uranium mines, they now say that, we are going to close the 
mines down – and in so doing, ruin our reputation as a trading 
partner with nations in the world; and in so doing, make it more 
difficult for us to trade our products throughout the world; and 
in so doing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, waste literally hundreds of 
millions of our dollars, and more importantly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, lose hundreds of jobs for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So now, Mr. Speaker, they have closed down the Gainers plant; 
they have closed down the new P.A. pulp and paper project; 
they shut down the uranium mines. But that’s not the end – 
that’s not the end, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now today we heard the Leader of the Opposition again 
speaking critically of the Rafferty dam project, a project which 
will create literally hundreds and hundreds of jobs. A project, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that will create recreational opportunities 
for the people of this province that were never there before. A 
project, Mr. Speaker, that is going to provide flood control for 
the people of this province and our neighbours to the south. A 
project that shows that this government can work with the 
Untied States government to provide the kind of 
forward-looking initiatives that we need. But what do the 
members opposite say? They say no. No, we are opposed. No, 
we are opposed to Gainers. We are opposed to the P.A. pulp 
project. We are opposed to the uranium mines. We are opposed 
to the Rafferty dam project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suspect that by now they have just admitted that 
they are opposed to literally thousands of new jobs being 
created in this province – thousands of new jobs being created 
in this province. But that’s not all they’re opposed to. And I 
think in all fairness, the people of this province need to know. 
 
And the member of this government who spoke earlier on today 
indicated that the members opposite are opposed to our oil 
recovery program, a program that has created literally hundreds 
of jobs – thousands in this province indeed – and a program 
which is making possible an oil upgrader for the city of Regina. 
That oil upgrader has the potential to create thousands of jobs 
over the long term. But I can assure you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that if the oil 

patch is shut down in this province, that the oil upgrader is also 
going to be shut down, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So now we have them opposed to Gainers, to the pulp mill, to 
the uranium mines, to the Rafferty dam. They’re going to put in 
jeopardy also the upgrader which will create thousands of jobs. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the risks that are associated with an 
NDP government are risks that no reasonable, sound-thinking 
person would say are risks that they want this province to take. 
Certainly not. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, not only do we have the loss of jobs that 
would come into place from the members opposite, but we 
would see a dramatically increasing deficit under the members 
opposite. We have just seen the Leader of the Opposition make 
promises, knowing full well that no provincial government in 
this country would ever be able to find the money to finance 
those promises unless they dramatically raise taxes. He knows 
that. 
 
He knows he’s promising the moon. He knows he promising the 
moon, and so does the editorialist from the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix know that he’s promising the moon. And I think 
any reasonable, intelligent person knows that that is not a 
responsible approach to government. That is not the right way 
to go at this time in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
People don’t want the moon promised to them, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. They want responsible government delivered to them. 
And when we talk about Gainers and we talk about the P.A. 
pulp mill, when we talk about Rafferty dam, when we talk 
about the oil upgrader, that’s responsible government. That’s 
building for the future, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I think we have to ask ourselves: who best can provide the kind 
of opportunity and protection to the people of this province? Is 
it going to be an NDP government? Well then we have to ask 
ourselves: can they work with small business to create jobs? 
Because we all know that most jobs today are in fact created by 
small business. The latest figure I heard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
was 88 per cent of all new jobs created by small business. 
 
So now let’s ask ourselves the simple question: who best can 
work with small business to create jobs in the province of 
Saskatchewan? Mr. Deputy Speaker, an NDP government is 
well-known for its anti-business philosophy. The NDP 
government in Manitoba has an employee tax which hurts small 
business. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government – this 
government – in this budget, just brought in an interest rate 
relief program which will provide 8 per cent money to small 
businesses – a clear indication of our support for small business. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this budget we introduced the 
innovate two-year tax holiday for those who wish to start up 
any new small business in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Because we really do believe in small business. The members 
opposite believe in big government, not small business, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
What about opportunity? If small business now has the 
opportunity to grow and to expand and they have secure 
  



 
April 1, 1986 

279 
 

protection from high interest rates with this 8 per cent program, 
what about students, Mr. Deputy Speaker? In this budget, 
mention was made of our commitment to provide money at 6 
per cent for students to attend post-secondary institutions – 
certainly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a very clear commitment of this 
government’s intention to provide opportunity for the students 
of this particular province. 
 
What about education in general, Mr. Deputy Speaker? We 
were the government which last year introduced the innovative 
educational development fund – a five-year program to provide 
new dollars over and above regular operating funds to enhance 
the education programs in the province of Saskatchewan. And 
this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that figure increased from $10 
million to well over $30 million – a substantial indication of our 
commitment to provide sound, forward-looking education to the 
students of this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk about providing opportunity, 
I think we also need to talk at the same time about providing 
protection for people. Opportunity is one track on which this 
government runs. The other track is protection. And we began 
in 1982, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by providing mortgage interest 
rate protection to 40,000 home owners in the province of 
Saskatchewan in order that they could keep their homes during 
times of high interest. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what do we see? We see a Leader of 
the Opposition who decides perhaps he should get on the 
bandwagon as well and provide interest rate protection. The 
only thing is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not sure he really 
believes in it. But even more importantly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
where were the NDP in 1982 when people really needed 
interest rate relief? Where were they? Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 
could have done something. They chose not to. 
 
(1615) 
 
Instead, they spent money on land bank. They spent money on 
101 other projects that really weren’t a high priority for the 
people of this province. Interest rate protection was then a high 
priority because people were losing their homes. Today people 
are not losing their homes, but the member opposite says, today 
we will provide interest rate protection. 
 
I suggest to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition is four years late – four years late. And the reason 
why they’re late, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is because it is this 
government that is providing, developing, implementing the 
kinds of sound initiatives, forward-looking policies that this 
province of Saskatchewan really needs. And a good example of 
that mentioned in this budget speech is the new Saskatchewan 
pension plan. 
 
I had the opportunity on the weekend, Mr. Speaker, to sit down 
with two constituents who came into my constituency office 
and wanted some information on this new pension plan. He 
happens to be a person who works in the construction business 
and his work is seasonal. He said, it sure would be good, it sure 
would be good if I had 

a pension plan that I could put money away when I’m at work, 
year after year after year, and his wife, a home-maker. He said 
it sure would be good if we had the opportunity to put some 
funds away in order that I had a pension when I was older. 
 
Then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they asked the question: why didn’t 
this ever happen before in the province of Saskatchewan? Why 
didn’t we have a Saskatchewan pension plan for home owners 
and for farmers, and for people who work in small business, and 
for part-time workers? Why didn’t we ever have a 
Saskatchewan pension plan? I suggest to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the reason why we never had a Saskatchewan pension 
plan — because the members opposite never really did 
seriously concern themselves with the affairs of true families. 
They were more concerned about the family of Crown 
corporations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, more concerned about 
taking $600 million of my money and the money of the visitors 
up in the gallery today and the members who are watching on 
television, the members of this province – taking 600 million of 
their dollars to buy uranium mines – more interested in taking 
tens of millions of dollars each year to spend money to buy land 
bank. Some pension. Some pension that was for the home 
owners and for the small-business people and for the farmers of 
this province. Some pension. 
 
They were more interested, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in taking tens 
of millions of dollars and buying real estate in some shopping 
mall in down-town Regina than they were in providing a 
pension for home owners and small-business people and 
farmers in this province. Mr. Deputy Speaker, they were not 
seriously concerned then about the families of Saskatchewan, 
and when I see the Leader of the Opposition making his 
outlandish promises in an attempt to win back power, I 
seriously question whether or not he is truly interested in the 
families of Saskatchewan today, 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I take a look at the budget, I see 
another initiative. I see another initiative, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that relates directly, directly to the interests of families in 
Regina Rosemont; in your seat, Mr. Deputy Speaker; it relates 
directly to the visitors who are here today and to those people 
across this province who are watching this telecast. I want to 
ask NDP members opposite and I want to ask the members of 
the Assembly, and I ask the citizens of this province: did you 
ever have the opportunity, under the NDP, to go down to your 
local clothier and to pick out a dress or to pick out a pair of 
shoes and to take it to the cash register and to take out your 
wallet and to put your money down and say, it sure is good not 
to have to pay sales tax on clothing in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Did they ever provide the citizens of this 
province with the opportunity to buy clothing and not pay a 
sales tax? Never. Never, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when the NDP was in power and people took out their 
cheque-book and decided it was time to pay their power bill 
again at the end of the month, did they ever have an 
opportunity, when they paid that bill, to say, it sure is good that 
we don’t have to pay the sales tax on our power bills any more? 
Under the 
  



 
April 1, 1986 

280 
 

members opposite, they had to pay sales tax on power. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, under the members opposite we all 
remember – how could we ever forget – that ever-escalating gas 
tax. Day after day people would go to the pumps in this 
province and they would fill up and they would say, how come 
the government has to gouge us with such high gasoline prices 
and such a high gas tax? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, during the last four years the people of 
this province have not had to pay a gas tax and that is why in 
the city of Regina today the gasoline prices are the lowest 
anywhere in Canada – the lowest gasoline prices anywhere in 
Canada. So now we have the lowest gasoline prices. We have 
no . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. The members realize that 
whether they are in the debate or not, they are not to call other 
members liars, and I would ask that those members who are 
guilty of that to please desist. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for drawing 
attention to those unfortunate remarks. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan today do not pay a provincial gas 
tax; they don’t pay sales tax on their utility bills; they don’t pay 
sales tax on clothing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I wonder what 
would happen in this province, what kind of tax increases we 
would see, if the members opposite were to get back in power. 
Did they ever reduce the income tax? Not once. From 37 to 39 
to 42 and on and on – up to 51 per cent the income tax went 
when the NDP was in power. Never once did they reduce the 
income tax. But they did put on a succession tax, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Remember that odious death tax – because that’s what 
it was – a repugnant death tax that they levied on the citizens of 
this province to the tune of 25 to $27 million. They never 
rebated it back to the people of this province; never gave it back 
to the people of this province. 
 
Succession tax; gas tax going up; sales tax going up. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I don’t want to see that happen again in the 
province of Saskatchewan, do you? You don’t want to see a 
succession tax back in the province of Saskatchewan. If you 
saw a succession tax back in the province of Saskatchewan, you 
know what the people would say? We don’t want the NDP 
back, we don’t want the NDP back. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the NDP were back we wouldn’t see a 
pension plan for farmers and home owners and small-business 
people. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the sales tax would be back on 
clothing. We would likely see a gas tax back in the province. 
We would see the land bank back in the operation again here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. We would see a Crown 
corporation set up to compete with small contractors here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the risks associated with an NDP government are 
simply too great for this province to bear, simply too great for 
this province to bear. We have to decide, and the members in 
this budget debate have to 

decide when they vote on this budget: do we want to see 
Gainers go ahead in North Battleford? Do we want to see the 
uranium mines continue to mine and trade and create revenue 
for the province of Saskatchewan? Do we want to see the 
upgrader go ahead in the city of Regina? Do we want to see 
enhanced trade for the province of Saskatchewan with the 
countries of the world? Is that what we want to see, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, or do we want to see jobs lost and the province of 
Saskatchewan shut down? 
 
That’s the issue that we’re voting on in this budget, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And I suggest to you, and I suggest to all members 
opposite, that if we want to see this province go forward, if we 
want to see vision and initiative and opportunity and jobs 
created, we have no opportunity, Mr. Speaker, but to vote for 
this budget and say yes. We have no opportunity, no other 
option. If we were to do otherwise, Mr. Speaker, we would be 
going backward, not forward. And I don’t think anybody in this 
Assembly wants to go backward. 
 
Perhaps the members opposite think that going back to a land 
bank is a good idea, but I don’t think so. Perhaps they think that 
shutting down the uranium mines is a good thing to do, but I 
don’t think so. Perhaps they think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
losing those literally thousands of jobs on those major projects 
that I’ve talked about today – jobs for our young people – that 
that is a good thing. I seriously suggest to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that this is not a good thing. I don’t think anybody in 
this province really wants to see those jobs lost. I would suggest 
to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when you consider the job 
record . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Especially George Hill. Especially Peter 
Pocklington. They don’t want to lose their jobs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — The member opposite talks about jobs. The 
member opposite, the NDP member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, talks about jobs. I suggest that he have 
the respect to be quiet for a minute and I will tell him about the 
NDP job record and the job record of this government. 
 
From October ’79 to October ’81, a three-year period under 
your administration, the editorialist researcher from the 
Leader-Post has dug up the facts and has indicated to the public 
that there were 4,000 permanent jobs created under your 
administration during those three years – 4,000. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will take another three-year 
period, October 1982 to October 1985, under this 
administration. That same Leader-Post researcher who said that 
there were 4,000 jobs created during that last three years of your 
administration has said: the following number of jobs were 
created in the province of Saskatchewan during a comparable 
three-year period . . . Did he say 4,000? No. Did he say 14,000? 
No. Did he say 18,000? No. Mr. Deputy Speaker, he said 
21,000 permanent jobs were created in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
April 1, 1986 

281 
 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would 
suggest that’s performance. That’s leadership. That’s building 
for the future, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s creating opportunity 
for young people. Four thousand permanent jobs under the 
NDP; 21,000 under a Progressive Conservative government – 
permanent jobs. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we could talk about part-time jobs, 
but I don’t think they would really want to hear the part-time 
job record because unfortunately they created more part-time 
jobs than they did full-time jobs. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I see the Leader of the Opposition has 
returned and perhaps as I close I would simply draw 
attention. . . Again, as I close, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will draw 
our attention, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the NDP members 
opposite could be quiet for a minute – they will have their 
opportunity to rise and stand in debate – I will draw the 
members of this House to the following facts: the editorialist of 
the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix has characterized the Leader of the 
Opposition as promising the moon. That’s not responsible. 
That’s not good management. That builds the deficit. That, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is not what the people of Saskatchewan want. 
They don’t the Leader of the Opposition – they don’t want 
anybody – to promise the moon. 
 
(1630) 
 
What do they want, Mr. Deputy Speaker? They want what the 
editorialist from that same newspaper said: this, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is a responsible budget. Promise the moon or a 
responsible budget? That’s the choice that we have, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and I have no question whatsoever that the members 
of this Assembly will vote in favour of a responsible budget 
instead of promising the moon. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bacon: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today in support of 
a budget that was delivered by my hon. colleague from 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden on Wednesday last, a budget of foresight, 
a budget of responsibility, and indeed a budget with a firm grip 
on the reality of this province. 
 
In my remarks this afternoon, I would like to address the 
women’s place in this province with this government: the 
promises that have been made and have been kept and are being 
made now; the credibility of the Leader of the Opposition and 
his party; but most of all, I would like to address the decorum in 
this House. 
 
The members of the NDP would have the people of 
Saskatchewan believe that it was the Premier of this province 
and the Progressive Conservative Party that is now the 
government that brought the grasshoppers to Saskatchewan; 
that brought the wheat midge to Saskatchewan; that ordered the 
drought in the South and the rains in the North; that flooded the 
potash market so prices are low; that is involved in the crisis of 
the oil right now. Well I say to the member from Quill Lakes, if 
we can 

make it rain in the North and keep it dry in the South, the 
people had best elect us forever. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan know the truth, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and as I quote from that famous political columnist in 
the Regina Leader-Post – and he’s speaking about the Leader of 
the Opposition – and he says, he obviously has no plans to 
reduce the deficit. He said that: 
 

On budget night when asked if he thought the $1.9 billion 
deficit would be the “major issue” in the campaign, 
Blakeney said he thought not. 

 
He’s quoted as saying: 
 

“The people still believe the government’s credit is good, 
and is for awhile at least,” Blakeney said. Long enough 
apparently for the NDP to let a quest for power override 
any sense of what is responsible politics. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’m a rookie politician in this legislature, and I’m 
a simple person. I do not have a degree in education, a degree in 
economics, a degree in agriculture, a degree in law. I am a wife. 
I’m a home-maker; and I’m a mother. And I can only speak to 
you simply because I am one of those ordinary people. 
 
The Conservative government has had a commitment to the 
people of Saskatchewan to build a better quality of life for 
them, and that commitment has been upheld. We protected the 
people against high interest rates which has allowed the families 
to remain in their homes. We allowed for the family farm to be 
protected, and the people have remained productive and 
optimistic. And we’ve allowed small-business men to employ 
fresh new faces, Mr. Speaker, in the private sector – the private 
sector that has created the 22,000 jobs. Fresh faces, Mr. 
Speaker, that are eager to work and who are denied that 
opportunity by members opposite. 
 
People were denied the opportunity to become productive and 
independent individuals because the previous administration did 
not believe in small business. They do not believe in free 
enterprise and they do not believe in people. And they do not 
believe in the people of – anyone in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And the people of Saskatchewan no longer believe in 
them. 
 
In 1982, the people elected a government, Mr. Speaker, a 
Progressive Conservative government, a government committed 
to families and to farmers, small-business men, and to home 
owners, and most recently to home-makers and women. The 
government is committed to the individual and the individuals 
from all walks of life. 
 
There are more jobs now than there were when we took power. 
There are more people in the work-force than when we took 
power. There are more people living in this province than when 
we took power. And that is not to the credit of the NDP 
administration. 
 
Let me speak briefly, Mr. Speaker, about my constituency of 
Saskatoon Nutana. We are located bordering on the river in 
Saskatoon. It is the original Saskatoon, full of lovely character 
homes and trees. It is served by Nutana 
  



 
April 1, 1986 

282 
 

Collegiate, which is one of the high schools, and Aden Bowman 
Collegiate, both which lie outside the provincial boundaries of 
my riding but none the less do a credible job. And I believe to 
some extent Holy Cross services the separate schools. 
 
I have many senior citizens living in my riding, Mr. Speaker, 
and they are now living an enriched life far beyond their 
greatest expectation for their golden years. And I’ll refer to 
these later, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Nutana also hosts an MLA office –first ever that we can find a 
record of within the constituency boundaries – where people 
can come to their MLA to see them, or even telephone them and 
know that somebody is there. And not only do we have an MLA 
office, Mr. Speaker, within the boundaries of Nutana, but my 
constituency also hosts the member of parliament for Saskatoon 
East, the Hon. Don Ravis, who is located just across the street 
and most convenient to the people of Nutana. 
 
I would like to repeat in point form, Mr. Speaker, some of the 
initiatives of this government that have resulted in prosperity 
for Saskatoon: there is funding for the new Saskatoon 
multi-purpose arena; Canpotex, the international marketing 
agency for the potash, moved its head office from Toronto to 
Saskatoon; a $7 million refurbishment of the Western 
Development Museum. Eight new child care incorporations in 
Saskatoon alone have provided pre-school and day care services 
to 300 families; a new $17 million cancer clinic; a new 
geological sciences building; a $78 million world-class 
agriculture building; a science research unit; a $31 million 
College of Engineering building. 
 
Twenty-eight new advanced technology firms have located in 
Saskatoon since 1982; over $2.9 million worth of planned and 
ongoing hospital construction since 1982; $41.2 million worth 
of school construction and renovations have taken place; 433 
special care home beds being constructed under the five-year 
special home care construction program; $2.7 million for the 
Kinsmen’s children’s centre; $40 million in science and 
technology research; 1,230 new jobs created through the 
Saskatchewan employment development program; 1,500 
increase in day care spaces in Saskatoon; $354,000 in grants to 
senior citizens and their organizations; expansion and 
renovation to Kilburn Hall youth centre; $11 million in grants 
to organizations in support of the handicapped; $20 million, 
nearly, in urban assistance from the Department of Highways. 
And over 10,390 families in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, were 
protected by our idea to buy down the interest rates and put in 
the thirteen and a quarter mortgage interest reduction plan. In 
1989, Saskatoon will play host to the summer games. And 
$24.5 million for a 240-bed special care nursing home, the 
largest in the province’s history. 
 
Saskatoon has done well under the leadership of the Premier 
and the Progressive Conservatives, and they can look forward 
to an optimistic future. 
 
But I want to talk a little bit about some of the rhetoric we’ve 
been hearing on the streets and on the radios and in the media 
about promises. And, Mr. Speaker, our government, my 
government, has been accused of not 

keeping promises that we made in 1982. 
 
The facts are and the truth of the matter is: did we not keep the 
promises made in 1982, or were circumstances such that it was 
impractical to keep them at that time? Were we able to keep all 
the promises? And have we made mistakes, Mr. Speaker? Well, 
yes we have. We have made mistakes. But let me tell the 
members of the opposition that the only men that go around and 
don’t make mistakes are the men that do nothing. 
 
We didn’t promise, Mr. Speaker, in 1982, a drought. And we 
didn’t promise a new City Hospital. And we didn’t promise a 
grasshopper infestation. And we didn’t promise a provincial 
pension plan. And we didn’t promise depressed potash markets. 
And we didn’t promise enforced maintenance orders. And we 
didn’t promise poor oil prices. And we didn’t promise the 
senior citizens, the seniors’ heritage program. 
 
We didn’t promise the second lowest unemployment in the 
country; we promised lower unemployment. And we didn’t 
promise an opportunity to get out of the welfare trap. And we 
didn’t promise to increase the work-force and the population. 
And we didn’t promise to establish the Women’s Secretariat. 
And we didn’t promise to control the spending on Executive 
Council. And we didn’t promise an open-arm approach to 
Henry Morgentaler. And we didn’t promise to increase the 
utility rates at the whim of the cabinet. 
 
And what didn’t you promise the people? You didn’t promise to 
nationalize the potash mines. And you didn’t promise to open 
and buy and then close the uranium mines. And you didn’t 
promise to bleed the equity out of the Crown corporations. And 
you didn’t promise to drain the pension funds to balance your 
budget. 
 
And what you promised since? What do the resolutions from 
the NDP party say? That they’re going to expropriate previous 
provincial assets for a one dollar bill. And what else have they 
promised by resolution? Is there going to be a tax on gas? They 
are promising no Rafferty dam, no Gainers plant, no expansion 
of the P.A. pulp mill, no agriculture building, no Opportunities 
’86 and perhaps ’87, no more jobs up North for the uranium 
workers . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Are you going to promise to help the homosexual community? 
Are you? I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the Leader of the 
Opposition, that a fox may change his colour but his habits 
never do. 
 
There is no credibility in his promises. There is no credibility in 
what he says. And I quote from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, 
Mr. Speaker, about their latest little prize that they’ve put under 
the Christmas tree. It’s written by Les MacPherson, and I’m 
sorry I don’t have the date: 
 

Now the NDP program (this is the 7-7-7-7-7) is worth 
175.6 million annually, and that seems to be a very 
conservative estimate. Costs will be much higher if 
interest rates go up, and they might do that at any 
moment. 

  



 
April 1, 1986 

283 
 

And what happens if interest rates are high in seven years 
when the program is due to expire? Will thousands of 
Saskatchewan families suddenly find themselves living in 
homes they can’t possibly afford? Blakeney claims that 
additional government revenue generated by activity in 
the housing sector will almost totally cover the program’s 
costs. 

 
I have been unable to find a single industry insider who believes 
that to be true. Most regard the NDP scheme as a blatant 
attempt to buy votes. 
 
And while we’re talking of promises let me refresh your 
memory. Let me refresh your memory. And it was recently 
stated in this House by the member from Regina North West 
who is a chameleon, who is changing his colours, to see whose 
soul he can buy at the time. Did you promise a gift tax and the 
succession duties that were removed in 1977? The gift tax cost 
the people $875,000, and the succession duty, the tax on the 
dead, cost another $26 million. The total of those two promises 
that you made or did not make, according to what was most 
convenient for you, came to $39 million. Was that a mistake? 
Was that a mistake? 
 
I say that your position on the tax on used cars is distasteful and 
cowardly. And again, I quote Mr. Greenshields from the 
Star-Phoenix that so eloquently put of the Leader of the 
Opposition, “Something old and something new and something 
borrowed and something blue, the old bride of Dracula.” 
 
And I have some questions for the members of the opposition, 
just a few simple . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . They would 
have to be for you to understand them. Why did you leave 
thousands of rural families facing high home heating costs and 
not give them natural gas? What did you say to our seniors by 
placing a moratorium on nursing home construction that the 
member from Shaunavon so selectively forgot this morning in 
Saskatoon? And why did the NDP leave the seniors to fend for 
themselves with only a $5 increase in their income supplement 
for 10 years? And why did the Leader of the Opposition want to 
reinstate the gasoline tax? Why did the NDP reduce patient 
days in hospitals by 5 per cent resulting in the lost of 400 staff? 
 
(1645) 
 
Why do they want to shut down our oil industry? Why did they 
want to spend millions of dollars on uranium mines and then 
close them down? Why did they not help farmers during the 
drought of 1980? Why did they not help home owners when 
interest rates were 22 per cent? And why did the Leader of the 
NDP, in 1979, say that helping farmers and small businesses 
battle interest rates was, quote “not appropriate”? Why is the 
NDP bankrupt of ideas and now copying our government to try 
and fulfil election promises? Even their slogan, “Stand up for 
Saskatchewan,” had to be borrowed from a younger socialist to 
our east. You only quote from younger socialists because 
you’re bankrupt of ideas. 
 
In 1982, Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative Party 

made a commitment to Saskatchewan. When the sky-rocketing 
rates were there and inflation was tough, we came through. And 
when young farmers could not own their land, we helped them. 
And when the economic exorcists of the opposition party next 
door were gone, we brought incentive and investment into the 
province. And Crown corporations that were out of control 
were being made to run accountably and run like a business. 
The SGI auto fund is even balanced now, and hospitals that 
were in disrepair and too small have been made larger, and 
nursing home construction is going full tilt and not halted. The 
university buildings in Regina and Saskatoon were inadequate 
and we have helped them there and the financial position of this 
problem has been seriously misrepresented by the members 
opposite. 
 
With the socialist-controlled tax dollars of the last 12 or 11 
years in Saskatchewan, dollars flew into potash mines and land 
bank and everything they could get their hands on, but there 
were no new jobs. You have no credibility. You suggest to this 
House some imaginative accounting the night of the budget or 
the day after, some imaginative accounting will balance the 
budget, will make the P.A. pulp mill look profitable or will not 
look profitable. I say to you and to the Leader of the Opposition 
that it is your party that has the skills; it is your party that has 
the motives, the expertise, and the scruples to teach a class in 
mathematical gymnastics. 
 
And did we promise, Mr. Speaker, that we would stop building 
if it didn’t rain or if it rained too much of if the grasshoppers 
came or revenues were down? We still removed the gas tax. We 
still put in the mortgage protection plan. We still put in the farm 
purchase program. We made the Crown corporations more 
efficient. We increased health spending. Yes, we did. 
 
And what did we do about the families, the real people of 
Saskatchewan, people much like myself and my husband and 
children? In 1982, as a point of interest, Mr. Speaker, the 
average age of the Conservative government was 38. The 
average age of members opposite was 48. So you tell me, Mr. 
Speaker, who is more in tune to the needs of young women and 
young men with young children than someone who has them at 
home right now? We have provided over $13 million for day 
care funding in 1986; that’s a 9 per cent increase. And for the 
first time, we’re providing a direct operating grant to day care 
centres. And the seniors citizens’ heritage program is almost 
$40 million. And there was a 25 million, five-year senior 
citizens’ home repair program for senior citizens. And we ended 
the moratorium on nursing home construction. We have built 
over 2,000 senior citizens’ housing units, and we have an 
additional 540 housing units that will be supported. All 
clothing, all footwear, all yard goods valued at less than 300, is 
exempt from sales tax, and this saves the people but a mere $23 
million. 
 
And in 1972, Mr. Speaker, to 1982 the former NDP 
administration increased Executive Council expenditures by 
280 per cent, an increase of 28 per cent a year. When they took 
power in 1971 the expenditures were in excess of $2.2 million, 
and by 1982 they were well in excess of 6. That is no longer the 
case, Mr. Speaker. 
  



 
April 1, 1986 

284 
 

The Leader of the Opposition, in his opening remarks in reply 
to the budget, set a precedent that we could talk about nearly 
anything we wanted to when were on our feet. So I would like 
to go back to a few things that have happened. 
 
I want to talk about the impaired driving and the moves that 
have been made by this government to stop the problem. This 
government, on the initiative of the Department of Highways, 
has got the highest fine in the country for driving while 
suspended, a full $500. And it was the PC federal government 
in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, a PC federal government, that brought 
in tougher restrictions and tougher laws and tougher penalties 
for those convicted of impaired driving. 
 
And it was the PC government in this province that launched 
the ad campaign in the liquor stores, on the key chains, and on 
the billboards of “Impaired driving – we’re all responsible.” 
And what did that do, Mr. Speaker? What did that do? Well, I’ll 
tell you. In 1984 we lost 86 people on the highways; and in 
1985, up to December 31st, we lost only 77. So the impaired 
driving problem is not cured, but it is being addressed, and that 
is far more than the members opposite ever even imagined they 
could. 
 
And who raised the issue of impaired driving in this Chamber? 
Was it members of the opposition? Was it members of the 
opposition, any of the boys? In the last 11 years, no. It was a 
woman, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that brings me to a short little talk about the women in this 
government, the women in this province, and the role they have 
to play. There are more women on boards and commissions 
with this government than ever before. There is a Women’s 
Secretariat. 
 
On behalf of women we now have in force maintenance orders. 
And the senior citizens, most whom are widows, are living far 
better with greater tax benefits than they ever had before. 
 
It happened to be a woman in this province, Mr. Speaker, that 
encouraged the adoption of the international child abduction 
Act, for it is women mostly, Mr. Speaker, that are searching for 
missing children. 
 
We have more women in cabinet. And who is operating Child 
Find in Saskatchewan? It is women. And who is doing it in 
British Columbia? It is women. And who is doing it in Alberta? 
It is women. 
 
And who is the best behaved and most respectful members of 
this House? It is the women. 
 
The women’s problems have been addressed by subsidies for 
day cares to help single parents. Who traditionally monitor the 
school and education? It is the mothers. And who nurses the ill 
in the family? It is the women. And who nurses the ill in the 
hospital? It is the women. And who is getting greater help in the 
hospitals? It is the nurses, Mr. Speaker. And who is getting a 
pension plan for home-makers? It is women. And who has been 
relieved by welfare reform from the constant treadmill of 

being on welfare? It helps the women. 
 
If ever a government radiated a pastel contempt for women, and 
was treasonous to the women of this province, it was the NDP. 
And I want to tell you a little bit about the NDP women. And I 
wish the member from Assiniboia would wake up. 
 
At the throne speech, Mr. Speaker – and I think this is not too 
difficult – at the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, there are 64 
members present. Okay? My spouse recognizes all members 
and most of their spouses himself. But having said that, there 
are only five women. So 59 people you know wear suits and 
trousers and the other five wear skirts – not too difficult. 
 
This is my year of election, Mr. Speaker, my year of election. 
And when we were walking into your Speaker’s tea in room 
218, the wife of the member from Assiniboia said to me, where 
are you from? And I said, well I’m from Saskatoon. She said, 
how nice of you to drive down for this. I said, I come to them 
all. I’m an MLA. And she said, well I don’t pay much attention 
to what goes on there. How interested in the careers of women 
politicians in this province can they be if their own wives don’t 
even know who the sitting members are? 
 
And let me tell you another little story about the women in the 
NDP party, Mr. Speaker. And this comes from the lips of one of 
their candidates, and she just happens to be running against me. 
And it took place at a women’s council meeting in Saskatoon, a 
public meeting where there was Pat Atkinson of the NDP, 
Evelyn Bacon of the PC, and one Maureen Darling who was a 
federal Liberal and a provincial Liberal candidate. And what did 
Ms. Atkinson . . . (inaudible) . . . say at this meeting about her 
role in the NDP party? She said that the old boys club of my 
party make it impossible for the women to win a nomination if 
the seat can possibly go to the NDP. They stop us. 
 
And what else did she say? She said, we tried to set up a fund 
across Canada to help young candidates who had children to 
run their homes and have help there and have child care. And it 
fell flat on its face. Pat Atkinson, NDP candidate, 
Saskatoon-Nutana. She’s not a member. 
 
So I’m telling you, if there’s any fudging from the truth, Mr. 
Speaker, it perhaps comes from the members who sit opposite. 
If there is any future for the women in the party of the NDP, let 
me tell you that it will not be a claim of theirs but a concession 
of yours out of shame and your disrespect for it. 
 
And lastly, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the decorum in 
this House. During question period today, Mr. Speaker, as 
occurs on most days, I could not hear my Premier nor my 
Deputy Premier, and most often not the Leader of the 
Opposition even with an amplifier in my ear – even with an 
amplifier in my ear. So if I want facts or want to know what is 
said, I have to read Hansard the next day. 
 
I don’t like not being able to hear my own leader and I don’t 
like not being able to hear members opposite. And I think some 
words recorded in Hansard, Mr. Speaker, in this House, are 
long overdue. In my opinion, the 
  



 
April 1, 1986 

285 
 

opposition has acted disgracefully and shamefully by their 
behaviour, not only to members on this side of the House, but 
even to their own colleagues. They appear to be full of 
contempt for this House and disrespect for their members. They 
are so badly behaved, Mr. Speaker, that their own leader even 
publicly chastised one of his own to be quiet so he can continue, 
right in this House. And yet again, after a recorded scolding by 
their own leader in this Chamber, on budget night, with the 
amplifier in my ear, Mr. Speaker, I could not hear what the 
Minister of Finance was saying, as they babbled and howled as 
they continue to do now. 
 
The worst-behaved people I have ever met, Mr. Speaker, are 
those that know they’re wrong. I came elected to this 
legislature, Mr. Speaker, with great expectations. Many have 
been met, and many surpassed. But the behaviour that you 
tolerate in this House is shameful and lacks any respect. I want 
all the people in Saskatchewan to be aware and to be able to 
identify the cliché of deplorable behaviour and where it comes 
from. It comes from the nine male members of the NDP party 
who were elected to this legislature and who attack all of us at 
any time we are on our feet. And let the people of 
Saskatchewan know, I resent their behaviour and I resent the 
tarring that I’ve received from the brush that they hold, because 
I am a politician. Their conduct has tainted me and I don’t like 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP party and their leader have been fully 
exposed nearly to what they really are. The member from 
Elphinstone has gone from a statesman to Moon Doggy to 
Crazy Al, and now one of the most desperate of all politicians 
in this province. You see, Mr. Speaker, politicians think only 
about the next election, but it is statesmen who watch out for 
the next generation. 
 
So in closing, Mr. Speaker, I say that I have only three wishes 
or dreams to be fulfilled as the generations follow. The first one 
is members of the NDP learn to hone their accuracy on the truth 
when they attempt to repeat it; secondly, that members in this 
House learn to act respectfully and with some dignity; and 
thirdly, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan can 
annually receive a budget as responsible and realistic as the 
ones presented by my colleagues. I will support the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
once again it’s a pleasure for me to stand in this Assembly and 
take part in the budget debate and, Mr. Speaker, a budget that I 
would consider a common-sense budget. I wish to commend 
my colleague, the Minister of Finance, and the member from 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden for a most excellent presentation of our 
government’s budget, and the formation of a most realistic and 
common-sense budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I spent four more enjoyable days back in my 
constituency of Yorkton over the Easter weekend. And needless 
to say, I did a lot of checking around our constituency and 
found very few constituents who did not think that it was a 
tremendous budget and a common-sense budget and one that 
we could all be proud of. 

The people in the Yorkton constituency understand full well 
that sound economic growth is responsible for the well-being of 
our society. Economic growth is a stimulus to provide jobs and 
prosperity to support the social institutions necessary for our 
forward-looking and caring society. We must encourage and 
assist wherever possible, Mr. Speaker, our small-business 
community, our farmers, and the development of our rich 
natural resources, and in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, this budget 
does just that. 
 
We believe strongly that big government, the philosophy of the 
members opposite, is not the answer. The majority of the people 
in the province of Saskatchewan detest the heavy yoke of 
government around their necks. And if there is one, if there’s 
one remark that I’ve heard consistently since being a MLA, it 
is: for Pete’s sake, get the government off our backs and let us 
get on with the job. And this is the comment that I heard when I 
was electioneering back in 1982. They don’t want governments 
dictating every move and regulating the living breath out of all 
of us. And creating a positive climate towards business is a 
must if we are to promote and encourage the economic 
development of our business community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And our budget confirms our commitment to create a positive 
climate: an 8 per cent maximum interest protection rate for 
small businesses up to a maximum loan limit of $100,000, 
which has been increased from the 50,000 to $100,000; a 
two-year corporate tax holiday for new small businesses. 
 
I can think back when I started with my own private business in 
1975. Would I have ever loved to have that kind of 
consideration when I was starting up a small business as well. 
 
A stock savings plan to encourage equity investment by 
Saskatchewan residents. This plan is part of our continuing 
emphasis to encourage public participation in the Saskatchewan 
economy. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


