


















































July 3, 1986 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 July 3, 1986 
 
 

2447 
 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 56 — An Act respecting the Sale of Assets of Prince 
Albert Pulp Company Ltd. and Saskatchewan Forest 
Products Corporation and the Establishment of a Paper Mill 
in Saskatchewan 
 
Clause 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I was saying 
before 5 o’clock, Mr. Chairman, the minister refuses to answer 
any of the questions we ask him, and he continues to say that his 
government provides every bit of information, that they believe in 
being an open government. Well, Mr. Minister, if you want to be 
an open government and to let the people know what is happening 
and what you’re doing, how you’re spending their money, then 
what you should be doing is answering some of the questions that 
you are being asked and provide some of the information. 
 
When I asked you the question about the roads in the forest area, 
and who was going to look after them, and what kind of 
agreement you had with Weyerhaeuser, Mr. Minister, you went on 
to ignore that question and to talk about an agreement that was 
made, or a loan that was made prior to your being government 
when PAPCO was first bought. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, even when you talked about that loan that you 
referred to in this House, you would not table any of the 
documents. You would read parts of that agreement and you know 
very well that that was only an interim financing kind of 
arrangement. But you would not send any of that information 
across. Now some of your members are hollering from their seats 
saying that this was an arrangement that was made and money was 
borrowed. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, you can have all your members on that side 
yell and scream all night if they like, but the facts are that you 
have some information there that you won’t send across and that 
you don’t want the people of Saskatchewan to see. You don’t want 
the taxpayers of this province to see it, because if they did see 
some of that information they would know what the truth really is, 
Mr. Minister. And that’s why you won’t send that information 
over. 
 
And you can have members like the member from Moosomin said 
to me once before, that he would put a sword through me. Well, 
Mr. Minister, your members can say anything they like and it 
doesn’t frighten me. It doesn’t frighten me because I am here on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, and we’re here to try and 
get some of that information out. We would like to know . . . We 
would like to know . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, we are 
here to get the information out to the people, so that the people can 
make a decision on whether this is a  

good deal or a bad deal. From the information that we’ve had so 
far, it appears it’s a very bad deal, Mr. Minister. And unless you 
provide us with different information, we only have to assume that 
it is a bad deal. You keep saying that it’s a good deal. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It is. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well if it is a good deal, we’re prepared to accept 
that. But table that information or send it over to us, so we can 
assess whether it is a good deal. And if it is a good deal, then 
you’ll have no problems. We can get this finished with in a hurry. 
But you refuse to send information over. You just make 
statements; you make statements that really have no truth to them. 
And you won’t present any documentation to prove that your 
statements are correct. 
 
Mr. Minister, you say that this deal to Weyerhaeuser is such a 
terrific deal for the taxpayers of the province. Well, Mr. Minister, 
if it’s such a good deal, why didn’t you offer that deal to some of 
the people from Saskatchewan? We’ve got in northern 
Saskatchewan anywhere from 40 to 60 independent foresters. Did 
you go to those independent foresters and say to them, look, we 
got a mill that we want to give away. We’ll put on paper that 
we’re going to sell it to you, but if you guys lose any money in the 
first three years, we’re going to write it off the principal. 
 
Or if we don’t want it as a government, why didn’t you go to the 
independent foresters and say, look, all of you take this over as 
shareholders; run that mill and try and make some money. And, 
Mr. Minister, I can assure you that those people, they are private 
individuals that have been operating in that forest for a long time 
and they know how to make a buck. They know how to operate in 
that forest, because they have been given nothing but scavenger 
type of forest. 
 
Mr. Minister, he says, am I going to talk about independent 
foresters. Well certainly, Mr. Minister, I will talk about 
independent foresters because, Mr. Minister, you can holler from 
that side if you like. Those independent foresters are good 
operators and they have been creating employment in that part of 
the province. 
 
You talk about 160-some people that you are going to create jobs 
for with Weyerhaeuser. Well, Mr. Minister, when we’re talking 
about 40, 60 independent foresters, they would create those 160 
jobs without being given $248 million, plus another 83 million. 
When you’re looking at about 330 million in total, Mr. Minister, it 
wouldn’t have taken that much for those independent foresters to 
create those jobs. 
 
But you have not offered any of those people that kind of money. 
You have not offered that to manufacturers, Mr. Minister. We’ve 
got manufacturers and processors in this province that have been 
having some problems and some have loans from Sedco, but did 
you say to them that if you have some losses you can write that off 
the principal? And if you don’t make a certain amount of profit, 
that you don’t have to pay the interest on your loan? 
 
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2448 
 
 

No, Mr. Minister, you didn’t say that to the manufacturers or to 
the processors in this province. But you do have money for people 
like Pocklington or Weyerhaeuser. You have money for those 
kind of people, but you don’t have for the smaller operators. 
 
Then you go around the province saying that you are concerned 
about the small operators in this province; you are concerned 
about the economy of this province and how it’s going to get built 
with a Tory government. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, four years, going on five years, has shown 
exactly how you intend to build this province and how you intend 
to improve the economy of it. You’ve created a deficit that has 
been unheard of in this province — $2 billion in the budget alone. 
And, Mr. Minister, I would say those figures are very conservative 
— if you want to use that phrase — very conservative figures 
when you’re looking at $2 billion. I would say that before this year 
is up, it’s going to be an awful lot more than that. 
 
That’s what is happening in this province, Mr. Minister, since you 
have been the government. There aren’t any of those people. The 
small-business men, the farmers, the small manufacturers — none 
of those have profited from any deals like you’re offering to 
Weyerhaeuser. None of them have received that kind of benefit. 
 
I have had farmers in my constituency saying to me . . . and not 
only farmers; I have even had some teachers. Yes, you may say 
that they’re saying I’m done. Well I guess when you call the 
election, we’ll find out. I guess we’ll find out when the election 
comes about. 
 
Mr. Minister, you can be as arrogant as you like on that side of the 
House, but that won’t win you an election because the people in 
that constituency, and I’m sure in every other constituency, are 
saying that if this government can afford to throw away taxpayers’ 
money the way they are doing now, and to offer Weyerhaeuser 
$248 million worth of a plant, of a pulp-mill, and virtually giving 
it away to the, and then giving them another $83 million for a 
so-called paper-mill that we have no assurance is going to be built 
as yet. We have no assurances of that. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, they are saying farmers are in trouble today 
too. And there is a lot of Crown land around. Why doesn’t this 
government say to the farmers, here’s Crown land; we’ll sell you 
this land at a given price, and if you make a profit on it, you can 
pay back that land — you can pay for it. But you’ve got to make a 
profit on it before you have to pay for it. And if you don’t make 
that profit, you don’t have to make the payment nor do you have 
to pay the interest. That’s what you should be saying to the 
farmers, because that’s the deal you’re offering to Weyerhaeuser. 
But you certainly have not given that deal to the farmers of this 
province, Mr. Minister. 
 
And that isn’t only the farmers I think just about every business 
man in this province has been saying the same thing. You have all 
kinds of money for the Peter Pocklingtons, for the Weyerhaeuser, 
and for anybody that wants to come into this province from the 
States or anywhere else . . . (inaudible interjection) . . .  
 

Now the member for Regina North, or Regina South — North, 
South, whichever it is — is saying that the people aren’t saying 
that. Well, Mr. Minister, I’d like to tell that member for Regina 
North-South that the people are concerned about the give-aways 
of this government. They are concerned about the expenditures of 
this government where it has no regard for the taxpayers’ dollar. It 
simply is prepared to give it away and then say to the taxpayer that 
we can’t afford to operate without raising your taxes. And it’s not 
only happening in Saskatchewan. We see exactly what’s happened 
in Ottawa. They believe in the same kind of give-aways, and now 
they’re saying, we’ve got to increase your taxes. Well, Mr. 
Chairman, I would say that that is exactly what’s going to happen 
here. 
 
They can continue to say that we’re creating all these good deals 
for Saskatchewan and for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, but in 
the end, somebody’s going to have to pay for it. You can only give 
so much away until the time comes that you have to pay for it. 
And, Mr. Minister, when that time comes, then that government is 
going to say to the taxpayers, we’ve got to increase your taxes 
because somebody has to pay for it. 
 
And the people are starting to realize that, Mr. Chairman. They are 
starting to realize that and they know exactly what this 
government is doing. they know that when a government starts to 
give something away, that it’s not going to be able to operate very 
long without the people feeling the effects of it. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you have been giving money away in this 
province for over four years now, whether it was Manalta Coal or 
any other multinational; whether it was Peter Pocklington or 
Weyerhaeuser, you have been giving it away to them. 
 
When the farmers asked for something, you didn’t have the money 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And some of the members are 
saying, how can you say it? Well they can holler from their seats, 
how \can I say it, Mr. Minister, because it’s not difficult, because 
when you compare what has been given to Weyerhaeuser and 
what has been given to the farmers, it’s not very hard to 
distinguish between the two. 
 
(1915) 
 
One is a loan that they have to pay back at 6 per cent interest over 
three years, and they have to pay it back over those three years. 
They have no choice. But Weyerhaeuser has 30 years to pay it 
back, and if they don’t make a profit, they don’t have to pay for it. 
But I don’t remember seeing anything in the legislation that was 
put before this House regarding that loan to farmers. I didn’t see 
anything that said that if the farmers don’t make a profit on their 
farm this year that they don’t have to pay it back, and if they have 
a loss, that they will be able to write it off, the amount that they 
borrowed from the government. No, it doesn’t say that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What about small business? 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Small business is in the same situation. They 
have 9 per cent loans for small business. But, Mr.  
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2449 
 
 

Minister, those small-business people have to make their 
payments or they have to close their shops. 
 
And I have a processor in my constituency that has some problems 
financially. But is Sedco saying that, because you’ve had some 
losses, you don’t have to pay your money back? No, Sedco isn’t 
saying that to my business people. And they’re not saying that to 
any of the business people in this province. 
 
But when it comes to people like Weyerhaeuser or Pocklington, 
then there is no problem providing money for them. It goes in the 
millions and the hundreds of millions. And that, people are starting 
to realize. And, Mr. Minister, the people aren’t going to allow you 
to get away with give-aways like what you are proposing. 
 
Now I know you’re going to go into another one of your 
harangues. But I still would like to know what you have in the 
agreement regarding the roads in the forest area. It’s quite evident 
that you’re going to give this away to Weyerhaeuser. You’re 
going to give them the pulp-mill and you’re going to give them the 
chemical plant and you’re going to give them the sawmill at big 
river. That’s quite obvious you’re going to do all of that in return 
for a so-called, in your words, paper-mill. You’re going to give 
this away to them. 
 
But what about the roads? Are you also saying the Department of 
Highways, with the kind of budget that they have and the kind of 
highways that we see in this province that are not fit to drive on, 
are going to have to maintain the roads in that forest? Mr. 
Minister, I would like you to come forward with a clear answer as 
to who is going to be looking after the roads in that forest area. 
PAPCO looked after them before. Is the government and the 
taxpayers, or the Department of Highways going to have to look 
after them now? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member asked 
several — or he alluded to several aspects of this deal in his 
remarks. One of the things that he alluded to was something that 
the member from Regina Centre alluded to earlier, before supper 
tonight, regarding the source, the original source — and I think it 
goes right back to the heart of the matter here, goes to the very 
heart of the matter here. The member from Regina Centre this 
afternoon and then the member from Pelly just a few moments ago 
suggested . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re not going to give us the documents, 
are you. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — . . . suggested that there was no borrowing 
— you’ll get them — in terms of the $162 million which the 
former government paid. That’s what he said; he said there was no 
borrowing. And then he said something to the effect that, if there 
was any borrowing in the latter months of 1980, if there was any 
borrowing, it was merely bridge financing which was in fact paid 
off before the end of 1980 year. He used as a source, he said, the 
Crown investments corporation annual report for the year 1980, 
Mr. Chairman . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Who was the board then? 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Oh, the board of directors at that time, for 
members of the committee, I could relate who they were. Board of 
directors at that time were the Hon. Elwood Cowley, chairman of 
the board; Hon. Allan Blakeney, Hon. John Messer, Hon. Walter 
Smishek, Hon. Ted Bowerman, Hon. Eiling Kramer, Hon. Don 
Cody, and Hon. Ed Tchorzewski. G.H. Beatty was there and 
secretary of the board was R.M. Sherdahl. 
 
Now the member from Regina Centre used this annual report as 
evidence that there was no bank indebtedness in that amount. But 
on page 17 of that annual report, bank indebtedness — I take you 
to that line; I know the member has a copy of the report in front of 
him — bank indebtedness went up by something in the order of 
256 million. And what I suggest and what I am saying to the 
House and to the committee, Mr. Chairman, is the following: what 
I’m saying is that $162,370,000 which they borrowed was in that 
amount, that $256 million — it was in that amount. 
 
What I’m also saying, Mr. Chairman, is this: that the members of 
that New Democratic Party, through all of this time since 1980 
until now — and it’s today that the truth comes out — they have 
said that they paid for that 70 per cent, that 162 million, out of the 
Heritage Fund. They said that; their leader, the Leader of the 
Opposition has said that; the member from Regina Centre said 
that, this day in the House — this very day. The member from 
Pelly stood tonight and suggested that there was no borrowing, the 
fact that there was no borrowing, and he said if there was any 
borrowing . . . He alluded to the same argument that the member 
from Regina Centre had, that if there was any borrowing of the 
$162 million it was only bridge financing which was paid back 
before the end of that year. That’s what they said. Now that’s 
clearly on the record, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman, what I am contending is the following. I contend 
that: 
 

CIC borrowed $2163 million or thereabouts in December of 
1980 to finance the purchase of PAPCO. This was split 
between the Bank of Montreal, ($80 million) and the Bank of 
Commerce, ($83 million). 

 
These loans were due on April 19th, 1982, and they “should be 
renewed,” is what it says here. This is a little memo that I’m 
reading from now. I’m quoting. All of this that I have said here is 
a quote. 
 

We can get a better deal by giving all of it to the Commerce. 
 
And in brackets: 
 

(The Bank of Montreal wanted to up the rate on us). The 
Department of Finance agrees with this change. 

 
And then the fourth point: 
 

The Board will not be meeting in time to consider the 
extension, so I recommend that you approve it for the Board 
at this time. The terms will be: up to  

  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2450 
 
 

$165 million temporary loan, at prime rate, payable quarterly 
in arrears, from the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, 
and coming due on September 30, 1982. 

 
Now that little memo which I quote from was signed by G.H. 
Beatty, president of Crown investments corporation. It’s initialled 
with the “okay” above it by one Hon. Elwood Cowley, chairman, 
Crown investments corporation. And the day is key here, Mr. 
chairman. The date is key here: April 14th, 1982. 
 
Now all members of this House on April the 14th of 1982 will 
remember that this was during the writ period. Those of us on this 
side of the House remember that writ period very well. Those 
members on that side of the House like to forget that writ period. 
But this is an example of the jiggery-pokery that they liked to play 
throughout their term in government, and in fact right down to the 
last dying, gasping breaths of that government — that former NDP 
government. And this is what they did. 
 
This shows that the hon. member from Regina Centre, who 
accused me of misleading the House as it relates to this detail — 
he said in this House today that they got that money; the money 
was in the Heritage Fund. That’s the line that those people used. 
They told people that that money came from the Heritage Fund; 
that there was cash in the Heritage Fund; that they did not have to 
borrow the money. 
 
The documents show that they did in fact borrow the money from 
two charter banks; and that they did in fact use it as more than 
bridge financing in the fact that they renewed those loans on an 
ongoing basis and that those loans — it was necessary to renew 
those loans. What I’m submitting to you, Mr. Chairman, it was 
necessary to renew those loans on an ongoing basis even after we 
took office. That was the problem that they had. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I have several documents here, and I hear the 
members saying, table the documents, and table the documents, 
and so on, and I will be quite prepared to that before this evening 
is over, Mr. Chairman. The member from Regina Centre will have 
an opportunity to have the documents in his hand. He’ll have the 
opportunity to stand in this House and apologize to the people of 
Saskatchewan. He will have his opportunity to stand and 
apologize to the people of Saskatchewan and to all the members of 
this committee for misleading the House. 
 
Because what that member did — clearly what he did, Mr. 
Chairman — that member from Regina Centre who is a lawyer, 
said to this House that they got that money directly from the 
Heritage Fund. They didn’t get it from the Heritage Fund; they 
borrowed it, Mr. Chairman. They borrowed the money. He said 
they did not borrow it. I contended that they did borrow it. He said 
they did not borrow it; and they in fact did. 
 
Mr. Chairman, that takes me back — that takes me back to the 
document that I quoted from earlier in the day where it said: 
 

To assist with the purchase of Prince Albert Pulp  

Company shares pending resale to an investor yet to be 
named. 

 
And that was the case, “yet to be named.” And I can say to you, 
Mr. Chairman, had that government remained in power, that 
purchaser would still, “yet to be named.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Mr. Chairman . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. All the members 
opposite clap what the minister said. But as usual all he gave us 
was a great big pile of thoroughbred fertilizer, as far as I’m 
concerned. That’s about all we got from him. 
 
Mr. Minister, or Mr. Chairman, I’ve asked a question over and 
over of him, and he hasn’t given me an answer yet. He 
deliberately avoids the question because he doesn’t want to give 
us an answer. And he says before this evening is up, he is going to 
table some of those documents. Well, when he said he’s going to 
table them, I can understand that he may table some of them, 
because they’ve apparently gone over the supper hour and made 
some photocopies of them, but they’re going to table some of the 
documents. 
 
I would suggest he had a number of them, about three or four 
stapled in each little pile before, but he is going to be a little 
selective in what he provides to this side of the House. He won’t 
give us all of the documents that would show exactly what went 
on. But he is going to give us some of them. He’s going to be very 
selective in what he passes over. I know he is hurting a bit from 
what he sent over before. When he gave us schedule B., I know it 
smarts a little, so now he’s going to be very selective in what he 
sends over. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I wish you would send over all of the 
documents and not only one or two pages out of the complete 
package, but send over the total package so we can go through it 
and know exactly what went on. But to be selective and say that 
we’re going to give you a little bit of information but we won’t 
give it all, is the same as what you did with schedule B. Only 
schedule B had a little bit more in it than what you would have 
liked us to have. But now you’re not going to give us that much 
any more. There’s schedule A and schedule C that would be nice 
to see, so we would really know what that agreement is all about, 
and just how much you’re going to give away. But no, you won’t 
give us schedule A and you won’t give us schedule C. 
 
You made an error when you gave us schedule B. Well, Mr. 
Minister, from schedule B alone, it’s quite obvious exactly what 
you are planning to do and how you are giving away the resources 
of this province and giving away some of the assets of this 
province . . . (inaudible interjection) . . .  
 
Well, Mr. Minister, the member from Kelvington-Wadena would 
like to trade me off. The 
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2451 
 
 

 member from Moosomin would like to put a sword through me. 
Now the member from Wadena wants to trade me off. Well, Mr. 
Chairman . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. We have 
to have a little bit of order in order to give the member an 
opportunity to make his point. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Chairman, thank you. The members opposite 
can throw all kinds of insults that they like. That doesn’t bother me 
at all. I don’t mind them at all. And I know the member from 
Moosomin has something else he’s like to say and I’m willing to 
listen to him, and I’ll give him his opportunity to get up in his seat 
and make his comments. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, if you can just dispense with some of that 
garble that you’ve been giving us and get back to answering some 
of the more specific questions, I think the people of Saskatchewan 
would appreciate having some straightforward answers from you. 
 
The one specific question that I’m starting to get tired of asking 
you is: just who is going to be responsible to maintain the roads in 
the forest area that you are giving to Weyerhaeuser? Is the 
Department of Highways going to be responsible for them or is 
Weyerhaeuser going to be responsible for them? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Tourism is. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Now, the member for Kelvington-Wadena again 
says that it’s going to be Tourism. Well, it doesn’t really matter 
what department is going to be responsible for them. I suppose 
what the people would like to know is whether it’s going to be the 
company that’s receiving all these give-aways from the taxpayers 
that are going to be responsible for those roads, or whether the 
taxpayer is going to be asked to do even that for them yet on top of 
everything else to maintain the roads in that forest area. 
 
That, Mr. Minister, is what I’d like to have you answer and tell the 
people of Saskatchewan: is the Department of Highways going to 
look after them or some other department of government, or is 
Weyerhaeuser going to look after them? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, I’ve said to the hon. member in the 
other debate that the roads agreement . . . There will be a roads 
agreement signed with Weyerhaeuser. 
 
There is a roads agreement in place at the present time with 
PAPCO. The roads agreement, as in some of the other aspects of 
this deal, are not completed in terms of the negotiations. You will 
have a copy of the roads agreement . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
The member says, why are you bringing this forth? 
 
I want to remind him what the essence of the Bill is. The essence 
of the Bill is enabling legislation to be able to do two things. One, 
is to be able to sell some of the assets of Prince Albert Pulp 
Company and some of the assets of the Saskatchewan Forest 
Products Corporation and to  

provide a guarantee of one-third of the cost of developing a 
paper-mill at Prince Albert. 
 
Enabling legislation, I remind the hon. member, that’s what we’re 
here to discuss, and I would ask him to come on with it. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, you continue to talk about an 
agreement, some roads agreement that you’re still negotiating with 
Weyerhaeuser. You come before this House, Mr. Minister, asking 
for legislation to be approved to sell PAPCO to Weyerhaeuser — 
in your words, to sell. According to schedule B, it’s a give-away. 
But even if we used your interpretation of that agreement, or of the 
principles of that agreement, you are saying that you’re somehow 
going to sell them PAPCO. But you haven’t finalized the 
agreement. but you come before this House asking for approval to 
do exactly that. And you don’t have any of the information that we 
can deal with to know just what it is that you are going to be 
giving and how much it’s going to cost the taxpayer. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, if you’re saying that it is such a good 
agreement, we’re not going to argue that with you. If it is a good 
agreement, put some documentation on the table that we can look 
at. And if it is a good agreement for the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, then we’ll have no real problem allowing you to go 
ahead with the legislation and make the sale. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, it’s quite obvious that that’s not what’s going to 
happen. It’s certainly not going to happen by the information that 
we have. It’s more in the line of saying that, we are going to give it 
away; we don’t want the people to know the details of the 
give-away; and we want you to pass this Bill before those details 
do become public. That’s what you want us to do. 
 
You want us to give away taxpayers’ money without knowing just 
what it is that you are going to do with it. Well, Mr. Minister, 
we’re not in here representing the public to just give you authority 
to give away their money without knowing what it is we’re 
approving. We’d like to know, as the taxpayers would like to 
know, what it is that we’re approving here. And you won’t give us 
any of that information. 
 
You continue to talk about some kind of a negotiation that’s going 
on, and something that’s going to be in that agreement that’s going 
to be good for the people. It appears at this point that you don’t 
even know what’s in that agreement. And if you don’t know 
what’s in that agreement because it’s still being negotiated, then 
how can you stand up here and say that it’s a good deal for the 
people of Saskatchewan? You’d have to know what’s in that 
agreement to know if it’s a good deal. But, Mr. Minister, if you 
continue to tell us that it’s being negotiated and you don’t know 
what the negotiations are going to end up like, then how can you 
tell the people of Saskatchewan that this is going to be a good deal 
for them? 
 
Mr. Minister, are you prepared — and it seems that you’re not 
going to answer the question — but are you prepared to make a 
commitment to the people of this province that when you give this 
pulp-mill away to Weyerhaeuser that  
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2452 
 
 

they will be responsible for roads within the forest area? Will you 
make that commitment to the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I have said there will 
be a roads agreement. There has been with PAPCO. I can think of 
an example. I gave you an example just a while ago. I gave you an 
example of a road which was built by Prince Albert Pulp in my 
own constituency. It’s a matter of fact. One that was built 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you say, what does that mean? 
I’ll tell you, it was a part of a roads agreement, one road, and it 
was a tremendous road. It was built by the company. It is now 
operated by the province, and is a tremendous addition to the way 
in which transportation is done between Meadow Lake and 
straight north into Canoe Lake and Keeley and so on. Now you 
can say that that’s not a good deal if you want to. 
 
What I’m saying to you, to the members opposite, is that there will 
be a roads agreement; that roads agreement will not be out of the 
ordinary of what is done in this kind of a deal; and that the interest 
of the people of Saskatchewan as it relates to the operation of the 
forest, to the royalties from the trees which are used, the roads 
which are developed . . . The member from Cumberland was 
asking other questions related to wildlife and some of the other 
resources there and access to those by people. All of those things 
will be taken into consideration. I give you that assurance; I’ve 
done it on several occasions as has my colleague, the Minister of 
Parks and Renewable Resources. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Mr. Minister, you talk about a road that 
PAPCO built, and I guess we’d have to agree that PAPCO was 
responsible for a road that was taken over eventually by 
Highways. It was on their expense account, I would say, and in 
their total expenditure. When they did make a profit they built 
roads even at that time that the government took over. And we 
don’t disagree with that. They were apparently a very good 
corporate citizen. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, we don’t know what Weyerhaeuser is going to 
do. We don’t know if you’re gong to ask Weyerhaeuser to do the 
same as PAPCO had to do, because you won’t tell us. You won’t 
tell us if you are going to put into the agreement that they will 
have to do at least as much as PAPCO did. You won’t make that 
commitment. You are saying that somehow you are going to 
negotiate a good deal for the people of Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. 
Minister, how can we take you at your word when we see what’s 
in schedule B of the principles of that agreement? When we look 
at schedule B, it says the absolute opposite of what you’re trying 
to tell us and the people of this province. That’s what schedule B 
says, and yet somehow you want us to believe that further 
negotiations are going to be good for the people of Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Minister, people don’t believe you any more, and we have a 
difficult time believing you, because you haven’t been telling us 
exactly what’s happening. The only way we find out what’s really 
happening in this government is when we get some documents 
that they didn’t really intend to release. 
 
Mr. Minister, a government that in ’82 got elected on saying that 
they were going to open the books to the  

people of Saskatchewan, that they were going to leave everything 
wide open — their doors would be open; the public would have 
total access to every minister in this government — we find that 
people have no access to information, have no access to ministers, 
and can’t find out what this government is really doing. That, Mr. 
Minister, is the problem that people have today. They find it very 
difficult to believe what you are saying now in light of what you 
have done over the last four-plus years now. 
 
Mr. Minister, that’s why people don’t really believe you, because 
you haven’t been honest with them. Mr. Minister, all I asked you 
to do was make a commitment that you will ask for at least what 
PAPCO was responsible for regarding roads in the forest, or you 
would be prepared to stand up in this House and say that when 
you are giving all those assets to Weyerhaeuser that they would be 
asked to be responsible for the roads within the forest area. That’s 
all you have to tell the people of this province. 
 
And if there’s any honesty in you, Mr. Minister, you wouldn’t be 
afraid to get up and say that to the people. But if you are afraid to 
say it, then they can only conclude that there is something devious 
behind what you are saying here and what you are really putting 
together with Weyerhaeuser. That’s the only conclusion they can 
come to, Mr. Minister. 
 
And if there isn’t anything in that agreement that you don’t want 
to tell us, that would not really hurt the people of this province, 
then you would get up and provide us with that information and 
tell us exactly what you’re prepared to do on behalf of the people 
of this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, it’s obvious that the 
member from Pelly and myself are going to need to agree to 
disagree on this, and that’s what we’ll have to do. And it’s obvious 
that he will not agree with me and I can tell the committee today, 
right now, Mr. Chairman, I will not agree with the member from 
Pelly. I think we’ll leave it at that. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well I guess, Mr. Minister, it’s quite obvious that 
we do agree to disagree — that you won’t give us the information; 
you’re not prepared to tell the people of this province exactly what 
kind of deal this is. So I guess it’s not going to help for us to 
pursue it because we can continue this argument for hours and 
hours and days, as we have, and you won’t give us that 
information. 
 
Mr. Minister, when we talk about this so-called sale or this 
give-away, what kind of agreement do you have with 
Weyerhaeuser then regarding jobs in that so-called paper-mill, or 
the pulp-mill itself? Is Weyerhaeuser prepared to say to you and to 
put it in writing that every job that’s there now will remain, and 
that they will very likely in the near future increase the number of 
jobs that are available? Or are you saying to them in this 
agreement that they can made the decision as to whether the jobs 
are there or whether they lay people off or whether they add more 
to the employment roll at the pulp-mill? 
 
Mr. Minister, do you have any kind of commitment from 
Weyerhaeuser regarding those jobs at PAPCO that are there right 
now — any commitment at all — or is  
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2453 
 
 

Weyerhaeuser going to be free to do as they have been doing in 
the States where they go and tell people if you want a job, then 
you better take about a $4 an hour cut? Are you leaving it wide 
open to them or is Weyerhaeuser prepared to make a commitment 
regarding jobs in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I think Weyerhaeuser 
Canada’s record is clear in other jurisdictions, in other parts of 
Canada in which they operate. Their record is clear as it relates to 
the employment of local people. They’re proud of that record and 
the people of Prince Albert who went to Kamloops, one of whom 
was . . . The member from Prince Albert was there; people 
representing the chamber of commerce and representing the 
elected governments of both the Big River area and of the Prince 
Albert area were there. They talked to many people in the 
Kamloops area who have no relationship whatever to the 
Weyerhaeuser corporation except to recognize them as a good 
corporate citizen of their community and came back with nothing 
less than glowing reports of the way in which Weyerhaeuser 
conducts itself in their community of Kamloops. And there’s no 
evidence that the member can bring forward — none — can bring 
forward to suggest that Weyerhaeuser Canada will not be a good 
corporate citizen of this province and of the Prince Albert area. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, we’ve heard similar assurances 
from this government. We’ve heard those kinds of assurances. 
We’ve seen what happened with Saskoil where you promised very 
big projects for this province and we’re going to see increased 
activity with many jobs. And what happens? We see that Saskoil 
is laying off people here and going to go elsewhere. They’re going 
to invest elsewhere. 
 
That, Mr. Minister, is exactly what can happen with PAPCO. 
You’re giving away a pulp-mill. You’re just giving it to them. But 
there’s no guarantee that those jobs are going to stay there. 
PAPCO can in the long run, if they feel that it’s to their advantage, 
shut down the operation in Saskatchewan or leave just a skeleton 
crew and expand their operations in the States, and say, we are 
going to increase our operation in the States and we’ll control this 
one here where there’s going to be very little happening in 
Saskatchewan and at P.A. That’s what you are leaving it open to, 
Mr. Minister. If they wanted to, they can shut Prince Albert down 
and they can expand in the States. 
 
And you are asking for no commitment, Mr. Minister, other than 
saying to them, well you’re such a fine corporate citizen 
everywhere . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And as the member 
from Shaunavon says, trust us. Well, I’ll tell you, you’ve been 
saying that to the people of this province for four years now. And 
they’ve been trusting you, Mr. Minister. And he says, trust me. 
Well, Mr. Minister, I don’t think that the people are going to be 
that prepared to just trust you, because they have witnessed the 
things that you have been doing in this province. They have 
witnessed that you have taken advantage of them and wasted their 
money. You’ve give it away; you’ve spent it. You’ve spent money 
on trips like Ottawa has. A Tory government in one place seems to 
be  

the same as a Tory government elsewhere, whether it’s in Ottawa 
or whether it’s in Saskatchewan. 
 
You are saying, trust me. Well, Mr. Minister, if there was any 
reason to trust you, I think the people would. But there really is no 
reason for them to trust you, because you haven’t done anything 
that would give them a reason to trust you. Because every time 
they trusted you, what would you do? You would always do the 
opposite of what they expected, and it would cost them money in 
the long run. 
 
People are starting to realize that — that you can’t be trusted — 
and that’s why they want the information before them where they 
can see it, where they can assess what’s happening. That, Mr. 
Minister, is what they would like to do. They would like you to 
table some of that information, and they would like to see it in 
writing before they approve over $300 million worth of their 
money to be given away to Weyerhaeuser. That, Mr. Minister, is 
what they would like. 
 
And if you were going to give it away, at least they would like 
some assurance form the company that there is going to be money 
in this province made from that operation, and that there are going 
to be jobs provided because of that operation that you are giving 
away. But you have asked for no such commitment, Mr. Minister. 
 
You are simply saying: trust me; trust Weyerhaeuser; why, trust 
everybody. And it doesn’t matter what happens after. Just trust us 
now and give us $330 million; that’s all we’re asking. And after, if 
you’re going to lose money, well that’s too bad. We know we’re 
going to give it away, but we don’t really want to tell you that 
we’re giving it away. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think the people are going to want some 
commitment. And I’m sure that the people that work at PAPCO at 
this point and the people that expect that you are going to be 
creating some jobs with the so-called paper-mill that’s going to be 
added to PAPCO, Mr. Minister, they would like some 
commitment that those jobs are really going to come and that it’s 
going to happen — not just some pipe-dream that someone in 
Tacoma had or maybe something that this government dreamt up 
just because there’s an election coming up. 
 
And I can see why, when the Premier of this province said that 
there are a number of things he wants to do before he calls the 
election . . . Well I can tell you, this is one of the things that he still 
had to do; and that was to give PAPCO away and really get no 
commitment in return, no commitment in return that that 
give-away is going to create any jobs, Mr. Minister — no 
commitment at all. 
 
Are you prepared, Mr. Minister, to say to the people of 
Saskatchewan that within a year or two — and you can pick the 
number as to when it’s going to happen — that those jobs that you 
continue to promise to the people of Prince Albert are going to 
come about? When are those jobs going to happen, and are you 
prepared to make that commitment and stick to it? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes. Those jobs will happen when the 
paper-mill is constructed. The paper-mill will come  
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2454 
 
 

under construction immediately following the closing of the deal. 
The net increase in jobs will be 215, estimated. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, I’m sorry for not catching just what 
you said. Could you repeat that, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I said yes, there will be a paper-mill 
constructed immediately following the closing of the deal, and the 
jobs which will accrue to the province — and to the Prince Albert 
area, more specifically — will be 215, estimated. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well, Mr. Minister, now it’s immediately after 
the closing of the deal. Now one would assume that that deal is 
going to close shortly, because you said that this agreement will be 
signed within four to six weeks, and this was maybe a week or two 
ago. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Six to eight weeks. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Okay, six to eight weeks. If you want to use six 
to eight weeks, that’s fine. And shortly after that, you were saying 
that there’s going to be a paper-mill constructed at that site. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, six to eight weeks — we are looking at about 
two months down the road, and that’s going to bring us in August. 
And I would suggest that maybe we will get a few pegs set up by 
the company that would indicate that there may be some activity 
regarding the paper-mill, and shortly after that you’ll be calling the 
election. 
 
So you’re not really going to have to live with that commitment 
that you’re making, and you’re not prepared to show us any 
agreement that says that Weyerhaeuser is going to construct that 
mill or begin construction right after they make the purchase of 
PAPCO. 
 
Is that in the agreement, Mr. Minister, that once that deal is closed, 
this give-away that you’re putting together now is closed, that 
Weyerhaeuser is going to immediately proceed with construction 
of a paper-mill? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’ve said before in the debate, Mr. 
Chairman, I repeat again: there will be no agreements executed 
without the provision that a paper-mill will be built adjoining the 
pulp-mill which is presently located at Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you’ve referred to a letter from 
the Bank of Montreal, two letters which confirmed loans. You 
referred to another letter in ’82, I believe it was, renewing the loan 
till September of ’85. Mr. Minister, I call upon you to table those 
documents now. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, is the member from Regina 
Centre denying that there were loans taken out? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, I rise on a point of order now. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — We will hear your point of order. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I refer you, Mr. Chairman, to  

paragraph 327 of Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms: 
 

A Minister of the Crown is not at liberty to read or quote 
from a despatch or other state paper not before the House, 
unless he is prepared to lay it upon the Table. (The rule) is 
similar to the rule of evidence in courts of law, which 
prevent counsel from citing documents which have not been 
produced in evidence. The principle is so reasonable that it 
has not been contested; and when the objection has been 
made in time, it has generally be acquiesced in. 

 
I call upon you, Mr. Chairman, to have the minister table those 
documents. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I would like to draw the committee’s attention 
to a similar situation which arose in a previous situation in this 
House. And I would like to read from the Hansard of that era, 
Monday, April 13, 1981. 
 
During consideration of the main estimates for the Department of 
Tourism and renewable resources, the minister was asked to table 
documents from which he was quoting. The Chairman made the 
following statement. Here is the statement: 
 

There are two questions that must be determined regarding 
this matter. The first is whether or not a minister should 
quote directly from departmental documents during debate in 
committee of finance. The second question is whether he can 
be compelled to table such a document that has been quoted. 
I will refer all hon. members to Beauchesne’s (Fifth Edition) 
citation 327 as follows: 

 
(1) A minister of the Crown is not at liberty to read or quote 
from a despatch or other state paper not before the House, 
unless he is prepared to lay it upon the Table. 

 
I further refer members to a precedent of this House dated 
December 4, 1973 and February 4, 1935 of the Journals of 
(the Legislative Assembly of) Saskatchewan, where it was 
ruled that a minister who quoted from a public document or 
state paper during debate could be required to lay such paper 
on the Table, but this did not apply to confidential 
documents or documents of a private nature passing between 
offices of a department. These rulings were based on 
references on Beauchesne’s (Fourth Edition), citation 183, 
and Erskine May (Seventeenth Edition), paragraph 421. 

 
I therefore rule that in this case the document in question is 
an interdepartmental report and the minister cannot be 
required to table it. 

 
I find that the precedent established by a previous chairman, in a 
similar situation, is applicable to this situation and therefore the 
minister does not have to table the document. The point of order is 
not well taken. 
 
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2455 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, may I speak to a point of 
order, because clearly the document which was quoted from was 
not interdepartmental; it was from a bank . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Oh, yes. That’s what he said. That’s what the 
minister said. Well, I think we can have the minister stand up and 
if the minister will stand up and say that’s an interdepartmental 
document, that’s one thing. If he is saying that it is not an 
interdepartmental document, we obviously have to take his word 
for it. But that was not my understanding of what he said. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I will, just to clarify the 
point, just to make sure . . . Because if the members are under the 
impression that the document from which I quoted was from a 
bank to a government agent of any description, that’s not the case. 
The letter, the memo I reported from was within a department — 
it was from Mr. Beatty, president, Crown investments corporation; 
to Mr. Cowley, chairman, Crown investments corporation. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’m afraid the point of order is not well taken. 
The debate continues. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you refer to the second of the 
two documents. The first of the two documents, Mr. Minister, I 
understood to be a confirmation of a loan. I ask you, Mr. Minister, 
to specifically deal with the first of the documents which you dealt 
with this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the question here is, and 
the member from . . . If I could just get a clarification from the 
member from Regina Centre. Is he still holding to the position that 
there was no loan? Is he still holding to the position that there was 
no loan in place? Because that’s what that member said today in 
this House. He said today in this House that the money came from 
the Heritage Fund . . . the money came from the Heritage Fund, 
and that there was no loan. There was no loan from the banks, is 
what he said. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The minister is clearly avoiding the issue. 
You are required to table those documents. You are required to 
table those documents. If indeed those documents back up what 
you say, then that will be the end of the issue. But if you insist on 
quoting from documents you won’t give us, then you can forgive 
us for making all the assumptions against you. 
 
Mr. Chairman, that document he dealt with this afternoon, I 
understood to be a letter from the Bank of Montreal confirming 
the loan. So I say to you, Mr. Minister, reread that letter that you 
read this afternoon. And if you don’t, we’re going to keep this 
issue going until somebody gets back with a copy of Hansard, 
which will be now be ready. I understood, Mr. Minister, you were 
referring to a confirmation of a loan from the banks. 
 
(2000 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure which one the 
member . . . I quoted from two or three documents today. But I 
would ask the member to clarify, just which — what it is, and 
what was the content of what he’s talking about I quoted. And I’ll 
go through my stuff here and see which one it is. 
 

Mr. Shillington: — It was a confirmation of an $80 million loan 
and an $82 million loan. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll read this aspect and the 
member can confirm if this is the one he was talking about. And I 
read the Crown investments corporation financing offer term 
sheet. And I read something to this effect, I believe: 
 

Borrower: Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan, 
Lender: Bank of Montreal, main branch, Regina, 
Saskatchewan. Amount: up to $165 million Canadian or the 
equivalent in U.S. dollars. 

 
Is that the material that you are talking about? 
 

Purpose: to assist with the purchase of Prince Albert Pulp 
Company shares pending resale to an investor yet to be 
named. 

 
Is that the document the member refers to? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — No it is not; it’s a confirmation of one loan 
for 80 million, the other loan for 82 million and change. 
 
I wonder if I might give the minister some assistance with the 
background to this rule. The background to this rule is: if you refer 
to a document, you ought to lay before the body the best evidence 
available. And the best evidence available is not what the minister 
says the document says, but the document itself. 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Minister, if you say the document proves your 
point, then lay it before us. Because we are entitled to the best 
evidence available, not to the worst evidence available — and 
we’d be hard put to do worse than to get the minister’s 
interpretation of a document. We’ve had some experience with 
that. 
 
You said, Mr. Minister, that the agreement to which you referred 
earlier would have had the loan repaid in 20 years. It turned out to 
be out by 10 years — small, small error. Small error — 10 years. I 
say, Mr. Minister, you referred to a series of documents; table 
them. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, clearly from the very 
beginning of this . . . At the end of 1980 your government, the 
former government of the province, the New Democratic Party 
government, purchased 70 per cent of PAPCO for $162.370 
million, and they purchased it for that price. I was quoting 
numbers this afternoon, and I said that they had borrowed $80 
million from one bank and $82.370 million from another bank. 
That’s, I believe, what the member is raising here. 
 
While he was saying, while he was continuing to say . . . The 
member from Regina Centre was continuing to say that there was 
no loan; that there were no loans and, in fact, the money for the 
purchase of that on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan came 
from this phantom Heritage Fund — that’s what he said; he very, 
very clearly said that. 
 
Now in a way you can understand why the member from  
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2456 
 
 

Regina Centre would say that. He said that because the people in 
his party have come to believe their own rhetoric. And their own 
rhetoric is that the Heritage Fund looked after all of this; and that 
there was, in fact, a Heritage Fund. That’s what he said, and that’s 
what he was echoing today when he said it was the Heritage Fund 
which paid for PAPCO. 
 
What I was saying to him is that that government borrowed that 
amount which I outlined, $162.370 million; paid interest on it in 
the high teens, I believe is what I quoted to you, high interest rates. 
And if you look back to 1980, the later stage of 1980, you’re 
talking up in the 17, 18, per cent range, somewhere there, because 
that’s what interest rates were in those days and that’s what they 
were paying. 
 
But through all of that time, through all of that time since that day, 
the Leader of the Opposition and the members that were in that 
government, four of whom sit there now, have been telling the 
people of Saskatchewan, misleading the people of Saskatchewan, 
as that member from Regina Centre attempted to do today — in 
fact did, until he’s being brought to order on it — did mislead the 
people and did mislead this committee, Mr. Chairman, in saying 
that it was purchased from the Heritage Fund under their 
jurisdiction. 
 
That’s what he said, and we need a clarification from that. I mean, 
that member should certainly be clarifying for the committee, Mr. 
Chairman, whether or not . . . He should be telling this committee 
whether or not he still holds to the position, whether he still holds 
to the position that this was purchased from the Heritage Fund. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the member from Regina Centre should clearly lay 
out for the committee and for all the members of this House: was 
that $162 million money directly from the Heritage Fund or was 
that borrowed from banks? Now you’re a member of that former 
government. You were in the cabinet of that former government. 
Which way was it? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well clearly, Mr. Chairman this is going to be 
a case of the minister making statements and not giving us the 
proof. It’s easy to make statements and not to give the proof, and 
that’s what the minister is doing. I intend to spend a couple of 
moments and see if I can find the Hansard from this afternoon. In 
the meantime my colleague from Pelly will have some other 
questions of this minister. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, every 
time we ask you some questions you get up, you avoid the 
question, you don’t want to table any of the documents — you 
don’t want to table any of them. And you go on to say across the 
floor that somehow we are misleading the people of 
Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Minister, if anyone is misleading the 
people of Saskatchewan, it has to be that minister and the 
government on that side of the House. That’s who is misleading 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have told the people of this province that this 
was a very good deal and you began . . . When you first 
announced it you said that it was a 20-year term for 
Weyerhaeuser. We find out in a document that we  

received that it’s a 30-year term. And then you talk about 
misleading the people of Saskatchewan. It’s quite clear, Mr. 
Minister, to see just who is doing what in this province. And when 
you talk about misleading, it’s coming right from that minister 
across the House. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Minister, even the P.A. Herald isn’t sure whether this is a 
good deal or a bad deal and I’d just like to quote to you what they 
say. It says: 
 

Until all the facts are known and all the agreements are made 
public and all the factors weighed, it is difficult and less than 
responsible to simply state that this is a good deal. 

 
That’s what the P.A. Herald says. And, Mr. Minister, they’re 
right. Unless you get some information before you, it is difficult to 
state that this is a good deal. The minister says it’s a good deal but 
he won’t tell anybody how he comes to the conclusion that this is 
a good deal. He says, trust me and we’ll negotiate a good deal for 
you. Trust me. Well, Mr. Minister, even the P.A. Herald, where 
this mill is going to be sold, is not prepared at this time to say that 
it’s a good deal. 
 
Now the member for P.A. holds up a big paper: “Pulp-Mill for 
P.A.” Well I know you’ve been making all kinds of ads saying 
that there is going to be some great things happening in P.A. But 
I’m not sure that the people of P.A. are convinced at this point that 
all of this is going to be so great for them. They’re not convinced 
that those jobs that you promised are going to be there. They’d 
like to see something in writing, and if you put it in writing then 
they might believe you. But you refuse to do that, Mr. Minister; 
you refuse to tell them anything about what’s going to really 
happen. You will not give them any assurances, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, because you won’t give them any assurances, I 
would like to propose an amendment. I would like to propose an 
amendment, Mr. Minister, one that I believe is reasonable. It’s one 
that’s reasonable and that you should accept and the people would 
then believe that what you are saying might have some credence 
to it. But unless you give them something to believe in, Mr. 
Minister, how can they accept the word of a government that’s 
broken their promise time and time again? How can they accept 
your word for it? 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to move this amendment, and it’s to section 
1 of the printed Bill. I’d like to add the following section after 
section 1 of the printed Bill, and it is 1.1 of the printed Bill: 
 

Restrictions 1.1 Notwithstanding any agreement or 
arrangement with respect to the sale of assets of Prince 
Albert Pulp Company Ltd. and Saskatchewan Forest 
Products Corporation in exchange for a $248,000,000 
debenture from Weyerhaeuser, those assets shall not be sold 
to Weyerhaeuser unless Weyerhaeuser constructs a paper 
mill in Prince Albert. 

 
Mr. Minister, I think that’s a reasonable request. It’s one  
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2457 
 
 

that would give the people of P.A. some assurance that there will 
be a paper-mill, and that there will be at least some assurance of 
those jobs in that area. 
 
Mr. Minister, this is a reasonable amendment, and I think that one 
that you should be . . . one that you should be accepting and not 
even questioning; because this is very reasonable. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to table this amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, there’s no question that the 
intent of what the members want here, in terms of . . . What 
they’re really saying is that there be assurance that there will be a 
paper-mill. And I’ve given that assurance on several occasions. 
 
What we have here . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, no. Just let 
me finish my remarks, please. I believe that section 4(a) of the 
Bill, if the member will refer to that, section 4(1) of the Bill covers 
that aspect. I believe that’s the case and in drafting the Bill that 
was what clearly what our intention was, to make sure that . . . 
And I have said to the House in the past that there will be a 
paper-mill constructed or there will be no agreements or no deals 
executed in any way, shape, or form. 
 
And so, you know if the member feels strongly that this needs to 
be in there, I have no problem with a similar kind of idea. And I 
would make the following suggestion if you feel that the wording 
of 4(1) needs to be beefed up to make sure that it is clear. I believe 
it’s clear now; I make that point. I believe it’s clear that there will 
be a paper-mill. But I can make a suggestion that if there are any 
amendments to be made to clarify that point, that they be made to 
section 4 of the Bill rather than as the member from Pelly 
suggests. 
 
And the wording I would give you is the following, which I will 
send a copy over to the members to see if they would agree with 
what I’m suggesting. 
 
And I’ll read it as follows. This is a proposed amendment to 
section 4 of the printed Bill, just to clarify the points as well that 
the member brings up. 
 

Amend section 4 of the printed Bill by adding the following 
subsection after subsection (3): 

 
(4) no agreement or indemnity in respect of the sale by 
Prince Albert Pulp Company Ltd. of assets comprising the 
pulp-mill shall be entered into or executed pursuant to this 
section, unless the purchasers of the pulp-mill concurrently 
enter into and execute an agreement with the Minister of 
Finance or such other member of the Executive Council as 
the Lieutenant Governor in Council may designate on behalf 
of the Government of Saskatchewan providing for the 
development of a paper-mill at Prince Albert to commence 
immediately after the completion of the sale of the pulp-mill. 

 
That wording is what I would suggest, and I submit to you that it 
accomplishes the same thing and it would be in the proper section 
of the Bill. So I would ask for a response  

from the member who proposed the amendment. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, in your amendment you refer to the 
assets of P.A. pulp-mill. Would you be including in that the 
sawmill at Big River and the chemical plant at Saskatoon? Would 
all of those be included in those assets? Because as far as we 
understand right now, Weyerhaeuser could sell off some of those 
assets; they can sell off the chemical plant. Would you include in 
this amendment all of the assets including the chemical plant and 
sawmill? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, just to draw the 
member’s attention: we’re dealing with section 4 of the Bill, 
section 4(1) with this amendment in which I am proposing, which 
I believe will accomplish what you are trying to accomplish with 
your amendment. Section 4(1) would remain in place as it is. And 
look at the latter several lines of section 4(1), which says: 
 

. . . facilitating the sale of assets of Prince Albert Pulp 
Company Ltd. and Saskatchewan Forest Products 
Corporation and the development of a paper mill at Prince 
Albert. 

 
That’s the clause which I believe accommodates what we’re trying 
to do anyway. You have said, no, it doesn’t. But I’m saying that 
4(1) remains; 4(2) remains as it is: 4(3) remains as it is; and 
section 4(4) is what I’m suggesting, and that would do the job. 
 
An Hon. Member: — But not just pulp-mill. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well what more would you want it to say? 
 
An Hon. Member: — I want the chemical plant, the 7 million 
acres . . .  
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Assets of Prince Albert pulp-mill 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It does because section 4(1) 
includes the sawmill at Bodmin, which is an asset of 
Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation. That’s included in 
section 4(1). 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, what we’d like to see in your 
amendment is . . . And we just sent out for some copies of that 
amendment. But you refer in the amendment to the assets of 
Prince Albert forest products. And that’s meaning in there . . . And 
you said the asset being the pulp-mill, the pulp-mill itself. That’s 
the only asset that you refer to in your amendment. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you be prepared to add into that amendment the 
chemical plant at Saskatoon, the sawmill, and the forest rights, 
where none of that can be given away unless they are prepared to 
build that paper-mill? Will you be prepared to add those to your 
amendment? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I would suggest if the . . . “no 
agreement or indemnity in respect to the sale by Prince Albert 
Pulp Company Ltd. of assets including a pulp-mill and a chemical 
plant . . . ” Does that get what you were after? 
 
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2458 
 
 

An Hon. Member: — Why don’t you put them all in? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well that’s what we did; we have put in. 
Because the assets of Sask Forest Products is not there, but it’s up 
in section 4(1). It says that, and it clearly says assets of 
Saskatchewan Forest Products — which is, in this case, Bodmin 
sawmill. Fair ball? I’ll just wait for the member to respond, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — “No agreement or indemnity in respect of the 
sale by the Prince Albert Pulp Company of assets including a 
pulp-mill, sawmill, chemical plant, and forest rights, shall be 
entered into . . . ” etc. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman . . . Well, Mr. Chairman, 
the member says they want included in there the sale of forest 
rights. That’s what he said just now. Forest rights are not sold. The 
forest rights are not being sold, Mr. Chairman. 
 
He doesn’t understand it. In the very amendment proposed by the 
member from Pelly . . . I’ll read the amendment from the member 
from Pelly, the one that started this discussion. There was no 
reference in there at all to forest rights, and now the member from 
Shaunavon, sitting in his seat, says, oh that’s what we want. Well 
I’ll tell the member from Shaunavon, that’s not what you’re going 
to get. You’re not going to get that because there is no sale of 
forest rights in the first place. It’s a forest management lease 
arrangement, and that arrangement is the same as is in place in 
Simpson Timber and MacMillan Bloedel and all of those. That is 
exactly the case. And the member says in his scare tactic attitude 
. . . It is typical. 
 
(2030) 
 
So I have given an offer, a very reasonable offer, Mr. Chairman, to 
the members. I’ve said here because . . . But he comes in here and 
he says, we want forest rights in there. That’s from the member 
from Shaunavon who’s sitting there, whining away from his seat. 
 
The member from Pelly makes the point; he mentions nothing 
about that. If we had voted for this amendment they would have 
been happy. This amendment does not include what we wanted to 
have. This amendment over here, which I suggested in a very 
reasonable fashion to accommodate just the point that the 
members wanted . . . Because what this amendment that I’m 
proposing as a new subsection (4), subsection (4) under section 4 
of the Bill, what I have proposed is reasonable and it 
accommodates just exactly what the member said, and in fact goes 
even further. Because what it does is points it out clearly, without 
question, something which I believe and contend, and still 
contend, is already in the Bill. It is in the Bill. 
 
We’ve give the undertaking there will be a paper-mill. Why would 
the company want the pulp-mill and the sawmill at Bodmin 
without have a paper-mill there? I mean that’s a question which 
those guys will never understand, Mr. Chairman. So what I would 
say to the member: if they do not want to accept this offer which is 
made in a reasonable way . . . They’ve got an amendment which 
does not accomplish at all what they say, and what our amendment 
does has been crafted to accomplish just  

that. 
 
We have offered it. Right now I’m going to withdraw it, and I’m 
going to ask all members of the committee to vote against their 
ridiculous amendment. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 8 
 
Blakeney Koskie 
Tchorzewski Lusney 
Engel Shillington 
Lingenfelter  Yew 

 
Nays — 22 

 
Birkbeck Smith (Swift Current) 
McLeod Embury 
Berntson Klein 
Lane Currie 
Duncan Martens 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, please. Order, please. We need 
some quiet please so that the Clerk can hear the responses. Order, 
please. Order. I would ask the member from Shaunavon to please 
come to order. 
 
Maxwell  Hopfner 
Smith (Moose Jaw South) Rybchuk 
Muirhead Meagher 
McLaren Muller 
Parker Petersen 
Johnson Swenson 
  
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 
THIRD READINGS 

 
Bill No. 56 — An Act respecting the Sale of Assets of Prince 
Albert Pulp Company Ltd. and Saskatchewan Forest 
Products Corporation and the Establishment of a Paper Mill 
in Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — There’s to be no talking while the vote is being 
taken. 
 

Yeas — 23 
 
Tusa Smith (Moose Jaw South) 
Birkbeck Muirhead 
McLeod McLaren 
Berntson  Parker 
Lane Johnson 
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2459 
 
 

Duncan Hopfner 
Smith (Swift Current) Rybchuk 
Embury Meagher 
Klein Muller 
Currie  Petersen 
Martens Swenson 
Maxwell  
 

Nays — 8 
 
Blakeney Koskie 
Tchorzewski Lusney 
Engel Shillington 
Lingenfelter Yew 
 
Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan 

Vote 165 
 
Item 1 — Statutory 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, one look at this indicates 
that there is a vast increase in the activity of Crown corporations. 
You are borrowing very, very large sums for the Crown 
management corporation. You are also borrowing large sums for 
other Crown corporations. The total sums that you are borrowing 
for Crown corporations will be a good deal more than in previous 
years. 
 
Potash corporation is about the same, and crop insurance is 10 
million more, which in this context is not great. The Saskatchewan 
Economic Development Corporation is about 30 million less; the 
power corporation is about 10 or 15 million less, but we have a 
huge increase in . . . Well SaskTel, $37 million more, but the big 
increases are the property management corporation at 158 million 
more and the Crown investments corporation at $230 million more 
— an extra $230 million you’re borrowing under this one heading. 
 
I think that no one could deny that even having regard to the way 
that the government opposite regards money, $230 million is a 
large amount of money, and I would like the minister to outline 
what he proposes to do with this extra $230 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, last year it was $21 million and this year it’s $254 
million — a startling increase. I would ask the minister to explain 
where the extra money is going, to what agencies, and why this 
very large increase in borrowing under this heading? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m told that the additional money going 
to SaskTel is the ILS program, individual line service, and I’m 
sure that the member opposite remembers the debate that went on 
about the property management corporation with the Minister of 
Finance and, in fact, already has the information relative to that 
expenditure. 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I am 
sorry that I didn’t make myself clear. The items that I referred to 
were mere instances of other corporations which were borrowing a 
lot of extra money. I will forget all about the other corporations 
and ask about the one before us. 
 
The Crown investments corporation was going to borrow, or 
borrowed in the year past, $21 million, is now proposing to 
borrow, in this year, $254 million, none of it, so far as I’m aware, 
having anything to do with telephones, SaskTel; none of it, so far 
as I’m aware, having anything to do with the property 
management corporation or the potash corporation or the power 
corporation. What is the money for? 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well I want to apologize to the hon. 
member for not having this in detail at my fingertips. I’m told that 
a large part of it is — and if you want the detail, we will get the 
officials out of Finance and get it — but I’m told that a large part 
of it is the financing of long-term debt that came due this year plus 
financing of ongoing operations in the Crown sector, and that 
accounts for a large part of the 254 million that you’re talking 
about. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. It is a lot 
of money. The major corporations who are the big consumers of 
capital are separately listed, except for one or two, and I won’t 
mention pulp-mills again . . . so we get into that argument again. 
We’ve had a reasonably exhaustive discussion of that. 
 
I would then ask the minister to forward to me a breakdown of the 
$254 million, and I’m doing that on the assumption that by far and 
away the largest part of it is the refinancing of debt which is 
currently outstanding and falls to be refinanced. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I believe that to be the case. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — The minister indicates that he believes 
that to be the case. I accept his statement to that effect, and I 
accept his statement that he will send me a breakdown, and I will 
cease further questioning on this. 
 
For the sake of members of the public who may think that we’re 
passing over $254 million very lightly, I think we should make the 
point that it has to do with the financing of corporations, and the 
details of the individual corporations have been discussed at some 
length in Crown Corporations Committee. The details of the 
financing of the power, telephones, or the details of the insurance 
corporation or the Crown investments corporation itself, although 
we haven’t got to that this year, on other occasions we discussed 
these fairly comprehensively. This is merely the borrowing 
program as opposed to the spending program. And while it is right 
and proper that we should ask about the reasons why money is 
being borrowed, and I do that and the minister has given me the 
answer, we have already dealt with the question of how the money 
is to be spent, and we have dealt with it over many hours. 
 
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2460 
 
 

Item 1 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 165 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

Vote 158 
 
Item 1 — Statutory 
 
Mr. Shillington: — My first question is similar to the member 
from Elphinstone’s. What’s the $143 million being used for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — It’s the completion of Lanigan II. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — So that is all capital I gather, is it, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Our understanding is that the vast, vast 
majority of it is capital. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What part of this vast, vast loan is operating 
then? Can you tell me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m sorry, I can’t provide you with that 
tonight. It’s information that I would have to get from the potash 
corporation, and we don’t have those officials here. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Will you undertake to provide that to me at 
an early date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’ll undertake to provide the member with 
that information. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to ask a further question with respect 
to the strike at Lanigan. The strike has carried on for some months 
now. It has been characterized by the management of that mine as 
being one about wages. The workmen, however, state that it has to 
do more with safety. I wonder, Mr. Minister, what has been done 
by the potash corporation to ensure that the workers’ concerns 
with respect to safety have been met? It doesn’t strike me as the 
kind of thing that the workmen would make up to avoid picking 
up their pay cheque which has been the practical result of this 
strike. 
 
The practical result has been that they have gone for a long time 
without a pay cheque. They say it has to do with safety. I suggest, 
Mr. Minister, that if this government has any care at all for those 
workmen, for their families, it remedy the safety problems, deal 
with the strike, and get everybody back to work. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — It’s an unfortunate situation, and 
unfortunately the hon. member has me at a bit of a disadvantage. 
The member, the minister responsible for the potash corporation, 
is the Hon. Paul Schoenhals, who is not in the House this evening. 
He’s in Saskatoon visiting with the Prime Minister. And I’m sorry; 
I simply haven’t been dealing with that issue, and I can’t speak 
intelligently on the question. I would invite the member though, to 
address the question to the minister responsible for potash, and I 
know that you’re going to tell  

me that the House will wrap up tonight and you won’t have that 
opportunity in this forum. But you know, feel free to write him a 
letter; I’m sure he’ll be very candid with you in answering it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well I doubt, Mr. Minister, that a letter from 
me is going to resolve the matter. The difficulty is that this 
government apparently has no interest in settling the strike. The 
government is saving money when that mine is shut down because 
you don’t have to pay wages — partially through your bad 
management, partially through your bad luck, and you’ve had lots 
of both since you’ve come into office. 
 
The potash industry is in the doldrums. Mr. Minister, I suggest that 
this government has no interest in settling the strike. You’re just as 
happy that those families and those men are out of work without 
pay cheques and saving the potash corporation money, just as you 
are happy to see the Saskoil move to Alberta because of some 
perceived financial advantage. I suspect you’re just as happy this 
strike is going on because you perceive the financial advantage. If, 
Mr. Minister, you wanted to settle this strike, you could. I say you 
don’t want to; you’re just as happy to have this mine shut down. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of points — I’m 
not very happy about the potash industry, as the hon. member 
says, being in the doldrums. We don’t have much control over the 
international market-place and in potash commodity. I’m not very 
happy about the unfortunate situation with the Lanigan workers 
being on strike. 
 
The first question, I can’t do a lot about that. The second one, as it 
relates to the strike, you have me at a disadvantage and I can’t 
comment intelligently on it, and I invite you to take it up with the 
minister responsible. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The next matter I wish to raise has to do with 
this whole government’s approach to free trade. I’ve said on past 
occasions that the only practical result of your race to embrace free 
trade, and your enthusiasm for telling the Americans that Canada 
has everything to gain by free trade arrangements, is that you have 
played into the hands of two groups of Americans. One group of 
Americans, who believe in the fortress America, believe in 
protectionism, believe that the U.S. will be stronger with 
protectionism. 
 
You have also, though, played into a larger group of Americans, 
those who are just sharp horse-traders. With any understanding of 
the issue, I suggest that this government would have recognized 
that free trade negotiations is not a blissful march towards some 
nirvana. It is a series of hard-nosed negotiations which there’s 
some give and some take. You enter these negotiations saying we 
have everything to gain and nothing to lose by this, and you are 
surprised when the Americans decide to play hard to get, and to 
get as much of an advantage as they can. 
 
If you go to sell a person a horse, you don’t start out by telling him 
that this horse — if you go to buy a horse, I’m sorry . . . If you’re 
going to buy a horse from a person, you don’t start out by telling 
him that it’s the best horse in the  
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2461 
 
 

country. That’s not the way to get a low price for the horse, but 
that’s what you’ve done. You’ve gone to the U.S. to buy a horse, 
and you’ve started out by telling them it’s the best there is that we 
have, and you are surprised when you wind up paying top dollar. 
A far, far sounder approach would have been for this government 
to go to those negotiations recognizing them for what they are — a 
trading session — and to have been a bit more circumspect in 
what you said about free trade and what you said about Canada’s 
approach to free trade before these negotiations began. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have approached the nation on earth which is 
renowned for being sharp traders, and you’ve gone on bended 
knee, with a roaring voice, saying . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order. I’m not sure that the 
member is on the topic. Order. We’re talking about a loan to the 
potash corporation. I don’t see where free trade enters into this 
debate. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well I’ll give the Chairman some assistance. 
The latest disaster . . . Part of this loan is for operating; we 
established that. He couldn’t tell me what, but he said part of it 
was for operating. The latest disaster to befall the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan is a decision by the federal Court of 
Appeal, federal circuit court I guess, that the amount of potash 
coming from Canada was in violation of the U.S. laws which 
prohibit potash coming in at under a certain market value. The 
latest strike of the U.S. protectionist forces is at potash. 
 
The latest thing to hit the decks is a move by the U.S. team, part of 
which is protectionism, and part of which is just good old U.S. 
Yankee trading. The latest of these two teams, the latest attack, 
they made it on the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. So free 
trade has everything to do with potash, and everything to do with 
the fact that an operating loan is needed for this company. 
 
If this government hadn’t begun, Mr. Chairman, their foray in 
1982 into potash by giving away a part of the market, they 
wouldn’t have had the problems. In the good times they gave 
away the market; in the bad times they now say they’re beset by 
low prices. The latest thing to happen to them is that the U.S. 
Senator from New Mexico, with the aid and assistance of the 
Secretary of State, is launching an action against Canadian potash. 
I say that this is, Mr. Chairman, that this is . . . (inaudible) . . . 
which impinges on their operating finances and is a part of the 
reason why they need this loan. I say this comes about because 
they’ve played into the hands of a nation which is renowned for 
being good horse-traders. You don’t go to deal with the 
Americans by saying, I want to buy a horse, and, by the way, it’s 
the bet horse there is to be had; I want to tell you there’s nothing 
finer. That’s scarcely the way to get a good price for a horse. That 
is the equivalent of what these people have done. 
 
Instead of going to those negotiations, saying, Mr. Chairman, and 
recognizing that this is a trading session — we have something to 
give, and we want something in return, and we’re therefore in a 
market. You didn’t do that. With a childlike simplicity of a 
10-year-old, this government went to the Americans, saying, we 
want to travel with you to a new utopia. It’s not a utopia at all; it’s  

a market in which we have something to give and we have 
something to get. But you didn’t understand it in that fashion. 
 
With a minimum understanding of what free trade is to us and to 
them, you would have recognized that you are trading with them, 
and you would have recognized that you are dealing with a nation 
which has made quite a success over two or three centuries in 
negotiating treaties. 
 
I say, Mr. Chairman, that the U.S. free . . . this government’s 
blundering, and the federal government’s blundering in the area of 
free trade, has everything to do with the present woes of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The member’s obviously at odds with the 
views put on the record by his leader the other day. His leader the 
other day was telling all of us in this Assembly that he favoured 
free trade in several commodities — including potash, including 
uranium, including pork, including a few other things — and that 
he didn’t favour free trade in some other areas such as agricultural 
commodities. And you can’t have it both ways. 
 
You’re the same member that stood up in this House some months 
ago, or some weeks ago, and, as I recall, were quite critical of the 
minister responsible for Sask Potash, calling on him to become an 
aggressive marketer in the United States — an aggressive 
marketer in the United States. Well by any definition, aggressive 
marketing . . . I mean, there’s only one price for a tonne of potash, 
only one price for a tonne of wheat, and anything below that, I 
guess, if you’re going to penetrate the market, is considered to be 
dumping. 
 
The hon. member opposite tries to let on that he knows something 
about the trade business. I think that his little talk demonstrated 
that he knows very little about the trade business. There is, in fact, 
a protectionist attitude in the United States. It’s been there for 
some time, and it’s evolving and becoming more and more heated; 
and so sector by sector there are challenges to certain sectors in 
Canada and, I imagine, other parts of the world. 
 
We believe that we should be at the table to protect those markets 
that we have. We don’t much appreciate the protectionist attitudes 
that are going on in the United States, and I don’t know how you 
stop them if you aren’t prepared to go down and negotiate . . . I 
mean, if you take potash and uranium and sodium salt and pulp 
and paper — if you slam down the door on all of those markets, 
Mr. Chairman, Saskatchewan’s standard of living is going to be 
somewhat reduced. 
 
We in Saskatchewan live on trade, Mr. Chairman, and that’s why 
these trade discussions are so important to us. And to suggest for a 
minute that we shouldn’t be down there through the federal 
government, with the federal government, trying to maintain these 
markets . . . And we intend to just fight with everything we’ve got 
to maintain these markets. 
 
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2462 
 
 

And the member has admitted that the industry is in the doldrums, 
and we’ve got some competitors in United States and New 
Mexico, I believe, that are a high-cost producer, and they don’t 
like very much low-cost potash going into their markets. So 
they’ve called for an investigation, I think under the anti-dumping 
laws, and so that’s going to take place. Where it will take us, I 
don’t know, but we intend to present our position; we intend to 
fight hard to keep the markets and . . . I mean, we must. We live 
on trade here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well the lesson of this is obviously lost on the 
minister. The lesson of this . . . And I am in good company. I note, 
Mr. Minister, that the disapproval among Canadians of the federal 
government’s handling of free trade is far higher than those who 
oppose free trade. What has concerned the majority of Canadians 
is not free trade, but the way that you people have handled free 
trade . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — How do you know? How do you know? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The member from Regina North says, well 
how do you know? Regina North, South, I forget that. I say the 
way we know is because there’s been two polls taken up, some of 
which have been quoted by journalists which you sarcastically 
describe as socialists. 
 
Mr. Minister, you say you go aggressively. Of course you deal 
with them aggressively. Of course we sell aggressively. We sell as 
aggressively as we can. It is true that our standard of living 
depends on our ability to trade, but we aren’t going to maintain 
our present standard of living by being poor traders. That’s what 
you want us to do — by being poor, p-o-o-r. You want us to be 
weak in the market. 
 
I say, Mr. Minister, we have to go there as aggressively selling as 
we can. If you want to go and deal with them on bended knee, 
you’re going to get exactly what you deserve, and that’s a foot in 
the mouth. 
 
Mr. Minister, we should have gone into those negotiations 
realizing they were negotiations. We are not marching off to some 
Utopia. We are in a hard-headed bargaining situation, and you 
people and the federal government went into it as children. You 
got cleaned, and nobody should be surprised. Canadians aren’t 
surprised; they’re just disappointed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — You know, I’m not going to spend a lot 
of time on this except to say that the hon. member, in about three 
sentences there, contradicted himself twice. And if it’s the political 
point that you’re trying to score, I don’t mind. It’s late at night and 
I’m ready to go home. So you can have the last word if you want. 
We’ll disagree. 
 
Item 1 — Statutory 
 
Vote 158 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation 

Vote 148 
 

Item 1 — Statutory 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I 
wonder if there is anybody who has any knowledge of the 
operations of this corporation to address a point or two which I 
think are highly relevant. 
 
We are asked to put up $21 million, and I would suspect that some 
of that — and maybe quite a bit of it — is for a newly acquired 
subsidiary of the Sask Economic Development Corporation, 
Sedco, and the subsidiary is Westank-Willock. That used to be a 
private company, and you’ve decided to make it a Crown 
corporation . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you certainly 
have. There is no question of that. I have an auditor’s report 
prepared by Deloitte Haskins & Sells, dated December 13, 1985, 
which is addressed to the members of the Legislative Assembly, 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 

We’ve examined the consolidated balance sheet of Westank 
Industries Ltd., as of September 30, 1985. 

 
I inquired as to why I was getting this as a member of the 
Legislative Assembly. I found that the, I believe it’s The Crown 
Corporations Act says that if we own something more than 90 or 
95 per cent of a company, it is a Crown corporation and they are to 
address their audited report to the members of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
I found, somewhat to my surprise, that our holdings in 
Westank-Willock were up around the 99 per cent level. This, for a 
government which purports not to be in favour of Crown 
corporations, I found a little surprising. I know that in 1984 the 
shareholdings, I believe, were at about the 30 per cent level. They 
certainly were not higher than that any time in the past. The 
highest they’ve ever been up until 1984, at least, was about 30 per 
cent. We now find that they are 99 per cent, and I think they’re 99 
per cent because of actions of this government in buying a great 
block of shares. 
 
The operations of Westank-Willock under the guidance of this 
government — and this government has had managerial people in 
there, I suspect — since 1982 or ’83 has not been a happy one. 
Westank-Willock did reasonably well, with certainly its ups and 
downs, but reasonably well until 1981 or 1982. In 1980 it made a 
profit of $1.1 million; in 1981 it made a loss of $150,000, which 
loss we would greet with open arms about now; and 1982 the loss 
moved up to over $3 million; and in 1983 it was about $2 million; 
in 1984 it was about $4 million; and 1985 it was about $2.5 
million. And you have . . . under the careful guidance of the 
business people opposite, this corporation from 1982 to 1985 has 
lost $11.8 million, virtually all of it public money. 
 
There were Sedco loans. Those loans kept going up and up and up, 
and finally you said, we’re never going to collect these loans; 
we’re going to take $11 million in shares — and $11 million in 
shares to cover the $11.8 million that this company, now a Crown 
corporation, has lost. And it’s been losing money still, as a Crown 
corporation. And I think that we all would wish Westank-Willock 
well in the sense of maintaining its business and creating jobs and 
employment. But we have  
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2463 
 
 

to face the fact that Sedco opted to get rid of the founder of the 
company — for good or ill, but they must take the responsibility. 
They got rid of the man who built it — for good or ill, but they 
must take the responsibility. And they have been losing money at 
an impressive rate since that time. 
 
And you’ve now got another Crown corporation that is, as I say, 
losing money at an impressive rate. And I have no doubt, of this 
$21 million, some significant amount of it may be going to deal 
with the problems which you people have created at 
Westank-Willock. It’s not every corporation of this size . . . And 
it’s not a large company. It doesn’t have a large capital; its gross 
assets are in the $12 million range; its property is worth 3 or $4 
million; it has sales of $20 million. And you lose 3 or $4 million a 
year some years; 2, $3 million a year on $20 million of sales — 
that is not a happy business venture. 
 
And I am a little bit surprised that the government decided that 
they were going to become the 99 per cent owner of this, as you 
have. I make those comments and then ask the minister whether 
Sedco has a policy of making loans, or guarantees, other financial 
commitments of a major nature, to companies who have no 
substantial operations in Saskatchewan. And I ask that very 
carefully: are you making loans or guarantees to companies which 
have no substantial operations in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well again the member has me at a bit of 
a disadvantage, not being the minister responsible. But my guess 
is that the only incidence that would come to mind would be one 
that will, in fact, have substantial operations in Saskatchewan once 
this facility is completed, and I’m speaking of the Gainers bacon 
plant in Swift Current — pardon me, in North Battleford. We’re 
going to try to get one in Swift Current too, but that’s another 
discussion. 
 
But I’m not aware of any others and, as I said at the beginning, 
you have me at a bit of a disadvantage. I’m covering for a minister 
who is out of the country at this particular time. And I invite you 
to put you questions on record, and I will undertake to have them 
answered upon his return. 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, I hasten to say that I wasn’t 
talking about companies who are outside Saskatchewan but are 
coming in here to commence an operation, that no one quarrels 
with Sedco loans of a proper nature to those companies. What I 
was talking about was loans to people whose operations are not 
effectively connected with this province at all by way of the 
financing of purchases of goods from some companies which are 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
More directly, I would want to ask whether Sedco is providing any 
loans or guarantees to customers of Westank-Willock in order to 
finance the purchase of goods from Westank-Willock. Are they 
providing such loans or guarantees to, I was going to say 
Cyprus-Anvil, but I’m not talking . . . The people who bought 
Cyprus-Anvil in Yukon is one I’m asking about. I am not sure of 
the name, but I will suggest it as C-U-R-R-A-G-H,  

Curragh Resources Corporation, or any other. They obviously can 
work through subsidiaries. 
 
Shortly put: is the corporation providing loans or guarantees or 
other financial assistance to Curragh Resources Limited or to any 
other mining company to assist them in purchasing goods from 
Westank-Willock for the purpose of hauling ore from Faro to 
Skagway or to anywhere else in the Yukon? 
 
I am not sure that my information is right. I ask whether the 
minister can provide me with that information in a timely way. I 
don’t want to phrase my question to say that it must only be a 
loan, because there may be some other financial arrangement, but 
what I am asking is: does Sedco make any financial arrangements 
involving any financial risk or exposure to Sedco or the people of 
Saskatchewan in order to finance the purchases of goods in 
Saskatchewan which may be manufactured in Saskatchewan — 
and particularly by Westank-Willock — to people outside the 
province? And I’ve give you a particular example. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay. I do know that Westank-Willock 
was successful in getting a large contract on these ore carriers. 
 
As to the specific questions, in Sedco’s involvement, your 
question is on the record, and I will undertake to provide the 
member with that information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I repeat the 
general question I asked, and I asked a specific question with 
respect to the contract for ore carriers, and you will be familiar 
with it. I believe the number was 90, and the amount was 
somewhere between 4.2 to $4.7 million, somewhere in that range. 
I am asking what part . . . how was Westank-Willock and/or Sedco 
involved in the financing of the purchase of those ore carriers, as 
well as being the vendor, and I think it’s the same question as I 
asked before. 
 
Item 1 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 148 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation 

Vote 152 
 
Item 1 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 152 agreed to. 
 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Urban Affairs  Provincial Development Expenditure — Nil 

Vote 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the Public 
Service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1986, the sum of 
$486,000,430  

  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2464 
 
 

be granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the Public 
Service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1987, the sum of 
$2,335,892,690 be granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the Public 
Service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1986, the sum of 
$27 million be granted out of the Saskatchewan Heritage 
Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the Public 
Service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1987, the sum of 
$575,324,680 be granted out of the Saskatchewan Heritage 
Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the Public 
Service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1987, the sum of 
$627,000,700 be granted out of the Special Projects Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the resolutions be 
now read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and resolutions read a first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, I move that the 
resolutions be now read a second time and agreed to. 
 
By leave of the Assembly, the said resolutions were read a second 
time and agreed to. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 58 — An Act respecting The Saskatchewan  

Pension Plan and Providing for the Payment of a Minimum 
Monthly Pension 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I rise just to make a few 
comments on what certainly the government believes and many 
people in this province believe to be an historic piece of 
legislation. 
 
The Saskatchewan pension plan has attracted interest across 
Canada. It has attracted interest, not only from other governments 
and other political parties, but it’s attracted interest from those 
concerned not only about the general question of pensions but the 
adequacy of pensions and the opportunity for adequate pensions. 
 
The Saskatchewan pension plan is historic legislation that for the 
first time gives an opportunity for home-makers to have a pension 
plan of their own. The interest has run in the several thousands of 
requests for information to the Department of Finance, and I 
believe that the legislation will be legislation which will move the 
debate for a national home-makers’ pension plan to the front 
burner where it deserve to be. 
 
There has been some criticism by the opposition that the 
Saskatchewan pension plan should take family income into 
account. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we should begin to treat the 
home-makers as individuals, as equals, and recognize the need for 
home-makers, as individuals and as equals, to have the 
opportunity for a pension plan. 
 
I was surprised by the comments of the opposition that students 
should not be eligible; that there was criticism because 
Saskatchewan students would have an opportunity. One of the 
thrusts of the Saskatchewan pension plan, Mr. Speaker, is to 
encourage those very young people to begin to save now for their 
retirement. Too often we have seen young people say, no, I’d just 
as soon have a car; or the normal, I would just as soon spend the 
money on new stereo equipment, things of that nature. Those are 
obviously desirable expenditures by young people, but we also 
believe that it would be desirable for our young people to begin to 
save for their retirement. The sooner they begin to save, the bigger 
the pension they will have, the more secure retirement they will 
have for themselves and for their families. So very much a thrust 
of the Saskatchewan pension plan is to encourage young people to 
begin to put away moneys for a pension. 
 
We have had a tremendous number of requests from 
small-business men who believe, rightly or wrongly, that they 
don’t have access to other pension plans, and they wish to have an 
opportunity to make some contribution on behalf of their 
employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again, the Saskatchewan pension plan is legislation 
that was brought forward with a great deal of pride by the Premier 
of this province and this government. It’s legislation that breaks 
new ground. It breaks new ground, much to the . . . with the 
support of this government. It was not a difficult decision for this 
government to make, to say that home-makers should be treated as 
individuals and equals and that they should have a pension plan of 
their own and that we should treat them, as I say, as individuals 
and as equals. 
 
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2465 
 
 

(2145) 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s with a great deal of pride that, on behalf of the 
Progressive Conservative Government of Saskatchewan, I move 
third reading of a Bill, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, I move: 
 

That Bill no. 70, An Act for the Granting to Her Majesty 
Certain Sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Years Ending Respectively March 31, 1986, and March 31, 
1987, be now introduced and read the first time. 

 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, before I ask for leave I will 
follow the long-standing tradition of the Assembly and make some 
general comments on the session, some of the activities during the 
session. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the throne speech laid out an agenda 
for the people of this province, an agenda which included a 
Saskatchewan pension plan and other activities, and that certainly 
has been one of the highlights of this past legislative session. 
 
The budget removed the sales tax on clothing of a value of under 
$300. Not only was that well-received, Mr. Speaker, it has had the 
effect on communities along both the east and west borders of this 
province. Those along the east side are now finding that people 
from Manitoba — NDP Manitoba — are coming over to do all of 
their retail buying in Saskatchewan because virtually all goods are 
sales tax free. Manitoba, of course, has a 6 per cent sales tax. 
 
Along the west side of the Saskatchewan border, people that 
traditionally went to Alberta to do their retail shopping are now 
staying in the province, again because most goods are sales tax 
free and there’s not much value in driving to Alberta for retail 
purchases. 
 
We also made fundamental changes in student loans, in the 
criteria, so that single parents will now have a better opportunity to 
get university and advanced education. We changed the criteria to 
expand the eligibility for student loans so that farm children and 
young people are no longer excluded. 
 
We made fundamental changes to the day care funding in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are continuing the thrust of this government to 
increase opportunities for people of Saskatchewan to invest as 
individuals, and not through the institutions of government, in the 
opportunities which  

exist and will continue to exist in this province through a stock 
savings plan. And already we have some six different companies 
indicating that they desire to proceed with public issues for 
Saskatchewan people; they will be Saskatchewan companies, 
funded in this province by Saskatchewan people. 
 
We have instituted a labour venture capital fund, a new 
opportunity, a new thrust, and a new project, and a new idea for 
the people of Saskatchewan, to give working people the 
opportunities to invest in small and medium-sized businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the first time the people of this province and the 
rural people of this province will have private lines and private 
telephones. Seventy thousand people now, Mr. Speaker, will have 
the opportunity, as a result of this government’s initiatives and 
individual line service, to have the privacy of private telephone 
calls, the opportunities of the latest technology, Mr. Speaker — a 
new thrust by this government, a new initiative, led again by 
Premier Devine and the Progressive Conservative government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not all of the activity during this session took place 
in this Chamber. This government settled issues with doctors and 
nurses, and settled with the pharmacists and teachers. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have taken new initiatives for agriculture. 
No government in North America has been more responsive to the 
tremendous difficulties faced by our farmers through 
circumstances not always of their own making — in most cases, 
beyond their own control. And we have tried to cut their costs of 
operation with lower fuel costs and other farm input costs which 
have been lowered by this government. 
 
We have lowered interest rates for farmers, a commitment that we 
have made some time ago, and a commitment which was 
exemplified by the first and the only acreage payments, the cash 
advance programs for Saskatchewan farmers. It’s been taken up 
and accepted by over 85 per cent of Saskatchewan farmers, and let 
me suggest, Mr. Speaker, to all the people of this province, that 
that initiative has the overwhelming support of most farmers in 
this province, and I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that those — 
particularly those in the opposition that say, oh, you don’t have to 
pay it back; and they won’t pay it back — have a distorted view of 
the honesty and integrity of Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We believe most strongly that this 
government had to stand, and the people had to stand, behind the 
farmers in their hour of difficulty, and we have done so, and we 
will continue to do so. That has been a commitment of this 
Premier — of our Premier — and of this government and this 
party. And no other party and no other premier and no other 
government has made the commitment to farmers that this 
Progressive Conservative government has. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had the courage during this session to change 
urban store hours and recognize that public  
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2466 
 
 

demands are changing, consumer interests are changing, and that 
the opportunity is now there for local governments to remain open 
as many as six nights a week, if that is the decision they make. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, we can watch that debate and put it in 
perspective and look at the number of local governments, 
opposition parties, that said, oh, no, we don’t want to take a stand; 
we’ll wait to see what you’re going to do. The provincial 
government has the responsibility. We took the responsibility, and 
we made the decision, Mr. Speaker, and we changed that 
legislation. 
 
Throughout all of this, Mr. Speaker, we had a constant attack by 
the New Democratic opposition, which opposed virtually every 
new legislative action by this government. And one of the things 
that’s come clear, Mr. Speaker, over the last several months, is that 
the people of this province really don’t want the NDP back in 
office, and they really don’t like what the NDP stands for. 
 
They believe fundamentally, and they believe in their hearts, that 
the proposals of the 1960s and the mid-1970s as put forward by 
the opposition, are not the programs and the proposals that will 
take this province into the 1990s and into the next century, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We had a continuous attack on the bacon plant in North Battleford 
until the local people stood up and said, we want that project. And 
then we saw the NDP do a complete flip-flop and say, all right, 
well, I guess we’ll have to go along with that. 
 
The only time that they have said and stood up in the House . . . 
And I give them credit for finally girding their loins and screwing 
up their courage and saying that they would oppose the paper-mill. 
They finally said that they would oppose the paper-mill, and the 
sale of the pulp project. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that this whole 
session, and the thrust and the direction of the two political parties 
in this province, is exemplified in the debate over the P.A. 
pulp-mill. I believe that it is crystal clear. 
 
The NDP took several positions. First of all they said they 
favoured it; then they said they didn’t; then they said they might; 
then they said they might not. They said they didn’t borrow the 
money, and then they found out they did borrow the money to buy 
it in the first place. Then they said they only borrowed it for bridge 
financing. Mr. Speaker, the member for Regina Centre said it was 
only for bridge financing. 
 
We can talk about bridges and their idea of bridge financing of 
PAPCO because that financing is still going on. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s either a pretty long bridge, or it ranks up there with another 
famous bridge and that’s the sale of the Brooklyn Bridge, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that’s their idea of bridges, and that’s their 
idea of bridge financing some four or five years later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will have . . . And I happen to look forward with 
a great deal of excitement, Mr. Speaker, to the activities over the 
next couple of months. The NDP ads have been on about PAPCO. 
Without letting the cat out of the bag, I would suggest that the 
Progressive  

Conservative ads will be running, and it won’t only be a battle of 
philosophies and MLAs and candidates and parties. It will also be 
a pretty healthy fight of ad agencies, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, over 
the next several months, and we very much look forward to it. 
 
The NDP have looked for a Meadow Lake pulp-mill issue since 
1971. If I recall that debate in 1971, they didn’t have much success 
selling the deal; they certainly had a great deal of success talking 
about the environment. But what they don’t have this time, Mr. 
Speaker, is that horrendous deal made by the opposition, by the 
New Democratic Party, to buy the P.A. pulp-mill in the first place 
— with borrowed money, Mr. Speaker, with borrowed money, at 
interest rates of 17 per cent. They borrowed money to buy P.A. 
pulp mill, tried to deny it, tried to deny it — at 17 per cent money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely amazing because the other question 
that arises is why did they have to? They had another buyer. They 
had a private sector buyer to buy the P.A. pulp-mill. They pushed 
that private sector buyer out of the way and said, no, we’re taking 
it. They tried. They said they’d buy it with the Heritage Fund. In 
fact they borrowed the money, and the evidence is there for all to 
see and will be there for all to see over the next days and months. 
They had a choice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that wasn’t an economic decision to save an industry. 
That wasn’t an economic decision to save an enterprise for Prince 
Albert. That wasn’t an economic decision for the forests and those 
effected in northern Saskatchewan. That was a straight 
philosophical decision by the previous government which said, we 
want to own the P.A. pulp-mill, and we’re prepared to put the 
taxpayers’ money at risk to buy that pulp-mill. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the fight is not just a question of the deal, 
because we will debate that. The issue is one of philosophy. And 
secondly, Mr. Speaker, the P.A. pulp-mill is going to be an issue 
of management and the care and control of the province’s moneys, 
because when the people of Saskatchewan are judged and have the 
opportunity during the debate over the next months as to why they 
bought the P.A. pulp-mill, why it cost $91,000 a month, why they 
would put out financial statements that didn’t include the interest 
charges on buying the P.A. pulp-mill — Mr. Speaker, that issue is 
not one of ownership of resources; this issue will come down to a 
question of whether the people of Saskatchewan want a 
government that will let the private sector develop a new 
paper-mill, will own and operate for the best interests of the 
people of Saskatchewan, or whether they want to go back to the 
old ways of government buying and government ownership and 
government take-over of the resources. And that’s what that issue 
will be debated upon over the next months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me tell you that every single member of this 
government, and every single candidate of our party, is looking 
forward to that debate with a great deal of vigour and a great deal 
of interest . . .  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — . . . and looking forward, Mr. Speaker,  
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2467 
 
 

with a great deal of relish to that debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the NDP made some financial 
proposals. They try to say on the one hand that they were against a 
deficit, made promises which could total $1.2 billion, aren’t 
worried about the deficit. They even went so far, Mr. Speaker, to 
have a deficit in their own party financing this year. That’s how 
little regard they have for the deficit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to remind all hon. members that, when 
the Leader of the Opposition will say that he’s against the deficit, 
that when he was provincial treasurer of this province, he ran a 
deficit — he ran a deficit, Mr. Speaker. And I believe that the 
issue of the deficit will be another interesting one that the debate 
will continue past this evening and into the future. 
 
As I said, I believe that much of the activities of this session and 
much of the debate can be exemplified by the PAPCO debate. We 
have a philosophical difference, but we also have a management 
difference, and we also have a financial difference. And I lay the 
question out, and it will be one that the people of Prince Albert are 
already asking. 
 
(2200) 
 
You know, if the NDP had not insisted on buying the P.A. 
pulp-mill, if they hadn’t bought the P.A. pulp-mill and really 
wanted to spend the money, taking the same amount of money, 
they could even have built a paper-mill. But no, the difference 
was, when they had the choices between either letting the private 
sector buy it so there was no taxpayers’ money at risk, they chose 
and made the choice of government ownership. And they bought 
the P.A. pulp-mill, Mr. Speaker. All of us, all of us look forward 
to the debate, as I say, over the months because this will be a 
fundamental issue for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And by leave of Assembly, under rule 48(2), I move that the Bill 
be now read a second and third time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I think we were all 
entertained by the remarks of the member for 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, the Minister of Finance. He is entertaining. 
He is particularly entertaining when he makes an argument which 
is so weak as the one he made. He is trying to suggest to you, Mr. 
Speaker, and to all of us, that they’re busy, just waiting to get out 
on the election trail; that they’re just panting to get out there and 
make all of these points on the election trail. 
 
They announced — and he uses the pulp-mill as an example — 
they announced this pulp-mill with great fanfare in March, with 
the idea of getting out on the election trail in April — on April 
28th, or April 30th, or perhaps May 5th. And the member for 
Lakeview certainly thought so, since he put his committee rooms 
— since dismantled. He’s taken his trailer away, I take it to have it  

repainted. 
 
And we know, and you know, and the public knows that there was 
an election planned and you decided against it — wisely, mind 
you, but you decided against it. And again in June, you had at least 
tentatively selected the date of June 18, and you withdrew from 
that. And you were not nearly so interested in debating these 
issues on the hustings then. No, indeed. You weren’t interested in 
debating them because you knew the public of Saskatchewan was 
not going to buy those arguments. 
 
Going back years, about what happened five or six or seven or 10 
years ago, is a typical argument of the member for 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. But what the people of Saskatchewan want 
to know is what’s going to happen one, two, or five years hence. 
They’re looking at the future. Members opposite are looking at the 
past. 
 
The really remarkable thing about this session, Mr. Speaker, the 
really remarkable thing about this session is that we’re still in 
session — that we’re still sitting here; that this legislature is still in 
session; that indeed this legislature is still in existence. That is the 
remarkable thing. 
 
When you and I and all of us go out and talk to people, I can 
certainly tell you what people were asking me today. For every 
one who asked me about the pulp-mill or about our housing plan 
or other things which came up — for every one who asked me 
those, five asked me: when are we going to have the election? 
When are they going to have an election? When are they going to 
call it? That is in the public mind, and if you feel that it isn’t, then 
you are kidding yourself because I tell you that’s what the public 
are asking. 
 
And it’s not surprising that they are asking it. After all, this 
legislature has lasted longer than any since World War II. It is the 
second longest legislature in the peacetime history of 
Saskatchewan. The first one was under the aegis of the 
distinguished Dr. Anderson. The Tories, under Dr. Anderson, 
hung on for five years, and they lost. And did they lose! 
 
And now we have another doctor, our Premier. He is busy. 
Another Tory hanging on — hanging on, clinging to power, 
longer than anybody in the peacetime history except Dr. 
Anderson, and the public are going to greet him with some of the 
same welcome they gave to Dr. Anderson. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And what are they going to remember 
about this session and about the latter years of this government? 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to remember the Minister of 
Finance’s provincial budget with the largest deficit in the history 
of Saskatchewan, when properly calculated — when calculated 
the same way his colleague, the member for Kindersley, 
calculated his last year — the largest deficit in the history of 
Saskatchewan, bringing our combined deficit up to something 
over $2 billion. 
 
And the Minister of Finance talks about previous deficits,  
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2468 
 
 

and no doubt there may have been a deficit of 1 million or 2 
million. But never, never in the history of this province has any 
government ever run a deficit of as much as $10 million — not 
since World War II — and he couldn’t guess his deficit to the 
nearest 50 million. He couldn’t estimate it. Such is his method of 
financing that he wouldn’t be able to estimate what the deficit is to 
the nearest 50 million, and anybody would be very, very unwise to 
believe in the figures which he put forward. 
 
His budget is interesting in other respects. He didn’t reduce the 5 
per cent sales tax or didn’t eliminate it, as he and his colleagues 
promised . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You promised to 
eliminate the entire 5 per cent sales tax. That was the promise, and 
you are now proposing to just fall a bit short of that, by about $375 
million. That was your promise. It wasn’t my promise; it was 
yours, and you broke it. 
 
And you promised to cut the sales tax by 10 per cent, and that was 
your promise — not mine, but yours, your income tax by 10 per 
cent. And you broke that. And instead of cutting income tax by 10 
per cent, you put on the flat tax, and we are the proud possessors 
in this province of two income taxes, the only province that does. 
 
You suggested other taxes from time to time for other purposes, 
and you didn’t even bother taxing those. He had a proposal to tax 
pornography and he decided against that. He decided against that. 
And there are just so many instances of mismanagement by the 
Minister of Finance that it would take the House a very long time 
if outlined them all. 
 
May I ask you to look at the record of Crown corporations under 
this government. In the last year you lost another 79 or $80 
million. Now that’s more than at any time Crown corporations 
ever lost prior to 1982. We had records of profits in those days, 
and you have a record of losses, of mismanagement, of running 
these corporations in to the ground, trying to make them look bad; 
and you’re so good at that because it doesn’t take you very much 
to make those corporations look bad. You are running them into 
the ground . . . And that’s what you did with the pulp-mill. It made 
profits up to 1982. You ran it into the ground, and now you want 
to sell it off. That is what . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — There is, I think . . . A simple look at the 
financial statements will tell you. I have them; you have them. 
And those are the facts. And you have run it into the ground, run it 
into the ground again, and now you’re trumpeting the fact that 
because you’ve run it into the ground, it should be sold. 
 
And you’re going to do the same thing with the potash mines. 
You’re running those into the ground. They made healthy profits 
and you are . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Admittedly, these are 
different times, but there’s certainly different management as well. 
 
The whole style of your government is indicated by so much of 
the extravagance and give-aways. We already touched this 
evening on Westand-Willock and its record  

of losses since you have taken over the majority ownership. And 
yet you have a manager there receiving a salary of $8,000 a month 
and a furnished apartment, regular trips to Toronto, and what does 
he do? He makes the corporation, which was previously making 
money, lose 2 million or $3 million a year. That’s another bit of 
your management, and we’ll be delighted to debate some of these 
managerial issues on the hustings with you. 
 
You are saying you didn’t plan an election; I know that. Those 
four television shows in March that cost half a million dollars 
were pure accident, just happened to be in March, just happened to 
cost the taxpayers half a million dollars, and then, after that big 
experience, you got cold feet, and you know that. 
 
A reference was made to bacon plants and Peter Pocklington 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right, but all the references 
come from your mouths and none of them come from the paper. 
There’s not a word on paper in this House about your deal with 
Peter Pocklington. And so I can’t state emphatically whether it’s a 
good deal or a bad deal because so far it’s a secret deal. But I tell 
you this: I am not encouraged by the belief that Peter Pocklington 
is bringing his managerial talents to Saskatchewan. I’m not 
encouraged by the fact that here’s the man who set out to break the 
pork marketing board and the farmers of Alberta. I’m not 
encouraged to have him coming in here dealing with our pork 
farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I’m not encouraged by the fact that here’s 
a man who set out to break trade unions and to break the rate paid 
by all of the other packers in western Canada. I’m not encouraged 
by that. 
 
I believe that those, the other packers, the Canada Packers and the 
Intercons and the others are not in business for their health. They 
bargain hard with their unions. They bargain hard. I think they 
bargain fairly, and I would like to think that other packers would 
be able to bargain in the same way and not have a performance 
such as we now have in Edmonton by Peter Pocklington, but that’s 
up to you. You choose your friends. You will be responsible for 
them because you choose them in the full knowledge of what they 
stand for. 
 
We’ll have an opportunity on another occasion to speak on 
Weyerhaeuser, but here is another secret deal without facts on the 
Table, without facts on the Table. I invite the minister to look at 
the situation when the Prince Albert pulp-mill was built before, 
and when we had the first Bill to guarantee. And every deal was 
on the table, copies of the signed deal — copies of the signed deal 
were on the table before the public was asked to guarantee. And 
that you refuse to do. That you refuse to do, pretending to say that 
the deal was not closed, that it was still under negotiation. And 
then when we asked, what is the forest deal? you said, well it’s just 
as good for the public as the current deals; I don’t know what the 
deal is, mind you; it’s still under negotiation; I can’t tell you what 
the terms are; I can just tell you it’ll be good. 
 
(2215) 
 
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2469 
 
 

Now that, Mr. Speaker, is not very convincing. Either the minister 
knows the terms or he doesn’t. If he knows them, he should give 
this House the terms. If he doesn’t he shouldn’t stand up and say 
how good they are. And that’s what he’s doing. I don’t know the 
terms, therefore I can’t tell you what they are, but I can assure you 
they’re great and everybody will think they’re wonderful. That’s 
out of the mouth of the minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I think that if we’re going to carry on the debate 
in the House, we should give the member on his feet the 
opportunity to be heard, and that applies to both sides of the 
House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the hollowness 
of the government’s position saying, no, we don’t have the deal; 
we can’t tell you what the deal is with Weyerhaeuser; we can just 
assure you it’s a good deal; we know it’s a good deal; it isn’t 
signed yet; it isn’t negotiated yet, as the member for Meadow 
Lake says, but the member for Turtleford says he can give us 
absolute assurance that the forest management licences are fine 
and they’re going to be very, very good, but he can’t tell us what 
the terms are because they aren’t negotiated. They aren’t 
negotiated, and he doesn’t know what they are, but they’re good. 
Well I wonder, Mr. Speaker, whether that has any level of 
credibility at all. 
 
And then we have their performance with respect to cabinet 
ministers going all over the country spending close to half a 
million dollars on travel, an increase of 59 per cent in the last four 
years. And then we have, as another instance of their management 
and the sort of management which has become to be suspect in the 
minds of the public, we have contracts let out by the deputy 
minister of Government Services to the wife of the deputy 
minister of Government Services, without tender. And I ask 
whether the public can have confidence in that sort of tendering. 
 
And then we have the $285,000 paid out for three part-time trade 
consultants. We’ve got $138,000 paid out to Tanka Resources to 
do some polling — unspecified — and it just happens that that’s 
the polling organization which does polling for the PC party. And 
people say, look, sure, parties have got to do polling. But I don’t 
think my tax dollars should be going to pay for the PC party’s 
polling, and that’s what’s happening with Tanka; and you know it, 
and I know it, and so does the public know it. 
 
And then we have the member for Indian Head-Wolseley, the 
Minister of Health, paying $154,000 to get a company to come in 
to write some speeches and a PR campaign for him when he’s 
already got seven people on staff. And he pays $154,000 for 
speech writers and PR people to set up a campaign. 
 
And then we have Ron Ryan, a person who was fired by SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance); Ron Ryan, fired by SGI 
for improper conduct — at least that’s how I would judge it, and 
that’s how the manager, the president of SGI judged it — and 
what penalty is visited upon him by the government opposite? I’ll 
tell you. Contracts of $126,000 — $126,000 in contracts after he 
has been fired for improper conduct. 
 

An Hon. Member: — No tendering. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And then we have . . . No tendering. Of 
course not. Tendering? With this government? 
 
And then we have Dave Tkachuk, as revealed in the court 
documents, interesting himself — and that’s the politest word I 
can choose — interesting himself in an arson investigation by SGI 
to the extent of taking file home over the weekend and then 
discussing them with the person under investigation. It matters 
not, Mr. Speaker, whether or not that person who was being 
investigated was acting properly or improperly, had a valid claim 
or an invalid claim. I ask, what is a person in the Premier’s office 
doing, going down, engulfing himself in an arson investigation, 
and then taking the file and discussing it with the person who’s 
under investigation? I say that is improper. I say that is improper. 
 
We’ve had . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well the member is on his feet to remind 
the member opposite that the Minister of Finance, in another 
responsibility which he bears, has given to senior officers of 
SaskTel increases of about 13 per cent. These people are all 
getting of the order of $75,000. They’re good people. I don’t deny 
that. But 13 per cent at a time when you’re offering 25 cent 
increase in minimum wage over four years. I ask you, Mr. 
Speaker, does that give the impression of a government which is 
compassionate and fair? And I suggest to you that it doesn’t. 
 
Then we’ve had all of the instances of this government telling us 
things which we couldn’t rely on. Take Saskoil. We were assured 
that the privatization of Saskoil would simply mean that the 
money which had been in there would still be used to develop 
Saskatchewan resources. And we find that that’s no longer true. 
This corporation is clearly planning to move its major operations 
to Calgary and moving the focus of its operations away from the 
heavy oil deposits of Saskatchewan to the lighter oil deposits in 
other areas. 
 
Then we have the member for Souris-Cannington telling us that 
the power plant at Estevan is a great deal; and the Rafferty dam is 
a great arrangement; and it’s the best option we have. And he may 
be right. But do we have any confidence in that when he is 
unwilling to supply either this House, or a committee of this 
House, with the facts which show that this is a better deal than any 
of the options? He hasn’t done it, and he declined to do it. And 
having regard to the fact that Estevan moved up, and moved 
steadily up, in the priority when the chairman of the power 
corporation came from Estevan — Mr. George Hill. 
 
And I’m saying nothing now that I haven’t said at other times. I 
say that the public are entitled to ask some questions when this 
government decides to build a power plant at the recommendation 
of Mr. George Hill on a piece of property which is within a few 
years of one owned by Mr. George Hill. And you don’t deny that. 
 
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2470 
 
 

An Hon. Member: — Yes, I do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, owned by a company of which Mr. 
George Hill is the primary owner — all right, I am sorry. I am 
sorry to suggest that Mr. Hill owns it personally; it is his company 
which owns the land. And I am sure the public is greatly 
comforted by the fact that the land is owned by Mr. Hill through a 
corporation and not directly. 
 
And then we have the Ombudsman who was saying that he needs 
more staff in order to inquire into the concerns of the public, and 
he’s getting turned down by the government opposite. 
 
We had the member for Wilkie, who hasn’t darkened the door of 
this House — not in this session — and he’s going to get his MLA 
pay and expenses. I’m told that he’s proposing not to take his 
sessional allowance. Well, well. Well, well! He’s not going to take 
his sessional allowance — just take two-thirds of his pay and not 
the other third. Well, well. I am sure that the public are reassured 
with that statement of principle on the part of the party opposite. 
 
Well I won’t talk about the late-lamented freedom of information 
announced in the Speech from the Throne and forgotten promptly. 
 
I won’t mention the fact that these people, particularly the member 
for Rosthern, but many others, talked about the unfunded liability 
in pension plans and what a shocking thing it was, and then he 
stood mute while the Minister of Finance took $30 million out of 
the teachers’ pension fund — $30 million he took out right after 
having complained about the level of unfunded liability in that 
very pension fund. And that’s true of members opposite who were 
saying, isn’t it a shocking thing that these pension funds have an 
unfunded liability? Well I’ll tell you, it’s $30 million more 
shocking after this budget, because that’s what the minister took 
out. 
 
And then we have the performance by the government opposite of 
being unwilling to talk about Pioneer Trust. We have a committee 
of this House set up for that, set up to talk about expenditure of 
public funds — that’s the Public Accounts Committee. And your 
members set out to gag that committee so they couldn’t talk about 
Pioneer Trust. You did it effectively, and you will not talk about 
Pioneer Trust. And with that record, if I were you, I wouldn’t talk 
about it. But I can tell you, the public are talking about Pioneer 
Trust, as well they might. 
 
After Mr. Will Klein outlined his dealings with this government, 
his dealings — the fact that he was among the chief money-raisers 
for the Conservative Party . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — A pretty good one too. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Pretty good fund-raiser. You bet he was a 
pretty good fund-raiser, and had a lot of incentive to be a good 
fund-raiser when he was getting this sort of support from your 
government. A lot of incentive. I suspect we could find people 
who would raise funds for you at a cheaper rate than promises of 
$27 

 million guarantees. I suspect you could raise it cheaper, and 
certainly cheaper so far as the public of Saskatchewan are 
concerned. 
 
Then we have your economic record — the number of young 
people now leaving this province. Just what’s happening to our 
young people is shown by the one in five youths who are suffering 
from problems of drug and alcohol, according to your own reports, 
and on and on. These, Mr. Speaker, are well-known. 
 
I want to mention one other area where this government has failed, 
and that is speaking up for Saskatchewan at Ottawa. I take the 
Nielsen task force. We all remember Erik Nielsen. We won’t 
remember him for long, but we remember him. 
 
He prepared a report laying out a series of policies for 
Saskatchewan agriculture which would have been disastrous, and 
yet might be disastrous, if they are introduced. Certainly they 
purport to be a policy basis for the government in Ottawa. 
 
Have we had any public representations against those Nielsen task 
force reports? And if so, when? If so, when? 
 
We have listened to the Minister of Agriculture, present and past, 
outline in this House their concerns, and I don’t recall them taking 
them point by point. I don’t recall them talking about their desire 
to retain at least some of the aspects of PFRA. I don’t recall them 
speaking out in favour of interest-free cash advances which the 
Nielsen report says we ought not to have, and on and on. I think 
those are points which the public will remember — mute on the 
Nielsen task force, just as surely as they were mute on the Crow 
rate short years ago. 
 
Then we have the question of initial grain prices. Here we have a 
situation which has cast Saskatchewan farmers in a situation as 
difficult as they have faced for many decades. The war between 
the United States and the European Common Market is now 
widely known, and the impact on Saskatchewan farmers is known. 
The need for the federal government to step up and support our 
farmers in the way that the federal government of the United 
States and the national governments of Europe are supporting their 
farmers is clear. 
 
(2230) 
 
And yet week after week farm organizations and political parties 
call for deficiency payments, and week after week we heard not a 
word from members opposite — not a word. Not a word until the 
member for Estevan, the Premier, got talking with other premiers 
across western Canada and said: we have no way out; we’ll just 
have to ask for them; we’re being pushed. And not until that did I 
hear a word from our Premier asking for deficiency payments. 
 
I think of the federal transfer of payments, the very sharp 
cut-backs which are going to impact on every citizen of 
Saskatchewan on all our programs. Do I hear any word of protest? 
 
We had protests from the Liberal government of Quebec,  
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2471 
 
 

and we had protests from the NDP government in Manitoba, and 
we had protests from the Tory government in New Brunswick, but 
not from Saskatchewan. They’re happy with Brian Mulroney 
cutting back. They’re happy with that. And is it any wonder that 
people don’t have confidence in this government speaking up, 
speaking up for Saskatchewan. They simply put too high a 
premium on their cozy relationship with the federal government. 
Just as surely as Brian Mulroney is putting too high a premium on 
his cozy relationship with Ronald Reagan — and we’re all now 
paying for it — just in the same way our Premier is putting too 
high a premium on his cozy relationship with Brian Mulroney, and 
we’re all going to pay for that. We’re all going to pay for that. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to outline all of the problems 
which have been disclosed by the many, many days of this session 
which we have inquired into the stewardship of the government 
opposite. All we know, Mr. Speaker, is that we have a provincial 
deficit of $2 billion. We have young people leaving the province 
in numbers which we haven’t seen for weeks and weeks. We’ve 
seen the tax burden being continued on ordinary people. We have 
seen, in fact, the government doubt the flat tax — double the flat 
tax. We have seen them confirm the fact that they don’t propose to 
have any property tax rebates. We have seen all of these thing 
confirmed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen this government continue to fail to 
speak for Saskatchewan people in the councils of the nation. And 
all of these things are clear. They have put all of their hopes upon 
some megaprojects, almost all of which are financed almost 
completely by the taxpayer. Their megaprojects — whether it be 
Estevan, or whether it be upgraders here in Regina, or whether it 
be Peter Pocklington, or whether it be pulp-mills — almost 
completely financed by the taxpayer. 
 
They have been unsuccessful in attracting very much private 
money. Their investment is very much below what it was short 
years ago; very much below. Their economic and industrial 
strategy is in a shambles. Their financial planning is in a shambles, 
their social programs are in a shambles, and their political fortunes 
are in a shambles; and that is what is just beginning to dawn on 
them, and that is why we are not now on the election trail. That is 
why we didn’t have an election at the end of April, why we didn’t 
have one in June, and why it may well be true, Mr. Speaker, that 
we will have a fall session, because they won’t dare to call an 
election this fall. That even could be possible. I hardly think it 
possible, since I think the public will chase them into it. 
 
We certainly hope there will be an election. We hope there will be 
an election soon. The public hopes there will be an election soon, 
and we welcome an opportunity to explain to the public the 
positive alternatives in the New Democratic Party, the 
shortcomings of this government, and particularly the 
shortcomings of the budget we’re now debating. We welcome that 
opportunity, and it’s very, very clear that members opposite don’t, 
otherwise we would have had an election long before now. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have just seen 
and witnessed tonight the opposition from Saskatchewan to 
Johnny Carson, because we’ve never seen anything more 
humorous. And here is the Leader of the Opposition, premier for 
11 years, said that this government is resting on megaprojects. 
How many projects did he bring in when he was the premier of 
this province? Did he bring in a paper-mill? No. Did he bring n 
one pulp-mill? Did he bring in a potash mine? No. 
 
What kind of megaprojects did the NDP bring in? I’ll tell you, 
they didn’t bring in any. They bought several; they bought several. 
They want to talk about the Sturdy Stone building and the SaskTel 
building as megaprojects. But that’s the legacy that they have, Mr. 
Speaker. The NDP in 11 years couldn’t bring in one project. And 
they stand here and criticize the Conservative government for 
bringing in several in the first four years of office. Let me tell you, 
let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, the last thing the Leader of 
Opposition wanted to see last night on television were those 
caterpillars and tractors out around the heavy oil upgrader in the 
city of Regina, Mr. Speaker, because they said it won’t happen. 
They said there won’t be a paper-mill, and just watch this 
September, because the people of Prince Albert are already 
making the NDP eat their words. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Do you know why they attacked the 
megaprojects? Because they couldn’t get any themselves. They 
couldn’t bring one. They tried. They tried, but they couldn’t bring 
one. 
 
And here, the humorous thing is here we had the Leader of the 
Opposition criticize this government for secrecy. The biggest 
investment by the people of this province was in the potash 
nationalization by the government opposite. And the people of 
Saskatchewan have never seen the documents, never saw the 
marketing studies, never saw the financing arrangements, because 
for six months we debated in this House, and the NDP won’t give 
us one piece of paper — one piece of paper. 
 
I’ll tell you, we’ll make sure that the public gets the documents 
this summer. We’ll give them to the public, but it won’t be the 
NDP that were giving full disclosure to the people of this 
province. 
 
And they seem a little embarrassed that Saskoil, now the 20th 
largest oil company in Canada, virtually debt free, is going to 
expand. And I strongly suggest that with in the next five years, 
Saskoil will be in the top 10 oil companies in Canada. It’ll be a 
national company, and it’ll be headquartered right here in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and the people of Saskatchewan will 
be the shareholders. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, for some reason the fact that 
Saskoil wants to become a national company, that it wants to 
expand, is now opposed by the members in the opposition. Mr. 
Speaker, as I say, I bet within five years Saskoil will be one of the 
10 largest oil companies in this country, and it will be 
headquartered here — as the  
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2472 
 
 

legislation says — headquartered here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I have to laugh at the fighting Ottawa. It says we’re not fighting 
hard enough. The Premier has listed, and we have listed over and 
over and over again, the successes. 
 
Well let’s look at what 11 years of fighting and mating with 
Trudeau got the province. Do you know what it got us? It 
happened to get, I suppose, the charter of rights, and I don’t know 
if that’s universally accepted, and I don’t know if that’s 
universally popular, and I’m not sure yet whether the people in 
Canada think that that is a legacy . . . The lawyers like it. The 
lawyers love it. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s what we got for 11 years 
of fighting with Ottawa; that’s what we got. 
 
Did the farmers get any help? Not a thing. They got LIP (local 
initiatives program) — they got LIP. They got LIP from the NDP 
liberals. They got high interest rates. They got Petro-Canada and 
the tax to surcharge on gasoline taxes. They go all those high input 
costs. So that’s what fighting . . . that’s the NDP fighting Ottawa; 
that’s what it gets us. I’m not sure the people want that any more. I 
think they’ve made it abundantly clear they don’t want it any more 
— they can’t afford it. 
 
You know, it was interesting that we heard the Leader of the 
Opposition for nearly 20-some minutes, half an hour, and do you 
know what? — hardly mentioned the farmers. Did you notice 
that? — hardly mentioned the farmer. Never said . . . he said 
maybe deficiency payments and he was critical of us. Not one 
question in this House on the grain transportation. 
 
And the only thing we had from the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg was on the one day, saying, don’t spray 
the forest; spray the whole province to kill the grasshoppers, bring 
out the air force, dive-bomb the grasshoppers! That was the 
grasshopper fight. That was the one suggestion we had from the 
member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. He wanted the Canadian 
air force in to begin to gun down the grasshoppers of this 
province. That’s how much they really care about farmers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Did they say one thing about the seniors? Not 
a word tonight. And they said it, and they missed the seniors for a 
very good reason. The seniors and the heritage program is being 
well-received by the seniors of this province, and the NDP know 
it, and that’s why they were deathly silent throughout this whole 
session — never mentioned seniors — and the seniors will 
remember it. 
 
And they talked about the youth, but they didn’t talk about the 
jobs being created by the very megaprojects they criticize, and the 
opportunities that they criticize. And we know that we have to 
create those opportunities and diversify to get the jobs for the 
young people. And the young people will be reminded time and 
time and time again that every single job creation effort by this 
government was attacked by the New Democratic Party — 
attacked and attacked and attacked. Mr. Speaker, that’s the record. 
 

And they talked about transfer payments, and they know they 
were wrong. When we got the inflation factor in there, we could 
end up more under the new established program financing than 
under the previous. So I ask again . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — What did they ever build? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — What did they ever build? They didn’t build 
anything. 
 
And they said that the people want to look to the future, and on 
that, that I agree. And they don’t want to see a future based on 
government ownership of every project that exists in the province. 
And they don’t want to see a future which says that, every time an 
opportunity comes along, it has to be the government to do it; that 
they don’t want to see a future which says the government owns 
farm lands — not the farmers. And they don’t want to see a future 
which says that, if you want an opportunity, you’d better do it 
through the government. It’s not the future they want, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They want a future that the farmers can build and grow and 
prosper on their own, and use their skills and their talents, and the 
government be there if necessary; and that the young people will 
have the opportunities in new industries and upgraders and 
paper-mills, be able to grow and build and raise their families in 
this province. That’s the type of future they want. They want a 
future, as well, that people can have adequate retirement pensions 
and can retire in dignity. And that’s the type of future that the 
Progressive Conservative government under Grant Devine will 
give to the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second and third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
(2245) 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the Assembly 
to move: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of the sitting 
day it shall stand adjourned to a date and time set by Mr. 
Speaker, upon request of the government, and that Mr. 
Speaker shall give each member seven clear days notice, if 
possible, by registered mail of such date and time. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, if I could just wish a good 
summer to the members of the government benches as well as to 
the staff of the Assembly who have worked long and hard, and 
here of course I’m referring to the staff of the Assembly. In all 
seriousness I would like to extend on behalf of our caucus a wish 
for a good summer and an  
  



 
July 3, 1986 

 

2473 
 
 

early election and the best to everyone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I join with my colleague opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, in wishing everyone, all members and staff of the 
legislature, a very good summer. I think everyone has reason to be 
optimistic about the summer because of good government and all, 
and I know that all members and staff to the legislature will, in 
fact, enjoy a very pleasant summer. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 
 
At 10:46 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to 
the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 56 — An Act respecting the Sale of Assets of Prince 
Albert Pulp Company Ltd. and Saskatchewan Forest Products 
Corporation and the Establishment of a Paper Mill in 
Saskatchewan 
Bill No. 58 — An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
and Providing for the Payment of a Minimum Monthly Pension 
Bill No. 70 — An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums of 
Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Years Ending 
respectively March 31, 1986, and on March 31, 1987. 
 
His Honour then retired from the Chamber at 10:49 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:50 p.m. 
 
 


