













































December 5, 1986 Hansard


 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

December 5, 1986 

 

31 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: — According to order and under rule 11(7) I hereby 

present and lay on the table the following petition of the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities praying for 

an Act to amend its Act of Incorporation. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Consolidation of Government Departments 

 

Mr. Shillington: — My questions is to the minister responsible 

for the Public Service Commission. It has to do with hints in 

yesterday’s throne speech that while this government has 

millions of dollars for the Peter Pocklingtons of the world, it 

can’t find money to maintain jobs and provide adequate 

services in this province. 

 

When the throne speech talks about plans to consolidate 

government departments and agencies, is that not, Mr. Minister, 

a code phrase which means that a number of public services 

workers are about to be unemployed? Doesn’t consolidation 

mean a loss of jobs, and why would you brag about putting 

people out of work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, no, it is not a code word 

for anything. What it is is a commitment on behalf of this 

government to provide efficient and effective service for the 

people of Saskatchewan — nothing less and nothing more, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Supplementary. In light of the comment in 

the throne speech about inviting individuals and firms to 

compete for the delivery of specific government services, can 

the minister confirm that this means a contracting out of public 

services and giving a number of public servants the option of 

transferring to the private sector? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, where there is some 

efficiencies, some dollars to be saved, an opportunity to be even 

more effective than the current method of providing that 

service, if contracting is a viable option, that’s one that will be 

looked at because all we are interested in is being as efficient as 

possible, as effective as possible, and using the taxpayers’ 

dollars as wisely as possible 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Can the minister tell the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan whether or not this contracting-out plan is based 

on the Highways department model — the model whereby 

hundreds of workers were fired, equipment was auctioned off at 

a fraction of what it was worth, and the highways have 

continued to deteriorate ever since. Is that the model that the 

government is using? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well there is no special model, and 

the instance that the hon. members refers to and his view of the 

facts as far as what happened there, his view and my view 

might differ, Mr. Speaker, and all I can say is that it will be 

proceeded with on an instance by instance  

basis, if you like, and where it makes most sense. 

 

I think the hon. member is of the view, I suppose, that big 

government is good government, and that may not be the people 

of Saskatchewan’s view entirely. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well does an instant by instant case mean 

that, as was the practice with this government in the past, you’re 

flying by the seat of your pants, or has this government done 

any studies about the economies of contracting out? And if 

those studies have been done, will you table them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, insofar as how we 

proceed on this, as the hon. member full well knows, the throne 

speech lays out the broad framework. The details on how it will 

be done will be fleshed out and in fact, Mr. Speaker, as they 

themselves suggested yesterday, it might be wise for us to 

consult with some others — others in the industry, others in 

Saskatchewan — as far as how one might pursue it and in what 

areas that it might make most sense. So consultation and 

co-operating with others out there might well be a trade mark of 

how we approach this. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. I take it from that that no 

studies have been done. One final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. 

Is this kind of privatization of the public service not really just 

an attempt by the PC party to rid itself of professional public 

servants, whom you have tried but failed over the last four years 

to manipulate, and replace them with private contractors who 

will have to be regular contributors to the PC Party in order to 

get these contracts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No. 

 

SaskTel Contracting Telephone Repairs to Alberta Firm 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My first 

question in this House is directed to the minister responsible for 

Saskatchewan Telephones and, Mr. Speaker, it deals with an 

example of contracting out of public services. I have here 

photocopies of SaskTel invoices, invoices that show that 

SaskTel paid more than $67,000 between January and early 

April of this year to a Calgary firm, a Calgary, Alberta firm 

named Palco Telecom Limited, to repair and refurbish 

telephones. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s the kind of work that can be done 

right here in Regina and is being done, in fact, by SaskTel 

employees at the corporation’s depot here. But in recent months 

more and more of that work has been going out of the province 

as part of SaskTel’s contracting-out policy. Can the minister 

explain how this contracting-out policy is good for 

Saskatchewan when it is shipping jobs and tens of thousands of 

tax dollars to Alberta? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll take notice of 

the question and get information for the hon. member. I would 

expect in a case like this that it’s probably highly specialized 

equipment that may require some special expertise that we may 

not have. If that’s not  

  



 

December 5, 1986 

32 

 

the case, I’ll be glad to take a look at the matter. SaskTel, as 

other Crown corporations, do have specific instructions under 

the new government policy to serve Saskatchewan, and if that 

policy is not being compiled with, appropriate action will be 

taken. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Given that the 

minister referred to more complex equipment, I see here by the 

invoices that the complex equipment he’s referring to are 

Contempra telephones which are being done here at the depot in 

Regina. They’re being done, Mr. Minister, at a cost less than 

that of the cost being done by the Alberta firm. Why is it, Mr. 

Minister, that when Saskatchewan is the only province between 

November of this year and November of last year which has 

fewer people working, are you shipping jobs out to your Tory 

friends in Alberta? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I’m glad the hon. member mentioned 

employment, and it’s with a great deal of pleasure that the 

people of Saskatchewan have noted today that Saskatchewan 

has the second-lowest unemployment rate in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I suggest to the hon. member that the 

reasons for that are the policies of this government, and we can 

compare our record with that of any other government of 

Canada, and I think we stand up well, given the fact that we are 

a resource- and agricultural-based economy. 

 

I’ve indicated to the hon. member that I will take notice and 

report back to the members, that if the repairs are being done 

and not source Saskatchewan as contrary to policy and, and I 

said, appropriate action will be taken. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Supplementary to the minister. Policy, Mr. 

Minister, is obviously not being followed in this case; it’s not 

being followed as recently as the 18th of November — the 18th 

of November. I have here a photocopy of a very recent work 

order to the tune of $68,000 worth of work which went to the 

Conservative Palco telephone firm. Will you say before this 

House that . . . will you give a commitment to this House that in 

fact all work done by Palco telephones will be transferred to the 

Regina depot? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Obviously I’ll want to know what the work 

is being done first, and I think that . . . I would caution the new 

member not to fall into the trap of believing some of your old 

members, that all work done for the Government of 

Saskatchewan is done by Conservatives, and if you happen to 

believe that I’m sure that you may have — and I know you’re a 

new member — inadvertently insulted a great number of 

Saskatchewan contractors, Saskatchewan small businesses, that 

do a lot of work for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I know that the hon. member is new and probably will 

apologize for his statement when the facts are there. I have 

indicated what the policy is; it is to source Saskatchewan. And 

if the corporation is not carrying out the policy, I’ve undertaken 

to report back to you. I’ve now said that three times. I will take 

notice. I will report back to you. I’ve indicated to you what the 

policy is, and I’ll try  

and get the answer for you. I’ve indicated that now three times. 

 

Appointment of President of SPC 

 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the minister 

responsible for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation I’d like to 

direct this question to the Premier. It deals with the appointment 

of George Hill as the president and chief executive officer of 

SPC. I would like to know, Mr. Speaker, when Mr. Hill’s 

appointment takes effect; what salary and fringe benefits will 

the former PC Party president receive in his new government 

job? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will consult with the 

minister responsible for Sask Power to find out exactly when 

the new president takes office. I believe that it’s, if not by the 

end of the year, early in January or February. But I’ll get that 

information and, as well, any other financial information that is 

appropriate for members of the Crown corporation. I know 

some of it is, and some of it is not made public, but whatever is 

normally made public, I’ll provide to the House. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In 1982 the PC 

Party promised to de-politicize Crown corporations, and I’m 

wondering how the appointment of a former president of the PC 

Party to the top administrative job at the biggest Crown 

corporation in Saskatchewan de-politicizes the Crowns. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as you know, we want 

to hire the very best people possible in the province of 

Saskatchewan and put them into Crown corporations, and in 

this case the very best happens to be a Progressive 

Conservative. Obviously, in a democracy . . . I heard, Mr. 

Speaker, people across the legislature speaking about 

democracy and tradition yesterday at some length, and surely 

they wouldn’t deny anybody from any political persuasion to be 

appointed to a Crown corporation. I mean that’s the essence of 

democracy. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Or to the bench. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Or to the bench, or to any other place in 

society. So, Mr. Speaker, I would say that we have looked all 

over the country, we have consulted with people, and Mr. 

George Hill comes with high qualifications as a man who has 

been on the bench, a man who has been an active lawyer in this 

province, and a man who has been a Progressive Conservative. 

 

Now he is a very talented individual, he has management skills, 

he was chairman of the board of Sask Power. He has worked on 

and initiated projects like the Rafferty dam, completed the 

Nipawin power project, and many other things. So he’s a man 

of extensive qualifications and I am very proud to say that we 

have a first-class individual, Saskatchewan individual, as 

president of Sask Power. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 

appears to be denying that Mr. Hill’s appointment will 

politicize the Power Corporation. Yet in recent days, even  

  



 

December 5, 1986 

33 

 

before Mr. Hill is officially in his job, he’s fired a long-time 

professional public . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Does the 

member have a supplementary? And if you do, please get to it 

quickly. 

 

Dismissal of Employee from Sask Power 

 

Ms. Simard: — New question, Mr. Speaker. I’m wondering if 

the Premier’s aware that a long-time professional public 

servant, Mr. Don Moroz, has been fired from the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation. And I’m wondering if he can explain why 

the former president of the PC Party decided to fire this 

professional public servant. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I read in the newspaper that 

the employee resigned from Sask Power and beyond that, I 

mean, I can’t comment. With respect to the activities that go on 

in Sask Power, I would refer to the minister or to . . . well, the 

minister of Sask Power to provide additional information. 

 

Fiscal Responsibility and Political Integrity in  

Government 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. 

With the recent election campaign still fresh in our minds, the 

Premier will know that I have a keen interest in those references 

in Wednesday’s throne speech to fiscal responsibility and 

political integrity. 

 

Consistent with the government’s commitment to high ethical 

standards in public office, which is the language used in the 

throne speech, and in response to the Premier’s general 

invitation for constructive opposition suggestions, I wonder if 

the Premier will present proposals, or would he support 

proposals presented by the opposition to, first of all, curtail 

political advertising by government; secondly, to require proper 

tendering and competitive bidding on all government contracts; 

and thirdly, to implement a public review process to examine all 

patronage appointments before they come into effect. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will say to the hon. 

member that we would be glad, and I would be glad, to look at 

any suggestions that members of the opposition bring forward 

to make sure that tenders are fair and that advertising is 

appropriate, or anything else that goes on with respect to the 

Government of Saskatchewan. As the hon. member probably 

knows, virtually all large contracts are tendered, smaller 

contracts usually aren’t, across Canada. From province to 

province it may vary to some degree with respect to the exact 

amount. But we would be glad to look at it. 

 

I share many concerns with respect to the advertising that went 

on in Crown corporation that just advertised the Crown 

corporation, information advertising on new programs for 

farmers and new programs for students, pension legislation and 

so forth. I believe there’s a very good role for the public sector 

to inform people how to get at it. 

 

If people think there is political advertising done by the 

government, then I would be glad to discuss it here or to review 

it or to look at it. But information to the public, I believe a 

government has a responsibility to inform the public of new 

programs and new ideas and access to information that they 

want to have. But marketing a Crown when it’s a monopoly, 

probably that is political, and I don’t agree with it. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, on that final point mentioned by 

the Premier in relation to government advertising, I wonder 

when he might be in a position to provide the House with a 

figure, in detail, on the amount of money spent by the 

government, particularly during the summer of 1986, in respect 

of a whole range of government advertising programs that 

appeared to be, when you added up all the various modes — 

radio, television, direct mail, all of that — appeared to be a 

rather enormous flood of advertising. I wonder when the 

Premier might be in a position to provide some detail on that, 

including the overall total cost to the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we would be glad to. 

And I believe that there is a process where we can put requests 

in on order papers so that you can get the information. And we 

would be glad to fill it out and provide the hon. member with as 

much information as we have now. Obviously when we get into 

estimates in the new year, we’ll provide complete packages of 

how much the advertising is year after year after year, as we 

always do. 

 

So if the hon. member wants to put the request in, we can put 

our officials at it and we can provide the information, or as 

much as we have, as quickly as possible. 

 

Status of Ex-Cabinet Minister 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister 

responsible for the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. It deals 

with the status of one Sid Dutchak who the people of 

Saskatchewan fired on October 20 from his position as a PC 

cabinet minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, you referred to Mr. Dutchak as “your helper” 

when you announced his temporary appointment to head up the 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation and you were quoted as 

saying, “Mr. Dutchak is doing all of this out of the kindness of 

his heart.” 

 

Can the minister confirm that Mr. Dutchak is now on the public 

payroll, and can you tell this Assembly what Mr. Dutchak’s 

duties and salary are. 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, at the time that I assumed my 

responsibility we lacked a president at Sask Housing, and we 

were in the middle of one of our most successful programs in 

the last four years, our home program. That corporation is 

involved presently in creating some 60 brand new jobs a day. 

We estimate that probably 4,000 jobs have been created in the 

last few months. With the extreme success of that program it 

has generated some $230 million of activity. Those figures are 

starting to reflect now in the new unemployment insurance 

figures  

  



 

December 5, 1986 

34 

 

that have just recently been announced. 

 

As a result, we needed somebody over there that was familiar 

with the program, that was familiar with the senior management 

that was in place. Mr. Dutchak was available, and we’re very 

delightful to say that he came with us for a 90-day period and 

he’s running the corporation in a solid and efficient manner. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, is the minister 

of Sask. Housing telling us, and Saskatchewan people, today 

that there were no professional public servants within the 

corporation capable of taking over as acting interim president? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say that 

senior management itself was looking for guidance and they 

welcome the opportunity to work with Mr. Dutchak. He’s 

highly respected by the business community. As a matter of fact 

he’s pretty highly respected by the people of our province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — When and how will the government move to 

fill the job of Saskatchewan Housing Corporation president on a 

permanent basis, and to your knowledge will Mr. Dutchak be a 

candidate for this job? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I can hardly speak for other 

people, but I can tell you that there is a search presently under 

way for the presidency of Sask Housing Corporation. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Was the 

position advertised, that Mr. Dutchak now holds, in any fashion, 

even within the corporation, or did you just decide on your own 

that Mr. Dutchak was the best man for the job? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, in most instances searches 

are conducted for the presidency, not only of major Crown 

corporations but of any major corporation throughout the 

country, and we are presently conducting that search. And it’s 

not a matter of advertising in your favourite reference material, 

the Regina Leader-Post, and hoping somebody’s going to come 

out of the woodwork. We are doing a thorough, positive, 

professional approach, and in due course we will announce a 

president. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Is the Minister for Sask Housing then telling 

us that all of the former Conservative MLAs will be eligible for 

all the jobs to head up Crown corporations and government 

departments in the short future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — I really don’t know how to respond to a 

question like that short of saying, I suppose if our former MLAs 

applied through the proper channels when a search was being 

conducted, I’m sure they would come out shining and be very 

good candidates for almost any kind of job that they might 

apply for, Mr. Speaker. 

 

New Electoral Boundaries Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Premier and it deals with the announcement in  

Wednesday’s throne speech that the government has a plan to 

introduce, and I quote, “a new electoral boundaries Act.” Mr. 

Speaker, I was puzzled because it will be known that there is 

already on the statute books a process for constituency 

redistribution, and its two principles are that there shall be an 

independent commission chaired by a judge chosen by the 

Chief Justice, and the basic principle is: one person, one vote. 

 

Can the Premier tell us why he is calling for a new Act, and 

which of those principles — the independent boundaries 

commission headed by the judge, or the one person, one vote — 

is unacceptable to him so that he needs a new Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re introducing a 

new Act, not to address either one of those principles, but if 

there are additional things that should be considered with 

respect to population changes or polling during elections or 

various other kinds of things that the House wants to consider, 

then we believe it’s appropriate. 

 

Every eight years, as the hon. members knows, we have the 

three-member commission review it. They bring their 

recommendations in here, an Act is passed, and we carry on 

again for the next eight years. Well, we are going to at least 

allow the province to look at any other alterations they might 

want to have with respect to the whole process. So that’s why 

it’s introduced. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Premier, you will know that in order to carry on the process 

every eight years we don’t need any legislation. It’s already 

there. You will know that if we wanted to make small 

adjustments you would propose an amendment to the Act, not a 

new Act. My question to you is: what fundamental principle of 

the old Act do you propose to change which requires a totally 

new statute? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure the hon. 

member that the commission will be totally independent — 

absolutely independent. And the reason for this — the 

introduction of this — is to allow for any other changes that this 

House may think is appropriate or necessary, and certainly at 

that time we can discuss them; we can debate them; we can 

review them; we can suggest them. Any suggestions you may 

have, or any suggestions that I may have, can be put forward. 

That’s the reason for the introduction of the Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. As the 

Premier will know, any matters dealing with advertising, or 

polling, or expense limits — and those matters are not in the 

Constituency Boundaries Commission Act but the Election Act. 

The Constituency Boundaries Commission Act, as he will 

know, is limited in its effect to a commission and the manner in 

which the boundaries are to be distributed. 

 

My question again, Mr. Premier, is this: which of those few 

principles that are set out in the Act do you find so 

reprehensible and abhorrent, that you are proposing to have a 

whole new Act and not simply an amendment to the Act to deal 

with some matters you want to change? 

 

  



 

December 5, 1986 

35 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well as I said, Mr. Speaker, neither of 

those. And I don’t find them . . . And I believe that it will be — 

and I assure you that it will be — independent. I’m just making 

sure that if there are other suggestions with respect to the 

process that you might have or your colleagues may have or 

some others may have, or other jurisdictions or the public may 

have, that we can consider them — and at that time there may 

be, and there may not be — so that the Act will allow us to do 

that. I mean, I’m sure that the public knows that we have some 

ridings with 23,000 people in them, and not too far away we 

have some ridings with 10,000 people in them. And we have 

some constituents that have to travel 150 miles in their ridings 

because of sparsity. We know that. We have, Mr. Speaker, the 

opportunity in this Act to look at any new suggestions that 

members opposite have, or the public has, in general. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I 

wonder if I might have leave to introduce some guests who 

were overlooked earlier. 

 

I would like to introduce 11 adults who are here with the 

Independent Living Skills group from the Regina Plains 

Community College. I look forward to meeting with you later 

on in the day, in a half an hour or so. 

 

I want to congratulate the Regina Plains Community College. 

My riding is right next to the Legislative Building and yet there 

are very, very few schools from Regina Centre which actually 

come to the Legislative Building. This is a college which at 

least once a session, and sometimes oftener, brings groups over. 

So I want to congratulate the college, and I will look forward in 

half an hour or so to meeting with you and discussing what you 

see here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

Mr. Martineau: — Mr. Speaker, I am deeply honoured to 

move the address in reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Before I begin, Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to 

congratulate you on your election to the office of Speaker of the 

Legislative Assembly. The regard, the respect, indeed the 

esteem of all members of this Assembly is humbly presented to 

you today, Mr. Speaker. In offering our sincere support we wish 

you the greatest success as you fulfil your duties and 

responsibilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank the constituents of Saskatoon 

Eastview for the confidence they placed in me on October 20, 

1986. 

 

As a first-time member of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I am 

greatly humbled when I think of the many members who have 

preceded me in these Chambers. Their personal standards, their 

beliefs, and their efforts on behalf of the people they have 

represented have helped make Saskatchewan the great province 

it is today. 

 

I acknowledge their efforts today, Mr. Speaker, because any 

time something is being built for the present and for the future, 

it must be built on a strong foundation. In Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, the foundation goes back to men and women who 

pioneered and settled this province. Not only did they want, but 

they pursued and carved out their right to establish their own 

standard of living and quality of life. They simply would not 

settle for anything less. Their efforts and their success, Mr. 

Speaker, not only allows us, but absolutely demands that we 

continue the spirit of building established at the turn of the 

century. 

 

It is up to us; we must be builders that open the future for the 

generations to come. We are rapidly moving into the last decade 

of this century, and we must move with the same zeal, 

dedication and disregard for obstacles as did our forefathers. 

 

As Premier Grant Devine just said recently, this is not the time 

for standing still. This is the time to believe in ourselves, and in 

the strength of our province. We must meet the challenges and 

shape the future to the best of our ability.  

 

Mr. Speaker, in reviewing the Speech from the Throne, it is 

obvious that the government of Saskatchewan is not standing 

still, and indeed, is continuing to build on the strong foundation 

it has created during the past four and a half years. 

 

While identifying the need to diversity our economy in order to 

provide new and exciting opportunities, this government 

remains committed to the continued protection of individuals, 

families, communities against the hardships they neither create 

nor control. 

 

As pointed out in the Speech from the Throne, this government 

will also carry on with the initiative to maximize the efficiency 

and effectiveness of the government and its departments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the track-record of this government during the 

first term — its accomplishments and its performance in 

delivering for the needs and aspirations of Saskatchewan people 

— are again the foundation of our new government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have the privilege of representing in this House 

the great constituency of Saskatoon Eastview. Its people are 

hard-working and honest. They are people of integrity. They are 

also people who believe in a job well done. I know I speak for 

many of them, and for many who live in other parts of the 

biggest city in Saskatchewan, by acknowledging appreciation 

for the initiative of this government in building and creating 

new facilities and opportunities in our city since 1982. 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, the new $17 million cancer clinic 

which is 100 per cent financed by the provincial government; a 

new $78 million world-class agriculture building for the 

University of Saskatchewan; over $200 million worth of 

planned and ongoing construction for expansion at St. Paul’s 

University, and the construction of a new city hospital; over $40 

million in school  

  



 

December 5, 1986 

36 

 

construction and renovations undertaken since 1982. 

Construction and approval of 433 special care home beds under 

the five-year special care home construction program; about 

$25 million for a new 240-bed special care nursing home, the 

largest in our province’s history; over $11 million in grants to 

organizations in support of the handicapped since 1982. Over 

$40 million in science and technology research has been 

allocated to 12 research facilities in the city. Funding for the 

new Saskatoon multi-purpose arena project has been assured. 

The attraction of Canpotex, the international marketing agency 

for Saskatchewan potash, which moved its head office from 

Toronto to Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, these are but a few of the 

benefits our city has received as a result of the efforts of this 

government since 1982. 

 

This government is quick to acknowledge that there is more that 

must be accomplished in Saskatoon over the next four years or 

so, and with the continued co-operation of individuals, 

community leaders, community organizations, industry and 

local government, more will, in fact, be accomplished. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the first term of this government its 

members had the foresight to priorize those areas which will 

prepare the province for the years ahead. Agriculture, jobs, 

health care, and education were, in fact, labelled as cornerstones 

of our future success. 

 

And our government delivered to these areas as never before. 

The problems facing agriculture in the last few years have been 

monumental. The challenges in providing new jobs amidst 

tough economic times were many and complex. The necessity 

to provide in health care and education were so directly related 

to our quality of life and future security that both demanded 

immediate action. They could not be compromised. 

 

When young farmers could not afford to buy their own farms — 

an intolerable situation in the province built on the tradition of 

fathers and sons working side by side — this government 

established the farm purchase program providing 8 per cent 

mortgages, this at a time when interest rates were at 20 per cent. 

When drought and grasshoppers threatened the existence of 

many farm families, this government provided assistance and 

incentives unmatched by any government in the history of 

Saskatchewan. Not satisfied with only short-term assistance, 

your government, Mr. Speaker, created the $200 million 

agricultural development fund for agriculture research 

development and marketing opportunities. 

 

To ensure the same opportunities for individuals throughout the 

province, this government created the $600 million employment 

development fund to create and maintain jobs. 

 

In education, a $400 million endowment fund provided for the 

creation of the $275 million education development fund. Mr. 

Speaker, I believe no one in this Assembly would argue with 

the fact that it is our sacred responsibility to ensure our children 

be provided with a solid education. 

 

In the area of health government has spared no effort in 

providing protection against illness. To finance new health care 

facilities and renovate those we have, the $300 million health 

care capital fund was created, this on top of an annual budget 

which equals about $1,200 for every man, woman, and child in 

our province. Mr. Speaker, it is clear that the foundation in this 

province is solid. 

 

During this first term, Mr. Speaker, this government committed 

itself to providing protection and opportunity for all residents 

— for the farmers that work this land from border to border; for 

the oil workers in Estevan, Swift Current, Lloydminster, 

Kindersley and Weyburn; for the teachers in every school, both 

large and small; for the nurses and doctors; for the labourers 

whose skills we cannot do without for the small-business men 

who employ more people than all other sectors combined; for 

our senior citizens whose courage, wisdom, and knowledge we 

rely on so heavily. 

 

The reason for the commitment was quite simple, Mr. Speaker. 

The people made it clear it was their priority, thus it became the 

government’s responsibility. Among the many programs and 

polices that we developed to deliver protection and opportunity, 

we want to highlight just a few. 

 

The Saskatchewan Pension Plan protects the people of 

Saskatchewan and helps them secure their own futures. The 

plan gives those without a pension plan an opportunity to have a 

pension of their own. Home-makers, employees of small 

businesses, small-business people and farmers now have an 

opportunity that was never before provided in this province, nor 

indeed was provided in this country. 

 

Senior housing, for instance. The senior citizens’ home repair 

program has helped enhance the quality of life for seniors in the 

form of a $1,000 grant for home repairs. The senior citizens’ 

heritage program is designed to protect seniors by offering a 

property tax rebate to seniors earning less than $30,000 per 

year. Enriched housing for seniors encourages and promotes an 

independent life-style, with rent control to no more than 25 per 

cent of their income. 

 

The mortgage interest protection plan protected home owners 

and their families and jobs in the building industry by placing a 

ceiling of thirteen and one-quarter per cent on mortgage interest 

rates up to $50,000. 

 

The Saskatchewan new home program is our latest initiative 

and will create up to 25,000 jobs made up of two major 

components — a mortgage protection plan which extends the 

mortgage interest reduction program guaranteeing home owners 

nine and three-quarter per cent mortgage interest over 10 years 

to a maximum of $50,000, and the home improvement plan 

which offers a matching grant of up to $1,500 for repairs or 

improvements, and a $10,000 loan at 6 per cent interest for up 

to 10 years for home repairs. 

 

The production loan program protects Saskatchewan farmers 

from high operating costs, providing loans of $24 per cultivated 

acre at a rate of 6 per cent. Over 1 billion has been distributed 

under the program to over 56,000  

  



 

December 5, 1986 

37 

 

Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

The farm fuel rebate program helps to lower farmers’ operating 

costs by giving farmers a 21 cent a gallon rebate on gas and 

diesel fuel used in farm equipment. In 1986 farmers will save 

about $42 million. 

 

The Saskatchewan natural gas distribution program has brought 

natural gas to some 10,200 rural and 7,217 urban customers, 

saving as much as 50 per cent in fuel costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, your government has many examples of its efforts 

to encourage private enterprise projects in order to create 

opportunities for all of us. 

 

The purchase of the Prince Alberta Pulp (and paper) Company 

(PAPCO) by Weyerhaeuser, along with the building of a new 

paper-mill, will create 250 new direct jobs, hundreds of indirect 

jobs, and over 700 construction jobs. 

 

The new Gainers bacon plant in North Battleford will create 

185 jobs. The $7 million Philips cable plant in Moose Jaw will 

create 40 new direct jobs and many more spin-off jobs. The 

Canapharm plant in Wolseley provides 40 new jobs and an 

important addition to our growing high technology industry. 

Intercontinental Packers in Saskatoon expanded its operation by 

installing a $2.5 million blast chiller, creating 70 permanent and 

30 seasonal jobs. The $23.9 million second stage under 

construction will create 730 new jobs. Again, Mr. Speaker, the 

foundation is strong. We are building on our strengths, our 

people, and our resources. 

 

I want to retrace my steps for just a moment, Mr. Speaker, to 

talk a little more about this government’s commitment to jobs 

and opportunities. 

 

A major innovation of this government during its first term was 

the establishment of the Employment Development Agency 

created to examine, promote, and co-ordinate government 

programs dealing with employment and to ensure that every 

opportunity for a job is made available to Saskatchewan 

residents. 

 

(1045) 

 

A strategy was developed: a short-term plan to ease seasonal 

employment; a medium-term plan for those who need 

education, training, and retraining, and a plan to aid those 

seeking that all-important first job; long-range plans for 

economic development to ensure that our province has the 

necessary economic activity to create jobs in the future. 

 

Earlier I mentioned the employment development fund — a 

five-year, $600 million fund totally designed to create jobs. I 

now want to give you a few examples of the programs that have 

evolved from this fund: the opportunities program in 1983 and 

’84 where over 7,500 young students received summer 

employment; the Canada/Saskatchewan Opportunities ’85 

program which helped about 10,000 students find summer 

employment; and the Opportunities ’86 program which 

provided over 11,000 students with summer employment. The 

winter  

works program is designed to create employment opportunities 

during the winter months., About 10,000 people found work 

under this program over the past two years. 

 

The New Careers corporation will continue to provide welfare 

recipients with new opportunities through career-related 

training and community colleges, technical schools, and 

universities. As well, practical working experience on various 

capital projects across Saskatchewan is provided. Already over 

$2.5 million has been allocated for 1986 and ’87. 

 

The Saskatchewan employment development program has 

committed $28 million since 1982 to help provide jobs for 

people on social assistance. The Saskatchewan employment 

support program has created over 3,600 jobs since 1982 for 

people who have physical disabilities. The youth Access 

program was designed to create jobs for unemployed youths. To 

date, over 3,100 jobs have been created with the most 

significant factor being that 76 per cent of employers intend to 

keep employing these young people after the government 

subsidy has ended. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these examples are only a part of the picture. A 

long-term objective of the fund is economic development. To 

that end, several initiatives were developed, supported by the 

spending of $3.25 million for regional development in 1985 and 

’86. 

 

The small business interest reduction program allowed 5,500 

small business to have their rates brought down to 9 and 

five-eighths per cent, and after April of this year the program 

offered an 8 per cent rate on loans of up to $100,000. 

 

The industrial incentive program provided $16 million for 

incentive payments to companies which undertake capital 

investment and permanent job creation in manufacturing and 

processing. Since 1984 the program has helped to generate 

$100 million worth of industrial capital expansion and has 

created 3,500 new permanent jobs in 74 communities across 

this province. A total of $58 million for a number of capital 

works project including $4 million for the new Saskatoon arena 

and $2.25 million for the final phase of the Buffalo Pound 

filtration plant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were other initiatives that helped to stimulate 

job opportunities in this province: introduction of the oil royalty 

holiday which reopened and revitalized our oil industry and 

resulted in the creation of over 7,000 new jobs in the oil patch. 

Mr. Speaker, because of the world crisis in the oil industry, 

maintaining many of these jobs has now become a priority of 

this government. 

 

The elimination of corporate income tax on small 

manufacturing and processing firms provided $4 million in 

assistance to the small-business sector, and a two-year 

provincial income tax holiday for small business was 

established; introduction of the venture capital program which 

provides tax credits to both individuals and corporations who 

invest in Saskatchewan’s small business. 

 

An active, enhanced trade promotion has been designed  

  



 

December 5, 1986 

38 

 

to assist local manufacturers and exporters to compete more 

aggressively in an increasingly competitive world market-place. 

Mr. Speaker, let me report, the foundation is strong. 

 

I have touched on only a few initiatives and accomplishments 

of this Progressive Conservative government and only in a few 

areas of responsibility. There are many more. 

 

And there is, Mr. Speaker, one area that I do not want to omit. 

Its significance has always been rated of major importance, 

evidenced by the initiatives and development of policy 

regarding all related issues and concerns. What I am speaking 

of, Mr. Speaker, is our government’s commitment to the 

women of Saskatchewan. To ensure that women’s interests and 

views are fully represented in our society, our government 

established the Women’s Secretariat in 1984. It has also been 

instrumental in developing policy to provide jobs and 

opportunities for Saskatchewan women. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, the women’s services branch was created 

in the Department of Advanced Education and Manpower in 

April 1983 to address equal access and opportunity for women 

in both the labour force and the educational system. 

 

Under this government many new programs and initiatives were 

designed and introduced for women and their families. Among 

the most notable, Mr. Speaker, is the automatic enforcement of 

maintenance orders; the Saskatchewan pension plan; the 

establishment of sexual assault centres in Melfort, Kindersley, 

and Swift Current; improvement in representation of women in 

management and non-traditional positions in government; 

first-ever operating grants for day care programs; continued 

lobby of federal government for stricter laws regarding 

pornography. 

 

We are all aware that times are changing. Traditional roles in 

many cases are no longer relevant. This is especially true as it 

applies to women and the role they now plan in business. 

Women are starting businesses in Saskatchewan in record 

numbers. Estimates indicate that women are opening small 

businesses at a rate three times that of men and are successful in 

their business at the same ratio. 

 

In the last five years the number of self-employed women in 

Saskatchewan has grown by more than 30 per cent. Given 

estimates that 70 per cent of new job creation is now the 

small-business sector, women are responsible for the majority 

of new jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has provided a number of 

economic initiatives for small businesses. In addition to a 
number of measures to streamline and improve government 

assistance to reduce the burden of excessive regulation, our 

government has and will continue to ensure that information 

and support programs for small business address the particular 

needs of women in business and family operations. 

 

Three conferences for women starting new businesses  

have already been held with great success. Mr. Speaker, the 

foundation is clearly in place. Through a process of listening 

and working in co-operation with people all over this province, 

this PC government has paved the way for continued growth in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne opening the first 

session of the 21st Legislature is a formula to address the 

problems and concerns this province is facing while building 

our strengths and opening new directions and opportunities for 

everyone. 

 

Yes, we are clearly in the midst of transition in the world and 

here at home. We still face tough, hard economic problems that 

affect us all financially, but we are not easily discouraged. No 

matter the setback, the people that make up this province do not 

quit. They simply work harder to overcome the obstacles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to note that this is the same approach 

this government is taking. Having established direct 

communication with individuals, communities, business, 

industry, and local governments, we are now going to work 

even harder to find the appropriate solutions to our problems. 

As indicated in the throne speech, this does not mean that 

government must increase in size or produce more regulation. 

Rather, it must work as efficiently and with as much thrift as 

possible. 

 

We must all be encouraged by our government’s commitment 

to retaining its spirit of openness to seek out the ideas and 

aspirations fuelled by so many within our constituencies. 

 

Just recently we have all been made aware that Saskatchewan’s 

people, its builders, want to see new business and 

manufacturing plants created here. Not only are they prepared 

to accept diversifying our economy, but they whole-heartedly 

encourage it. Why? Because it means new jobs, more 

opportunities, and a foothold in competing more effectively in a 

world market-place. 

 

The emphasis given by the throne speech to begin economic 

diversification within our strongest resource, agriculture, 

ensures credibility and success. It will also help to create an 

even closer association between urban and rural Saskatchewan. 

I firmly believe that the encouragement of increased 

manufacture of agricultural chemicals and fertilizers is the first 

step in gaining future control of our future in employment and 

agriculture. 

 

The inclusion of small business and tourism in further 

diversification will help break our dependency on forces outside 

our province. However, I believe we all realize that government 

cannot achieve success by itself. If business in Saskatchewan 

will support our attempts, the likelihood of building a strong, 

stable, prosperous and diversified economy can be ours for 

generations to come. 

 

The recognition that training and education are key to long-term 

success is evident through the identification of new institutes 

for tourism and hospitality, industrial research institutes, and 

commitment of resources to make sure that excellence is the 

goal of our education system,  

  



 

December 5, 1986 

39 

 

 

simply cannot be over-estimated in their value. Our government 

knows that if we are to meet future challenges, we must 

continue with the process of renewal and development within 

our primary and secondary schools and universities. 

 

We remain committed to initiate this process in partnership with 

all participants of education, of the education community — 

parents, teachers, students, trustees, and others. The emphasis 

placed on education in the Speech from the Throne is certainly 

good news for everyone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the encouragement of labour unions to participate 

in creating new jobs is a continuation of this government’s 

co-operative spirit. Encouragement, too, to our aboriginal 

peoples to become involved in business, manufacturing, and 

processing, is a challenge guaranteed to create positive results 

for the entire province. The assurance of equal access to credit 

is a further step to ensure Saskatchewan’s women enjoy every 

available opportunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed establishment of a Saskatchewan 

entrepreneurial institute deserves separate and special 

recognition. Our young people deserve the opportunity to gain 

expertise and experience in the business world. They should not 

and will not have to leave their home to gain this valuable 

education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, creation of the new department of human 

resources, labour, and employment will not only ensure 

consideration for the needs of those concerned, but it will 

provide more efficient delivery to benefit Saskatchewan’s 

taxpayers. 

 

The legislation to extend the provisions of The Farm Land 

Security Act and The Farmers’ Counselling and Assistance Act 

is a continuation of the commitment this government has 

created in protecting farm families. Our promise to push for the 

early delivery of the $1 billion deficiency payment is further 

evidence of this commitment. 

 

The concerns of the oil industry are also being recognized. 

Protection of the livelihoods of our province’s oil workers is of 

primary concern and will continue to be a focus of cabinet. 

 

The legislation that will guarantee mortgage security for 

Saskatchewan home owners is a further tribute to a government 

that created protection for Saskatchewan families. It will be 

joined in legislation by the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, which 

offers the first ever pension plan to home makers and those who 

have no access to a pension plan. 

 

(1100) 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government promises to carry on in providing 

quality health care, to review its social assistance programs in 

order to combat poverty, remaining consistent, and ensures 

protection for those in need. 

 

The development of a rehabilitation for young people and their 

families who are encountering the increasing pain related to 

alcohol and drug abuse is an essential step in solving a very 

serious problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are facing some difficult times — times that 

require strong management. Saskatchewan people want to see 

their government managed in an efficient yet effective manner. 

They realize that money is hard to find, but that the demands for 

money are only increasing. 

 

The direction taken in the Speech from the Throne regarding 

administrative efficiency and effectiveness is not only 

responsible, it is essential. Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the 

Throne builds on the foundation our Progressive Conservative 

government has put in place since 1982. Indeed, it will become 

an integral part of the foundation that will launch us into the 

1990s and beyond. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in moving the Speech form the Throne, I have 

saved the best for last. At the core of every effort, program, 

initiative, and incentive of this government has been the 

leadership of Premier Grant Devine. This is acknowledged 

freely by every member of the PC government’s caucus. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a rare individual who can inspire another. It is 

rarer still for one individual to accept the responsibility of the 

fellow man, not just as a duty of the office he may hold, but out 

of a desire to see everyone succeed. 

 

Our Premier understands the concerns and aspirations facing 

Saskatchewan people. He believes in those who dare to dream 

and those who reach the goals they have established and those 

who caution for caution’s sake. He believes in the farmer, the 

teacher, the welder, the waitress, the nurses, the doctors, the 

clerks, the salesmen, the engineers, the labourers, the 

repairmen, the oilmen, and yes, even the lawyers. 

 

He understands what Saskatchewan is all about, simply because 

be believes in listening and then listening some more. He has 

challenged his government caucus to be the very best it can be. 

He has challenged us to rise above ourselves and to create the 

kind of Saskatchewan that only pride and hard work can 

produce. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Premier has gained the respect of people 

everywhere. He is an example for all of us to follow. We must 

know our people, their concerns and their dreams if we are to be 

effective representatives. It’s our duty and our pleasure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have now spent some considerable time 

reviewing portions of our government’s legislative record and 

of its proposed initiatives. There are points on which I have not 

touched, both on our past record and of our future intentions, 

but I believe I have stressed the Progressive Conservative 

government’s general character and intentions since I rose from 

my seat. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have and will continue to listen closely to 

Saskatchewan’s people, and as before, we will respond quickly 

to provide opportunity and protection for all Saskatchewan’s 

people. It is a commitment of which I am  

  



 

December 5, 1986 

40 

 

proud, and it is a commitment that will grow in the years ahead. 

 

My pride in this commitment causes me to move, with honour, 

Mr. Speaker, and seconded by the member for Pelly, that a 

humble address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor as follows: 

 

To His Honour the Honourable Frederick Johnson, 

Lieutenant Government of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative 

Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in session 

assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious 

speech which Your Honour has been pleased to address to us 

at the opening of the present session. 

 

I so move, seconded by the hon. member for Pelly. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the MLA for 

Pelly constituency, I am indeed honoured to second the motion 

to move the Speech from the Throne. I wish to express my 

sincere thank-you to the constituents of Pelly for the confidence 

they have placed in me on October 20, 1986. On that day, they 

elected me as the first Progressive Conservative MLA in the 

history of Pelly constituency. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — As a result, today I am about to delivery my 

maiden speech to this legislature and at the same time have the 

honour of seconding the motion to move the Speech from the 

Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I first of all congratulate you on your election 

to the office of Speaker of this Legislative Assembly. I know, 

Mr. Speaker, that you are respected and held in high regard by 

all members of this Assembly. All of us who serve as members 

to this legislature wish you, sir, continued success in your new 

position. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to express my confidence in the Premier of 

our province, the hon. member for Estevan. It is because of the 

excellent leadership of the Premier and the Progressive 

Conservative government that I am here today representing the 

constituency of Pelly. The Premier and his ministers were given 

a renewed mandate by the people of Saskatchewan on October 

20th. The electorate re-elected a Progressive Conservative 

government. The message from the people was that they put 

their trust, their confidence, and their faith in the future in the 

policies of a Progressive Conservative government. 

 

Today we are gathered here to begin the second term of the 

government of Premier Grant Devine. The Speech from the 

Throne, which His Honour the Lieutenant Governor delivered 

to this Assembly, spells out the course this government will 

allow in the months and  

years ahead. 

 

I’m exceptionally pleased to be able to speak in support of the 

Speech from the Throne. The people of this province have faith 

in the Progressive Conservative government. Saskatchewan has 

been on the move for the last four or five years, and the people 

want that to continue. People are proud of our province and all 

that it stands for. The future for us is bright. The people have 

continued confidence in their Premier and his government. 

 

The Progressive Conservative government is a government that 

cares about people. It is a government that has the courage to 

protect people when they need to be protected. It is a 

government that wants to build and provide opportunities for 

people. It is a government that listens and carries out the will of 

the people. It is a government that is open. It is a government 

that has faith in people. On October 20th the people of 

Saskatchewan said yes to that government. The people said yes, 

we want to have another four years of a Progressive 

Conservative government. The voters put their confidence in 

our Premier. 

 

The people of Pelly constituency sent me to this legislature 

because they wanted to be a part of the Progressive 

Conservatives’ faith in the future. They wanted to have a 

member on the government side of the House. Mr. Speaker, 

they put their trust in the leadership of our Premier and the 

policies he put forward to Saskatchewan. 

 

In four years the Premier of Saskatchewan has become a 

nationally respected premier. When he sits down at a first 

ministers’ conference, the other nine ministers listen. The Prime 

Minister of Canada listens to him, and they all respect him. 

That’s why the premiers endorsed the excellent national 

agriculture policy put forward by the Premier of Saskatchewan. 

And that is why the government in Ottawa made a commitment 

of $1 million to help Saskatchewan’s farmers — because they 

respect Saskatchewan’s Premier. 

 

The Premier of this province has the courage to help people 

when times are rough. He had the leadership to help home 

owners some five years ago when he pledged to help them 

combat high interest rates. The Premier did the same for 

farmers. Not once, but time and time again, the Premier and the 

Progressive Conservative government had the vision to help 

people. 

 

Saskatchewan families in turn showed their confidence in these 

policies by endorsing the leadership of Premier Grant Devine. 

Mr. Speaker, I am very proud of our Premier and the fact that 

Pelly constituency elected a PC MLA for the first time in 

history. That proves they, too, believe in Premier Grant Devine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we look to the future with confidence. On every 

farm, hamlet, rural municipality, town and community the 

people said on October 20th, let’s move forward with 

confidence. We face a future of sustained economic growth. We 

face a future of building Saskatchewan. 

 

The exciting record of achievement of the past four years  

  



 

December 5, 1986 

41 

 

will be continued. Since 1982 this province has consistently had 

one of the lowest unemployment rates of any province in 

Canada. We shall continue to create jobs. Since 1982 this 

province has had an excellent record of positive economic 

growth. We shall continue to build a strong economy. Since 

1982 this province has been a leader in protecting agriculture 

and the family farm. We shall continue to be leaders in 

agriculture. Since 1982 we have put forward health and social 

programs unequalled anywhere in Canada, and we shall 

continue to help people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative government believes 

in protection, in building and opportunity, openness and 

participation by Saskatchewan people. I said this government 

will continue to create jobs. That is what the Saskatchewan 

Builds program is all about. This bold new initiative will 

emphasize agriculture and economic diversity. That is why in 

the Speech from the Throne there is the announcement that this 

government will encourage the local manufacturer of farm 

chemicals. 

 

Small business will play a key role in the Saskatchewan Builds 

program. The Premier has said that $50 million will be 

committed over the next five years to encourage business 

growth. The government is taking a leadership role in a 

program to increase the purchase of goods and services from 

Saskatchewan sources. We are strongly committed to a Buy 

Saskatchewan policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, tourism is very important to Saskatchewan. The 

Saskatchewan Builds program will put a major emphasis on 

tourism. In the area of job creation we see over 7,000 new jobs 

in the hospitality industry over the next five years. I’m excited 

about the fact that this government intends to establish a 

Saskatchewan tourism and hospitality institute. This tourism 

institute will provide new jobs in an expanded industry. We 

plan to build on the reputation Saskatchewan established at 

Expo ’86. Our pavilion was hailed as one of the best at Expo. 

Tourism will help build Saskatchewan. 

 

(1115) 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is the intention of this government to keep on 

building on the strong economy of our province. Labour unions 

will be encouraged to participate in the creation of new jobs 

through the labour venture capital program. Young people, 

women, aboriginal people, all will be provided opportunities to 

become involved in the community. 

 

The major new department, the department of human resources, 

labour, and employment, is a major part of building 

Saskatchewan. It is proof that the Progressive Conservative 

government believes that in building the economy the interests 

and needs of people are always foremost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a solid education system is vital to our province’s 

future. We must provide young people with an education equal 

to or better than any other jurisdiction in North America. To 

give them excellent education opportunities is to say that we 

believe in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a farmer I am both thankful and satisfied  

with your government’s record in protecting and providing 

opportunities for our farm families. When the Premier of a 

province also serves as Minister of Agriculture, it sends a 

message to farmers. It says we believe in the family farm and 

we believe in agriculture. The Premier is on record saying that 

the Progressive Conservative government will continue to 

ensure that agriculture remains in the forefront in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Premier has committed this Progressive Conservative 

government to four significant steps in building agriculture. 

One, the Saskatchewan Builds program, an injection of $10 

million annually to help new manufacturing plants locate in 

Saskatchewan. The first goal is to have 50 per cent of the farm 

chemicals used in this province, produced in this province by 

1991. Two, a strong emphasis for Saskatchewan farmers to 

receive the lion’s share of the federal government’s $1 billion 

payment for western farmers. Saskatchewan farmers, we 

believe, should receive the majority of the funds. Three, an 

extension of the Saskatchewan Farm Land Security Board to 

December 1987. And four, deferral of payments on the 

principal of loans received under the production loan program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is what you call a solid commitment to 

farmers. The farm is so important to Saskatchewan’s heritage. 

Agriculture is sacred to the future of Saskatchewan. The 

farmers of this province had confidence in the farm policies of 

this government. This government has never restricted farmers. 

We have helped them build time and time again. The Premier of 

Saskatchewan knows and understands the business of 

agriculture and farming, and the farmers know that he knows. 

That’s why, for example the rural people in Pelly constituency 

decided to put their vote behind the Progressive Conservative 

MLA to this legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, your government’s track record in defending the 

family farm is exemplary and will be maintained. That is the 

commitment of the Progressive Conservative government to 

Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, protecting people against factors they alone could 

not protect themselves from is important to this government. 

The Progressive Conservative government believes that 

protection against unforeseen increases in mortgage rates is 

important to provide security to home owners, but will also 

create jobs in the housing industry. This government is the only 

government in North American with the courage and the vision 

to guarantee an effective mortgage rate of 9 and three-quarters 

per cent for 10 years on principal residences. Yes, Mr. Speaker, 

I call that courage and vision to protect people the way this 

government has and is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in all western democracies, especially here in 

North American, people have been sending a message to 

government. The message is: we want governments to be more 

effective and more efficient. Government is the servant and not 

the master of people. The government is going to seriously 

address the question of government efficiency and 

effectiveness. After all, the taxpayers who elected this 

Progressive Conservative government put their trust in us to be 

custodians of their tax dollars. They want their public service, 

their government, to be  

  



 

December 5, 1986 

42 

 

effective and efficient. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government will, as stated in the Speech from 

the Throne, improve the delivery of programs and services 

while constraining the costs to taxpayers. New legislation will 

be introduced to reorganize and consolidate provincial 

government departments to ensure maximum efficiency and 

effectiveness. Again, this government is demonstrating courage 

and leadership. 

 

The province of Saskatchewan can look forward to having one 

of the most effective government administrations in all of North 

America. Mr. Speaker, all of the programs and policies in the 

Speech form the Throne are the result of vision and leadership. 

I believe the people of Saskatchewan have faith in the 

leadership of our Premier and the Progressive Conservative 

government. 

 

In the recent election in this province the Progressive 

Conservative Party showed leadership and the people stood 

with us. The people of Saskatchewan support the kind of 

leadership that brought about mortgage protection and saved the 

homes of over 44,000 families. They believe in a leadership that 

protected the family farm. The people of Saskatchewan support 

a leadership that responds to their hopes, their concerns, and 

their aspirations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since 1982 this government has provided dynamic 

and effective leadership for the province of Saskatchewan. The 

people of Saskatchewan recognize and value the leadership of 

our Premier. He represents the heritage, the traditions, and the 

values of our people throughout this great province. 

 

In four years the Progressive Conservative government, led by 

our Premier, showed leadership by building and protecting 

Saskatchewan in difficult times — difficulties over which we 

had no control — and yet this government had the vision and 

the courage to take action. 

 

We helped small business to build, we helped the farmer to 

build, we helped young people, we helped seniors, because we 

believe in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, all of the record of the 

past four years took leadership, and on October 20th the people 

said, we will give you another four years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to, as part of my maiden speech to 

this Assembly, make some reference as to why I entered public 

life, and at the same time pay special recognition to the 

constituency of Pelly. Mr. Speaker, on July 29, 1919, the people 

of Pelly elected the first women to the Saskatchewan 

legislature, Sarah K. Ramsland. And I’m sure that she would be 

pleased to note that your government, Mr. Speaker, appointed 

the first two female cabinet ministers and is committed to 

providing equal access of opportunities for all women. 

 

It is also very significant that on October 20th the voters in 

Pelly elected a Progressive Conservative MLA for the first time 

ever. I would like to thank the people of Pelly constituency for 

the trust they have put in me as their new MLA. I also wish to 

extend my appreciation to the Premier for his personal 

confidence in me by having me as part of  

the Progressive Conservative caucus. 

 

Pelly constituency is in many respects a mosaic of what rural 

Saskatchewan is all about. It has communities such as the 

historic town of Veregin, home of the national Doukhobor 

village. Each year on July 13th they celebrate heritage day in 

this community. 

 

Near Pelly, we have the historic Fort Livingstone, which was 

established in 1874. The first session of the Northwest 

Territorial Council was held there in March of 1877. The early 

settlers of this area are in evidence today with the existence and 

heritage of three Indian reserves. Mr. Speaker, Pelly 

constituency is rich in history and in tradition. The people of 

Pelly constituency are hard-working people who believe in the 

spirit of our pioneers. The residents of such places as Kamsack, 

Mikado, Norquay, Danbury, Arran, Rhein, Calder, just to name 

a few of the 21 communities that make up Pelly constituency, 

are people who have strong family ties to Saskatchewan. I’m 

pleased to be here to represent Pelly constituency and hope to 

serve them for many years to come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I put my name forward as a candidate for the 

Progressive Conservative Party in Pelly constituency because of 

my belief in the Premier and the record of his government — a 

record that has seen new opportunities develop for people; real 

and meaningful jobs; a record of building and improving on the 

quality of life for people; a record of real economic growth; a 

record of making Saskatchewan a province we can really be 

proud of. Those are some of the many good reasons why I 

offered to serve the people of Pelly constituency. Each of us has 

a calling in life and I believe the time had come for me to step 

forward and contribute in whatever way I could for the 

betterment of the people who elected me as their MLA. 

 

Since 1905 Saskatchewan has moved ahead because of the 

noble idea of building our province. Our pioneers built a rich 

province out of the land, and like most pioneers, this 

Progressive Conservative government has a vision for the 

future. That’s why we’re here. We will make Saskatchewan the 

model for all other provinces in Canada to look at and admire. 

We will build the strongest province in the Confederation of 

Canada. Our record in health care is already the model for 

Canada; so is our record in agriculture. In the next four years 

we will move to the forefront in building small business, 

tourism, and a further strengthening the provincial economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne is a message to the 

people of Saskatchewan. It says we respect your confidence in 

this government. We will honour your trust in us. Mr. Speaker, 

as we commence the second term of the Progressive 

Conservative government, we do so with renewed confidence 

and faith in the greatness of Saskatchewan and its people. We 

are proud of our accomplishments and proud of what we will 

accomplish in the future. October 20, 1986, will go down in the 

history books as the day the people of Saskatchewan said: we 

want a government that has the vision and the courage to lead 

and to build. Mr. Speaker, in years ahead October 20, 1986, will 

be the day recorded as the time Saskatchewan decided to stay 

the course with the  

  



 

December 5, 1986 

43 

 

government of Premier Grant Devine. History will record that 

they made the right decision. I say that with confidence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we begin the job ahead of us I conclude by 

saying to every member of this legislature that I have nothing 

but the greatest confidence in our Premier and the Progressive 

Conservative government. The Speech from the Throne 

reconfirms my confidence. I say to this House that I shall 

faithfully work hard for Pelly constituency, ever mindful of the 

trust the people of Pelly have put in me as their new MLA. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on that note, I am proud to second the motion in 

support of the Speech from the Throne and thank this Assembly 

for the honour of having had the opportunity to second the 

Speech from the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, my first words are to 

congratulate you on your election to the office of Speaker. This 

is my first opportunity since your election to have the 

opportunity formally to do so. 

 

As you know, sir, the office of Speaker is a very important 

office in our legislative system and whether or not this 

legislature is effective in doing the job that the people of 

Saskatchewan expect it to do depends in no small way on how 

you perform your duties. No one thinks it’s easy to be a 

Speaker. I congratulate you on your election and hope that we 

on this side of the House can give you some support in 

discharging the onerous duties which fall upon you. I wish you 

well in discharging those obligations. 

 

I want to congratulate the mover and the seconder. I think they 

did a very creditable job, particularly in view of the materials 

they had to work with — the Speech from the Throne 

containing, as it did, rolling phrases and crashing clichés but 

little else. A positive paucity of content offered them very little 

to work on and I noted therefore, that they tended to dwell on 

what happened in the past rather than what was in the Speech 

from the Throne — exactly the course of action that I would 

have adopted faced with that Speech from the Throne and faced 

with saying anything very appropriate and very stimulating 

about it. 

 

(1130) 

 

I want to extend my best wishes to all the new members of the 

Assembly. Being a member of the Legislative Assembly is an 

honourable pursuit. It seems to be a current fad to suggest that 

politicians are not very honourable members of society, that 

politics is not a high calling, and that politicians are lacking in 

ability or probity or perhaps both. And I’ve always been 

puzzled by that because I’ve met people who said, “Boy, we’ve 

got the greatest institutions of government in the world, our 

parliamentary system and our democracy is as good as it comes 

and we here in Canada are smart. I’m smart; my neighbours are 

smart; we’ve got a good system of government.” And then in 

the next breath they say that the people, all these smart people 

elected to serve in this excellent legislature are not good people. 

Now I don’t believe that the electors are stupid, and I don’t 

believe that the people they elect are stupid, and I don’t think  

they’re lacking in either ability or probity. 

 

To the new members, may I say a few words. I don’t want to 

sound like Father Time, but may I say a few words. The job of 

being an MLA can provide a good deal of satisfaction. 

Certainly there are frustrations. None of us can influence events 

as much as we would like to, but as MLAs we can influence 

them, and influence them more than most ordinary citizens. 

Few people have the opportunity to shape their society in a way 

that an MLA does. It’s said that first we, as citizens, shape our 

laws, and then they shape us. And in the shaping of those laws 

which set rules for the way our society operates, MLAs have a 

special role to play — influential role to play. 

 

I suggest that you take satisfaction in doing a good job and in 

your own knowledge that you’re doing a good job. You will 

know whether you’re doing all you can, and that knowledge is 

your satisfaction. Don’t wait for public recognition. Don’t 

expect it. Most of the public feel that you spend all your day 

sitting in these seats listening to stimulating speeches and doing 

nothing else — and that’s a pretty soft touch the way they look 

at it — nothing but bask in the glory of being an MLA. They 

think we’re on the gravy train. You may be able to convince 

them that you work hard, but I wouldn’t count on it. 

 

Having said that, don’t succumb to the temptation of thinking 

that the public are sometimes ungrateful, they’re just not 

knowledgeable. Serve them. Your reward is in serving them and 

not in having your service recognized. Some may be fortunate 

enough to get recognition and to get from the public an 

acknowledgement of just how many hours you put into your 

job. But for many that will not come, and your satisfaction will 

be in knowing that you’ve done the job for your people. 

 

I noted the member for Pelly had pointed out that he entered 

public life in order to serve the constituents that he believed 

needed a voice for them, and that is the basis upon which one 

should conduct one’s public life. if you approach your job in 

that way, you can get some real satisfaction. 

 

One other point. Don’t expect you’re going to be here 

indefinitely. As the poet says: 

 

Dame Fortune is a fickle gypsy, 

Always blind and sometimes tipsy. 

 

I don’t know whether Dame Fortune is fickle, but I can tell you 

the voters are. I can tell you the voters are. 

 

I looked at the last House. Sixty-four people were elected in 

1982, and during the course of the period from ’82 to ’86 three 

of them left and three more came. So between that period of ’82 

to ’86, 67 people served in this House. Of that 67, by my count, 

33 of them are back; 34 are not. Some of that number of 34 left 

voluntarily; a large number did not; and for some it’s a little 

difficult to tell just how voluntary it was. But as least 34 of 

them are gone — a big 50 per cent turnover at a time when a 

government is being returned to office. I can tell you when a 

government is being defeated, the carnage is even greater. I 

could offer that prospect to members opposite, but I don’t want 

to be controversial at this point. 

 

  



 

December 5, 1986 

44 

 

An Hon. Member: — Or wrong! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well I have a much greater hazard of 

being controversial than being wrong on that one, I’ll tell you. 

 

Thirty-one members were elected in October who didn’t sit in 

the last House. Of this number, five served in previous 

legislatures and 26 are new to this Chamber. Two of the 26 new 

to this Chamber served in the House of Commons — the 

member for The Battlefords and the member for 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. And that leaves us with 24 people 

elected this time — as I say, when a government was being 

returned — who have never sat in this Chamber before or never 

sat in the parliament before. Somewhere between one-third and 

one-half of this Chamber changed in a total way in a sense that 

the people who were elected had not sat in a Chamber before at 

a time when a government was being re-elected. And that’s 

fairly typical. So whatever the joys of being an MLA are, 

security and tenure is not one of them. 

 

You may find that the debates in this House are a little stylized 

and fall into predictable moulds. That’s true, but it’s not always 

true. Not all issues are approached in a partisan way, nor is the 

debate in this Chamber the only way that you can affect the 

outcome of decisions of this legislature. Frequently arguments 

in caucus can influence the ultimate decisions made in the 

House. Sometimes arguments in committee will do that. So to 

members of both parties, I urge you to participate fully in your 

caucus deliberations. The independent member will find that 

easier. But certainly that is the way to make your influence felt. 

And I think if you approach your period in this legislature, 

however long or short it may be, in that light, you will get a 

good deal of satisfaction in serving as a member of the 

legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Premier, as I did on 

election night, on the re-election of his government. The PCs 

won the election, and we did not. I do however want to 

comment on some of the results briefly. It will be known that 

the New Democrats gained more votes than the PCs, but 

plurality of votes didn’t translate into a plurality of seats. 

 

One reason was that, on the average, the seats which were won 

by the New Democratic candidates had more voters than those 

won by the Progressive Conservative candidates. That stems 

from the population movement since the last redistribution, and 

it no doubt will be addressed in the upcoming redistribution. 

 

Our established system will deal with this anomaly in due 

course. We are not crying foul. We just say that that’s what 

happened last time, and we expect that the system will deal with 

it unless it’s prevented from doing so by some arbitrary action 

by this legislature, which I really don’t anticipate. 

 

The topic I wanted to touch on, however, was not the one I just 

alluded to, but on the conclusions drawn by some of the media 

from the election results, particularly some conclusions drawn 

about what had happened in rural Saskatchewan. I’ve read some 

stories to the effect that,  

compared with the PC support, New Democratic support had 

dropped in rural Saskatchewan. And that’s just not so. The 

figures will not support it, and it simply isn’t the fact. 

 

Now if we define rural seats as those excluding the 10 seats in 

Regina and the 10 in Saskatoon and the two in Moose Jaw and 

the two in Prince Albert and those seats which have significant 

city votes — Estevan and Weyburn and Yorkton and Melville 

and Melfort and Swift Current and The Battlefords and Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster — and if we exclude Cumberland and 

Athabasca, which are not rural in the sense that I’m now using 

the terms, we’re left with 30 seats. 

 

And in these 30 seats, compared with 1982, New Democrats 

improved their position, vis-a-vis the PCs, in 22 of them, and 

we didn’t improve our position in eight of them. And in these 

same 30 seats, we improved our percentage vote over 1982 in 

22 of the seats. Indeed, in four of them we improved our 

percentage vote over 1978, which was a high year for New 

Democrats. 

 

The figures do not support the conclusion that the New 

Democrats lost voter support in rural Saskatchewan — certainly 

not compared with 1982 — and that simply isn’t true. 

 

I refer to these comparisons not to rehash the last election but to 

refute the view that there has somehow been a large realignment 

of voters in rural Saskatchewan. Certainly there has been some. 

But what took place, took place prior to 1982 and partly 

reversed itself, both rural and urban, in 1986. All that can be 

said with certainty is that the reversal in the urban areas in 1986 

was high greater than that in the rural areas, but that the trend 

was the same in both. That’s the only appropriate conclusion 

that can be drawn from the figures while, as I say, the 

examination of the entrails of elections is something which 

really interests, by and large, only politicians. The broad 

conclusions drawn that somehow there was a sharper division 

between rural and urban Saskatchewan in that the New 

Democrats did much better in the cities and lost a great deal of 

support in rural Saskatchewan, isn’t the case. In fact, New 

Democrats did better both rurally and urban, but made more 

progress in urban Saskatchewan than in rural Saskatchewan. 

And that, I think, is simply one of the ebbs and flows of the 

electoral system and does not indicate any fundamental change 

in voting patterns by the people of Saskatchewan — rural or 

urban. 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, I want to touch on a couple of other things 

before I beg leave to adjourn the debate. I think the Speech 

from the Throne is indicative of where the government stands, 

not only because of what they put in the Speech from the 

Throne, but because of what they didn’t put in the Speech from 

the Throne. 

 

You can tell where a government stands, partly by what it says 

and does, and partly by what it does not say and does not do. 

And accordingly, some of the absences from the Speech from 

the Throne speak loudly — indeed more loudly than the speech 

itself. 

 

The speech didn’t touch on northern Saskatchewan with  

  



 

December 5, 1986 

45 

 

its unique people, its unique opportunities, and its unique 

traditional values — no mention of the thousands of families in 

that part of Saskatchewan who are probably undergoing more 

stress than any other comparable group in Saskatchewan. And 

so we had a government which did not wish to address the north 

half of the province. 

 

There was no significant focus on jobs or job creation. One time 

I heard a reference in the address — I think of the mover? — 

talking about the jobs creation minister, the minister who was 

given the opportunity to be the minister in charge of the 

employment development agency. And I remember when that 

was announced, and the Premier said that we were going to 

have a minister whose sole responsibility was going to operate 

the employment development agency — I believe was the name 

given to it — and his job was to see that we had just as many 

jobs in this province for our people as possible. 

 

(1145) 

 

When that minister was appointed, we found that he did not 

have exclusive responsibility for employment; in fact, he had a 

half a dozen other serious and major responsibilities in 

government. 

 

Now in this Speech from the Throne we have a reorganization, 

and what does it propose? It proposes that the jobs minister, the 

minister in charge of the Employment Development Agency, 

shouldn’t have half a dozen major responsibilities apart from 

that, but about a dozen. I don’t know whether you’ve added up 

the responsibilities heaped upon the member for Melville but 

you will find way down at the bottom, the Employment 

Development Agency, and that indicates the focus and priority 

which this government is giving to job creation. 

 

And I say that the results are already showing in the numbers 

which came down this morning. The level of employment in 

Saskatchewan in November of this year is found to be lower 

than it was last year — 2,000 fewer jobs in this province in 

1986 than in 1985. No other province in Canada has seen a loss 

of jobs; number one in the lack of opportunity for our people 

looking for jobs. 

 

That may be something of which the government is proud, but I 

doubt it. They are taking solace in the fact that because so many 

people are leaving this province the unemployment figures are 

not rising as sharply as they might. It’s no good denying that. 

The figures that were put out by the Department of Health, the 

department of the member for Meadow Lake, will show that. 

There is no doubt that the people are leaving rapidly. And there 

is no doubt that in this province we have 2,000 fewer jobs than 

we had last year. And in no other province has there been a 

decrease. 

 

It’s not only a matter of numbers, because the job creation 

efforts, or the lack of job creation efforts by the government 

opposite has meant deep hardship for many people in this 

province, many in my constituency, but many in the 

constituencies of members on both sides of the House. And that 

wasn’t mentioned in the Speech from  

the Throne. 

 

Nor was there any mention about revising our tax system, 

which is acknowledged to be unfair. We simply are not going to 

address the question of making our tax system fairer. There was 

some suggestion that there might be tax breaks for major 

corporations. That was in the Speech from the Throne. But as 

for any fairer system for ordinary people — no mention of that. 

And I think it’s pretty important that we have a fair tax system 

because I expect that taxpayers are going to have to pay more 

money, either federally or provincially or both, over the next 

several years. Looking at the sad record of financial 

mismanagement which both Conservative governments have 

engaged in, I see no alternative to further taxes. And it is 

important that the system be fair, and be seen to be fair; and it is 

not now seen to be fair. And there is no addressing of that in the 

Speech from the Throne. 

 

There was some talk about farm chemicals but no mention of 

generic chemicals, no mention of pressing the federal 

government to move in this area so that our farmers could make 

major savings. Everybody acknowledges that the savings could 

be made. Everybody acknowledges that if we had generic 

chemicals our farmers would have very substantially less to pay 

in providing agricultural chemicals — and no mention of that. 

 

There’s another point that I was disappointed in — there was no 

mention of human rights. I thought there would be because in a 

few days, December 10th, we’re going to celebrate Human 

Rights Day, an occasion to remind us of the human rights we 

enjoy in Saskatchewan and the fact that many people 

throughout the world do not enjoy those human rights. I think 

Saskatchewan people would have appreciated an indication in 

the Speech from the Throne that their government shared the 

view that Saskatchewan people do, that human rights are 

important and their protection is important here in 

Saskatchewan and beyond our borders. And as I say, we’re 

going to celebrate Human Rights Day in four or five days and it 

would have, I think, been highly appropriate in the Speech from 

the Throne. 

 

Those are a few of the glaring omissions that were in the 

Speech from the Throne or were not in the Speech from the 

Throne, depending on how you wish to phrase that. We could 

have replaced paragraph after paragraph of self-congratulatory 

purple prose with which that speech was filled, with some 

succinct comments on what the government proposed to do 

about some of those pressing problems that are being faced by 

Saskatchewan people. But they were not there and I was 

disappointed that they were not there. 

 

One final comment, Mr. Speaker, before I beg leave to adjourn 

the debate. I’ve indicated that there were many items of 

importance that were not referred to in the Speech from the 

Throne. There were many things which ought to have been 

mentioned but instead we had talk and more talk about 

government reorganization. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to read something about government 

reorganization. I want to quote: 

 

  



 

December 5, 1986 

46 

 

I am happy today to announce a major reorganization of 

government departments and agencies . . . It is designed to 

meet three key objectives: one, to improve government 

productivity, overall effectiveness, efficiency and economy 

by co-ordinating similar programs; two, to consolidate related 

functions under single departments to ensure greater 

accountability; three, to improve public access to government 

by simplifying communication and reducing confusion. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you may have thought I was quoting from 

the Speech from the Throne. I was not. I was quoting from the 

speech of the Premier in this House on March 25, 1983. At that 

time we were promised effectiveness, efficiency, economy. 

Have you heard those words lately? All the same words as were 

in the Speech from the Throne on Wednesday. 

 

Three years ago they proudly announced a major reorganization 

of their government and they were going to get effectiveness, 

efficiency, economy, greater productivity . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well that seems to me they have fallen short. 

It’s disturbing that a government which is recently re-elected 

has to indulge in a regurgitation of reorganization — a kind of 

saga of scramble in lieu of putting forward any positive 

programs in its Speech from the Throne. 

 

They’re busy rearranging the deck chairs as they did three or 

four years ago. We heard it all. And all I can say is, after the 

reorganization of three years ago — and that wasn’t the first 

one that they have indulged in since they were in government 

— they have clearly adopted the principle that when they have 

nothing that they know what to do, that they can do, they 

announce a reorganization. And they have done it over and over 

again. And in 1983 we were promised efficiency and 

effectiveness if we had a reorganization. And if what we’ve had 

in the last three years is an efficient government, then spare us 

from any more reorganization. Spare us from any more 

reorganization. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I will have an opportunity as I extend 

my remarks on Monday, Mr. Speaker, to deal with some of the 

efficiency and effectiveness of this government. I’ll have an 

opportunity to point out what they’ve done to our budgetary 

system; point out the deficits; point out their record of 

borrowing. We’ll have an opportunity to deal more effectively 

on other occasions, with the efficiency represented by 

appointing the past president of the Progressive Conservative 

Party as the chief executive officer of the power corporation 

when he has no related experience, either in administering any 

large organization or in the energy field in a technical sense. 

 

We’ll have an opportunity to deal with just how efficient this 

sort of thing is. I’m sure it’s efficient for the Progressive 

Conservative Party. But we’ll have an opportunity to address 

the matter of whether it is sound business on the part of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So we look forward to having an opportunity to have a full and 

free debate in this Chamber on what is in the Speech from the 

Throne and what is not in the Speech from the Throne. In order 

that I may extend my remarks at a more appropriate time, Mr. 

Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Before adjourning this House, I would just 

like to take this opportunity to compliment all the hon. members 

for the professional behaviour they have displayed in the first 

two days of this Assembly. I’m sure the people of 

Saskatchewan are pleased, and it is no less than they expect 

from members of your stature. And I trust that the trend you 

have established will continue in the coming weeks. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11:58 a.m. 

 


