


















































March 19, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 March 19, 1986 
 

35 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
The Clerk: — According to order and under rule 11(7) I hereby 
read and receive the following petitions: Of the Canadian Bible 
Society, South Saskatchewan District, of the city of Regina in 
the province of Saskatchewan, and Canadian Bible Society, 
North Saskatchewan District, of the city of Saskatoon in the 
province of Saskatchewan, praying for an Act to amalgamate 
the two districts to constitute a single corporate body: and — Of 
Medical Services Inc. of the city of Saskatoon in the province 
of Saskatchewan, paying for an Act of incorporation. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Shillington: — I give notice that I shall on Friday next 
move: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Saskatchewan government to 
restore property tax relief for farmers, home owners, 
renters, and small-business people, and to take steps 
immediately to work with municipal governments to 
eliminate municipal business taxes. 

 
Mr. Sveinson: — I give notice, Mr. Speaker, that on Friday 
next move I shall move: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan 
to promptly respond to the desperate situation in new 
housing starts by implementing a program offering the 
owners of all principal residences in the province 
interest-free first mortgages to a maximum of $50,000 
based on appraised value. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Friday next ask the 
government the following question: 
 

In the period January 1, 1985 to December 1, 1985, the 
amount spent by the Department of Energy and Mines in 
the Lanigan Advisor. 

 
And the ballots I will just table, but they refer to the same issue, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Zazelenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you, and through you to members of the Assembly, 
a visiting class from Princess Alexandra School in Saskatoon. 
They're a class of 35 grade 7 students, accompanied by their 
teacher, Dr. Lozinsky, and chaperons, Mrs. Cousins, Mr. Dave 
Adolph, Mr. George Isbister, and Miss Robin Cohen, visiting 
from Australia. I'll be pleased to meet with the group at 2:30 for 
pictures and refreshments. We hope you have a worthwhile 
educational stay here in Regina, and a safe trip home, and I 
would ask all members to join with me in welcoming them 
here. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I'd just like to introduce to the Assembly 
through you, Mr. Speaker, 66 students from Centennial 
elementary school in north-west Regina. They're here today to 
observe question period and the workings of the Assembly. I 
believe they're going to stay for 15 minutes after question 
period. I will meet with them for drinks after that time, and I 
look forward to doing that. I would ask you to give them a good 
round of applause. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Sale of Saskatchewan Potash Overseas 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to direct my 
question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister responsible for the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, can you confirm 
that in March of 1985 you met privately with executives of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan and representatives of an 
international commodity broker, Cord Enterprises 
International? And can you confirm that at the meeting you 
suggested that if Cord Enterprises had an interest in selling 
Saskatchewan potash overseas, that they should meet with the 
overseas selling agency, Canpotex? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, obviously any time 
someone comes and indicates that they have the ability to help 
us sell potash in Saskatchewan, we're interesting in talking to 
them. At the meeting that I assume the member for Quill Lakes 
is referring to, there were no officials from PCS present, but 
there were people from Cord International, Lou Corral by name, 
and we did in fact hold a meeting at that time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Supplemental, Mr. Speaker. Is the minister 
aware that following his referral of Cord Enterprises to 
Canpotex, that Canpotex issued a sales authorization dated 
September 16, 1985, which authorized this company to sell up 
to 600,000 tonnes of Canadian potash overseas? Are you aware 
of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, as I indicated, Cord 
International came and indicated that they were in a position to 
sell potash to an offshore market that was at that time 
undefined. They met with, as I understand it, Canpotex. 
Canpotex did some preliminary investigation. And as to the 
timing of the document to which the member refers, I don't 
have details on that. 
 
As he is aware, this case is before the courts, but Canpotex did 
in fact do some preliminary investigation. They determined that 
the market that Cord International proposed to sell in was not 
incremental, that it would simply be replaced with tonnage in a 
market which we already had, and in their opinion would be an 
element that would force price down, would not be in any way 
beneficial to the marketing of Saskatchewan potash. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — is the minister aware that on November 
4, 1985, the state trading company of India, Minerals and 
Metals Trading Corporation, agreed to purchase up to 150,000 
tonnes of potash from Canpotex, 
  



 
March 19, 1986 

 

36 
 

subject to final authorization from Canpotex, and that Canpotex 
denied that authorization, effectively killing a $14 million sale 
of Saskatchewan potash to India? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, it's certainly not my 
intention to try this case in this forum, but since it's been 
brought up and since the Leader of the Opposition has indicated 
the type of aggressive marketing that he's always discussing, 
maybe I could add a few facts. He's indicated that he has taken 
up the cause of Cord International. Immediately after . . . A 
couple of facts that we should maybe . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Chairman, as I indicated, some 
preliminary investigations were undertaken into the credibility 
of the company that had come forward to Mr. Lou Corral. It 
was interesting in my discussion with Mr. Corral the number of 
times that he assured me that he was, in fact, an honourable 
man. However, we had Canpotex do some investigations. They 
obviously don't have the capacity to do it all, and they hired 
Dun & Bradstreet to check into this corporation. 
 
When Dun & Bradstreet . . . and I'll simply read the telex that 
returned. They were given an address of 35 Park Avenue in 
New York. Dun & Bradstreet indicates that that name of Cord 
International is unknown to local authorities in New York. A 
company by the name of U.S. Continental Investors is located 
at 375 Park. They say they represent Cord International; that 
Cord International is in fact located in Garden Grove, 
California. 
 
Dun & Bradstreet then attempted to locate them in Garden 
Grove and were unsuccessful. They had never been heard of in 
Garden Grove, California. 
 
Follow that, Canpotex attempted to make telephone contact 
with Cord International. They were informed that a company of 
that name had existed, but the phone had been disconnected. 
Following that, Mr. Speaker, Canpotex, in fact, contacted 
MMTC (Minerals and Metals Trading Corporation) to 
determine the status of any dealings they may have had with 
Lou Corral or Cord International, and I will read into the record 
the telex that came back from Cord International. It's dated 
January the 9th: 
 

We would like to state categorically that MMTC does not 
authorize anybody to negotiate purchase of any fertilizer 
on its behalf stop In these circumstances the question of 
MMTC authorizing Cord Enterprises International or 
another organization to purchase MOP (muriate of potash) 
on its behalf does not arise stop We trust this makes the 
position clear stop 

 
I should indicate, Mr. Speaker, as well . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I would ask the minister to 
bring his answer to an immediate close. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, I should indicate as 
well that the day after Lou Corral came to visit my office I had 
a visit from the RCMP carrying out an investigation 

for the FBI — which I won't go into details — but I think it's 
safe to say that Canpotex determined that this company, which 
is clearly the choice of the party opposite for their aggressive 
advertising thrust, was not one that we felt we could deal with. 
Possibly Mr. Messer, Mr. Dombowsky, are recommending 
them to the Government of Manitoba as their prime consultants. 
We don't think that they're the marketing agency we want to 
deal with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. A couple 
of clear questions I direct to the minister. Does the minister 
agree that Canpotex entered into an arrangement with Cord 
International, giving Cord International the right or 
authorization to sell potash, and does he agree that a sale was 
negotiated as evidenced by information in writing from 
Minerals and Metals Trading Corporation under date November 
4, 1985? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, I could reread the telex 
to Canpotex from MMTC. I don't see a great deal of point in 
that. Whether an agreement was signed, it may in fact be the 
case. I'm sure that's part of what's in front of us. A decision, 
however, has been by Canpotex on behalf of the potash 
producers of Saskatchewan, whom they represent, that in fact 
this organization was not the organization we wanted marketing 
our product. We felt they were less than reputable. We have not 
taken up the cause of Cord International. I assume that's the role 
of the members opposite. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, does the minister deny 
that Canpotex, by Robert J. Ford, vice-president, marketing, on 
September 16, 1985, wrote to Cord International, the same Mr. 
Corral, saying, "We hereby authorize Cord Enterprises 
International to offer our product on the world market" — in 
this case up to 600,000 metric tonnes of muriate of potash of 
Canadian origin? Do you deny this? And do you deny that at 
least Canpotex felt that Cord International was presumably a 
proper firm to whom to give an authorization to offer muriate of 
potash to the tune of 600,000 tonnes? 
 
Hon Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, I think that there are 
some conditions attached to that, as I indicated. In the course of 
the investigation which followed, Canpotex became convinced 
that Cord International was not the type of company that they 
wanted representing them as an agent, in whatever country — 
in this case, India. I think the facts that I've laid out involving 
the visit from the RCMP, the fact that they do not have a 
business address, the fact that they don't have the phones 
available to pick up phone calls, and, or course, the denial by 
MMTC, would indicate that this corporation, in fact, was not 
the type that we certainly would approve of, marketing 
Saskatchewan products around the world, and consequently no 
deal was pursued, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is this: does the minister agree that in order to make 
sales in some markets, notably India, counter-trade has to be 
offered. Does the minister agree that Cord International 
proposed to make, and did make, a counter-trade proposal? And 
does the minister agree that 
  



 
March 19, 1986 

 

37 
 

Canpotex did no counter-trading until short weeks ago after 
pressure from Cord International and others forced Canpotex to 
consider counter-trade proposals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, once again, the Leader 
of the Opposition is defending Lou Corral and their very 
reputable company. If the member believes that a counter-trade 
deal is put together in a matter of a few minutes or weeks or 
hours, and that pressure from Cord has anything to do with this 
announcement of Canpotex's counter-trade deal, he's sadly 
mistaken. This counter-trade agreement that was announced 
yesterday, and is a very, I think, progressive step forward, and 
indicates Canpotex's ability to market potash, the fact that they 
agreed to look at more than the traditional manner, was stated 
months and months ago, and in fact we've been corresponding 
and dealing with MMTC on this specific issue as well as some 
others that I'm sure the Leader of the Opposition is aware of. 
Now pressure from Lou Corral or Cord International has 
absolutely nothing to do with the arrangements that were 
announced yesterday. 
 

Reduction in Price of Oil 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question to 
the Premier. Mr. Premier, in recent months the world price of 
crude oil has fallen dramatically by something like 55 to 60 per 
cent, and yet the price which the major oil companies are 
charging Saskatchewan consumers has fallen nowhere near that 
amount. Pump prices in Saskatchewan have not fallen 55 to 60 
per cent, but less than 5 per cent. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Premier: have you or your Minister of Consumer 
Affairs asked the big oil companies to explain their pricing 
practices, or asked them to justify these continuing high pump 
prices? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, we have been 
monitoring the gasoline prices, both rural and urban, in 
Saskatchewan and other jurisdictions. I have been in contact 
with the major oil producers and major retailers, whether they 
are large companies or local co-ops, or whoever. 
 
I can point out that in December of last year the price in 
Saskatchewan on average was about 42.2 cents a litre. Given 
any kind of normal discount, which is running around 4 cents, it 
came up to about 30.7 cents a litre. Today, under the similar 
circumstances with about a 1 cent discount, it's down to 33 
cents in Saskatchewan. 
 
We're looking at price declines on a weekly basis. We're in a 
situation now where we're following price declines which could 
put prices in the province of Saskatchewan as low as 29 cents a 
litre. In the province of Saskatchewan, say about seeding time 
. . . I have comparisons here — this was day before yesterday 
— in Winnipeg the Esso full service price was 50.8 cents per 
litre. In Regina it was 38.9 cents a litre. We're looking at 12 
cents a litre lower gasoline in the province of Saskatchewan 
than we do in our neighbouring province. And that 12 cents a 
litre here does not include the 21 cents a gallon that the rural 
people will be picking up on top of it. 

So in the province of Saskatchewan the people are picking up 
an advantage of something like 16 cents a litre above what 
they'd get in Winnipeg, Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I don't know where the 
Premier gets his numbers from, but I suspect he'd better 
question his source. I'm not sure even where he gets his gas 
from, but he gets it from some place where nobody else in 
Saskatchewan seems to be getting it. May I suggest in my 
supplementary, Mr. Speaker, that the only people who have 
gained out of this whole operation are the oil companies. 
 
Is the minister aware, is the Premier aware, that in this province 
today there is a sharp variance in retail gasoline prices between 
different regions of Saskatchewan, and can he explain those 
differences? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, there are differences in 
gasoline prices. Last week Mohawk was selling it at 36 cents a 
litre in Regina, and people down the street were selling it at 38. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I thought you said it was 33. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, it is 33 if you give our rebate, 
okay? When you put the combination together, then you get . . . 
 
Gasoline prices and fuel prices in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are lower than they are any place 
in Canada. So our surveys have showed Regina has had the 
lowest priced gasoline any place in the nation, and is certainly a 
lot lower than it is in Manitoba where they're paying 50 cents a 
litre. They are lower here than they are in some jurisdictions, 
and it depends on the competition. If Mohawk goes at 36 cents 
a litre, other people start to follow. In Melfort the other day they 
were 26 cents a litre because there was a gas war on. So you're 
right. Around the province we see places where the price of 
gasoline is coming down. 
 
Two observations I make, Mr. Speaker. One is: gasoline prices 
are the lowest in Canada in the province of Saskatchewan and 
in the city of Regina; and number two, Mr. Speaker, that those 
advantages are the largest in rural Saskatchewan compared to 
any other place that you'll find in the nation. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I don't 
know of anyone in my constituency who qualifies for the 
so-called rebate which the Premier talks about — nobody. Let 
me give him a couple of examples — and I ask this as a new 
question. 
 
Today in Regina you can buy gasoline for 40.3 cents a litre. 
That's the lowest, Mr. Premier. And while in Swift Current the 
cheapest prices is 44.1 cents a litre, and in Yorkton it's 45.5 
cents a litre, and in Saskatoon it's 44. 1 cents a litre. Those are 
the figures of the price of gas at the pumps today in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I ask you: how you can justify that kind of variance when 
there is no way that the transportation costs can 
  



 
March 19, 1986 

 

38 
 

justify a difference of 20 cents a gallon between any of these 
points? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I find it really interesting 
that the member opposite was finance minister sitting in the 
Government of Saskatchewan, and if it was still in power today 
the price would be 50 cents a litre in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and he knows it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — You had a 20 per cent sliding tax on 
gasoline all over the province of Saskatchewan, and you can 
stand there and you can say, what about the price of gasoline? 
The price of gasoline in Manitoba . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please, order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the price of gasoline in 
Manitoba is 40 to 50 cents a gallon more than it is in the 
province of Saskatchewan. and if you take the rebates that 
we've brought in, the royalty structure we have, and the fact that 
$150 million of savings goes right into the pockets of 
Saskatchewan consumers . . . They remembered that in '82 and 
they'll remember it in '86 and '87 and '88 and in 1990, because 
they know you'd put it back on, and we won't. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, 
and I wish the Premier would address the question. I ask again, 
Mr. Speaker: how can the Premier sit in this House and stand up 
in this House and justify a 20-cent-a-gallon variance at the price 
of the pumps of gasoline from one part of Saskatchewan to 
another, through which an awful lot of Saskatchewan 
consumers are being ripped off by the oil companies which he 
and his colleagues are protecting? How can he justify that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite was 
minister of finance, and he had a bigger discrepancy right here 
in the province of Saskatchewan due to his government. I mean, 
he charged people 40 cents a gallon more than they should have 
paid, and he had a sliding tax, and he would ride with the oil 
companies right up the top, and he'd blame them and say, oh, 
it's their fault. He took 20 per cent of it. In the province of 
Saskatchewan there's no more tax on gasoline, and we have the 
lowest prices in Canada, and they will continue to be the lowest, 
and in fact they're going down because of measures that we 
have taken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Final supplementary. Mr. Premier, 
surely, don't you think that you and your government ought to 
be concerned and make some effort to try to change things 
when you find that people of this province who are buying gas 
at the pumps have to pay 20 cents a gallon in some parts of the 
province more than they're paying other parts of the province. 
Don't you think you ought to be concerned and that you or your 
Minister of Consumer Affairs ought to take some action? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the man opposite was 

minister of finance and he charged them over 40 cents a gallon 
more than are being charged now — 40 cents a gallon. that's 
what he charged them, and year after year he would raise the 
sliding 20 per cent scale. He still wants to charge them again. If 
the NDP come back in, the gas tax is going right back on. It 
goes up another 40 cents a gallon. It'll be 60 cents a litre. That's 
what they want to do. He's standing there saying . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, there will be no gas tax in 
the province of Saskatchewan, and this province will have the 
lowest-priced gasoline as long as I am Premier in this province, 
because won't tax the people on their gasoline and their energy 
like people opposite did. We have now got a 40 to 50 cent 
gallon advantage over Manitoba, and we're going to hang on to 
it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — New question to the Premier of 
Saskatchewan. Crude oil prices have tumbled throughout the 
world in the last several months. I think you will agree, Mr. 
Premier, that the price at the pump in Regina has not tumbled 
accordingly. Part of the problem is taxes coming out of Ottawa. 
Your counterparts in Ottawa have refused to recognize that that 
tax does hurt the people of Regina, and certainly the people of 
this province. Are you putting any pressure through your 
government on Ottawa to drop the tax on that gasoline 
accordingly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have taken the tax off 
gasoline in the province of Saskatchewan, and we have 
followed the footsteps of Alberta. The two provinces have the 
tax off gasoline. We've encouraged all governments to do that. 
We encouraged the Government of Manitoba to do it. We've 
encouraged the Government of Ontario to do it. We have 
encouraged the federal government to do it — to follow our 
lead. 
 
All I can say is they should follow what we do. They would see 
the lowest prices in gasoline in any place in this nation right 
here in the city of Regina as a result of what we've done. So I've 
encouraged all jurisdictions to do it. 
 
We've listened to people in Ontario saying they don't want to 
trade with the United States, but people like Bob White are the 
first guys to say, but I want the price of gasoline in the United 
States. Sure, they want to go over there and pick it up just like 
right now, but they don't want to have anything to do with them. 
 
I'll tell you we made the difference here in this province. We 
know what it means to trade. We know what it means to create 
economic activity, and we know what it means to reduce taxes 
for consumers and families in this province. We have in the 
past, and we will in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Premier, what have you done in direct 
communication with Ottawa requesting Ottawa to lower the tax 
on gasoline? 
  



 
March 19, 1986 

 

39 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I have set the example for 
the rest of the nation to follow when it comes to tax reductions 
for families. That's what I've done. I have protected their home 
against high interest rates. I've cut the taxes on gasoline. I've 
taken the sales tax off children's clothes. I've taken it off power 
bills, to reduce that burden of tax on Saskatchewan families. 
 
In gasoline and fuel, the members opposite raised taxes all the 
time, 20 per cent sliding scale, so what I've done is said, follow 
me. I didn't just phone them and say look it, I think you should 
do something about it. Follow the kinds of things that we do in 
the province of Saskatchewan and you'll be going the right way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — With respect to gasoline prices, there is, in 
fact, a great discrepancy between Preeceville and Regina as it 
relates to the price at the pumps. That price can only be 
attributed to the producer of that fuel. Is there any action being 
undertaken by this government, or anticipated by this 
government, in forcing the producer to, at least in our rural 
areas of Saskatchewan, charge a more equitable price for the 
fuel he sells? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, let me just give the member 
opposite an idea about what price competition can do. We said 
in the province of Saskatchewan that we're open for business 
and we wanted firms to come in here. As a result of that, Mr. 
Speaker, they might . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — As a result of new businesses coming into 
the city of Regina . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, retail food prices in the city 
of Regina have dropped 25 per cent because of a little price 
competition. We said we want to invite food retailers into this 
province, processors into this province. And do you know 
what? They're right. They charge different prices. Do you know 
what? The member from Regina North West might want to hear 
this. There are different food prices now in the city of Regina. 
Regina is now lower than . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Construction of Northern Power Line 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have the 
honour, Mr. Speaker, of announcing two important times to this 
House. The first, Mr. speaker, is an agreement — and the 
members in northern Saskatchewan might want to listen to this 
— to build a $48 million power line from Uranium City to 
seven northern communities, including Eldorado mine at Rabbit 
Lake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — This announcement, Mr. Speaker, is 

being made this afternoon by the Deputy Premier, in charge of 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation, to the people of La Ronge. 
This project will create approximately 150 jobs, 100 of these 
being local jobs, during the next two years. These jobs will 
result from the manufacture of steel for tower structures, the 
fabrication and welding of this steel, the manufacturing of 1,000 
kilometres of electrical conductor, and the transportation of this 
material to the job site. Other jobs, Mr. Speaker, to be drawn 
mostly from the local labour market, will require people to 
undertake environmental studies, surveys for the power line, 
clearing trees, erecting steel towers, stringing the conductor, 
and building transmission feeders to the communities. 
 
The communities which will receive the power are the 
following: Camsell Portage, Uranium City, Fond-du-Lac, Stony 
Rapids, Black Lake, Rabbit Lake, and Wollaston post. There 
are approximately 2,600 people living in these communities. 
These communities, Mr. Speaker, are now served by expensive 
diesel generator units, and they've had to pay electrical rates 
that were higher than anybody else in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, when the power line is completed, the families in these 
villages across northern Saskatchewan will pay the same rates 
as everybody else in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the power line will have 
tremendous social and economic impact on these communities. 
After months of negotiation between Sask Power and the 
federal Crown corporation, Eldorado Nuclear Limited, an 
agreement was reached between the two parties this week. The 
power line will cover a distance of 340 kilometres and will 
carry 1,115 volts. The steel towers will be made of steel pipe 
sections, made into a unique Y formation, and this hopefully 
will be manufactured right here in Saskatchewan. All the 
electrical conductors will be made by Canada Wire and Cable at 
its Weyburn plant, and for this job nearly 800 tonnes of 
conductor will be required and delivered to the site. 
 

Extension of Electrical Distribution System in 
Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The second announcement, Mr. Speaker, 
is the following. I also take pleasure in announcing another 
highly labour-intensive program, which is being undertaken by 
North Sask Electric Limited of La Ronge, an extension of the 
distribution system in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Starting this year, North Sask Electric will build two power 
lines, one from Pelican Narrows to Deschambault and Jan Lake 
areas, and the other is from Smeaton to Little Bear Lake, East 
Trout Lake and Lower Fishing Lake. The total cost of these two 
projects is estimated at $5.4 million. About 800 people living in 
these communities will benefit from the power lines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these two announcements confirm the 
commitment this government has to further enrich and enhance 
the lives of all people across this province. As the government, 
our policies and programs over the past 
  



 
March 19, 1986 

 

40 
 

four years prove beyond any doubt the importance we attach to 
families in rural and urban communities, residents north and 
south. 
 
Only recently, Mr. Speaker, we have announced our intention to 
bring individual telephone line service to rural people all across 
the province to stimulate economic activity in rural areas and to 
encourage small-business growth in the province. This is further 
affirmation, Mr. Speaker, of this government's quest to produce 
a quality of life in Saskatchewan residents anywhere they live, 
in northern Saskatchewan, southern Saskatchewan, rural and 
urban. 
 
We are building on the assets of northern Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. This will tie in the uranium industry, the gold industry, 
the tourist industry, the agriculture industry and provide for 
industrial services all across Saskatchewan. And for the first 
time, really, northern communities and families are going to be 
given the same benefit as those all across the rest of the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I will add a word or two 
to what the Premier has said. First with respect to the line from 
Pelican to Deschambault, and Smeaton to East Bear Lake, lines 
of that size, sir, and that cost are being built all the time, and if 
each one was announced in this House, we would not have very 
much time for other business. 
 
I turn to the other announcement dealing with the construction 
of a line basically from Uranium City, from the Eldorado 
generating plant, their dam north of Uranium City, to Wollaston 
and Rabbit Lake. I was a little surprised to hear that this line 
will serve Uranium City and that Uranium City was not 
previously served from that dam. I was mightily surprised to 
hear that. I think that people in Uranium City, I think will be 
surprised to hear it since I think that was not the case, sir. 
 
We fully support the provision of electric power in northern 
Saskatchewan in any way that is most economical, and if it has 
been determined that this is the most economical way, we have 
no quarrel with that. We do take some reservations — put some 
reservations on the Premier's alleged devotion to families. 
 
Mr. Premier, these are the same families, at Camsell Portage, 
and Fond du Lac, and Stony Rapids, and Black Lake, and 
Rabbit Lake, and Wollaston — I'll leave out Rabbit Lake since 
there are virtually no families there — but at Wollaston, and 
Black Lake, and Stony Rapids and Fond Du Lac, and Camsell 
Portage — those were the people who were getting the food 
allowances; those were the people who are a great distance from 
southern Saskatchewan and needed an allowance to have fresh 
food on the table; and those are the people to whom you denied 
the allowance which allowed them to get fresh food on the 
table. And now you are saying that next year or the year after 
you may offer them something. Will you show your concern 
about families in those communities by reinstating the food 
allowance and giving those families the same opportunity to 
have fresh food that families in southern Saskatchewan now 
have? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to respond to 
that for a moment or two. I would hope that isn't all they have, 
the northern residents of this province. I believe that there is a 
dramatic shortage of input by this government in northern 
Saskatchewan, and I hope they come up with ideas that can put 
food in their mouths and certainly jobs in their homes, because 
there is a definite problem with unemployment in northern 
Saskatchewan. And I do give them credit for at least addressing 
one problem, and that is high energy costs. But there are many 
others in northern Saskatchewan. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which moved by Mr. Klein, seconded by Mr. Domotor. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, when I left off yesterday, I 
was speaking in the debate on the Speech from the Throne, or 
what is being proposed as a Speech from the Throne, but the 
members of the opposition are finding lacking in a great 
number of ways. 
 
I say as well, Mr. Speaker, that it is an honour to lead off the 
debate for the members of the opposition. It's an honour 
because it sets a tradition in which the lead-off speaker is able 
to deal with a good number of things that we believe should 
have been in the throne speech which I must say were sadly 
lacking. 
 
Before I begin my main remarks, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
congratulate the mover and seconder of the speech. I think they 
did a relatively good job, considering what they had to deal 
with. I think attempting to make a silk purse out of a pig's ear is 
a little difficult. 
 
I say as well, Mr. Speaker, that I find it interesting that this 
government, this building of a team that the Premier has been 
carrying out since 1982, his appointment of 25 people to cabinet 
— the biggest cabinet in the history of the province — that he 
keeps for three and a half years, and then when the polls say 
that there should be 19 in cabinet, unceremoniously dumps six 
of them, or five at the time, from cabinet — built a team in this 
manner. Puts 25 in cabinet; when the polls show that that's not a 
good idea, turfs out five of them. 
 
But I say it's interesting that two of them who had got in no 
trouble in the House, were doing what some say to be a 
relatively good job in comparison to the other cabinet ministers 
— now I'm not sure that that's saying very much — took them 
out of cabinet. 
 
I find it interesting that this building-a-team operation works in 
this way, when the tradition is that when you are a 
newly-elected government you start out with a 
  



 
March 19, 1986 

 

41 
 

relatively small cabinet and, as back-benchers prove 
themselves, they are appointed to cabinet, and you build. 
 
But I'll tell you, it's just one more indication of why this is a 
one-term government, because you can't build a province with 
that kind of an operation that's based solely on polls, to say 
nothing about the supposed friendships and that, that would 
exist in a team that was supposed to be running the province. 
 
And I say it's also interesting how little it took to get those two 
individuals back on side. You kick them out one day, and then 
you say, we'll let you second and move the Speech from the 
Throne, and they're right back on the team again. I don't 
understand these people, but I say I'm not alone. There are a 
great number of people in this province who no longer 
understand what this government is doing, what it's about. And 
I say there's no wonder we're in the trouble and the debt and the 
unemployment and the high taxes we are, with this crew 
running the province. 
 
We're in that trouble because we have a government that lacks 
the leadership and the integrity. And I think that the Premier, in 
what he did, in turfing these people out of cabinet and then 
trying to get them back onside, is a perfect example of the lack 
of leadership that that individual from Estevan has. And that's 
what we're hearing across the province, and I believe that will 
be a big part of what the next election is all about. 
 
I would like to say as well, Mr. Speaker, that — and I 
mentioned it yesterday — this is a historic document. It's a 
historic document because it is the last throne speech, I believe, 
that we will be hearing from these people for another 50 years, 
such as it was the last time they gave a throne speech back in 
1934. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, at that time we were in a depression. We 
had a government that was uncaring, that did many of the same 
things that these people are doing, rather than attack the 
problems that were wrong in the province with the economy, 
with the control of wealth being in a few hands. 
 
Do you know what the Anderson government did? — and we 
can produce clippings, and people who read history know. They 
attempted to run the election in 1934 by beating up on welfare 
recipients. Now, Mr. Speaker, it's interesting how history 
repeats itself. 
 
This government came into the Assembly this spring with an 
attempt to get an election going. And you'll remember, Mr. 
Speaker, the debate over putting the SGEU workers back to 
work. The theory was at that time, if we get a fight going with 
our employees — our secretaries and those tough people — we 
can get the farmers and some of the unorganized people to vote 
for the Conservative Party. And that blew up in their face, and 
we didn't have an election because it backfired. And the real 
people, working people. clergy, and those people who care 
about individuals and families in the province — not mouth the 
slogans that the Premier does, but believe in people — didn't 
believe that fighting with your secretaries was a good reason to 
vote for the Conservative Party. So that didn't work. 

So then we have the member from Rosemont who tried to get a 
fight going with welfare recipients, the next tier of strong 
people in the province. This is the Conservative Party, the 
Rambo image, the tough boys — they've got to have a fight. 
The secretaries and their employees didn't work, so now we'll 
pick the next group of people to fight with, the welfare 
recipients in the province. 
 
(1445) 
 
Well I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that that will backfire the same 
as the other phoney war you attempted to start with your own 
employees. And the people of Saskatchewan will decide in the 
next election by doing what they did once before — the only 
time that a Conservative government has ever called an election 
— and at that time, the only other time they called an election, 
they went from a majority government to having not one seat in 
this legislature, and I say for a good reason. 
 
Because government that is unfair with people, that is that 
dishonest, when on the one hand you have $10 million of 
taxpayers' money for an individual like Peter Pocklington, and 
on the other hand you have the Minister of Social who makes 
people come crawling to his door to put food on the table, is not 
a government that's interested in the families of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to say as well, before I go on, that this being the last 
throne speech that we will likely be here in this Assembly, that I 
want to say that being involved in the opposition, I would 
suppose many would say, Mr. Speaker, that we would have 
wanted to win the election in 1982 — and of course we would 
have liked to — but the experience of being in opposition for 
four years, if it weren’t for the devastation to the province, has 
in many ways been a positive one. 
 
One of the positive things, I suppose, Mr. Speaker, has been the 
opportunity to work closely with colleagues who have done 
what I will say is an incredible job of putting forward ideas, 
new ideas, of how we can make Saskatchewan a better place to 
live. And I would like to now say publicly a congratulation to 
all the members in the opposition, and I believe great things 
await you after the next election when you form a part of the 
new Blakeney government. 
 
I say as well — and I see the old Liberal is speaking from his 
seat again, the member who the Tory party is calling on to pull 
them out of the slide and the slump they now find themselves 
in; the member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden who has been called 
on now to put together a budget to try to bail the Tories out, that 
old Liberal — I say to him that he's going to have a tough time. 
And after the Manitoba election where your former colleagues 
have taken a good chunk of the Tory vote, you're going to have 
an even more difficult time putting together a budget that will 
bail out this crew of Tories. And I say to him, while I wish him 
good luck, I don't think he's going to have it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to go on to the main issue that people in the 
province are saying to us that the government isn't dealing with, 
and that is unemployment. I mentioned yesterday that the 
unemployment situation in the 
  



 
March 19, 1986 

 

42 
 

province is one that is a personal disaster for a good number of 
people. And we hear endless number of stories of people laying 
off workers. Morris Rod-Weeder today announced, I think, 100 
people being laid off in the city of Yorkton. Now 100 people in 
that city will be devastated because for each family that's laid 
off there you have a factor of probably four others who will be 
directly affected throughout the system. 
 
We have smaller examples of Robinson stores in any number of 
towns in rural Saskatchewan — MacLeod's — who are laying 
people off. Ipsco, laying off hundreds of people. 
 
We have the example now of the one shining start, if you can 
call it that, in the Conservative administration. It cost $300 
million a year to get those 1,000 jobs. But I say to you, more 
people have been laid in the oil industry in the last three months 
than in any other three-month period in the history of the 
province. Even in that one area where they have all of a sudden 
become strangely quiet. 
 
And you will remember, Mr. Speaker, that we used to have 
ministerial announcements about land sales when the mineral 
rights were sold. And you will remember having to make 
decisions on whether or not it was a political speech or not, and 
borderlines, and lengthiness of the reports that were given on 
the land sales, and the $30 million that were being garnished 
from that, in the last session. 
 
Well, interesting that this March when the land sales were not 
33 million, but 8 million, there's no ministerial statement. But 
instead the Premier gets up and talks about a short little power 
line — an important one, but a short power line — that is being 
built in northern Saskatchewan. And I say that even in that one 
area the unemployment that has been created by this 
government is devastating to a great number of people. 
 
When we look at unemployment, Mr. Speaker, there are 
examples of other provinces that have done other things. And I 
refer again to Manitoba where last night the people of that 
province have said to Howard Pawley, thank you for reducing 
the unemployment that Sterling Lyon had run up to 11 per cent 
in 1981. And I use that as an example that when you're giving 
incentives to create employment, we have two provinces, one 
with more resources and more ability to create employment, 
that being Saskatchewan; and Manitoba, where the 
governments changed about the same time. 
 
In 1981 in the fall, and I remember it well, the Conservative 
government was turfed out in Manitoba. The unemployment 
rate was 11 per cent — 11 per cent. In the spring of '82, the 
NDP government was replaced by the Conservatives. The 
unemployment rate was about 5 per cent. It was about 5 per 
cent. What happened in the time period between? Well, in 
Manitoba, under an NDP government, Howard Pawley, by 
giving incentives in tax breaks to ordinary people, the 
unemployment rate went from 11 per cent to 8 per cent. It had 
been one of the highest in Canada; went to the lowest in 
Canada. And that is why the election turned around. 
 
Well what happened in Saskatchewan by giving 

incentives to oil companies and creating employment in that 
manner? Well the unemployment rate didn't go down after 
1982. It went from 5 per cent to a high of over 9 per cent, by 
this masterful giving of $300 million to a few oil companies. 
And I say to you that the people of the province will reject this 
idea that you give incentives at the top and take from the people 
at the bottom to do it. It simply doesn't work. It's been tried 
many times in many places. And you don't pour the money in at 
the top, you put it in at the bottom so people and families have 
more money to spend. The small business will have more 
products to sell; they will hired more people automatically and 
you don't need the jiggery-pokery of having people off welfare 
being trained to paint park benches and cut the branches of 
trees, the way you people have seen fit to create employment. 
 
And I say to you that that example — that example alone — 
will be enough to defeat you people, but there are many other 
reasons. I say to you that in creating employment as well, and 
getting the economy going, the theory that big business from 
outside the province is going to come here and somehow 
magically turn the economy around has been proven wrong in 
this province a number of times. 
 
The first time was the last time the Conservatives were in 
power, from 1929 to 1934. The same lines were spoken at that 
time, that we were going to open the doors to the American 
entrepreneurs, that they would come from Europe, if only we 
had a government that believed in big business. And what 
happened? Well you don't have to spend a long time because 
your parents and grandparents have told you that between 1929 
and 1934 was one of the biggest downturns in the economy of 
Saskatchewan that this province has ever gone through. 
 
And then, in the 1960s, we got another right-wing government 
under Ross Thatcher, and he too decided that open for business 
was the theme that we should be carrying forward, that if you 
only could get rid of the NDP and CCF at that time, the 
business would flock in and the economy of the province would 
flourish. Well what happened between '64 and '71? Well, it was 
the second biggest downturn in the economy because big 
business didn't come in, because the profit margins weren't wide 
enough. And then we had to go through it again between 1982 
and 1986. 
 
Big business, unless there's big money, doesn't come to this 
province — and I say to you, Mr. Speaker, we don't need it. We 
don't need big business to come here and develop our province. 
That's not the way that it has ever been done. The way 
Saskatchewan has developed is by small business, small 
Saskatchewan business, working people, and the public sector 
working together to build industry and to build the province. 
 
And I say to you, between 1971 and 1982 there were literally 
hundreds of small industries, not with hundreds of people 
working for them, but hundreds of small businesses and 
industries that came here and developed new products and built 
short-line equipment. And the list is long and impressive., and it 
included people like Friggstad Manufacturing and Morris and 
Schulte and all of those companies that came here, believed in a 
  



 
March 19, 1986 

 

43 
 

competition, the same as all of us do, and they built an industry 
and an infrastructure in this province. 
 
Well I say to you that that infrastructure and the employment 
that those people created is in serious jeopardy with a 
government that believes that outsiders can come in and do a 
better job, because that's not the way it will be done. And I tell 
you in all honesty, this attempt to get people like Peter 
Pocklington to come to our province to bail us out of the trouble 
we're in is not going to work. It can’t work. It never worked in 
the past and won't work in the future. 
 
I want to say another thing about the process of getting big 
business to come to the province. You have paid more money to 
one individual, to get him to come to the province to build 
something that isn't even needed, than what it would cost to set 
up 20 or 30 small businesses, family businesses, at the local 
level. Now you have to explain to me how that makes any 
sense. 
 
I want to say as well that when you're bringing people in and 
you're talking about the credibility of individuals, you will have 
to do better than getting individuals like Peter Pocklington, a 
former candidate for the leadership of the Progressive 
Conservative Party, because believe it or not, there are a few 
people out there who think that there's a conflict, who think that 
the getting of $10 million of taxpayers' money to a former 
candidate for the leadership of your party, that there's a conflict, 
that there's some sort of a give-away taking place in return for 
running for the Conservative Party. I'm not saying that that's 
what happened, but believe it or not there are people out there 
who believe that that could be the reason, that possibly Peter 
Pocklington is being paid using taxpayers' money. 
 
I say that that question is out there and that people, I think, have 
every reason to be suspicious because the connection is so well 
defined, Mr. Speaker. I haven't heard one word in this House, in 
any speech, about defending why Peter Pocklington was 
brought in to build some slaughtering plants that everyone 
agrees aren't needed. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn just for a moment to one other area 
of economic strategy that is baffling to the people of the 
province, and that is the deficit, a deficit which is still spiralling 
upward, is now close to $2 billion, a deficit which is putting 
many families in the province into a debt situation which they 
never would have believed they could have been in four short 
years ago. 
 
Now if you take the families in the province and you divide 
them by the amount of the deficit, we find that each family with 
three children now owes to bankers in New York, or to people 
who purchase bonds, about $10,000. And families in the 
province now realize, even those who have their home paid for, 
owe nothing on their vehicles, and believe themselves to be 
debt free in 1982, now have an accumulated debt, at the 
provincial level, of $10,000 for every family in the province. 
 
I say that this is another, this is yet another reason, 

Mr. Speaker, why, at the first opportunity, the people of the 
province will turn this government out, and I believe for a long 
time, and I believe justifiably. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn now to another area where people 
are saying this government should be doing more and where 
they obviously should be doing more, and where they obviously 
could be doing more, and that's dealing with their friends in 
Ottawa. We have heard a great deal about how the Premier of 
this province is going to exploit his close connection with the 
federal government. You'll have heard it many times that 
because he knows Brian Mulroney, and they're close friends in 
the same political party, how that will help in getting things 
done. 
 
But I want to say that in watching this process of friendship or 
kissing cousins working in this province, that I say that 
somebody is being exploited all right, and it isn't Brian 
Mulroney, and it isn't eastern Canada; it isn't Ontario and 
Quebec. The same thing is happening that has happened many 
times before when we have weak provincial governments. 
 
Now we hear Mulroney talk about how he believes in the 
federal government's approach to Canada, his vision of Canada. 
But I say to you, when the distribution of seats is in such a way 
that the federal government has an agenda which is to keep the 
seats in Quebec and Ontario in order to maintain power, that 
when they talk about the national interest, that interest often 
ends at the Ontario western border and Quebec's eastern border. 
And I say to Grant Devine that he is not doing enough to protect 
the interest of Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I would ask the member to not 
use the names of individuals, but rather to use constituencies or 
positions. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — There are many other areas in the 
relationship between Ottawa and the province that I want to 
deal with, Mr. Speaker, and I say as well, that the member for 
Estevan, the Premier, when he talked about agriculture last fall 
in the session that went on, he talked about getting agriculture 
on the agenda at the first ministers' conference in Halifax — last 
November, I believe it was — and he went on and on about 
how this was the first time that agriculture had been discussed 
at such a meeting. 
 
Now I know the Premier is loose with facts, and here again it's 
laughable to think that this is the first time that we've ever 
discussed agriculture at a first ministers' conference. In fact, the 
number of times that it has been discussed is probably many 
more than when it wasn't. 
 
But let's see the results of what Mr. Premier got when he went 
down to Halifax. Well we got the Nielsen task force report on 
agriculture, the agricultural sector as it will apply to western 
Canada. And what I would ask of the Premier is this: whether or 
not he asked, in fact, for the removal of the rebate program on 
farm fuel. I don't know whether he asked for that or not, but 
that's what he got. 
 
I wonder, when he was at the meeting in Halifax, if he asked for 
a 20 per cent increase in crop insurance rates. That's what he got 
Erik Nielsen and the Prime Minister 
  



 
March 19, 1986 

 

44 
 

when the report came out. They also talked about doing away 
with the cash advance. They talk about massive abandonment 
of branch lines in the rail systems, and he also talked about 
eliminating the Canadian Wheat Board and putting a tax, 
believe it or not, on grain in storage and cattle in the feedlot. 
 
Now these things will come as a surprise to the farmers in 
Saskatchewan that this is what is being put forward from the 
Premier when he goes to the Halifax conference. I don't think 
the people of the province wanted him to ask for these kind of 
changes in the structure that have been built up by farmers over 
the past number of years. And if we look at the federal budget, 
it's a continuation. Farmers here are being told that no longer 
will they be allowed a 10 per cent tax credit on the purchase of 
new equipment, and that will mean literally millions and 
millions of dollars out of the economy of Saskatchewan and 
shifted over to the federal government. 
 
They use the example on a combine, a combine which may run 
$100,000. That one change in the federal budget will cost that 
farmer, not as a deduction or depreciation, but will cost the 
farmer $10,000 in cash, that one little change that has taken 
place in the federal budget. The $100,000 combine will cost 
that farmer $10,000 more as a result of the 10 per cent tax credit 
being taken off — 10 per cent, $100,000 — that will cost the 
farmer an extra 10,000 bucks. And I say to do that to farmers 
when they're already up against the wall is unfair and uncalled 
for. 
 
So I say, when it comes to asking yourselves who is going to 
stand up for and fight for the rights of people in Saskatchewan, 
for the farmers and the working people, for the selling of the 
resources, I think very clearly the answer is not the present 
Premier in the Conservative Party, because we believe that the 
federal government in Ottawa is going to be working hard to 
keep their support in Quebec and Ontario and doing it at the 
expense of Saskatchewan and the people who pay taxes here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's one other area that we have a great deal of 
concern about, and I want to talk about it for a short time, and 
that is the health care in the province of Saskatchewan. Now 
you know, Mr. Speaker, that we have a proud heritage of 
developing a health care system in this province that goes back 
a long ways. And I'm not going to take a great deal of the time 
of the Assembly in going into the history of how medicare and 
hospitalization came about, but I think it's important to say that 
this process was started back in the '40s in the Swift Current 
health region — 1946, when we set up a pilot project under the 
Tommy Douglas government, CCF government, which was 
expanded in a full-fledged health care system by 1962. And it's 
a heritage that we are proud of, and I think many people, 
including the nurses in this province, are very concerned about 
it when they watch it being ripped apart, when they have to go 
publicly and have press conferences to try to embarrass the 
government into giving the proper funding so that the patients 
in the hospitals are not left at risk at the time when nursing staff 
are not on duty. 
 
And I say to you that in the hearings that we held last week in 
Regina where nurses and health care givers came out,  

and users, senior citizens came to us and told us the stories 
about what is happening in the province as a result of the 
Devine government, I say to you that something has to be done 
— something has to be done. 
 
And I think what has to be done is not a continuation of the PR 
job that is being done by the Minister of Health. I don't think we 
need an ad agency to send out his speeches at a cost of $5,000. I 
don't think we need expensive ad campaigns in all of the local 
papers and the dailies that are costing thousands of dollars to 
make it look like money is being spent. I don't think we need, in 
this budget, any more moving and shuffling of numbers and 
areas from other departments into the Department of Health to 
try to make it look like more money is being spent. And I found 
it interesting, that after three years of denying that any problem 
existed, that we had the Minister of Health now announcing that 
right after the next election he's going to solve the problem that 
a week ago he said didn't exist. And I say to the people of the 
province, can you believe what they say when you see what 
they do? And I say in the area of health the record of this 
government is not up to par, and for that reason, as well, this 
government does not deserve to be re-elected, and that we can't 
afford another four years. 
 
I suppose this PR work that is being done in the area of health is 
best exemplified by referring to a meeting that the Minister of 
Health organized in Swift Current last week. He sent out letters 
to all the administrators of nursing homes and hospitals, and he 
invited the clergy and nurses, and everyone came to this 
meeting which cost thousands of dollars. And in talking to some 
of the administrators afterwards, they said: you know, the 
minister didn't show up; he didn't come to the meeting. 
 
Now I believe the minister when he says that he was fogged in 
in Regina. I honestly believe that he couldn't make it to that 
meeting. I'm not sure why fog would stop you from driving for 
two hours to Swift Current, but I'll believe that he was fogged 
in. 
 
But the thing is we have two other cabinet ministers who 
represent the south-west who could have come to that meeting. 
We have the minister from Maple Creek and the minister from 
Swift Current. Now I don't know whether I believe that both of 
them were sick that day. I don't know whether I believe that 
story. 
 
But what I do know is that the member from Morse who went 
to that meeting did not do the job that people expected the 
Minister of Health to be doing. I don't blame the member from 
Morse. That's not his job, to be carrying on at the meeting in 
place of the Minister of Health. 
 
And I say to you that the people who went away from that 
meeting were terribly disappointed. They realized they had been 
used for political reasons. And I say to you that the kind of 
phoniness is one of the reasons, and other reason, why this 
government will not be back for a second term. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks by saying that I am 
not in agreement with this throne speech because it lacks 
credibility. It lacks substance, and it lacks the initiative to solve 
the major problems of employment, 
  



 
March 19, 1986 

 

45 
 

massive tax increases, and bad administration, and I therefore 
would have a great deal of difficulty in supporting the throne 
speech as it now stands. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to have the 
opportunity to stand today on behalf of my city of Saskatoon 
and particularly to stand on behalf of my constituents in 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
We have a great mix in the constituency, young and old, and 
most ethnic origins of the world are represented there. The 
down-town area is characterized by many high-rise apartments 
and condominium complexes. We also have several senior 
citizens and low-income apartment buildings administered by 
the Saskatoon Housing Authority. City Park and North Park are 
older established areas of the city and contain senior citizens 
and young, working couples with families. Richmond Heights 
may perhaps be described as containing more professional 
persons and business people. However, all parts of the Centre 
constituency represents a good mix. We estimate that senior 
citizens represent some 20 per cent of the constituency. I'm 
therefore very much aware of the issues that concern seniors, 
such as health care and housing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the senior citizens' heritage grant of up to $700 per 
couple is a benefit well deserved by them. And the seniors very 
much applaud this government's decision to build a new city 
hospital, and appreciate very much the $100 million that was 
added to enhance services in our hospitals and, of course, the 
more than 500 nursing positions that will be added. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon is very renowned for its quality of life. 
Our citizens recognize it and feel comfortable in their city. We 
have publicly-owned river banks and paved biking and jogging 
trails. We have boating launches and river cruises, excellent 
theatres, the symphony, museums, and art galleries. We have 
everything one could expect in a major cosmopolitan area. Our 
people are warm and friendly, and visitors are always welcome. 
We're proud to call Saskatoon home. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last few years Saskatoon has developed into 
Saskatchewan's commercial and financial centre. I know that 
soon its citizens will approve a new multi-purpose arena 
facility. We will then host world-class sporting events, 
agricultural shows, and cultural events. I'm confident we'll soon 
host a Canadian curling championship. And it's a fact that the 
Canada Summer Games will be coming to Saskatoon in 1989. 
Millions and millions of dollars will be injected into the 
Saskatoon economy by this new facility. 
 
Saskatoon is a city on the grow. The February issue of the 
Saskatchewan Report magazine listed major projects proposed 
or under way for Saskatoon in 1986. And that list includes a 
new city hospital at $106 million, St. Paul's Hospital expansion 
at 52 million, expansion to the University Hospital at 30 
million. 

There are building cranes all over the city of Saskatoon. There 
will be two new recreation complexes at 6.4 million, a 238-bed 
nursing home costing 20 million; a new University of 
Saskatchewan administration building at 5 million; the Circle 
Park Mall addition at 17 million; SED Systems' new plant will 
cost 10 million; Intercontinental Packers expansion, $21 
million; and a brand-new agricultural college on the University 
of Saskatchewan campus costing some 78 million. There are 
many more listed, and they add up to a whopping $400 
million-plus for the city of Saskatoon in 1986. 
 
Saskatoon is growing and building in 1986, and that adds up to 
hundreds and hundreds of jobs and economic activity for our 
people. Mr. Speaker, we all know that economic conditions 
have been tough over western Canada in 1985; however, 
Saskatoon enjoyed a healthy economy. The city boasts 8,000 
new job positions in 1985, for an 11 per cent annual increase. 
 
Saskatoon's industrial development officer, David Fairlie, says 
Saskatoon's growth has been fuelled by a large number of plant 
expansions. Intercontinental Packers' recent expansion 
announcement and SED System’s new $10 million plant will 
add to this growth in 1986. 
 
Saskatoon has the lowest per capita civic debt in Canada at 
$195, and we can now have friendly feuds with the city of 
Regina that we are the largest city and the fastest-growing in the 
province of Saskatchewan at 176,000 persons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is that despite recession, drought, 
grasshoppers, and what not, Saskatoon continues to grow and 
prosper. Mayor Cliff Wright even indicates that the 
long-awaited south, down town redevelopment project may at 
last get under way. That would mean more jobs and much more 
business for the city. 
 
Saskatoon boasts one of the finest universities in the land. It is 
continuing to grow with the recently completed geology 
building; as I mentioned, a new administrative building on the 
way; the announcement of this fantastic $78 million college of 
Agriculture; and a $17 million cancer facility just under way; 
and a $50 million addition to University Hospital. Some 14,500 
students are enrolled in the winter session, so it's indeed a busy 
place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon has a fine convention centre in the 
Centennial Auditorium, and we can offer visitors the sweetest 
drinking water this side of the Rockies. 
 
Our real estate market is booming. Multiple listing service sales 
surpassed $200 million in 1985, and it looks like more of the 
same for 1986. Real estate people recently told me that they just 
can't get enough listings in Saskatoon at this time to meet the 
demand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon is renowned for its progressive thinkers 
and leaders and its entrepreneurial spirit. These qualities make 
our economic future and our social future very attractive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech of Monday last is the building 
blocks from which we will continue to build 
  



 
March 19, 1986 

 

46 
 

Saskatchewan. The plan is one of opportunity, of participation, 
and of protection for our people. Accordingly, home-makers, 
part-time employees, and employees of small businesses will 
now be able to build security for old age. I will have more 
comments on this voluntary Saskatchewan pension plan later. 
 
Small business in my constituency can look forward to new 
initiatives to provide relief from high interest rates. There will 
be expansion of the nine and five-eighths per cent interest 
reduction program on $50,000 for small businesses. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, my constituents will be pleased to see five 
new provincial parks in the province established, including 
Saskatchewan's first wilderness park. Many Saskatonians enjoy 
and utilize the parks, both summer and winter. And, as well, 
these new provincial parks will provide many jobs. 
 
My constituents will also be pleased to see the development of a 
provincial educational, cultural, and public-interest television 
network. Education and information service through television 
and the computer is definitely the trend of the future. 
 
Improved financial assistance will be made available to 
post-secondary students, and this is good news for those who 
have to finance their advanced education. 
 
Opportunities '86 will provide some 8,500 summer jobs for 
students. Coupled with the federal program, some 11,000 
students will have work this summer. 
 
The industrial incentives program has been very successful in 
the past, and it, therefore, will be extended. 
 
And housing construction programs will be introduced. This 
will mean jobs and homes for young families. 
 
Extended training programs for those on social assistance will 
help those people get out from under the yoke of welfare. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the tourism industry is expanding under this 
government, and we intend to intensify these programs for the 
benefits of our hotels, resorts, fishing camp operators, and the 
like. 
 
The Speech from the Throne indicates the venture capital 
corporation program will be expanded and the youth 
entrepreneur program will be continued. We believe that 
business people will respond to these business opportunities and 
that Saskatchewan women, who in recent years have played a 
major role in the development of new small business, will take 
advantage of them to expand their participation in the business 
life of the province. 
 
And I was pleased to encourage the Premier to move the 
Department of Science and Technology to Saskatoon. That will 
mean added jobs for our city. I believe in decentralization of 
government if it is done at the least cost. 
 
Moving the crop insurance corporation to Melville, the 

water corporation to Moose Jaw, and the agriculture credit 
corporation to Swift Current will inject some added economic 
activity into those communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I indicated earlier that I wanted to come back to 
the announcement regarding a real first for Saskatchewan and 
that is the Saskatchewan pension plan. I'm very excited by this 
plan and so are many of my constituents. I've talked to several 
of them over the past few days, and they like the idea very 
much. Participation in the pension plan is voluntary. It will 
offer additional security to people who are unable to participate 
in employer-sponsored retirement programs. It will be available 
to home-makers, part-time employees, and employees of 
small-business firms. This initiative is a milestone in the history 
of Saskatchewan, and I commend my constituents and the 
people of Saskatchewan who suggested it to us. 
 
Premier Devine and my colleagues in this legislature know it 
will provide security for many folks who are unable to avail 
themselves of a pension plan. This pension plan will be the 
answer for home-makers, urban and farm wives, working 
women and mothers, part-time employees in the workplace all 
over Saskatchewan, and employees of small firms that are 
unable to provide pension plans. So this is great news, Mr. 
Speaker, and I know the people of Saskatchewan agree. 
 
The seniors in my constituency are also applauding the new 
seniors' heritage grant. It's the best program ever for seniors in 
this province, and it puts some $40 million into seniors’ hands. 
It'll help pay the rent, property tax, prescription fees, and other 
expenses that seniors incur. Senior couples under the $25,000 
annual income level can gain some $700. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm enthused over some recent economic statistics 
compiled by the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. Retail 
sales in the province were up 7.7 per cent from 1984 to 1985. 
That's 4.3 billion in 1984 to 4.6 billion in '85 in volume. That's 
an increase of some $300 million over the year. 
 
And vehicle dealers had reason to grin in 1985. Sales of all new 
cars, trucks and buses increased some 10.9 per cent from 1984 
to 1985. 
 
Construction figures for the year show an increase in activity 
compared to 1984. In 1984, dwelling unit starts numbered 
3,456. In 1985, the number goes to 4,111. That's a 19 per cent 
increase Mr. Speaker, 1985 was a year of growth for 
Saskatchewan in these sectors. I know we can expect added 
growth in 1986. 
 
I sadly acknowledge that 1985 was a tough year on many of our 
farmers. Drought, grasshoppers, and in some areas too much 
moisture, caused great problems. High input costs and low 
prices for their product has put many farmers in a bind. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, Premier Devine and this government can be 
well proud of the measures that we took to help farmers, and I 
pray the good Lord will at least give our drought-stricken 
farmers a good harvest this year. We all in this province, either 
directly or indirectly, depend on 
  



 
March 19, 1986 

 

47 
 

agriculture for our economic well-being. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I grew up in a small farm community and a family 
of eight children. We knew some tough times but like most 
Saskatchewan families, we knew that by hard work our lot 
would improve. Saskatchewan families have that spirit. The 
men and women of this government have that spirit. This throne 
speech demonstrates that spirit of growing and building and 
improving Saskatchewan for all people, and I heartily endorse 
it. 
 
I highly commend our government for the opportunities, the 
participation, and the protection that has been generated by my 
government in the last four years. This new plan will carry 
these goals on with the well-being of all Saskatchewan citizens 
as our top priority. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to begin 
my remarks by pointing out a number of things that I believe 
are pertinent to the discussion that we have here today and the 
discussion relating to the Speech from the Throne that was read 
by His Honour on Monday. 
 
I want to evaluate it and place a degree of compassion and a 
sense of unity in relation to that speech, that I thought it 
exemplified, and the dimension that I thought was transferred 
by His Honour in discussing it with us. He presented a number 
of things that I think were important. It showed a degree of 
vision and hope and a sense of stability and security. Those four 
things, I believe, Mr. Speaker, were demonstrated by the 
Speech from the Throne, but there are also other things that I 
think that lead up to that that I want to point out. 
 
We go to our travels around the province in the past few months 
and I want to point out a number of things in relation to that. 
The cabinet committee on farm input costs, as they travelled 
around, had a lot of sense and feel for the direction that 
agriculture in Saskatchewan is supposed to go, and I think it's 
kind of mentioned in a report that was written by Dale Eisler on 
Wednesday, March 12th in the Melfort Journal. 
 
I want to quote a couple of comments here before I begin. 
"Based on that yardstick," of economic development in 
agriculture, the Premier of Saskatchewan and his government 
"has done more than any other provincial administration ever. 
The Tories have literally poured more than $1 billion into 
farmers pockets in the province. By the government's own 
calculation, on average each farm in Saskatchewan will receive 
almost $36,000 in various government subsidies or support 
programs." 
 
Just repeating that — the Tories have poured in a million 
dollars, or a billion dollars into the province, into the farmers' 
pockets, and they have done it in a unique way. And I'm going 
to talk about that a little later, but I want to continue from there 
and explain why I believe agriculture in Saskatchewan is 
important. 
 
We have seen evidence of that in the kind of programs that the 
government has put forward. We see that on an ongoing basis. 
We see that in a number of things we've 

already done, in The Farm Land Security Act. We wanted to 
establish a sense of stability and security, as I mentioned earlier. 
How can you have a vision and hope when you have no security 
or stability? 
 
(1530) 
 
We went through to a farm counselling and assistance program 
where we provide assistance to farmers who have economic and 
financial difficulty. And I want to point out to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that as I've travelled around and visited various credit 
agencies, like credit unions and bank managers, I have come to 
the conclusion, and they have come to the conclusion, that is a 
very important function of this government. 
 
And why? Because the people who are obtaining credit very 
often do not know how to manage it and put it into place. And 
these farmers telling other farmers how to handle that is a step 
in the right direction, and the people have continually said that 
to me. 
 
Another program that we initiated, and it is in line with doing 
things for all of Saskatchewan — the livestock cash advance 
program that we initiated. And that, in my opinion, Mr. 
Speaker, is a very important program in relation to production 
in this province. I noticed the bull sale in Regina here the other 
day had some record prices in relation to their cattle and 
livestock, and I believe that it is a beginning to put into place 
the kind of feeling that people in agriculture have about 
themselves and about the very fact that they have some hope 
and some stability in their market. 
 
I just want to put into perspective what it has done for my 
constituency. I took the time to put that into perspective, and in 
my constituency, just on the livestock cash advance alone, Mr. 
Speaker, the value is just about $6 million. And it comes to 
about $9,700 for every family, for every applicant in my 
constituency. And I think that that's important. I think that's an 
interest-free cash advance to these farmers who have livestock, 
to give them impetus to do the things that they feel they have to 
do. 
 
Another important area where we have universality, and it's the 
area that Mr. Eisler was talking about in his column, about a 
billion dollars in the farmer's pocket, is the production loan 
program. And I think that it is a very important part of unifying 
agriculture in this province. 
 
We had a program for livestock that dealt with all the livestock 
or the beef in Saskatchewan and I believe that that's very 
important. I think it's important because it ties the farmer in 
Cumberland House together with the farmer in Consul or the 
one in Meadow Lake with the one in Estevan. I believe that 
that's important because it provides the same benefit and adds 
continuity to the whole agricultural program. The livestock cash 
advance does that and also the production loan program. 
 
In my constituency we have about $43 million put out by the 
agricultural credit corporation in dealing with that. I just wanted 
to say about the agricultural credit corporation and its move to 
Swift Current, I believe that that's a step in the right direction 
and I'm looking forward 
  



 
March 19, 1986 

 

48 
 

to having that as an integral part of the community when that's 
done. 
 
We have talked today to some extent about the oil royalty 
holiday, and to some extent about the oil royalty rebate that 
farmers are going to get in this province. And as we travelled 
around the past month we saw a lot of farmers really concerned 
about the fuel prices. I believe that because of that concern that 
was expressed by the farmers in relation to that, I think that's 
why we're seeing the prices of the product come down. Every 
one of us would like to have it come down more rapidly, but I 
think as it comes down you have to recognize some very 
important function — that we do not, I believe, want to 
jeopardize the upgrader in this province. We do not want to 
jeopardize any of the upgraders in this province. 
 
As I travelled through the western side of my constituency I 
noticed this to a large extent, that the farmers would tell me that 
what you need to have is stability in the oil sector so that we 
can provide oil to the people of Saskatchewan from the oil 
within Saskatchewan. Right now, 95 per cent of the energy that 
is used by the people of Saskatchewan comes from Alberta and 
we pay a royalty charge to the Alberta government of 7.4 cents 
a litre. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that that is a part of the problem that we 
are facing today. For some many years in the '70s, we had no 
imagination, no vision to developing the kind of stability that 
we needed in the energy sector. Nobody wanted to build an 
upgrader in Saskatchewan and nobody proceeded to do it. And 
therefore today when we have the program of NewGrade in 
Regina here, it's going to be a very stabilizing force in the 
south-west part of Saskatchewan in particular, because roughly 
25,000 barrels a day will flow into the upgrader here and it will 
take up about 65 per cent of the total being produced there 
today. I think that that is a very big benefit to the people of my 
constituency, and also as it relates to the oil royalty. That 4.6 
cents a litre is going to be quite an asset. 
 
I just want to go on to another area where we have had 
development and that's in the area of water development in the 
south-west. When Sask Water Corporation was initiated, in 
Swift Current we had, for example, one person dealing with 
water and water-related problems, and it became a real critical 
issue in the south-west because demand was there, the necessity 
was there for more staffing. Today we have 13 people there 
working together, not only to provide assistance to the water 
development as it relates to irrigation, but also to the use by 
urban municipalities and small urbans in developing sewer and 
water projects. And I know that this has been an asset to the 
communities around in my constituency, and that's a very 
important feature that this 13 people provide to the area that I 
live in. 
 
They have initiated discussions with various towns and villages 
about their sewage needs, about their water needs. And I think 
it's an extremely important feature in dealing with how water is 
handled, how it's developed in the south-west, because in the 
last two years we had a lot of stress on those kinds of functions 
because of the drought. And I appreciate the fact that this 
government has addressed those areas. 

The next area that I want to deal with, Mr. Speaker, is the farm 
purchase program. We have heard a lot about this in the last 
three years, and I want to add to it a very important part, and 
recognize that it has done a lot for me and for the people of my 
constituency. 
 
The total rebates paid and interest rates paid to the people of my 
constituency represent about $1.5 million, and that, in my 
opinion, Mr. Speaker, is a very important function. I think it's 
been a benefit. The annual payment back is about $4,000, and I 
think that for the 340 people in my constituency, I think that's 
an important feature. 
 
I want to go next to something that has been discussed and was 
initiated in the throne speech and the discussion relating to 
grasshopper control. We had a number of very serious 
outbreaks in the south-west and the minister of Agriculture at 
the time, the member from Weyburn, played an extremely 
important role in developing the kind of things that were 
required to put some money into place. And if you have an idea 
that it cost a lot on your farm, it cost a lot generally, because 
that chemical was moved in here from the United States and 
from Europe at no cost to agriculture. And over and above that, 
the municipality that I live in had the benefit of about 3-mill 
payment made to them, and I believe that that is a significant 
contribution to the farmers in my constituency. The value of 3 
mills is, in my opinion, fairly substantial. 
 
The south-west has had a drought for the last two years and the 
people in the province are aware of that. And I'd just like to say 
that there were a number of programs developed in conjunction 
with the federal government that relate to that, and one was 
moving livestock from the south-west into northern parts of the 
province, and the people of my constituency have appreciated 
it. I've had some 25 farmers from my constituency who 
benefited from that. They were able to move their cattle and 
livestock into the northern part of the province. But of particular 
benefit to the south-west was the livestock drought assistance 
program that related directly to the $45 paid in 1984 and the 
$60 paid in 1985. And it was a direct benefit to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would like to say that the people who have benefited 
have really appreciated that. I've heard many, many comments. 
But the thing that they appreciated the most, Mr. Speaker, was 
the fact that they were able to gain access to that program by a 
very simplified method of applying for it. They had a good 
program, and they put it together, and it benefited my 
constituency in the two years by something like $4 million. And 
I appreciate that, and I want to thank the government for that. 
 
We have had a number of programs in relation to the cattle, the 
livestock. We have gone into another one, Mr. Speaker, that 
relates to publishing farm input costs and providing surveys for 
agriculture to find out really what the chemical costs, the 
fertilizer costs, are in the province of Saskatchewan. And I 
think that that's an important feature in the development of a 
better agriculture climate for the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Natural gas has been a very important part in my constituency, 
and I want to thank the minister responsible 
  



 
March 19, 1986 

 

49 
 

for Sask Power, and the government, for providing that kind of 
program into my constituency. In looking at it, viewing it from 
the people who benefit, I think it can be best said by a 
gentleman I visited in Bateman, Saskatchewan. And he told me, 
he said, you know, it isn't the farming community who gets the 
biggest benefit from it; it's the small towns, the small towns 
who never had it before. 
 
Like in the town of Bateman, he said, there's two churches, 
there's two community halls, and a skating rink. And of those 
five places the contributions and the continually making that 
community a viable community, those 60 families who are 
involved in keeping that community alive . . . And the benefit is 
extremely important to them because they reduce their cost in 
the amount of money they have to collect from those 
individuals to maintain that community in there. And that is an 
extremely important feature. 
 
For an example, he said, in the skating rink, instead of three 
months a year, they can go to four and a half months a year 
where they can keep that rink open. And for me, Mr. Speaker, 
that proves one point: that the natural gas program is an 
extremely important function in my constituency and for the 
farmers of Saskatchewan, and I know that the people really feel 
that it is an important part. As a matter of fact, the south-west 
region probably has a sign-up of at least three years in advance 
to get that gas into their homes. 
 
(1545) 
 
I was speaking to a member of the Hutterite Colony from the 
Val Marie area, and they reduced their costs by 50 per cent in 
relation to the propane that they were using, in relating that to 
natural gas. And I think that that is a measure of giving the 
farmer the benefit of lowering his cost in relation to his farming 
practices, and I think it's important. 
 
We heard talk already about the buried line service in the power 
and telephones, and I think those are two really important areas 
that we have had some discussion about already and a program 
developed, and I think it's extremely important that we look at 
those kinds of things in determining . . . reducing the cost, 
reducing the hazard, that is involved in some of these things 
like overhead lines on farms and that sort of thing. I think it's 
important that we take a serious look at those things. 
 
The rural line service in telephones — I just want to make 
another point about that — the rural line service in the 
telephones is very important, especially to the small 
communities, the small towns, because of the restriction that 
was placed upon them by the amount of people that they had to 
have in their communities in order to have private line service. 
And I think that the small businesses in those small 
communities are especially going to benefit from this program 
and I know that they're going to be happy with it. In thinking 
about it, as it was announced to the SARM convention, the 
people there at that time were particularly pleased by the fact 
that this government was going to take a look at that. And I 
think we need 

to commend the people from both Sask Power and SaskTel for 
their imagination and for their progressive kind of attitudes in 
relation to developing a better program. 
 
One of the things that we ran into, Mr. Deputy Speaker, during 
our travel around the province, was the fact that school boards 
and R.M.s, hospital boards, made presentations about their 
problems in dealing with liability insurance. We had 
representation from businesses regarding that, and I believe that 
what we are proposing to do as addressed in the throne speech 
is a step in the right direction. We have the necessity of 
providing some security, as I said when I started, about some 
stability and security in the vision of the people of 
Saskatchewan, and that is one way that we're going to be doing 
it — the security that they need because they have a problem 
with liability insurance. 
 
I want to just point out a number of other things that I think are 
important, and they deal with health care. 
 
The Saskatoon Agreement II, protecting us from extra billing, I 
believe was an important step forward in this province. And I 
believe that the Minister of Health, the member from Indian 
Head, I think led the attack in providing a better and more 
stable health care program for the people of Saskatchewan. And 
it is extremely important, I think, that we recognize this because 
the people who were receiving the extra billing were those 
people who were seniors. And I think the seniors gained an 
extremely important benefit by this protection against extra 
billing because it was the things that were related to those 
things that were breaking down — like not being able to see 
that well or hear that well — those are the kinds of things that 
were receiving the extra billing. And that's the kind of thing, I 
think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we, in the province, recognize 
and then provided a way to accommodate that. 
 
I think that we need to address something that is very important 
here, and that is the reduction of sales tax on a number of 
commodities, like the utilities. Many people did not recognize 
that on their power bills that the 5 per cent sales tax went off. 
And I believe that that is a very important thing to remember. 
 
I also want to point out that the farm fuel was another place 
where we're rebating more than what we're receiving, as far as 
the royalties that they're using on the gas that they're using. As I 
said before, the farm fuels are going to be rebated 4.6 cents a 
litre. 
 
We don't even consume our own gas. The oil that is produced in 
Saskatchewan is not refined in Saskatchewan, and therefore we 
have a very serious problem when world commodities, as oil, 
go down. We have a direct impact. And do you know where it 
impacts most? It impacts most in the south-west part of 
Saskatchewan. And that's because the kind of crude that is there 
is the kind of crude that's going to be refined in this new, great 
upgrader. I think that it is very important that we continue to 
place an importance and put into people's minds the importance 
of that upgrader in Regina here. It is a benefit to all of the 
people of Saskatchewan, and we'll finally be able to use our 
own crude oil. 
  



 
March 19, 1986 

 

50 
 

I want to point out a couple of things in education that are, I 
believe, important, and they deal first of all with the education 
development fund and its involvement in my community. And a 
lot of the people in the various school boards there have 
indicated to me that they are in support of the kind of programs 
that have been initiated by the education development fund. 
And they are supportive of the ideas that we have developed 
because they have had an access into the kind of programs that 
they want to see initiated. 
 
I also am very pleased that in the past three years I've been able 
to have two schools built in my constituency, and one is being 
built right now. It's going to be started in the next few days, and 
that's the school at Neville. 
 
It's a sorry condition when you have children who are not able 
to learn because of allergies in some of the places that they've 
had to learn in that school. And I believe that the new school 
there is going to add a great deal of community spirit. And like 
I said at the beginning, it's going to add stability to that 
community. It's also going to say to those children, we have a 
vision, we have a hope, we have a place to go. 
 
The key thing in those two things, in those two schools, is that 
the community has involved itself in putting together a 
program, together with the school board, a community centre 
for that development. And I am very pleased that the Minister 
of Culture and Recreation has provided some grants for that. I'm 
also pleased that the federal government is going to provide 
some grants to the Neville school for some of that. 
 
And they have, on the latest discussions together with them, 
they've got $15,000 to go out of about 65,000 that they had to 
collect. And I believe for an area of the province where they 
had drought, grasshoppers probably just as intense as anywhere 
else, I think it's a credit to that community. 
 
There are a couple of things that I'd like to deal with as it relates 
to an overall view and things that we're planning on doing and 
why I agree with the Speech from the Throne — why I'm going 
to be in support of it: the amendments to the livestock 
investment tax credit in relation to hog production, continuation 
of the agriculture development fund — I think it's an important 
item — enhanced assistance to irrigation and other water 
conservation projects, efforts to expand traditional markets for 
grain. 
 
We have to learn to develop an attitude that will provide for the 
greatest amount of advantage to our grain producer and our 
livestock producers in this province. We have to work together 
to provide the best economic benefit to all of us. And that's the 
kind of thing that we're looking at there. 
 
Application of venture capital corporations to agriculture — 
we've had some feedlots going into this, and I think it's a step in 
the right direction. I think a key to all of this in agriculture, and 
we heard this time after time after time in our hearings across 
the province, the key to the development of agriculture in the 
province is agriculture 

research. 
 
And the member from Saskatoon Centre pointed out some of 
the things that Saskatoon is going to benefit. Saskatoon is going 
to benefit an awful lot from having a research centre in 
agriculture developed in the city of Saskatoon. 
 
And that has a high priority by this government. It's a high 
priority by the people of Saskatchewan. They've recognized the 
importance of it, and I believe that it is a way that we tie 
together the sense of responsibility that the people of 
Saskatchewan have for the economy of Saskatchewan. If that's 
agriculture and its relationship to urban people, then that's what 
it has to be. Because it takes a very strong, sensitive urban 
person who is a researcher in an agriculture college, or the 
geology college, to put a development into agriculture that is 
going to be feasible, workable, and have the dimension of going 
some place in this province. 
 
And I think that that is one that we work together in this 
province to tie it all together. As I said before, when we travel 
around, research was one of the most important areas. It was 
identified at each of the meetings that we were at. And I think 
it's extremely important. 
 
The final thing that I want to say in relation to the throne speech 
has to do with the Minister of Health and his program of 
development of our seniors' forums in the province. Mention 
was made of it earlier from the member from Shaunavon, and I 
just want to say that the people in the south-west really 
appreciated that the Minister of Health would take the time to 
initiate that kind of a program. 
 
Dealing with various areas in the province like P.A., Yorkton, 
and other areas where these forums were held, these health 
clinics where administrators from hospitals, administrators of 
home care programs, nurses, and all the cross section of people 
who help people in our health communities, where they gather 
together to share some of their ideas, was a very important 
learning session, not only for the people that came, but also for 
the Department of Health, as they went there to look and 
observe. 
 
I think one of the most important things is this: that this 
government believes that seniors are an important and integral 
part of this society here, but that we're also doing something 
about it. 
 
In my constituency, I want to point to two things that they've 
done already. One is they have put together 19 refurbishing 
beds in one nursing home which was absolutely necessary. We 
did that in the early part of the term of office that we were in, 
and in 1987 and '88 we're going to establish an integrated 
facility in the town of Cabri. 
 
Now the town of Cabri has worked — and I know they've 
worked since 1975 — to get some senior citizens' care facility 
in that town. And I know that the people there, the hospital 
board has been trying and trying and trying. They finally see a 
hope. They see some light at the end of the tunnel in relation to 
the home care problems, senior problems in establishing an 
integrated facility together 
  



 
March 19, 1986 

 

51 
 

with a hospital in the town of Cabri. 
 
They are looking forward to that. They've already started their 
consultation process together with the Minister of Health, and I 
believe that that's a very important feature of the program that 
has been sponsored by the Department of Health, and I want to 
thank the minister for his caring attitude. 
 
The member from Shaunavon also indicated that the Minister of 
Health was remiss and negligent in not attending, and I just 
want to say that didn't dampen the sense of co-operation and the 
sense of warmth and responsibility that was evident at that 
meeting that we had there. Over 500 people attended, and as a 
conclusion, a member from the council at Cabri indicated that it 
was an important function and it should happen again. And I 
believe that in order to put the record straight, that the people of 
Saskatchewan want to be in a position where they can tell 
government officials what they would like and that's what that 
program was doing. 
 
I want to just conclude by saying one more thing as it relates to 
agriculture, and going back to the article that was written by 
Mr. Eisler, and I just want to finish off with that. It says: 
 

Combined with an array of other support programs, this 
government has done a great deal to support agriculture. 
Compared to the rather meagre effort of the former NDP 
government, the Tories have been far more sensitive to 
farmers . . . 

 
And I believe that it is for a very simple reason, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and that reason is that we care, we understand, and 
they that they get a listening ear when we go around to the 
various parts of this province. 
 
(1600) 
 
We have done that in various areas. We have done that as it 
relates to water. We did that when we got elected. We have 
done that in relation to education. We've done that in relation to 
health. We've done that in relation to agriculture and in just our 
recent tour would indicate to me that people care, that we care, 
and that we want to do something about it. I will be supporting 
the throne speech and I am very pleased to have been able to 
speak to it and been provided that opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I don't 
know if that was a prophecy that you thought I was moving my 
seat or if perhaps you confused me with my very much taller 
but not as good looking or intelligent colleague from The 
Battlefords. 
 
Well, thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for allowing me the 
opportunity to participate and I'm pleased to be able to stand 
here and take my place both as the MLA for Turtleford, which 
is more important to me, and secondly, as a Minister of Parks 
and Renewable Resources in the present Conservative 
government. 

Firstly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to reply in my role as 
Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources. I'd like to 
elaborate briefly on some exciting new developments in the 
provincial parks system which the people of Saskatchewan can 
look forward to in the near future. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our provincial parks make a special 
contribution to Saskatchewan. They provide opportunities for 
Saskatchewan residents and visitors alike to appreciate our 
natural and historic heritage and to enjoy a wide range of 
recreational activities. They are important to our life-style and 
they do make a significant contribution to the provincial 
economy. Visits to our 17 present provincial parks generate 
economic activity worth approximately $30 million annually. 
 
And during this sitting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be 
introducing our new parks Act. I will be proposing the 
establishment of five new provincial parks, including the 
province's first wilderness park. I will also be proposing the 
official designation of nine historic parks as provincial parks. 
As well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the new parks Act will establish a 
classification system which will categorize provincial parks as 
historic, natural environment, recreation, or wilderness parks. 
This new Act will also provide a mechanism for setting aside 
and protecting lands for future park status. 
 
In keeping with favourable public response to the white paper 
on the new parks Act proposals, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
Progressive Conservative government will continue to involve 
the citizens of Saskatchewan and the private sector in planning 
and developing one of Canada's finest parks systems right here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
As I said earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it gives me a great deal 
of pleasure to participate in the throne speech and to be able to 
outline that type of activity. In fact, it gave me great pleasure to 
hear this session's throne speech, and reflect on how many 
sensible programs and initiatives outlined in it have had a 
positive impact on my home constituency of Turtleford. In 
particular, the Progressive Conservative government's $300 
million commitment to upgrade medical facilities has had a 
very visible impact in my constituency. 
 
I have had the pleasure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I may say the 
honour, to return to my constituency over the last four years to 
participate in openings and sod turnings for several new special 
care facilities for the elderly — a new 30-bed special care home 
at Big River; a brand new nursing home facility in Spiritwood; 
and a new special care facility to be integrated into the hospital 
at Leoville. 
 
It gives me extreme satisfaction, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to have 
played a part in bringing these services to my constituency — 
services to the elderly which were denied to them by the 
previous administration which had, in fact, placed a freeze on 
nursing home construction. In nine years, the previous 
government built only 245 nursing home units, while in three 
years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Progressive Conservative 
government has built 688 new nursing home units and are 
providing 1,500 new special care beds over a five-year period. 
  



 
March 19, 1986 

 

52 
 

The Progressive Conservative government has banned extra 
billings by doctors. As well, the Minister of Health recently 
announced a further $100 million for improved staffing and 
equipment in hospitals and special care homes. I fail to 
understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how any member of the 
opposition in this House can attack the record of the 
Progressive Conservative government as it relates to health care 
without blushing. 
 
The Progressive Conservative government recognizes, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the contribution which senior citizens have 
made and are making to this province. Consequently, the 
Devine government feels they deserve better than the treatment 
they received under the previous socialist administration. 
 
One of the first actions of the Devine government was to 
increase the supplement to the low-income senior citizens. We 
doubled the supplement for single, low-income earners and 
increased the supplement 66 per cent for couples. In addition, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on New Year's Day, Premier Grant 
Devine announced a senior citizens' heritage program which 
gives lower- and middle-income seniors an appreciation grant 
of up to $700. 
 
As well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, improved housing for seniors is 
another Progressive Conservative government priority. In the 
past four years, new senior citizen housing units have been 
constructed in Debden, Edam, Glaslyn, Medstead, and 
Spiritwood in the constituency of Turtleford. 
 
To further improve the quality of life for seniors, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, a $20 million senior citizens' home repair program has 
been implemented by the Devine government. In my 
constituency almost 500 senior citizen householders have 
received close to $450,000 in home repair grants. In addition, in 
the past four years our Progressive Conservative government 
has contributed close to $60,000 towards private senior citizens 
groups in 11 communities in the Turtleford constituency. 
 
As a member of the legislature for Turtleford and as a former 
educator, I have been extremely pleased to see many 
improvements to educational facilities and programs in my 
constituency under the Progressive Conservative government. 
Two new schools in Spiritwood, a major school expansion in 
Edam, and improvements to schools in Turtleford, Shell Lake, 
and Livelong have been undertaken over the past four years. 
 
Since 1982, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the total provincial 
commitment to these capital projects has been over $2 million 
in the Turtleford constituency alone. As well, school divisions 
in the Turtleford constituency have received operating grants 
totalling more than $45 million at the end of 1985. 
 
While on the subject of education, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I must 
mention the $150 million education development fund which is 
allowing school districts to implement educational projects 
which they have developed to meet specific needs in their 
schools. A good example in my constituency is a grant for 
French education approved for the school in Debden. 

Over the last four years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the constituency 
of Turtleford has benefited from numerous highway and road 
improvements. Highways No. 12, No. 303, No. 24, and No. 3, 
and many grid roads have been improved for the safety and 
convenience of local residents. I would like to point out that 
almost $17 million has been expended by the Progressive 
Conservative government in the Turtleford constituency alone 
on road construction and maintenance, and this hardly 
constitutes neglect, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as some hon. members 
of the opposition are fond of claiming. 
 
I'd like to turn to something that I consider one of the most 
exciting and innovative announcements that was contained in 
the throne speech, and I refer to the issue of pensions. A 
Saskatchewan pension plan to provide pensions to those who 
cannot currently qualify: people such as home-makers, 
part-time workers, small-business employees. Only a visionary 
Progressive Conservative government under the leadership of 
Grant Devine could conceive the idea, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
then make it work. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'd like to comment on the most 
serious issue in my constituency, farming. The farmers in my 
constituency have not recently been plagued with drought or 
with grasshoppers, as their colleagues and neighbours to the 
south have been. For the last four years they've not even been 
plagued with a socialist government or socialist representation 
in the legislature. And they're thankful for these blessings. 
 
Nevertheless, from talking to the farmers and livestock 
producers in my constituency, I know they, like the rest of the 
province's farmers, are being seriously threatened by falling 
commodity prices and rising input costs. As their member of the 
legislature, I am proud that the Devine government is working 
to find solutions to their problems instead of waiting around to 
buy up their farm when they're forced to sell, as a certain 
socialist government has been known to do. 
 
The farmers in my constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, can face 
1986 with hope, knowing they can get their next crop planted 
with the help of loans at 6 per cent interest. In the few short 
months since the production loan program was announced by 
the Minister of Agriculture, our Premier, 650 farmers in the 
constituency of Turtleford have applied for over $13 million in 
low-interest loans averaging about $20,000 per farmer. That's 
$13 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker — $13 million worth of 
economic activity in the Turtleford constituency. 
 
In addition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from August 1985 to February 
1986, 533 livestock producers in the constituency of Turtleford 
have applied for almost $5.7 million in repayable, interest-free 
cash advances to improve their cash flow and help them 
maintain their herds. Similarly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, hog 
producers in my constituency will benefit from an interest-free 
cash advance program, as well as an 8 per cent interest rate on 
new loans for livestock. 
 
These Progressive Conservative initiatives to expand the 
livestock sector make good sense for my constituency 
  



 
March 19, 1986 

 

53 
 

and for the agricultural sector as a whole. The Progressive 
Conservative government recognizes that Saskatchewan's 
economy is dependent upon agriculture, but realizes that 
diversification will strengthen the agricultural sector and help 
stabilize the province's economy. It's called not putting all your 
eggs in one basket. 
 
To be fair, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the previous socialist 
administration does believe in a variation of that old adage. 
Their philosophy, however, was: everyone put all their eggs in 
our basket, and then we'll decide how they should be shared. 
 
Farmers in my constituency, as in others, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
will soon have their input costs reduced through a 4.6 cent per 
litre or 21 cent per gallon rebate on the full amount of 
qualifying fuels used in their farm operations. This is 10 cents 
more per gallon than the rebate offered by the previous 
government, which also enforced a maximum pay-out of $300. 
In total the Saskatchewan farm economy will receive $42 
million from revenues collected from oil royalties, revenue 
which would not have been available had the previous 
administration remained to finish off the oil industry. 
 
(1615) 
 
Another program introduced by the Progressive Conservative 
government to help reduce operating costs to farmers and fuel 
costs to residents in our towns and village, is a program my 
constituents had awaited for a long time. The people living in 
Turtleford constituency, and the rest of rural Saskatchewan, 
waited 11 years under the previous government to be hooked up 
to SaskPower's natural gas distribution network. Well, I'm 
pleased to report, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in 1986 almost 500 
new families and businesses in my constituency will be 
enjoying the benefits of natural gas service. 
 
In addition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all rural telephone customers 
can now look forward to individual line service. Work will 
begin immediately on the five-year, $264 million project 
recently announced by Premier Grant Devine. 
 
A primary objective of our Progressive Conservative 
government, Mr. Speaker, is the perpetuation of the family 
farm. Every time our farm purchase program helps a new 
farmer start to grow, the Progressive Conservative members of 
this House feel like proud fathers and mothers. I'm happy to 
say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that over the past three years 133 
young farmers in my own constituency of Turtleford have been 
able to start up or expand their farms, knowing they are 
protected from sudden increases in interest rates. 
 
Now the Progressive Conservative government knows, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that its production loan program, farm fuel 
rebate program, drought assistance, cattle and hog incentives, 
revisions to the agricultural credit corporation, etc., etc., will 
not in themselves ensure the future of the family farm. They are 
designed, however, to help farmers hold down input costs while 
together, government and farmers together develop long-term 
solutions. 

The special cabinet committee on farm input costs has listened 
to the concerns and ideas of farmers across the province. As 
well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have listened to the concerns and 
ideas of farmers in my constituency. Through agricultural 
policies developed with input from the people they most affect, 
through continued support of the agricultural sector in tough 
times, and through a continued commitment to agricultural 
research and development, the Progressive Conservative 
government is helping to build a more prosperous future for all 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am proud to be a Conservative. I am 
proud to belong to a party of vision, a party of hope, and a party 
that displays innovation, and I'm proud to be a member of the 
government of a gentleman of the calibre of our Premier, Grant 
Devine. And I also want to reiterate a commitment I made on 
election night 1982 to my constituents. I said, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it's constituency first, constituency foremost, and it's 
constituency always. And I'd like to think that I'm the same 
person I was four years ago, maybe a little older, hopefully a 
little wiser; certainly a little wiser in the ways and evils of 
socialism — I can say that much. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as long as I am the member for the 
Turtleford constituency, I'll be in here. I'll be in the offices of 
this building, and I'll be in the corners of this province, and I'll 
be in my seat, scratching, kicking, firing, and . . . (inaudible) . . . 
to do my very level best for the people of Turtleford. Thank 
you, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. May I first 
give leave to introduce guests? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — You have leave. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — I'm very excited today to welcome to the 
legislature exchange students for the College of L-i-m-o-i-l-o-u, 
which may be something like Limoilou, or something from 
Quebec. I'm not too bilingual, but I know a little Cree. 
 
And I certainly welcome them as they're visiting Kelsey 
Institute, a fine institute in my riding. They are accompanied by 
Eileen Cote of Limoilou and Cliff Adolph of Kelsey. Don't I 
say Kelsey well? 
 
And we certainly welcome them. We know they're having an 
enjoyable time, and it was very interesting to meet with them 
for pictures, and most of them were taller than the MLA. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Monsieur le President, et nos amis de la 
langue francaise, bonjour et bienvenue ici aujourd'hui. J'espere 
que vous allez enjouir de votre visite a la Legislature. 
Bienvenue. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
  



 
March 19, 1986 

 

54 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

Mrs. Caswell: — Thank you, member from Turtleford. It's nice 
to know you speak three languages. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, today I want to talk a little bit about why 
we've been doing the kinds of things we've been doing for four 
years, and what we want to accomplish in the next four years. I 
think that it's very important, as we look at a new session and a 
new throne speech, to start looking back at the fundamentals of 
why we are here. 
 
I am here first of all, personally, and I'd like to remind myself 
and other people of this, that in 1979, and there is an article 
about this fellow who won the Tory leadership race, and it was 
in The Commentator, a newspaper in Saskatoon. This young 
man won, and he said in his speech that he would put God first, 
the family second, and politics third. 
 
I was so impressed by that that I phoned up to get a Tory 
membership. And I remember when I came home and I told my 
husband I was a Tory now, and he thought that was kind of 
strange. But after, we had a little talk and I convinced him that 
it was a good idea. And I think that that kind of philosophy that 
was from the beginning, when the Premier won his leadership 
race in 1979, is still exemplified in Saskatchewan today. 
 
And then I think of something I heard as we were going into 
that first election in 1982, that somebody, a fellow from the 
riding of Souris-Cannington, had a quote in his speech, and he 
sent me a copy of the speech in which he said that someone 
called Roy Romanow had said that Saskatchewan is a 
sociological experiment. And I phoned up the PC caucus office 
and I said, is it really true that they would call Saskatchewan a 
sociological experiment? And indeed they verified this was 
actually true. Recently I read the quote in a history book by a 
University of Saskatchewan professor, in which he is adulated 
as a fine and noble person. 
 
And I'd like to talk about sociological experiments, that I 
thought the people are not experimented on without their wish. I 
thought that we were here to be governed in the province, not to 
be guinea-pigs in a sociological laboratory. And I think it is 
very important to realize that what we've had since the 
conception of the CCF is a group of people who are not 
involved so much in the process of politics and in the 
democratic process, but those who want to be change agents in 
a society which radically will change the role and function of 
the economy, the family, justice, the church, the institutions, 
and our banking system, and everything else. 
 
While involved in the — how shall I say it — while doing 
active sociological research in the left in the 1970s and '71, I 
noticed that really they saw the whole political process as a 
means to an end. It was not a means to, well, I want to govern; I 
want to be. But I want to create a sociological revolution. And 
many people with their radical, very intense views saw that they 
could hitch onto the NDP to create the kind of society they 
wanted. 

And you think, well that's old stuff; we're no longer talking 
about that kind of thing. But I look back at the kinds of things 
that the NDP have been saying lately, and I really wonder if 
they have really changed from 1933 when they passed the 
Regina Manifesto. 
 
And you think, well what has the Regina Manifesto got to do 
with the Conservative throne speech? I think what we have to 
realize: what's the alternative, and is the alternative still the way 
it always was? 
 
I just want to read Section 13 — and perhaps I've done this 
before, but I think it's time, you know, to remember what these 
people are about. This is in social justice, and what they want, 
from the Regina Manifesto: 
 

The establishment of a commission of psychiatrists, 
psychologists, socially minded jurists and social workers, to 
deal with all matters pertaining to crime and punishment and 
the general administration of law, in order to humanize the 
law and to bring it into harmony with the needs of the people. 

 
And it goes on to talk about: we would get rid of the idea of 
crime and punishment, of legal justice; and we would have a 
society ruled by the psychologists and the social workers — 
people who, I'm sure, have their place in society. I question if 
they have their place as rulers. 
 
It goes on to talk about: we will tax people as an intermediate 
measure until we no longer have any time for taxation because 
the state will be controlling all the economy. It talks about: 
there will be social ownership of virtually everything. And most 
important, it says it will not rest until the capitalist . . . 
 

We aim to replace the present capitalist system, with its 
inherent injustice and inhumanity, by a social order from 
which the domination and exploitation of one class by 
another will be eliminated; in which economic planning will 
supersede unregulated private enterprise and competition; 
and in which genuine, democratic self-government, based 
upon economic equality, will be possible. The present order 
is marked by glaring inequalities of wealth and opportunity, 
by chaotic waste and instability; and in an age of plenty, 
condemns a great mass of the people to poverty and 
insecurity. 

 
So we had a look at this as a constant virulent attack on 
capitalism. And what is capitalism? It is an economic system 
that is probably the worst in the world except for all the others. 
It is a system by which people can freely buy and sell without 
government interfering, disrupting, causing shortages. It is a 
system by which people in their economic base can create an 
independent, free base with other values such as freedom of 
religion, freedom of speech and otherwise. 
 
And we have to say, well . . . I remember the member from 
Shaunavon was saying, well, we're all for competition and we're 
all for this and yet they extol the value of their CCF roots, and 
they talk about how wonderful they are, 
  



 
March 19, 1986 

 

55 
 

and you know, I think in society that some of the worst things 
have been done by the people with the best intentions in the 
world. 
 
I'm sure that many of the leaders of the CCF, such as J.S. 
Woodsworth, who wanted research done on Ukrainians and 
idiots and is recorded in, A Prophet and Politics, and these 
people who wanted this kind of society were sincere men, were 
dedicated men, were certainly vigilant men and committed men 
and full of great energy and great sacrifice to accomplish what 
they wanted. I believe that their intentions were good, but their 
results are terrible . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
As my colleague from Turtleford just volunteered, "The road to 
hell is paved with good intentions." I heard that Karl Marx said 
that, although I haven't checked exactly. 
 
And we see what has happened in Saskatchewan when we had 
more and more socialism, that indeed we were having two 
classes of society. There was a class of society of those people 
the taxpayers, and another class of society called the 
government, which more and more was not the elected 
members, but the bureaucracy. And the bureaucracy, although 
many of them were sincere and were just doing a job, but more 
and more power was enhanced into the hands of a bureaucracy 
which usually were more well paid than most people in society, 
that had more perks than most people in society, that had access 
to the ear of government, like the average person did not. 
 
(1630) 
 
We had a class of society where you had . . . People in 
government could buy up a business if they thought it should be 
nationalized, and it was essentially expropriation because they 
had the power to legislate and the power to tax. We had a class 
of society of Crown corporations created that did not have to go 
by the usual rules in the market-place but could continually 
have an invested position so that they could compete with the 
others to the point that others would not be there. And we had a 
class of people that made it very difficult for people to live in 
Saskatchewan, and that's why many of them left. 
 
And you say, well, you know, we have changed all that. And 
some of those Crown corporations are still going, and they are 
functioning well and we are proud of some of the resources and 
we still have a great deal of bureaucracy, although we've 
decreased it very much, and we still have all kinds of things of 
the socialist legacy. 
 
But I think the thing is to realize there is a very clear difference 
about what we are talking about when we as Conservatives 
want to help people. Everybody, every politician is for jobs. 
And that might mean jobs, but it's a question of how are those 
jobs going to be created. 
 
Are they going to be created by more and more government 
intervention in the economy by make-work projects, by useless 
edifices to NDP or CCF politicians of the past, or unnecessary 
wealthy edifices that could be simple and efficient buildings? 
Or are they gong to be created by allowing the private sector to 
create more jobs and to have a climate in which people want to 
build and 

create, which people want to expand their businesses, which 
people want to keep preserving and strengthening their family 
business to hire more people. 
 
Every politician will always say, we're for jobs, but it's vastly 
different of what those jobs might mean. Will those jobs means 
more and more government in the economy? 
 
The NDP candidate in Westmount has said that we need more 
government aggressiveness in the economy. We need the 
government to become more and more involved in the 
economy. And of course along with more government 
involvement, we have more and more powerful unions. And I 
think that it's more important to realize that whereas the unions 
certainly have their place and where the unions certainly serve a 
useful role in society, that if it's a union in the private sector, 
they know there is limits to how much you ask. There are limits 
to what burden you put on the owner of the business because 
eventually that business will close down. But the unions in the 
public sector headed by irresponsible union leaders can ask for 
the sky and create all kinds of problems in society because they 
know that they are competing with the public purse, and if the 
public doesn't like what they're going to ask, then the 
government will be forced to raise taxes. 
 
And so when we talk about raising taxes, no one likes to raise 
taxes; then I ask you, first of all, not to raise taxes. The elected 
representatives must be in control of the government so that 
they can be in control of expenditure of salaries. And when 
there are people who complain, oh, you may have not cut off 
this tax or that tax, the socialists never said, but curb those 
union leaders who are asking for too much and are making 
impossible demands on the public purse which will come out of 
the people in Westmount who many of them do not have 
expensive government jobs. They have their own small business 
or they are working for Intercon, the St. Paul's Hospital, not at 
the kind of wages you get in Regina working for the 
government. 
 
Now while I'm saying these things, I most certainly do not in 
any way want to attack those people in government who are 
responsible, who know their places, to carry out the policy and 
wishes of the elected representatives, and who most certainly do 
not deserve the type of union leadership they have. 
 
But I think it's very important when we talk about taxes that the 
first thing we have to do is to control our government and to 
make sure the elected representatives, not union leaders, are in 
control. And for this reason I most certainly support the actions 
that the Minister of Justice did in January, and I most certainly 
support the kind of responsible attitude we have towards 
government and to who is in control. 
 
When I ran in '82, I had little cards. I didn't have much money 
for a lot of literature, but I had little cards printed up. And they 
said, "Stop bureaucracy, restore democracy.” And I think that's 
a very important issue. And I was very, very pleased in the 
throne speech when we talk about that the public must have 
access to government decisions and access to input in 
government decisions. 
  



 
March 19, 1986 

 

56 
 

We must reverse the trend of the government intervening more 
and more into the families of Saskatchewan, but turn it around 
that the individual and the family has more input into the 
policies and decisions of government. In other words, there's no 
place for government in the living-room or the bedroom of the 
nation, but there most certainly is place in government for the 
average citizen who wants to say something to his politician, 
who wants to give them information. 
 
I think any system eventually has control of information that is 
stifling to that system. We need fresh ideas. We need new 
approaches. We need people who have a compelling interest to 
research new ideas, to look at things in a different angle. And 
we're hearing more and more people saying things like: there's a 
lot of important issues about the family that need to be 
discussed, that need to be evaluated. And that needs to have 
input. 
 
There are people who are saying . . . I'm so pleased that the 
government is going out and having these consultation 
processes in health and such things, so that we can talk to the 
government — consistently all over Saskatchewan. Although I 
spend most of my time in Westmount, I hear the message that 
what people want is to have input in the government. They want 
to be able to say that their MLA is working for them. And 
indeed the people of Westmount are my boss and they can hire 
and fire me. I hope they'll rehire me, and I'll work hard at 
convincing them. But I have not ever forgotten that they are the 
boss. And if they don't like what I'm doing, then I'm afraid to 
say; then it's their verdict. And that is the way it should be. I 
appreciate that and respect that. 
 
I'm so thankful that many Westmount people see me as 
someone who goes to bat for them, and I'm sorry the many 
times that I've not been able to solve the problems that they 
wanted. But I welcome their input and their concerns. 
 
We go back to the NDP and their sociological experiment. They 
experimented in agriculture; they wanted state control of lands. 
They experimented in the economy; they drove people out — 
the young, the active, the educated. They experimented in 
education and health and decided that we would take money to 
buy uranium mines which another group of NDPers want to 
close down. And they experimented with the family and saw 
that they could put oppressive laws and taxation on the family, 
and they could indiscriminately give people welfare and it 
would not harm the family. 
 
One can only conclude after this sociological experiment, the 
experiment has failed; the ideas are old. We now know that 
welfare harms the family more than anything else — the 
welfare mentality, not that a family gets temporary help. We 
now know that government cannot run roughshod over the 
rights of people and have people living in freedom and 
integrity. 
 
We see now the kind of things that the NDP have done, that 
their old new-deal philosophy — their philosophy that more 
government the better — is gone. And it takes a long, long time 
to change it. 

I'm sure that the NDP has always had people who said, you're 
not going fast enough; you're not making changes in the 
sociological direction fast enough; you haven't bought up 
enough mines and businesses. We still have convenience stores 
that are owned by private-sector people. You haven't done 
enough to pass the radical feminist agenda and have day care in 
every school and in every corner. You haven't done enough to 
free women from the family. And I'm sure there was many, 
many of . . . and there still is people . . . The NDP were saying 
you haven't done it enough. 
 
But let me tell you folks, that when you look back in 1933 and 
you see the kind of things that the CCF-NDP set up, and you 
see what they were up to, the only conclusion that you can draw 
is that they did accomplish much of their goals, and if they may 
have not done it in five minutes or in five years, but they 
relentlessly kept their agenda and they pushed their agenda 
through election after election and we were the guinea-pigs in 
their sociological experiment. 
 
And so for those friends, and perhaps occasionally I've said it 
myself, that the Tories could have changed things a little faster. 
Remember, it took the NDP 40 years to experiment on us. It 
took Saskatchewan, 1982, to tell the NDP we didn't appreciate 
the experiment, and we want a government that is responsive to 
average people on average issues. We want government who's 
responsive to the idea that a housewife, for example, should 
have a pension; that being a home-maker is a noble profession 
and that we have a right to the kind of security for our career 
choice as other people have who've chosen a career force 
outside the home. 
 
We want people who . . . that part-time workers, for example, 
would have a pension, and I appreciate and I would like to hear 
more input into what the people of Saskatchewan think of 
Premier Devine's idea for a pension. 
 
But most importantly, I invite my constituents, and indeed the 
rest of the province, to tell us what they want, to become part of 
government, to become part of the decision-making process, 
and to give us their ideas and their freshness. And I appreciate 
that in four years some people have said, you haven't done 
enough on some issues, but I can assure you the NDP keep their 
promises. And if you think that we're a little slow in keeping 
our promises for freedom, for family issues, for any other issue, 
remember the NDP with their sociological agenda will 
eventually keep their promise, and that's the alternative. 
 
For this reason, I most certainly support the throne speech in its 
main, and I am so proud to be an MLA of part of the Devine 
team. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think every once in 
a while we have to stop and compare things, compare their 
record against our record. We've been here four years now and I 
think that maybe we should stop and look back a little, and then 
we can look ahead. We always have to look into the future. It's 
sometimes 
  



 
March 19, 1986 

 

57 
 

difficult to look into the future, but somebody has to take the 
initiative and do this, to see where we're going and what's going 
to happen. 
 
Looking back, I think we have to look to the last dying years of 
the NDP government and their old socialistic ideas. They were 
more interested in their family of Crown corporations than they 
were interested in real families. I remember the last few dying 
years of their administration. They advertised their Crown 
corporations, their family of Crown corporations, that nobody 
could compete with. They were non-competitive and yet they 
paid tax dollars to advertise these Crown corporations on 
television and radio and newspapers. 
 
(1645) 
 
The real families that they forgot about were the home owners 
and the farmers. They allowed interest rates to run rampant. I've 
talked to many people in my constituency in the last four years 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I'm going to ask for the 
members in the back row to cut the chatter. It's very difficult to 
hear in the Chamber. 
 
Mr. Muller: — I've talked to many of my constituents in the 
last four years, Mr. Speaker, and now some of the impact is 
coming to them of what happened to them in 1980 and '81. I've 
seen some notes come back to farmers that they signed in 1980 
and 1981 to buy farm equipment and granaries. When they 
originally signed those notes, they signed those notes at 24 per 
cent floating interest. I can document that, and I don't that that's 
the kind of interest rates that farmers can afford to pay. If the 
interest rates wouldn't have fell, those farmers today would be 
out of business. In fact that's part of the problem from the late 
1970s and the early 1980s, was those high interest rates on 
agriculture and housing. 
 
The housing . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please! 
 
Mr. Muller: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The housing interest 
rates in the late 1970s and early 1980s, the mortgage interest 
rates in those years were 17, 18, 19 per cent. How were people 
ever going to pay for their houses? I think it was a very positive 
move by the Conservative government to guarantee those 
interest rates at 13.25 per cent. 
 
I also think that they've made some very positive moves in 
agricultural interest rates. Agricultural and urban people have to 
live together. They're dependent on each other in this province. 
The interest rates movement in the agricultural sector with 
interest-free loans on livestock, the 6 per cent money on $25 an 
acre on cultivated acreage, is certainly a very important thing to 
the agricultural sector. They know now what they're going to 
have to pay for interest rates over the long term. They can plan 
their business. They don't have to work on a floating rate like 
they did under the former administration. I've talked to many 
farmers. And some of the fellows here sitting on my right are 
also farmers, and I'm sure that they're using the low-interest rate 
programs that have 

been put forward by this government. 
 
An Hon. Member: Never! 
 
Mr. Muller: — The member from Assiniboia with his new 
Lincoln says he's not using our 6 per cent money but I'm sure 
that he probably is. 
 
But I think these kinds of programs are important. People have 
to know what they're paying. They have to be able to plan 
ahead. Agriculture isn't a short-term business; it's a long term. 
And in order to run a long-term business you have to have 
long-term financing, and long-term financing and low interest 
rates is certainly important to Saskatchewan people and 
Saskatchewan farmers. I certainly support our government. 
 
Also we put into effect in 1982 the 8 per cent money for the 
purchase of farm land; told the people exactly how many years 
that this was going to be in place. So before they went out and 
purchased land they could plan. They knew exactly what it was 
going to cost them each year as they were in this program. The 
first five years it would be 8 per cent; the next five years it 
would be 12 per cent or whatever the going rate was at that 
time, and which we all know now that the going rate is less than 
what we had projected. But at least it was long-term, permanent 
interest rates that they knew they could deal with. 
 
And certainly this has put some stability back into the 
agricultural sector as did the 13.25 per cent mortgages put 
stability back into the housing sector, so people knew what they 
were going to pay when they were buying a house. 
 
Another very positive move that we've done is we've come up 
with a 21 cents a gallon on farm fuels. Farmers know that they 
will get a rebate of 21 cents a gallon on their farm fuels this 
spring. They know what they’re going to have to pay. They 
know what it's going to cost to put their crop in. 
 
In 1978, looking back to the former administration, they took 
off 3 cents a gallon — 3 cents. But right after the election they 
cancelled that program. They thought that they didn't need it; 
they were re-elected. They thought they'd never lose power in 
this province and certainly 1982 they found out different. 
 
An Hon. Member: — — '87's coming. 
 
Mr. Muller: — ’87's coming — yes it is. But I think these 
kinds of programs are certainly important. This farmers' royalty 
program . . . The refund of 21 cents a gallon is certainly going 
to help, I know on our farm, to put that crop in this spring. I'm 
sure it will help every other farmer in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm sure that there's lots of other members that 
have all kinds of ideas about what we should be doing and what 
we should have done. And we've certainly learned a lot in the 
last four years; we've been coming out with positive programs. 
 
I'm sure there's lots of other members that want to get up and 
support the throne speech. I will certainly be 
  



 
March 19, 1986 

 

58 
 

supporting the throne speech and I thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's with a great deal 
of pleasure today that I rise to my foot to stand in front of you 
and speak on the throne speech. It's a little bit of a pain here, but 
I'll get by. I'm used to pain. I've been looking at the opposition 
members for the last four years and if there is anything more 
painful than that I haven’t found it yet. 
 
There's one thing that the people of Saskatchewan can be 
assured of and that's that our government will try to keep them 
from enduring pain, the pain of high interest rates, the pain of 
seeing families move out and stay away. 
 
Instead, we're trying to turn that around, Mr. Speaker, and we've 
done it over the past four years. And the throne speech outlines 
numerous new activities that'll continue to do it from now, 10 
years from now, 20 years from now, for as long as we're in 
government. 
 
My constituency, Mr. Speaker, is largely agricultural-based. 
Agriculture is king. I've got a number of small communities — 
1,200, 1,500 in each town. And in those towns, Mr. Speaker, 
you're seeing something really interesting. We've got new 
schools, renovations taking place to others, nursing home 
additions, new nursing homes being built, new highways being 
built. And I'd like to list some of them out, Mr. Speaker, and 
then take it from there, and show how the new, innovative 
approaches in this throne speech will add further to that. 
 
In the town of Wadena, for example, Mr. Speaker, we're 
building a new elementary school. and that new elementary 
school, Mr. Speaker, is needed because we've got more students 
than we've ever had before. More people are moving into the 
community to start businesses. More young farmers are coming 
home and starting raise families. We're looking ahead. 
 
Over 5,000 young farmers in Saskatchewan have taken 
advantage of our farm purchase program, our 8 per cent money, 
and they're building around the town of Wadena. They're 
building new homes on their farms, and they're providing the 
infrastructure for small businesses to survive. We've had over 
40 new businesses start up in the town of Wadena in the last 
three years. 
 
The Premier was out there the other day and had a chance to 
travel around and talk to some of those people. And you know 
what they're saying? They're saying: we like your government; 
keep doing what you're doing; keep on. And we plan to. Many 
of those businesses wouldn't have been started without our nine 
and five-eighths interest program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Under the NDP, what did they have ? Nothing, not a darn thing. 
With us, they not only have got the support of a government 
that's bringing farmers back and providing customers for them, 
they've got nine and five-eighths interest money. 
 
And so things are a little tough in some places. This 

government, Mr. Speaker, has acted in the past to prevent 
farmers from going under. It's rough out there — commodity 
prices are down; world markets are slack; nature hasn't been 
kind to us. Our Farm Land Security Act, Mr. Speaker, has kept 
many, many farmers on the land who otherwise may not have 
been able to. And it doesn't just simply go out and say, whoop, 
you can't foreclose. It's a situation, Mr. Speaker, where we 
provide consultation and an intermediary between the farmer 
and the financial institution that has found themselves in a 
position where they have no other choice except to try to move 
on that farm. 
 
Our cash advances, Mr. Speaker, have been new and innovative 
approaches. For the first time, livestock producers can get a 
cash advance as well as the grain producer, interest free. Mr. 
Speaker, that's something totally new and different. And that's 
kept farmers on those farms and in those small towns. 
 
Presently, Mr. Speaker, farmers are getting ready to put their 
spring crop in. There is 6 per cent money available, $25 an acre. 
Forty-five thousand farmers have taken that up, Mr. Speaker. 
Forty-five thousand farmers are getting 6 per cent money. 
 
The previous speaker talked about what it was like in 1980 and 
'81 — 24 per cent interest rates, and the government of that time 
did nothing. This government is providing assistance and is 
providing help for those people. 
 
And you can hear the members of the opposition talk about, 
Tory times are tough times; and boy, things were good when 
were in. But you know, Mr. Speaker, they had 11 years of 
government and I never saw a private line come into my house. 
I had a party line. If I wanted to discuss business on the phone I 
had 42 other people listening to me. That may be exaggerating, 
Mr. Speaker, but it is possible. When I talk to people, Mr. 
Speaker, in my constituency, they're glad we've got a private 
line now, they're glad that they going to have a private line 
coming in there. Because when I talk to them they no longer 
will have to say, well, we've got to watch what I say because an 
NDP might be listening to me here. Private lines, Mr. Speaker, 
are definitely a boon and not just for that reason. 
 
Technology, Mr. Speaker, is becoming increasingly more 
important out in the agricultural sector. Computers, access to 
information, access to markets. 
 
And while we're talking about markets, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
point out that during the NDP regime marketing was not 
allowed to be taught. People were not supposed to make up 
their own minds. Good Heavens! I mean, if you wanted to have 
a program put on to discuss accounting or farm management, 
unless it was based on the Regina Manifesto, it wasn't allowed. 
There was no funding provided. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we're finding a great lack of technology out there 
today. There's a vacuum there. People need it, people want it, 
and during the 11 years the NDP were in, they did nothing to 
prepare people for our modern age of technology. Nothing! 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we're moving 
  



 
March 19, 1986 

 

59 
 

towards that modern age of technology faster and faster and 
private lines will help bring that about. 
 
We talk about highways, Mr. Speaker. I mentioned in my 
opening remarks that they were building highways in my 
constituency . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Highway 38 from 
Kelvington to Kuroki is being built. That particular piece of 
road was never improved under the NDP. Mr. Speaker, 
Kelvington is a town that's facing a difficult, difficult situation. 
The possibility of having its rail line disappear looms in the 
horizon. 
 
During the NDP regime another one of my towns lost its 
railroad — the town of Wishart in my constituency. And not 
one NDP member went out to fight that rail line abandonment 
hearing. Not one. They weren't there. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I was at Kelvington. I fought the rail line 
abandonment hearing and at least we got a stay of execution. 
But in case, in case someone in their wisdom decides to remove 
that railroad or the elevator companies decide to pull out, I'm 
making sure and this government is making sure that the 
farmers will have decent roads to at least haul their grain to 
market on. And that's why that particular highway is being 
built. Again, something that was never done under the NDP. 
 
Talking about nursing homes, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency 
there have been several announcements in the past year with 
regard to nursing homes. A couple of them are yet to be built. 
We presently have 12 beds that are being constructed at Rose 
Valley. Ten new beds are being constructed at Foam Lake, and 
10 beds were done at Kelvington The town of Wadena is 
engaged in consultation with the Department of Health in an 
attempt to come to an agreement on the size of the structure that 
will be built there. That, Mr. Speaker, is a new innovation too 
— consulting with people, talking to people, working with 
them. Under the NDP somebody walked out from the 
department and said, thou shalt have this, and bang — that was 
it. Nobody was ever consulted, because they believe in big 
governments, centralized governments. Big brother knows best. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I like to work with the people in my 
constituency, and I think they appreciate the consultative 
approach. Further . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It being 5 o'clock this House 
now stands adjourned until 2 p.m. tomorrow. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 


