


















































June 10, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 10, 1986 
 
 

1809 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Sandberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure 
today to introduce to you, and to all members of the Assembly, a 
group of 20 students from the Saskatoon Regional Community, 
which is located in Saskatoon Centre on 1st Avenue in beautiful 
down-town Saskatoon. Again it's my pleasure to have these 
groups of students come to visit the Assembly, and their teacher, 
Robin Stonehouse, is with them again. Robin has made many, 
many trips to the legislature, so it's good to see you again too, 
Robin. 
 
And I might point out to members, Mr. Speaker, that on the floor 
with us today, also, is Cathy West who is a member of this group, 
and she's accompanied there, in the white, by Marla Kowalchuk. 
So a special welcome to you too, Cathy. 
 
I'll be meeting with you shortly after 2:30, after question period, to 
discuss the goings on in the Legislative Assembly with you. I hope 
you've had a good trip to Regina. It's great weather, and I hope you 
have a safe journey home. So I'd like all members to welcome 
them here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Parker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's indeed a pleasure for 
me this afternoon to introduce to you, and through you to the rest 
of the members of the Assembly, a group of grade 6 students who 
are visiting with us from Lindale Elementary School in Moose 
Jaw. Lindale school is located in the Moose Jaw North 
constituency, but I suspect a good majority of the students would 
come from farms surrounding the city of Moose Jaw, as Lindale is 
part of the Thunder Creek School district. I'd like to also welcome 
their teacher, Mr.s. Paton, and also their chaperon and bus driver, 
Mr.s. McNally. 
 
I'd like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that Lindale school regularly 
brings students down each year to the legislature. And I'd like to 
commend the staff at the school for showing such an interest in the 
proceedings that go on in Regina in our parliamentary system. 
 
The Lindale School, Mr. Speaker, is also making preparations for 
1987, during which time they'll be celebrating their 25th 
anniversary. And I'd also like to take this opportunity to 
congratulate the staff and the school. I understand the enrolment at 
Lindale has more than doubled during the past 25 years while the 
school has been in operation. 
 
I hope you've had a successful and enjoyable day down in Regina. 
I know you'll have an interesting time watching question period, 
and I hope each of you have a pleasant summer. Thank you. I'd 
like to ask all members to join me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would just like to 
add my welcome to those from the member from Moose Jaw 
North. I had the privilege of being a student at Lindale School the 
year it opened in my grade 6 year when they began bussing in kids 
from the surrounding district. 
 
Mr.s. Paton, who is accompanying the students today, taught my 
sister in grade 3 or 4. And every time I go back, there are many 
fond memories. And I'm just glad to see that the students of 
Lindale School are carrying on a tradition which I enjoyed there, 
of coming down to the legislature. And I wish you well on your 
trip home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to add a welcome 
to the Lindale School, and particularly to Mr.s. Paton. She was my 
teacher at Lake Valley, Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — . . . in grade 7 and grade 8. And it's a 
pleasure to see her here, and I extend a warm welcome. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Dispute with Saskatchewan Doctors 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 
Minister of Health, and it deals with the unfortunate dispute 
between the minister and Saskatchewan doctors, the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association — a dispute which has, as the 
minister well knows, resulted in a withdrawal of health services in 
a number of communities. 
 
Can the minister inform the Assembly whether he has finally 
decided to put the public safety ahead of his particular political 
strategies, and has he agreed to get back to the bargaining table 
with the doctors? Has he agreed to do that later today, and if so, 
when and where will the meeting be held? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I don't think one would say 
there's a great dispute. There has been a bit of a breakdown in 
negotiations. The doctors have seen it adequate to withdraw 
services. 
 
I phoned, as you know, Mr. Speaker — if you've been following 
the press and anyone else— repeatedly, day after day, I've been 
calling for the doctors to come back to the negotiating table. That 
hasn't transpired, so I took the initiative the other day to set up a 
meeting for this afternoon with the chairman, the president of the 
SMA, Dr. Craig Hubbard. He and I will be meeting. I'd just as 
soon, for various reasons, keep the location of the meeting not 
announced at this time. I think you would understand that from 
past practices, sir. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary to the Premier. Mr. 
Speaker, I'm sure the Premier shares the concern of all of us with 
respect to this breakdown in medical  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1810 
 
 

services. My question is this: do you consider the health and safety 
of the Saskatchewan public a sufficiently high priority that you 
will involve yourself in the negotiations between your government 
and the Saskatchewan Medical Association, so that you can use 
the strength of your office to have both parties agree to a mutually 
acceptable settlement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I have met with the doctors 
previous to this. The Minister of Health and I have talked with 
them, and I will be there as I feel is appropriate. 
 
And I certainly will advise the hon. member that health care is 
extremely important to me and to this government in 
Saskatchewan. That's why we initiated the removal of direct 
billing in the province of Saskatchewan so anybody of any income 
could have full access to health care without discrimination 
associated with any sort of income. We initiated that because the 
previous administration didn't. And so we will stick to that, and it's 
very important. We've increased health care expenditures because 
it's very important, Mr. speaker. 
 
So, yes, I will be there if need be, and we will continue to make it 
a priority. And we will certainly protect the public and make sure, 
one, there is not extra billing, and that there is as good a health 
care as you're going to find any place in Canada in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Hearings re Canadian Softwood Products 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to direct a 
question to the Minister of Economic Development and Trade. As 
you may be aware, Mr. Minister, today in Washington the 
International Trade Commission began hearings on a petition from 
the U.S. softwood lumber industry for a 27 per cent duty against 
Canadian softwood lumber imports. 
 
Since nearly $20 million a year worth of softwood lumber 
products are sold from Saskatchewan into the American market, 
can the minister tell us whether the Government of Saskatchewan 
was represented at today's hearing? And is so, are you able to table 
the government's presentation in respect to its submission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member 
was aware of the process that is taking place in Washington, the 
interventions by the various provinces and by the various interests 
in Canada will be coming and will come down at a later date. 
 
I can advise the Assembly and the hon. member that I, along with 
my colleagues of other provinces involved with the production of 
softwood lumber, will be meeting in Vancouver on this Friday 
with Mr. Joe Clark to co-ordinate the strategies that Canadian 
provinces, the Canadian government, and the Canadian industry 
will be taking with their representation to that international body 
to advance the argument, as was done in 1982, as to why those 
particular tariffs should not be imposed. 
 
The hon. member, to go back to his original question: it was the 
initial hearings today; the hearings where you will hear evidence 
from the offended parties, if you like,  

will come at a later time during this summer and late into the fall. 
And I can assure the people of Saskatchewan and assure this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan will be there. 
Saskatchewan will be there as part of a Canadian contingent, and 
Saskatchewan will be there protecting the interests of the softwood 
lumber in this province. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Supplement, Mr. Speaker. I was wondering 
whether the minister can assure us that at the hearings which were 
initiated today, whether it was not possible for members to put in 
objections to proceeding with the same mater that had been 
already heard. In other words, whether the matter in fact had been 
reviewed and all the details had been submitted at a previous 
occasion, and therefore it was a duplication of process. Is it not 
possible that the Government of Saskatchewan, or indeed the 
Government of Canada, would not be available at such a 
presentation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — If the hon. member has been following the 
story, both in the media and is aware of the process that is taking 
place, the Canadian ambassador intervened on behalf of this 
country in that process to try to convince that particular regulatory 
authority that they should not once again hear this particular case, 
as they had in 1982, and ruled in favour of Canada as that there 
was no unfair trade advantage being imposed by Canadians. 
 
That process is starting again. Canada will respond and 
Saskatchewan will respond, and, I believe, in a way that will be 
beneficial to the softwood lumber industry in this province. 
 
I think the hon. member rises and raises that particular question in 
this Assembly, and what he is really saying is not so much, will 
we stand up for the softwood lumber industry in this province, but 
that the NDP, along with their people in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP in Ottawa have suggested to the national government, have 
suggested to the population of this country, that we should at this 
time cut off all trade negotiations with the United States; that we 
should go it alone; that we should somehow try to live on the 
small domestic market that we have in this country. 
 
I think that is wrong; I think that is wrong-headed; and I think the 
NDP should re-evaluate their whole position as how we approach 
trade, not only with the United States, but with the rest of the 
world. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — New question to the minister, Mr. Speaker. Can 
the minister confirm that, in spite of earlier promises of help, the 
Mulroney PC government is now refusing to provide financial 
assistance to the Canadian softwood lumber industry in the 
preparation of its case. And can you tell the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers what specific role your government will play in 
Canada's attempt to beat back the countervailing duty petition? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well again to suggest somehow that the 
federal government is not playing a role with regard to softwood 
lumber industry is completely wrong and demonstrates that the 
hon. member knows nothing of the process. The Canadian 
government is standing full  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1811 
 

force behind the Canadian softwood lumber industry and the 
provinces wherein that softwood lumber industry is located. 
 
The federal government, along with the provinces involved, will 
be appearing before the International Trade Commission to lobby 
its particular case, to advance its particular case, and to advance 
why the American argument was wrong in 1982 and is wrong 
again in 1986. To suggest that the federal government is doing 
nothing, is wrong. To suggest the Government of Saskatchewan is 
not prepared to do something, is wrong. 
 
We in this province are looking after that forest industry. We 
believe that the U.S. market is absolutely crucial to this particular 
industry, and we will look after it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, is the minister aware of the 
comments by a senior trade adviser to the U.S. Senate finance 
committee, Mr. Len Santos, to the effect that even if the American 
lumber companies lose this countervailing duty case, he went on 
to say that President Reagan will move to restrict shipments of 
softwood lumber from Canada. 
 
In fact, Mr. Santos has suggested that this was part of the deal that 
President Reagan agreed to in order to get the U.S. Senate finance 
committee approval of the free trade talks with Canada. 
 
Are you aware of those comments, Mr. Minister, and do you find 
this kind of back room deals in keeping with the spirit of free trade 
negotiations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have never found 
throughout the last four or five years that any bureaucrat properly 
spoke for the President of the United States, and I doubt that the 
bureaucrat is going to speak for the President of the United States 
today. 
 

Funding for Spraying Against Grasshopper Infestation 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 
Minister of Agriculture, and it deals with statements made by the 
federal Minister of Agriculture yesterday where he indicated that 
in dealing with the most severe outbreak of grasshoppers in many, 
many years, that he was prepared to put money into the farmer's 
pocket for the cost of spray, but in fact none of the Premiers in the 
affected areas, Alberta or Saskatchewan, had made submissions to 
him that that kind of money be forthcoming. 
 
Mr. Premier, I wonder, when that kind of a statement is made by 
the federal government, whether or not you have taken the 
opportunity in the last 24 hours to appeal to the federal 
government for cash and assistance in chemicals for spraying of 
the grasshoppers this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to get the 
specific statement or quote before I comment on it. I would say 
that if the federal government is prepared to spend additional 
money in agriculture, any province in Canada will be prepared to 
look at it and to explore the possibilities. So I would like to know 
exactly what the federal minister said and, Mr. Speaker, if the hon. 
member would show me the specifics, I would be glad to  

respond in some detail. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Supplement to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. It 
seems to me that this is a strange process where the federal 
minister has opened up the treasury for Saskatchewan farmers and 
the Premier wants to check the details of the suggestion. What I 
would like to ask you, Mr. Premier, is whether or not you have 
made a request to the federal government to give assistance in this 
disaster that's happening in the southern part of the province, 
including part of your own constituency. If you're not able to stand 
up for your own constituents, maybe we can give you a hand. 
 
But the question is whether or not you have made a submission to 
the federal government for assistance in the severe outbreak of 
grasshoppers that farmers are facing this year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we are in constant 
negotiations with the federal government. And if, if the federal 
minister has said that he would be prepared to co-operate with 
provinces . . . I was with the federal minister 10 days ago, Mr. 
Speaker. We had a whole conference together and we talked about 
grasshoppers; we talked about drought; we talked about disaster 
relief and everything else. If he said that he would look at 
co-operative programs with the provinces, it's as a result of us 
bringing it to his attention. So it isn't something that was 
brand-new. I mean, I met this Minister of Agriculture with him 
and my colleagues for two days in Ottawa 10 days ago, and we 
explored all these possibilities. So if he's saying that he's prepared 
to look at joint programs, it's as a result of the things that we've 
done already. So you know, as usual, you're just a little bit behind; 
I mean you're 10 days behind in terms of the negotiations that 
have been going on. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Final supplementary to the Premier. Will 
you join with the opposition in sending a telex to the federal 
government today, this afternoon, asking for a payment of 
chemicals to help fight grasshoppers this year? Will you join with 
us in a telex to the federal minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that it's fair to say 
that the opposition does not always acknowledge the several 
hundreds of millions and billions of dollars that we have put 
forward so far in co-operation with the federal government. So 
now they're asking me to join with them in asking for additional 
kinds of money when we have provided a list of programs and 
money that is the largest in Saskatchewan's history, and certainly 
in Canada's history for any particular province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I don't believe that it's necessary that I join with 
the member of Shaunavon to get any sort of response out of the 
federal government because the relationship and the success rate 
between the province of Saskatchewan and the federal 
government in agriculture has never, ever, in the history of this 
province been better. 
 

Deficiency Payment for Western Farmers 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — A new question to the Premier, and it's 
another area that affects farmers — and here again, I'm 
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1812 
 
 

wondering why you're not standing up stronger for the 
Saskatchewan farmers — and it deals with the request made by 
the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and the Western Canada Wheat 
Growers and the New Democratic Party who are calling for $2 
billion in deficiency payment for farmers. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Premier, why, on the one hand, we have on May 2 
your caucus voting against deficiency payment, and then talking 
about $1 billion in deficiency payment when you go to Manitoba. 
Why are you refusing to join with the farm groups in 
Saskatchewan and the New Democratic Party in calling for $2 
billion in deficiency payment for the farmers of Saskatchewan and 
Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again the member 
opposite doesn't give the whole story. I have asked for several 
billion dollars in assistance to Saskatchewan farmers and we have, 
as a result, received several billion. I have also asked for more, and 
I asked for $11 domestic wheat, and we've received 10 in terms of 
a recommendation. And I asked, along with the other western 
premiers, to have a deficiency payment or equivalent export 
subsidy of $1 billion so that we could negotiate from a position of 
strength when we're talking with the United States on their export 
subsidies and their farm bill. 
 
Now you put together the money we've received in a western 
grains stabilization package, in drought payments and the freezing 
of elevator tariffs and freight rates, and all the money that we've 
put together, plus $1 billion to protect our export wheat, plus $11 
or $10 a bushel domestic wheat, and you've got a combination of 
several billion dollars that we have not only asked for, Mr. 
Speaker, but that we have received. 
 
And I will just repeat to the member opposite. We have never seen 
such money in the history of the country come to a single province 
on any sector, let alone agriculture, as we have in the last two 
years between the province of Saskatchewan and the Government 
of Canada in the sector of agriculture. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Final supplementary to the Minister of 
Agriculture. Mr. Premier, you can posture all you want, but the 
fact is that there's a record number of farmers going broke under 
your administration. The facts are that you were the weak link at 
the Manitoba meeting with the western premiers, and that you 
gave only conditional support for the $1 billion in deficiency 
payment for the farmers. And in this very Assembly, as I have 
indicated earlier, you voted against deficiency payments on May 
2nd and, in fact, your caucus voted against it. You weren't even 
here . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order please. Order, order. The member rose on 
a final supplementary and is making a statement. If you have a 
supplementary, I'll take it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier 
and it deals . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order please. Order. The member rose on a final 
supplementary. If you have the supplementary, I'll take it. 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I'm now asking for a new 
question. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I'll take the next person that wants to ask a 
question. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question and I want to 
direct it to the Premier, and it deals with your posture on the 
deficiency payment and the fact that you have indicated that you 
are now in favour of a deficiency payment in Manitoba. How do 
you square that with the fact that on May 2nd your caucus, while 
you were away in Vancouver at Expo, voted against the deficiency 
payment? And what kind of a message do you think that is 
sending to Ottawa when it comes to paying out money to farmers? 
 
On the one hand you've indicated today that you're not even going 
to bother asking for assistance for farmers on grasshoppers, and 
now we see that you're voting against deficiency payment and 
saying that you're in favour. Who's standing up for Saskatchewan? 
How can we believe what you're saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when the member 
opposite asks who's standing up for Saskatchewan, I'll take his 
agriculture record in the last 11 years, or four years against this 
agriculture record any day of the week. The solutions, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have put into place in terms of improved crop 
insurance, western grain stabilization payments, and the various 
kinds of livestock and interest rate protection are unheard of in the 
history of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the answer, opposite, would be land banks — sell 
your land to the government. That's the NDP solution. That, Mr. 
speaker, and as well, I'll tell you what we could do — if you were 
NDP, you could charge them a little succession duties and death 
tax. Land bank and death tax — that's the answer to farmers. 
 
I'll tell you who has the support of agriculture. This side of the 
House has support of the agriculture every place in this province, 
and you know it and I know it. And all you can do is put up 
smoke-screens. If you want to know who led the charge in 
Winnipeg, it certainly didn't come from Manitoba. It came from 
this side of Manitoba, and everybody in Manitoba knows it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Answers to Written Questions 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Government House Leader, Mr. Minister . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who would that be? 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Well that could be anyone, I guess, at a given 
point. But my question is to the Government House Leader. Mr. 
Minister, this deals with the government's arrogant refusal to 
account for the expenditures of this government of public moneys. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the Government House Leader . . .  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1813 
 

I know you don't like the question; I know you don't like this 
question at all. But we're going to keep asking the question, Mr. 
Minister. We're going to keep asking it because this deals with the 
taxpayers' money, and your government still has not answered a 
number of written questions ordered answered by the Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker, of nearly two years ago. You haven't answered those 
questions. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, can you tell the Saskatchewan people when 
your government will finally answer some of the questions, such 
as the government employment arrangements of the former PC 
candidate, Terry Leier; the money paid out to various law firms by 
government departments and Crown corporations; and the 
out-of-province travel expenses of cabinet minister, such as the 
Premier and the former minister of Economic Development and 
Trade. When, Mr. Minister, will you respond to these questions? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I've indicated on a 
previous occasion in the House, I think it's something like over 
300 questions have been asked in the period of our term of office. 
I think there's something . . . there's certainly under 20 questions 
which have not been answered, and the member mentions one Mr. 
Terry Leier, the employment and so on of Mr. Leier; I believe 
those questions were answered in Crown corporations committee 
to his own leader, the Leader of the Opposition, as it relates to Mr. 
Leier's employment and the conditions of that employment. 
 
But in any case, there are, I admit, a few questions on the order 
paper that answers are required for, and answers will be 
forthcoming, Mr. Speaker. As I've said, we've answered well over 
300 questions, and there are very few that have not been answered. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — A question to the minister. Mr. Minister, you 
keep saying that the answers are forthcoming. Mr. Minister, this 
government's arrogant attitude in answering questions, or refusing 
to answer the questions, I think is some concern to the public of 
Saskatchewan. I think it continues to amaze the taxpayers of this 
province how you refuse to answer any of the questions. 
 
You have spent more tax dollars during the past four years than 
any government has . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member is making 
statements. If you have a question, get directly to it. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, I can see that we aren't going to 
have the opportunity to put the point across because you will not 
answer the questions. But, Mr. Minister, will you finally tell the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers the full cost of the various international 
junkets taken by the Premier and the former minister of Economic 
and Trade? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, as I have indicated, I will 
match the record of this administration in answering questions that 
have been ordered by this House with the record of that former 
administration any day. And any fair-minded person who 
examines the two records will give us good marks in that area over 
that government. That member who just asked the question was a 
member  

of that government. I can remember him in that chair over here, 
sitting there laughing, waking up and then laughing, when they 
brought in box after box after box of answers in the last dying 
minutes of a session. And the members opposite, some of whom 
are bellowing from their seats . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Proceed. 
 

Legislation Promised in Throne Speech 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question 
to the House Leader. Mr. Minister, I want to deal with the 
shambles which you have created in your legislative process in 
this Assembly since the calling of this sitting of the legislature. 
More than two and a half months ago your government promised a 
number of legislative changes in the throne speech which opened 
the session. You've even advertised some of those proposals, Mr. 
Minister. That was in March. Here we are in June. Not one piece 
of major legislation has been introduced. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, will you give the Assembly and the 
people of Saskatchewan a guarantee that all major pieces of 
legislation promised in the March throne speech will be introduced 
for first reading today or tomorrow so that interested groups and 
individuals will have a chance to review your proposals and 
comment on them before the legislature is required to debate 
them? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the member will 
look at the record, there are over 50 Bills before the House. Some 
of them have been passed, but there have been over 50 Bills 
introduced. There are other Bills being introduced as we go along. 
There will be more Bills introduced before this week is over, and I 
suspect there will be other Bills introduced next week. 
 
I would just say to the hon. member, we will be bringing forward 
our proposals in legislation as we have been doing. We will 
continue to do that. The hon. members, all they need do, as an 
opposition should do, is review those and provide whatever 
opposition statements that they feel appropriate. I'm sure they'll do 
that, and we'll get on with the business of the House. 
 
I would say to you, Mr. Speaker, there are 53 or 54 Bills that have 
been introduced in this session. He says they're housekeeping 
Bills. He says housekeeping. he says some are major, some are 
housekeeping. I'm saying that every Bill that's introduced before 
this House is part of the legislative program of the government on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Call for General Election 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to 
say a few words under rule 16, a special debate which is going on 
today. And when I complete my remarks, I intend to move the 
motion along the following line: 
 
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1814 
 
 

That this Assembly regrets that the Government of 
Saskatchewan has stayed in office longer than any peace-time 
government in Saskatchewan since the last Conservative 
government; regrets that the Government of Saskatchewan is 
clinging to power beyond the traditional four-year mandate; 
and further, that this Assembly therefore urges the Premier of 
Saskatchewan to call a general election forthwith. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you will know and other members of the 
government will know that we are now well into the fifth year of 
this government's lawful mandate. And I say legal mandate 
because by the rules and the laws of the country, a government, a 
provincial government, is allowed to stay five years. But, Mr. 
Speaker, you and the members opposite will know as well that the 
long-standing tradition in our province is that you have elections 
every four years or sooner — that you would have an election in 
this province every four years or sooner. Now the fact that we 
have gone beyond the four-year term of this government, the 
traditional four-year term, indicates clearly that we have a 
government that is afraid of the people of the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, people are asking us, why is Grant Devine and 
Premier Devine afraid to call an election. They're asking that. 
Everywhere we go in the province, it doesn't matter whether 
you're knocking on doors in Shaunavon or Watrous or up in the 
northern area of the province where my colleagues from 
Cumberland and Athabasca represent the area, the first question 
that anyone is asking is, why isn't there an election when this 
government's mandate has run out? That's what they're asking. 
The first question when you knock on someone's door or when 
you go into a coffee shop and sit down for a cup of coffee is, why 
isn't there an election — why isn't there an election? And they're 
also adding now, we know why there isn't an election; this 
government is afraid. They're afraid. 
 
They say that they ran away from the farmers last year in Swift 
current. The Premier was down there for a little meeting. There 
was 1,200 or 1,500 farmers who got together to have a little 
discussion with the Premier because he was meeting in Swift 
Current. And in that group there were people from the Hutterite 
brethren — they were there; there were people from the member 
from Morse's constituency — they were there to meet the Premier; 
and Shaunavon and Maple Creek and Swift Current and Morse, as 
I mentioned. And they all came out and they brought their picnic 
lunch, and they were going to listen to the Premier explain how he 
was going to bring the farming economy out of the doldrums. 
 
Now do you know what the Premier did, this man who today 
indicated that he's the one who represents farmers? He hid in the 
school behind police barricades and this was shown across the 
country on TV. And I had calls from British Columbia that night, 
people saying, why wouldn't Premier Devine come out and see the 
farmers? Well we know he runs from farmers. We knew he ran 
from the nurses here on the steps of the legislature a few months 
ago — wouldn't meet with them. He wouldn't even meet with 
them in Estevan in his own constituency. He said: I  

don't have to go there to meet with the nurses. He's referred to 
working people who come to see him as radicals and NDPers. 
Well the interesting thing, Mr. Speaker, is that he writes off about 
half of the population when he talks in insulting ways to that group 
of people. 
 
He treats working people as if they are dirt. And I say to you that a 
Premier in this province who runs away from farmers and runs 
away from nurses and won't meet with working people — and 
now even the doctors are saying that the Minister of Health and 
the Premier won't meet with them — is getting a reputation. Do 
you know what they're calling Grant Devine out in the cafe . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member is using the 
Premier's personal name. If you want to refer to the Premier, that's 
fine, but I would ask the member to obey that rule of this 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I accept your ruling and will refer to him as 
Premier Devine. But he's getting a reputation about running from 
people. He's ran from the farmers in Swift Current. He's ran from 
the nurses here on the steps of the legislature and his own 
constituency. He won't meet with the doctors. Do you know what 
people are calling him out in the country, Mr. Speaker? They're 
saying this is the gingerbread man Premier; he runs and runs and 
he won't meet with anyone, and they're saying he is now running 
from the people of the province. That's what they're saying, that he 
is running from the people of the province in not calling an 
election. 
 
Well I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, that this individual, this Premier of 
ours, Premier Devine, can run but he can't hide. He can run from 
the farmers, and he can run from the nurses, and he can run from 
working people, and he can insult them by calling them radicals 
and crazies, but I'll tell you that he can't hide from them because 
we still live in a democracy. We still live in a province where we 
have to have elections. We still live in a province where we have 
to call an election. And I say to you that maybe Grant Devine has 
a reason . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member is not obeying the 
rules of the Assembly. I would ask him to stay with the rules of 
the Assembly otherwise we'll move on to another speaker. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say again, that Premier Devine may have 
good reason to be afraid of the people of the province. He may 
have good reason. Because if we look at the economy of this 
province and the changes that have occurred in the last four years, 
I say to you, there is reason why Premier Devine should be afraid 
and should be worried. But I say that's not a good enough reason. 
That's not a good enough reason not to call an election. 
 
The tradition in this province is that you have an election every 
four years. And I say to you that the tradition across Canada is that 
you have elections every four years or sooner. 
 
Look at the facts. Over the past 26 years in Canada, since 1960, 
there have been 60 provincial elections in Canada, and the average 
length is three years and eight months. That's the average; that's 
the tradition. And in the British  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1815 
 

parliamentary system of government, tradition is every bit as 
strong as the written law because that's what we govern our lives 
by and that's what our laws are based on. In fact, they have much 
power in themselves because tradition is what we are all about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since April of 1982 there have been 10 provincial 
elections in Canada. In fact, Alberta and Prince Edward Island 
have had two elections, believe it or not, two elections since we've 
had one in Saskatchewan. Now that's unusual; that's very unusual 
to have two elections in our neighbouring province of Alberta and 
not having any in Saskatchewan. 
 
Believe it or not there are people in Maple Creek and along that 
west side of the border who are beginning to wonder about the 
laws of the province. They're saying: do you think there's a chance 
that Premier Devine is going to stay beyond his five-year 
mandate? That's what they're saying out there. They are concerned 
about it. 
 
They're concerned in Maple Creek, in the towns along the border, 
because they're saying this government is afraid because they 
broke all their promises. They're saying that he promised to take 
off the 5 per cent sales tax; even in places like Rosetown people 
are saying that. And the candidate out there, Mr. George Tweedie, 
is saying that when he's out on the doorsteps this is what he's 
hearing — that that promise to take off the 5 per cent sales tax is 
one of the reasons they're afraid. And they're afraid to call an 
election, this Conservative government, because you've broken all 
your promises. You can't possibly put ads in the newspaper in 
1982 saying you're going to eliminate the sales tax and then call an 
election three years later and win. 
 
Well here's an interesting theory that the Conservative Party 
believes that the people of the province have such a short memory 
that if you wait five years maybe they'll forget all our broken 
promises. That's what they're saying out in the streets of Rosetown 
and Maple Creek and in Moosomin, that this government is afraid 
of the people because of all the promises that have been broken. 
 
There's another tax increase that they're saying has been pushed 
across on the people of this province, and that is the removal of the 
property improvement grant, which amounts to a massive increase 
in property taxes. Now this wasn't talked about in the election 
campaign in '82; not one word in the hidden agenda of the 
Conservative Party in that campaign about taking off the property 
improvement grant. Was that ad in any of the papers? I didn't see it 
in one paper that they were going to take out the property 
improvement grant — not one word. 
 
Now that hidden agenda, that hidden agenda of Conservative 
parties when they get into power, is another reason that the people 
of this province are ready to kick the Conservatives out. And I 
invite all of the Conservative members opposite to think about 
why you are now in a position where you can't win an election. 
Why do you think that has happened? Why do you think it has 
happened that you've gone from 15 points in a lead to now being 
behind and not able to call an election? 
 
And this came as a shock to many Conservative members.  

They were here in a jocular manner for three years, believing that 
any time they wanted to they could call an election and be back in 
the same configuration as we are now. 
 
Well in April of this year I couldn't believe the look on their faces 
when Premier Devine told them that he couldn't call an election 
because they couldn't win. They looked like whipped dogs when 
they came into this House after that caucus meeting when they 
were told that they couldn't have a provincial election. I couldn't 
believe it. 
 
He had built them up in the hype and the cheer-leading to believe 
that they couldn't be beaten, for three and a half or four years. 
Then they had their caucus meeting in April and Premier Devine 
told them: look, we can't have an election in April because we 
can't win, but wait till June. 
 
(1445) 
 
I'll tell you, between April and June I'm going to advertise, I'm 
going to spend millions of taxpayers' dollars, and I'll bring us back 
up. I'm also going to travel around the province and I'm going to 
announce Pocklington in North Battleford, and Weyerhaeuser in 
P.A. And I'm going to announce a fertilizer plant in Regina, and 
I'm going to attach it to an upgrader that's never been built, but I'm 
going to be able to con the people of province. And you wait — 
wait till June. I'm going to spend millions of dollars advertising, 
and I'll use those executive aircraft to fly around the province and 
stop at each town. And I'll fix them. I'll get our popularity back up, 
and I'll use the taxpayers' dollar to do it. 
 
Well he tried. Grant Devine spent all of his time . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. That's about the fifth time today 
that the member has done the same thing, and I would ask that he 
either stay on the subject or move off the subject and let someone 
else speak that's prepared to obey the rules. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I apologize for using the Premier's name. 
When I get talking I slip into the use of his name, and I wanted to 
refer to him as Premier Devine. 
 
But I want to say that, in using the taxpayers' money . . . I want to 
finish this scenario that has happened between April and June of 
1986. premier Devine did spend millions of taxpayers' money. 
Every newspaper was plugged full of advertising. The TV — you 
couldn't turn it on without seeing a government ad or a beer ad — 
and they're closely connected. And we did hear all the 
announcements. 
 
And they did their polling in June. And then he came back to 
caucus and told them again, we can't have a June election because 
it's still not good enough; in fact, it's worse; in fact, it's much 
worse and slipping. And boys, I'll tell you, what we have to do is 
just sit back and enjoy it for five years and collect your salary 
because I don't think I can turn it around. That's what he told them. 
That's what he told them: get your cheques, spend your money, 
but I don't think I can turn it around. I've pulled my biggest punch, 
and that's spending all the taxpayers' money on  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1816 
 
 

ads and announcements, and it hasn't helped; in fact, it's got worse. 
In fact, what they're telling me out there is, they don't even believe 
me any more, and my popularity's slipping. Premier Devine said 
that to them: my popularity is slipping so fast that I don't know . . . 
He said, in fact it looks like we're in some trouble, and I think we'll 
have to wait at least until October or maybe even next April. So 
we'll see. 
 
But I'll tell you that the people of the province are not happy with 
being tricked and manoeuvred by Premier Devine. And I'll tell 
you, the day he chooses to call the election — and he will have to, 
and he may not choose but it will be forced on him — that that 
will be a day of reckoning for this government that has broken its 
promises of decreasing taxes, and in fact hasn't decreased, but has 
increased sales tax, put it on used automobiles; increased it by 
increasing property taxes by elimination of the property 
improvement grants, and increased income tax by putting a 1 per 
cent flat tax across the board. 
 
I'll say not only have they increased taxes on cigarettes and other 
examples up over 100 per cent, tax on cigarettes . . . increased 
every area of taxes. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that is one of 
the reasons that we're in a great deal of difficulty and have $2 
billion in deficits. 
 
Even though the taxes have been increased in every area, we owe 
$2 billion. Now people are saying, how is that possible; how can I 
be paying more taxes, getting less service, and still owe 2 billion 
in deficit? is that possible? Even at a time when we're producing 
more oil than ever before, and the oil prices are higher than they've 
ever been in the history of the province, how can anyone 
mismanage a province that bad? Well it's not hard when the 
Premier when he was elected said this province is so wealthy that 
you can mismanage it and still make money. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You can't even say it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well it's hard to say because it's so stupid. 
It's hard to say it because when Premier Devine said it I couldn't 
hardly believe it, that there's so much money . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It is my duty to inform the 
member that his time has elapsed. 
 
Order, please. Order. I've called for order several times, and I'm 
not going to call again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I am happy to second the 
motion of my colleague, the member for Shaunavon. The thrust of 
this motion is that the government opposite is clinging to power, is 
staying in office long after the normal time when people would be 
given an opportunity to pass judgement on a government. And 
there's no question that that's right. 
 
I looked up some figures and I note that in the history of this 
province since 1905 there have been 20 elections and 20 
legislatures. Sixteen of those legislatures have lasted four years or 
less. Four have lasted more than four years. Two have been 
brought about by the disasters and crises of two world wars, 
World War I and World War II;  

and two have been brought about by the disasters and crises of two 
Conservative governments — the government of Dr. Anderson, 
and the government of the doctor, Premier, who we now have. 
 
And that's what we've had. Every single peacetime government in 
this province that wasn't a Conservative government went to the 
people in four years or less, but not this government. Not Dr. 
Anderson's government, because it was scared and had every 
reason to be scared, because when it went to the electorate, it not 
only lost the election, it lost every single seat. 
 
And now we have the second Conservative government, the only 
other one in the peacetime history of this province who has clung 
to office beyond the traditional four years. And certainly there's no 
question that this government is clinging to office. And it's clear 
that it's clinging to office because they know they want to have an 
election, they come up to an election day, and they suddenly get 
cold feet and they back off. 
 
They have come up and back — they walked out to the end of that 
diving-board and looked down and turned around and walked 
back, and then they had another upwelling of courage and they 
walked out to the end of the diving-board again, and they have 
looked down and then they have turned around and come back. 
Every time that board looks awfully high and that water looks 
awfully cold, and they are still marching back and forth on the 
diving-board, still trying to get their courage as to when they're 
going to take the plunge. 
 
And certainly they tried it in the fall of 1985. Everybody knows 
that in the fall of 1985 they were planning an election. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who was? Who was? 
 
An Hon. Member: — You were. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Speaker, someone says we 
were planning an election. We were certainly planning for an 
election. I was up at the sod turning of the upgrader project in 
October . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, indeed, I was. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And I wish that project well, but I also 
hope, Mr. Speaker, that I will be able to attend the turning of the 
second sod before next fall because we certainly haven't seen the 
second sod turned since last fall. No indeed, we haven't. 
 
We've got in September 21, 1985, an article in the Prince Albert 
(Daily) Herald: 
 

. . . provincial campaign has already begun. Saskatchewan 
voters are being swept into a provincial election campaign 
despite no formal announcement by Premier Grant Devine. 

 
And then on April 30th, the Canadian press story quoting a 
Conservative government appointee — who asked not to be 
named — quote: "We were told to be ready for a fall  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1817 
 

campaign and not to plan any holidays." 
 
Well indeed, indeed, they were certainly planning for one. But 
they got out to the end of that diving-board and their feet got very 
cold and back they walk, and instead they had a Regina North East 
by-election. And I suspect they'd like to have that one back again. 
I think they'd like to have that one back again. 
 
And so that by January 2nd, the press were saying, and this is Mr. 
Paul Martin, in the P.A. Herald: 
 

So far Premier Devine and his government are finding that the 
last days of 1985 were difficult ones as they come to grips with 
the reality of the polls that showed them trailing and in danger 
of having the largest majority in the history of Saskatchewan 
lost. 

 
Yes, indeed. They were troubled by that, but they got their courage 
up again in the spring, and they planned a campaign for some time 
between April 28th and May 5th. And there's no question of that. 
Nobody could have existed in this province in March without 
knowing that the government was planning an election campaign. 
There was no question of that. Signs of spring election abound. 
 
This was when the member for Lakeview was moving his trailer 
on the parking lot at the Golden Mile mall and putting up his vast 
sign which says, Tim Embury. I know he just put that up because 
he wanted the trailer to be there. We all know that it isn't there 
now, but he just wanted to show the folks, I suppose, that he had a 
trailer. I think not. I think he was planning for an election. I think 
he was planning for an election. 
 
I think a lot of other people were planning for an election. Here's 
the Globe and Mail saying, "All signs point to a May election in 
Saskatchewan." and you bet they did. All signs pointed to a May 
election. but once again out on the end of that diving-board, once 
again the feet getting cold, once again deciding to turn around and 
come back. 
 
There were many, many comments during that period. The 
Premier's election tease was one of them. But when it came right 
down to it, there was a bad case of cold feet and a withdrawal, a 
walk back from the diving board. And the member for Lakeview 
has had to dismantle his committee rooms, and many, many others 
have had to do the same thing. I'm sure they knew there was going 
to be an election, and they were wrong, because even they didn't 
count on the bad case of cold feet that the government opposite 
most assuredly had. 
 
And then came the possibility of a June election. And again the 
Premier dithered and couldn't make up his mind. He consulted the 
polls and he found them once again not to his liking. Once again 
he walked out to the end of that diving-board, and once again that 
water looked awfully cold, and so were Decima telling him the 
water was cold, and so were the other pollsters telling him the 
water is cold, and he has once again turned back. 
 
But now, Mr. Speaker, the situation is changing. Up until June, if 
he'd had an election in June, it still would have  

been the longest legislature in the peace-time history of 
Saskatchewan except the Anderson one. But people may well 
have suggested that a month or so doesn't much matter. But now it 
is very clear that this government proposes to cling to office many, 
many months longer than any other non-Tory government in the 
peace-time history of this province — clinging to office because 
you're afraid to face the voters. 
 
So for the third time in about eight or nine months, the Premier has 
decided to cling to office rather than face the electorate. And I say 
that this at this point is wrong. Issues are hanging fire. Many 
people, not only the government, want to know who's going to be 
the government of this province over the next four years. They 
don't know who's going to win the election. I don't know who's 
going to win the election. You people don't know who's going to 
win the election. The voters as a group know who's going to win 
the election, and they ought to have the opportunity to say who's 
going to win the election. 
 
As the press are very, very clear in saying — and there are a 
number of editorials, and others could be quoted — as they say: 
even if the PCs aren't ready for an election, the province is, and it's 
time we had that election. 
 
It's possible, indeed, to run away from an election for a few more 
months, but not without making it very clear . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It is my duty to inform the 
member his time has elapsed. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to enter 
this debate. It got awfully entertaining and I thought I'd get into it. 
Just after listening to the Leader of the Opposition, Opposition 
Leader Blakeney, he describes it as if, you know, we're not asking 
for an election here. I was beginning to wonder, Mr. Speaker, was 
he asking for us to call an election; or was he asking for us to take 
a dive; or was he asking us to, you know, turn a sod; or what was 
it he was wanting? 
 
Well, I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, I'll tell you, he describes it as us 
going out on this diving-board and seeing the deep, murky, cold 
waters down below, and having to check it out, and then trotting 
back and not making the big dive. Well, I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
I recall when he went tiptoeing out in his lily-whites, clad only in a 
polka-dot bikini, you see, just for the little fellow. And he got out 
to the end of the diving board and he didn't check a darned thing; 
he just jumped right in. And he found out that the water was cold 
and it was deep. And they've been wallowing in that cold, murky 
water ever since 1982, and they haven't got over it yet. they're 
looking muddier every day. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let's take a look at what the Leader of the 
Opposition is doing here. He is wanting us to call an election. 
Well, he should be recalling, Mr. Speaker, that we've had, for 
instance, three by-elections since 1982. They need to be reminded, 
Mr. Speaker, we won two of those by-elections. They win one and 
they think they've won all three of them. We won two out of the 
three by-elections. 
 
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1818 
 
 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition was in 
government for 11 years and they got used to that position. And 
they have found it very, very difficult to be in the opposition 
benches. Oh yes, they want an election. They want to have the 
opportunity to get back into government. The Leader of the 
Opposition, Opposition Leader Blakeney, can't stand to be out of 
the limelight — not at all, Mr. Speaker. But be they reminded, we 
won two out of three by-elections. 
 
Now the member for Shaunavon, Mr. Speaker, says that the 
Premier is afraid to call an election; he won't meet with people. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the member for Shaunavon, whom I wish was 
right close to me so he could hear very well what I have to say, 
should well be reminded that the Premier would be more than 
happy to debate the issues with the member for Shaunavon, or any 
other member of the NDP, or anyone in this province, any time, 
anywhere in the province of Saskatchewan. And he's certainly not 
afraid of the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let's be sure that we understand what they're 
saying. To call the Premier of this province afraid and to say that 
he won't meet with the people is just not a fair statement. He has 
met with more people, Mr. Speaker, than the Leader of the 
Opposition ever did when he was premier in 11 years. He met 
more with Trudeau down in Ottawa, when Trudeau was the prime 
minister. He and "Rocky" Roy Romanow were down there putting 
a new constitution together. Bringing home the constitution — 
that's what they were busy doing. Bringing home the constitution 
and fiddling away with it and amending it and the like, while the 
people of this province were wallowing in despair — walling in 
despair with no help for agriculture, no help for mortgages when 
interest rates were 22 per cent. 
 
No, they couldn't deal with the issues that the people of this 
province were concerned about, Mr. Speaker. No, they couldn't 
deal with that. The Leader of the Opposition wanted to be again in 
the limelight down in Ottawa, in bed with the Liberals, and they 
still are. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to refer back to the member for 
Shaunavon again. he says elections should be held every four 
years. Well we had one in 1982 and we'll likely have one in 1986. 
Now '82 to '86, by my calculations, is four years. So I don't see 
where we're off the mark anywhere. I really don't see that. 
 
Furthermore, he said that we went into the campaign in '82 and we 
never said anything about the property improvement grant being 
taken away. Well I recall, Mr. Speaker, in the election of 1975, 
when they had their campaign on the roll, and I didn't hear in the 
campaign — not one little whisper from one unturned rock did I 
hear it — no, I didn't hear that they were going to nationalize the 
potash industry. I didn't hear they were going to spend $600 
million in the uranium industry. No, I didn't hear that — not in 
their campaign. 
 
So I think it's unfair for the members in the NDP party — the 
member for Shaunavon in particular — to be trying to tell us that 
we did something that wasn't in the campaign. My goodness, we 
were elected to govern, and that's what  

we're going to do. 
 
Further, with regards to the member for Shaunavon, if there was 
nay member in that caucus that epitomizes arrogance, that member 
epitomizes the arrogance of the NDP party. He wants to have an 
election because he believes that they can form government. He 
says the people of this province are fed up with us and they're 
going to vote for the NDP. Well I think it's unfair to prejudge what 
the people of this province may do in an election. They'll do what 
they want to do, not what some NDP member of this legislature is 
telling them they should do. We'll give them that option to vote as 
they choose to. 
 
I want to, Mr. Speaker, as well tell this Assembly, and tell the 
NDP members in particular, that elections are expensive. Elections 
cost millions of dollars. And when I was elected in 1975, I though 
I was here for five years because that's the legal mandate for an 
election term, is five years. We didn't get five years. We were into 
an election in 1978 — that's three years — just a little over three 
years they called an election. Then in 1978 we got elected again. I 
got elected again and I thought: well, great, I'm here for five years 
this time. No, not at all. We had another election. They had 
elections every three and a half years, more or less. Every time 
that they felt it was opportune for them to get back into power, 
they would call an election. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we hold a differing view from the NDP 
members in opposition. We believe that we were elected to 
govern. If we'd have called an election, Mr. Speaker, in three 
years, they would have said: aha! you're just using your big 
mandate and you're getting back into power when you think it's 
opportune. We could have went after the federal Tories were 
elected; we didn't do that. It would have been opportune, maybe. 
We said no, we were elected to build and build we have. 
 
The NDP would have complained, as I've said, if we went early. I 
say that we will go when we are ready to go. It's always been the 
Premier's prerogative when to have an election . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . .that's right, we will have an election when we are 
ready to go. We'll be ready when our Premier says we're ready to 
have an election. It's always been the Premier's prerogative to call 
an election, not the NDP members in opposition. 
 
So quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, it would be fair to say we're 
wasting our time discussing it in this House right now because, in 
fact, it's not our decision to make. It's always been the Premier's 
decision, and it still is the Premier's decision. And he'll call that 
election when he wants to have that election, and the people will 
get their choice at that time. 
 
The NDP want to throw this province into reverse. That's what 
they think. If they get a chance to be government, they hope they 
can get a chance to be government again, and I tell you they'll 
throw it into reverse. They'll bring back the land bank. They'll put 
the gas tax back on. they'll introduce the succession tax; the 
inheritance tax — the death tax if you want to call it that. They're a 
government, Mr. Speaker, that will get back to ravages of income 
tax increases — 37 to 51 per cent, Mr. Speaker.  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1819 
 

They're an anti-family government; they were an anti-family 
government; they are an anti-family party. We're pro-family; we're 
pro-growth; we're pro-reform. they're against welfare reform; 
they're against everything in this province. 
 
They're against major projects. They're against the Prince Albert 
pulp-mill. They're against the bacon plant in North Battleford. 
They're against the fertilizer plant here in Regina. they're against 
the co-op upgrader. They're against the co-ops; against the co-op 
upgrader here in Regina. They're against the upgrader in 
Lloydminster. They're against the two power projects in the South, 
the Alameda-Rafferty dams. They're against projects worth 
billions and billions of dollars and worth just hundreds and 
hundreds of thousands of jobs. They're against all those projects 
— not to mention, of course, an arena in Saskatoon — they're 
against all those projects. 
 
Let me just say this, Mr. Speaker. The Manitoba NDP waited to 
four and one-half years and I didn't hear a word from you people, 
not one peep out of these same NDP that have moved this motion; 
not one peep did I hear out of them. And your NDP friends in 
Manitoba waited four and one-half years. Where was your silly 
motion then? Four and one-half years the NDP waited; waited and 
waited so it was an opportune time for them to have an election. 
 
Well I say that's unfair, Mr. Speaker. We were given a mandate to 
build. And as I said, build we have with projects, trade and 
job-related policies . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It is my duty to inform the 
member that his time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Meagher: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to make a 
few comments on this motion because I feel that it clearly 
demonstrates a couple of points that I think the people of 
Saskatchewan should know in this election year. One is that either 
the NDP opposition have no understanding of the parliamentary 
system, or worse yet, they have nothing but contempt for the 
parliamentary system. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition expounded at great length about 
walking the plank and looking at the water, and I suggest to you, 
Mr. Speaker, that the people that were walking the plank were, in 
fact, the NDP and the media. They were the ones that called the 
election dates in the past several months. He quoted the P.A. 
Herald at length setting dates for a general election, and when the 
general election didn't come to pass, they get made because their 
predictions didn't come true. They call an election but they forget 
to tell the person who's supposed to call it, and that's the Premier. 
 
I'm not surprised that they're disappointed and a little disillusioned 
with their own ability to prophesy, but it certainly isn't a subject 
that should be debated in this House. If the media and the NDP 
opposition feel that an election should be called at a particular 
date, that's their problem. They make reference to a tradition of 
four years, and that's simply untrue. It's not true in Saskatchewan; 
it's  

not true anywhere in the British Commonwealth. I can think of 
election dates that were called here in this province in the past 
decade or so that were for purely political reasons, political 
expediency. And again that demonstrates the kind of contempt that 
they have for the parliamentary system; they don't recognize that 
legislators are elected for a period of time to do a job. They're not 
elected to get into office and then start looking at the polls or 
looking at the political winds to see whether or not they can be 
re-elected and then jump onto an election when they feel they can 
be re-elected. 
 
I can assure you that a lot of people in northern Saskatchewan 
aren't asking the question: when is the election? They're concerned 
instead that the same kind of thing may happen as happened in 
1971 when the Thatcher government did call an election in three 
years, a snap election, and it resulted in an NDP government that 
cancelled the Dore Lake pulp-mill that was already under 
construction and just entered into — a mill that would have 
provided hundreds of jobs to people in that part of Saskatchewan. 
That's a concern, and that's a far bigger concern in prince Albert 
than the date of the election, despite all the comments of the P.A. 
Herald and the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
I believe that we were elected to do a job and there's things to be 
done, important things, and that's one of them. I would like to see 
the Weyerhaeuser deal completed; I would like to see the 
paper-mill under construction; in fact, I'd like to see it further 
advanced than any . . . and heaven forbid any possible new 
government cancelling that project. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition and the member for Shaunavon as 
well in his motion makes great efforts to connect this Progressive 
Conservative Party and government to the far off 1930s Anderson 
Conservative government. And I would like to remind them and 
the people of Saskatchewan, and they are as aware as any, that 
there's absolutely no connection at all with those two parties. This 
is a new party of new people and new ideas, obviously. 
 
But on the other hand the party opposite would love very much to 
tie themselves into the old CCF party, a party that was a populist 
part with rural roots that did reflect some of the values of the 
Saskatchewan people, instead of the party that they are with no 
connection — none at all — with the old CCF. 
 
(1515) 
 
This new, New Democratic Party, based and controlled almost 
entirely by militant, revolutionary, labour people — a long, long 
way from the CCF party of Tommy Douglas. But while they are 
trying to make a connection with the CCF party, they're trying to 
establish one that doesn't exist between a Conservative 
government of the early '30s, which made some serious mistakes 
and certainly wasn't a government that reflects the views of people 
— for instance, Catholics in this province. It's interesting that 
many, many Catholics are sitting on this side of the House, and 
they certainly wouldn't be supporting a party that advocated some 
of the measures that the old Anderson government implemented. 
But I  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1820 
 
 

don't blame them for trying to make a connection when it doesn't 
exist and trying to make another connection that doesn't exist as 
well. 
 
Those of us in Prince Albert and northern Saskatchewan who 
believe that the kinds of policies that this government have begun 
to implement, the kinds of projects that are now established by this 
government, are essential, absolutely essential for our well-being 
in the future. We're not prepared to let either the media or the NDP 
opposition determine when a date for a general election will be 
held. 
 
This is an election year, and my suggestion to the members 
opposite is to get yourselves prepared for a general election, as 
opposed to speculating every second day on when it will be; come 
forward with some constructive suggestions for how to make this 
province a better place to live; do the things you were elected to 
do; be members of the Legislative Assembly for the duration of 
your term; make intelligent, constructive contributions to the 
workings of this House. Bringing stockings to emphasize the cold 
feet that you think that the Premier has, and clucking like a 
chicken, certainly isn't making the kind of contribution that the 
people that elected you expect you to do. 
 
It is again, I believe, not only a demonstration of your 
misunderstanding of the parliamentary system but, indeed, your 
contempt for the parliamentary system. You show it often. You 
believe in political expediency. You think that we should be like 
you. We stand for nothing but re-election. 
 
Well I don't support that proposition. I'm proud that we are 
prepared to stay here and do some work and accomplish some 
things, the very things that we were elected to do. When the times 
comes for the general election, I'm sure that the people of 
Saskatchewan will recognize that as well, and all of your 
speculating and, to the grate chagrin of the media and yourself, the 
election may not come on the date that you call it, but will come 
indeed, and it will return a Progressive Conservative government 
for the very reason that I outlined. And for that reason, I opposite 
this motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased to enter into 
the debate here, I think an important debate from the standpoint of 
the people of this province. I've listened to two members from the 
government side attempt to justify their continuing carrying on in 
government rather than calling the election. 
 
And you know, the last speaker got up and said: there are things 
that we were elected to do. Now I'll tell you, we'll agree. And not 
to pursue an immediate election, if in fact they will carry out two 
of the essential promises which they laid before the people of 
Saskatchewan — I say deceived the people of Saskatchewan 
during the last campaign and haven't carried out. And I'll tell you, 
if they guarantee to this legislature and to the people of 
Saskatchewan that they will reduce and eliminate the 5 per cent 
sales tax, which is in the tune of $386 million, then I say to you, 
they have a job to do, and we will not  

request them calling an election. 
 
But I'll tell you they have absolutely no intention of carrying out 
the essential plank that they promised the people of this province. 
You know, they said that they were going to reduce the income 
tax by 10 per cent on average. Well, what a laugh. What mockery. 
What a breach of faith! 
 
And they promised the people of this province that they would in 
fact eliminate the 5 per cent sales tax. And did they eliminate it? 
Well I'll tell you, they certainly haven't eliminated the sales tax. 
And they say, well we have things to do. What have they got to 
do? the only thing they have left to do is try to reverse the polls. 
That's what those birds have to do, Mr. Deputy Chairman. That's 
why they're waiting, hoping that there will be a change. 
 
But I can tell you . . . You know what? The Premier goes around 
and he thinks that if he makes enough promises to the people of 
Saskatchewan that he can, in fact, buy their support. And so this 
spring he went around and announced and announced project after 
project, but surprisingly no change in the polls. 
 
You know, people are saying that they have had so many official 
openings that there are more holes in Saskatchewan than there are 
pot-holes in the highways. These people are going around with 
official openings all over Saskatchewan. Nothing has been built. 
 
You know what I say: here is a party elected 56 members, had 55 
per cent of the vote, and do you realize that in four and a half 
years, going on to five years, that that outfit across the way has no 
respect for the people; and the people of Saskatchewan, I'll tell 
you, have no respect for them. They cannot, in fact, call an 
election because they'll be thrust out of office. Do you know what? 
Justice has been mentioned. This is nothing more than a caretaker 
government now. There is no substantial legislation. All they are 
doing is attempting to use taxpayers' money to reverse their 
position with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
As has been pointed out, there are important topics to be dealt 
with, such as The Matrimonial Property Act, and the Attorney 
General says: we've got to study that. Well I'll tell you, they aren't 
dealing with key issues that should be addressed. There are 
certainly other issues that should be dealt with which they are 
delaying — delaying — because if you take the legislation in 
respect to all-terrain vehicles, the Minister of Highways, he 
studied it for two years, but it's close to an election now, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, so what he's done — let's put that under the table. 
 
So let's be basically very, very frank on this issue. The party 
opposite, the government, have absolutely no intention of carrying 
out their basic promises they made during the last election. They 
are not going to reduce income tax as they promised, income tax 
by 10 per cent; and they are not going to remove the 5 per cent E 
& H tax. Now if they are not going to, in fact, carry out the basic 
promises they made during the last election, then one asks, what 
are they holding back for? 
 
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1821 
 

Well if you look and read from the Swift Current Sun: "Left the 
door open." 
 

It's open house for the opposition these days to criticize 
Premier Grant Devine's mischance to call a provincial election. 
He's left the door open for MLAs and others to express opinion 
and gain critical advantage on the Conservatives. The NDP 
surely accepts his gift with thanks. 

 
Over and over, paper article after article indicates that this 
government should in fact go to the people because the people of 
this province have the right to pass judgement on this government. 
 
This has been a bad government for the people of Saskatchewan, 
bad in many ways. And when you take a look at what they have 
done to this province in four short years, when you take a look and 
look at the magnitude of the deficit facing the people of 
Saskatchewan — $2 billion of debt in four years, $200 million of 
interest we're paying — more than enough to pay and finance 
medicare in interest alone. This is the legacy of Premier Grant 
Devine's government. 
 
And then when we take a look, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at other 
aspects of how our province has been downgraded. We take a look 
at the sale of the assets. We have a Crown corporation, Saskoil, 
which was in fact making money for the people of Saskatchewan, 
and what they did was sold off the one Crown corporation that 
was in fact making money for the people of Saskatchewan. And 
what they've done is also sold off a coal-mine down in Coronach; 
received over $100 million; have blown that. 
 
If you take a look at the fiscal management of this province, I will 
tell you it's fast becoming the worst-managed area in North 
America. And contrary to that, when Allan Blakeney was premier 
of this province, New York investors said that Saskatchewan was 
the best-managed area in all of North America. 
 
I'll tell you this: this province is rapidly becoming another Tory 
province from the standpoint of mismanagement. Today we are 
finding that the per capita debt is increasing. We find that our 
credit rating is going down. We find the power corporation, the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation — do you realize that every 
dollar that is raised in the power corporation in charges for 
services, that 36 cents has to be paid in interest? And that is the 
record of your government. 
 
And I'll tell you, the people are sick and tired of your 
mismanagement and they are demanding an election. Go around 
the city of Regina. You don't have to strike up a conversation with 
the business community. All you have to do is to walk into their 
premises and the business people of Saskatchewan are saying, 
how soon with there be an election? They are saying to us, is there 
any way that we can force them to call the election? — we want to 
get rid of them. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that what we have here is a 
government . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — The member's time has elapsed. 
 

Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You know, this 
debate simply is not an issue. And I can't believe that you're 
bringing this into this Assembly and wasting our time in here 
when we've got so much important unfinished business to do and 
you won't allow us to do it. I don't know why you're talking about 
an election. It's like you're rushing to your own funeral. 
 
Now while we indeed acknowledge, Mr. Deputy, that we have 
stayed in office approximately one month longer than the 
traditional four years, it's not well into the fifth year the way that 
the NDP would have us believe. You kind of tend to discolour 
everything all the time, and half-truths . . . and other remarks that I 
would like to make about your half-truths that I'm limited to doing 
in this discussion. 
 
But I'd like to point out a few things, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In fact, 
the legal mandate is five years, and the NDP is the only one in a 
hurry to call it. Now if a government with a huge majority like this 
one were to call an election, we would be branded as wasteful. It 
costs about $5 million to call an election. So why do you have to 
rush into something like that if you call one early when you have a 
huge majority? 
 
(1530) 
 
And they cry that we're clinging to power, and yet when your 
NDP neighbours in Manitoba did, in fact, go some four and a half 
years, did you have an outcry then? No, the NDP, when they went 
four and a half years in Manitoba, there was nothing said about 
that; that was accepted. 
 
Well they talk too, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about their great victory 
in Regina North East, that by-election. But do they say one word 
in fact about the two by-elections that were lost by the NDP — 
overwhelming by-election victories to the PCs — Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake, and Thunder Creek? No, you don't very often 
mention that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our Premier still has much to do before he 
calls an election, and he can't complete these important functions 
during an election campaign. And the member from Quill Lakes 
. . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I'd like to ask the 
members to my left who are hollering at the speaker to give him a 
chance to speak so he can be heard by the members. Order. Order, 
please. 
 
Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If the members of 
the opposition would care to just relax and enjoy for a moment, I 
could save myself a lot of my little vocal chord functions. 
 
But anyhow, I was saying that our Premier can't complete his 
important functions during an election campaign. Free trade, for 
example, very important to the province of Saskatchewan, and the 
jobs that this translates to, jobs for the people of our province. 
Now the NDP obviously don't care about free trade; the NDP 
obviously don't care about jobs for Saskatchewan people, and they 
would far rather be out there electioneering. 
 
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1822 
 
 

Well I guess it's understandable that they don't concern themselves 
with jobs for Saskatchewan. One of their colleagues, Bob White, 
the union leader down East who they're promoting to be the leader 
of the national NDP Party, he's got this quiet little pact going, in 
fact a free trade pact for his union, so why would he want to 
protect jobs in Saskatchewan? Doesn't want to. 
 
The NDP want to tie in with Bob White and the big union bosses. 
You don't believe in jobs for Saskatchewan. The member from 
Athabasca, we like jobs in northern Saskatchewan, and we can't 
get them up there with the way that they keep opposing the free 
trade and the free trade discussions, and thank God that our 
Premier is working so hard on that because it's so important. 
 
Now an election campaign would also take the Premier away from 
the important agricultural situations that exist now. The member 
from Regina Centre, walking into the Assembly late, started 
yelling at me and making me raise my voice again to be heard; if 
he would have been here from the outset there'd be no problem. 
 
But agriculture, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the number one industry in 
our province. Our Premier, fortunately, has the happy capacity of 
sitting down with the Prime Minister of Canada to discuss 
seriously the problems facing our agricultural sector and the 
possible solutions. 
 
So although we have accomplished much, we have a few more 
things to finish prior to the Premier's wish to call an election. This 
call will come in time, and it is not — and I repeat — a mandatory 
situation for another year. The Premier will call it when he's 
satisfied that the timetable is such that new projects permit the 
proper timing for this election call. And the people know, the 
people know that we're not afraid of an election call — on the 
contrary. 
 
As I've travelled in the business community, not only in Regina 
but throughout the province, they tell us the same thing. We can't 
be expected to change a socialistic attitude of 40 years in four 
short years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the business community 
very clearly want this government to maintain power. They know 
that Saskatchewan presently enjoys an excellent business climate. 
They know, too, that the NDP don't understand their problems, 
don't understand their situation. And their slate of candidates in the 
next upcoming election proves that. 
 
I keep telling my business community friends that. It is really 
unfortunate, but four candidates with business experience, four out 
of 64, is the best that the NDP could muster in candidates to 
represent their point of view to the business community. And I'm 
very doubtful, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that any one of those four 
candidates will ever have a seat in this legislature to carry forward 
their anti-business problems and situations. 
 
Tourism didn't exist under the prior  
administration. And the Leader of the Opposition, now, yelling 
from his seat to call an election. You were gone, Mr. Member, 
when I indicated why bother rushing to your funeral; it will come 
in time. 
 
Tourism, Mr. Speaker, that didn't exist under the prior  

administration. And Heaven help tourism if it should ever come 
back, and the tourism operators in this province are fully aware of 
that. We've just begun with the tourism industry to place that vital 
industry where it properly belongs in this province, and it can very 
definitely become the number two industry in this province with 
proper guidance from a private sector oriented government that 
knows how to expand and work with these people to insure that 
tourism does what it should do, and that is to create jobs, to create 
employment. 
 
Over 30,000 people are presently employed in the tourism 
industry in this province. Can you imagine how many jobs our 
government, with the private sector, could help create if tourism 
were placed where it rightfully belongs, and not on the back 
burner where the NDP had it before, tucked away in some little 
department as an offshoot of something, never recognizing what 
tourism potential could be when it relates to the economy of our 
province. 
 
I find it humorous that they ant us to call an election, too. 
Speaking about tourism . .   they keep talking about our 
advertising budget and the waste of money because of the pride 
that we have in our province selling this province of Saskatchewan 
outside of our boundaries. And yet, if our internal advertising 
campaign was designed to be a political platform then, as you say, 
why wouldn't the Premier call the election? So obviously that 
tourism advertising is designed to do what it should do, and that is 
to encourage tourism in our province to create those meaningful 
jobs for our people, and certainly not any kind of an election 
gimmick. 
 
The oil industry, and the small service companies related to it — 
you people don't understand the oil industry. You don't understand 
business; you don't understand the oil industry. And I'll just give 
you, Mr. Speaker, one short example of it, when the NDP leader 
said that their position was: we have no objection to a royalty tax 
holiday; every government has to realize that this is no longer the 
'70s. However, that's not what the rank and file of the NDP party 
have said, Mr. Speaker. The NDP MLA for Shaunavon, in direct 
opposition . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Contradiction. 
 
Mr. Klein: — Contradiction. Thank you, Mr. Member. 
Contradicting his leader, the NDP MLA for Shaunavon said that 
under an NDP government drilling incentives and royalty-free 
periods would come to a quick end. 
 
The NDP MLA for Regina North East contradicts his leader, as 
well, by saying: we believe we can raise more money out of 
resources. We object to the tax holiday. 
 
So why do they want to rush into an election call. They don't have, 
obviously, their stuff together between their leader and their 
candidates. The NDP claims that our oil royalty policies are for 
big oil companies. but they fail to understand the enormous 
economic activity that's generated by the small-business sector and 
by the service sector of that particular industry. 
 
I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that our government is respected, 
not only by the private sector, not only by the  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1823 
 

people that are employed by the private sector, but by all the 
people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 
take part in this debate also today. And in order for me to take part 
in this debate and to debate this motion here, I think I have to go 
back in history and talk about the Conservative Party that was in 
this province between 1929 and 1934. Because Mr. Speaker, if we 
are going to have a comparison, there's only one comparison that 
we can use, and we have to go back to the last Conservative 
government that was in this province. 
 
And I think that the old saying is that "a Conservative is a 
Conservative is a Conservative" holds true. And I think that all the 
Conservative members . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That's right. 
A New Democrat is a New Democrat is a New Democrat. And 
we're very proud to say that we were a part of the CCF 
government that brought the progress to this province. 
 
But I want to go back in history. And we all know, Mr. Speaker, 
that history repeats itself. I think we have to take a serious look at 
what happened in big River when they sold off the Big River 
saw-mill to a group in the United States. And we should say to 
ourself: is history going to repeat itself? Is Carrot River next? 
They've sold the Big River saw-mill, Mr. Speaker; are they going 
to now sell the Carrot River mill? We don't know. But I tell you, 
this is something that we want to know. 
 
But I want to . . . and I find it kind of interesting, Mr. Speaker. 
We've went through this whole debate today and this Conservative 
government has not even come up with an amendment. They've 
sat here and all of them have got up and spoke, and not one of 
them have got up and proposed an amendment to this motion. 
 
But I want to go back in history because I want to go back to the 
last Conservative government that we had in this province. And I 
want to go back to an ethnic group that's very important to me, and 
that's the French people in this province. My mother's French. She 
was born and raised in the Debden-Big River area. And I want to 
go back and show you how we compare the Conservative 
government of the Anderson government of 1929 to '34 and the 
government today that wouldn't call an election for five years, Mr. 
Speaker. And I want to say that my mother, who is French, had to 
live through the type of legislation that was brought forward by 
the Anderson government in 1930. 
 
I want to give you a little bit of history, and the Conservative 
government members sitting there like to talk about history. And I 
say that we have to be very careful in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
because history is starting to repeat itself. Here we are with a 
Conservative government that's now well into the fifth year. And 
let me tell you, even if they issued the writ today, we would be 
almost into four and a half years. They're well into their fifth year, 
so history is starting to repeat itself. 
 

We see a government — the Conservative government of Premier 
Grant Devine. It is no different than the last Conservative 
government that we had of Premier Anderson. History is starting 
to repeat itself. Premier Anderson decided that he wasn't going to 
go to the polls until the fifth year. He went to the fifth year. He 
also brought in the type of legislation that I want to put on the 
books here today. 
 
In 1930 — and I want to quote, Mr. Speaker: — 
 

When the strategies of the Anderson government made it quite 
evident that an all-out attack would be launched against the 
Catholic schools . . . 

 
And that's the type of legislation that came in. 
 

At the first session of the Anderson government, The School 
Act was amended in such a way that it prohibited the presence 
of the crucifix in public schools. 

 
And that is a fact. That is legislation that is on the books, Mr. 
Speaker, by the Conservative government. It also prohibited the 
wearing of religious costumes in class-rooms. Religious orders 
were numerous. 
 
A further amendment to The School Act referred to the trustees, 
and this is another Act that the Conservative government brought 
in. 
 

A trustee had to give satisfactory proof to the inspector that he 
could read and write English because henceforth all school 
meetings were to be carried on in the English language only. 

 
That is legislation brought forward by the Conservative 
government of Premier Anderson. He brought this into 
Saskatchewan. This was in 1930. This was legislation brought in 
by the last Conservative government. 
 
I tell you that history is repeating itself because once again we are 
into the fifth year of this Conservative government. They're 
following in the footsteps of the Anderson government, and you 
just watch, it's exactly what they're doing, and it ended up in 1934, 
the provincial election, the Anderson government was completely 
wiped out. They were completely wiped out. 
 
(1545) 
 
And this is the type of government . . . History does repeat itself, 
Mr. Speaker. And when we take a look at this government who sat 
here today, did not bring forth an amendment . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — We take a look at the member for Prince 
Albert who stood up in his seat, Mr. Speaker, and indicated his 
support for the Athabasca pulp-mill, and that's how Ross Thatcher 
lost the election in 1971 — because he was going to build that 
pulp-mill, which would have destroyed northern Saskatchewan 
and would have destroyed the last freshwater watershed that we 
have in this province, and that's the Churchill water  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1824 
 
 

system. But the Conservative government now say they approve 
of that. 
 
I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that what's going to take place if this 
government was given another term in office, not only would they 
sell the Big River sawmill, they'll sell the Carrot River sawmill 
also. And right now we know that there is talk between the two, 
the Simpson Timber and this government, to sign a new 
agreement. 
 
And I just wonder what's in that agreement. I wouldn't be a bit 
surprised if what's in that agreement is that Simpson Timber want 
the Saskatchewan government to get out of Carrot River also, and 
turn that mill over to them. 
 
But here we have a Conservative government following in the 
footsteps of the last Conservative government in this province. 
And let me tell you, they are right in step, Mr. Speaker. They are 
right in step. They're into their fifth year of their mandate. That is 
exactly what the last Conservative government did. It went into 
five years. 
 
And the polls are telling us across this province — not only our 
polls, but the Conservative polls — are telling them that they are 
following in the Anderson footsteps and, if they don't call that 
election by October, there's a good chance that this Conservative 
government will end up like the Anderson government, with not 
one seat in this province. 
 
I have talked to Conservatives, and I talked to a Conservative 
yesterday in Saskatoon who told me, Mr. Speaker, he has never 
voted anything but Conservative in his life, and he said he would 
never do it again. But he said, when they poll me, I tell them I'm 
voting Conservative, because I want them to get that election 
under way so we can get them out. And this is an individual who 
has never voted anything but Conservative in his life. 
 
And let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, that is the mood in 
Saskatchewan today. That is the mood out in voter land. And that's 
why, Mr. Speaker, we have not had an election last fall, and that's 
why we haven't had an election this spring, and that's why we're 
not going to have an election this summer. 
 
This group is repeating history over and over again. And if you 
just follow the pattern, you will see the Anderson government all 
over. And I tell you, here we are, a government in its fifth year of 
the mandate, a government that was left with $140 million in the 
bank and has now turned that into a $2 billion debt. They should 
call the election. 
 
A government that was left with 4 to 4.5 per cent unemployment; 
it has now turned that into 9.5 to 10 per cent, and in regions of this 
province it's up into the 90 per cent. I say they should call an 
election. But they're not going to call an election. They're not 
going to call the election because they want to repeat history. And 
that's what they're doing. They're repeating history. 
 
When a government can take, in four short years — they're into 
their fifth year — and turn a $140 million surplus into a $2 billion 
deficit . . . That's the operating  

budget. When they can take the accumulated debt that they had 
when they started, of 3.3. billion, and now turn that into a $9 
billion debt . . . 
 
And they also have another debt that they're facing, and that's 
about $3.3 billion. And I'm quoting here: " . . . where the debt is 
nearing a dangerous level . . . " 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to get into the 
debate on this rule 16 which is a debating forum that is being done 
by this Assembly. I find it somewhat strange, Mr. Speaker, that in 
the House, that we are elected to deal with the spending as to how 
government spends money; that we are set in an institution that 
sets to deal with the laws of the land; that we find a priority as 
politicians, quite frankly, to sit and want to talk about when is the 
election. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that you look at the institution. You look 
at the institution, Mr. Speaker, and what the NDP have done in 
this entire session . . . and this debate is rather fitting for the NDP 
because in this entire session, Mr. Speaker, they have raised not 
one point, not one substantive issue. Not about agriculture; they're 
not prepared to talk about that. Not about economic development 
and how you might create jobs; they've never talked about that, 
Mr. Speaker. They sit and are afraid, Mr. Speaker, to talk about 
some fundamental questions, some fundamental substantive 
questions in the field of health care. Are they prepared to talk 
about that? No. 
 
They simply walk around and say, well why haven't you got a deal 
with the nurses? Well we got to deal with the nurses, 93 per cent 
acceptance. Why haven't you got a deal with the doctors? Sitting 
gloating, Mr. Speaker, not about substance, not about principle, 
Mr. Speaker, but how are we going to gain a political advantage to 
this. And that's what this institution has become for the NDP. 
What this has become, Mr. Speaker, is nothing more, Mr. Speaker, 
than a political forum being driven by the members of the media 
and being driven by the members of the opposition. 
 
Don't talk about substance any more. Don't talk about substance. 
don't deal with the question of agriculture, Mr. Speaker; don't deal 
with how you might develop the economy of this province . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It's my duty to inform the 
member that the time allotted for motion under rule 16 has 
elapsed. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might have 
leave of the Assembly to move down the order paper to 
government orders. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, last day I had talked to the 
House Leader that day about moving some of our motions for 
return that stand on the order paper, which would take only a short 
amount of time — get them moved and then move down the order 
paper. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Would the House Leader give direction  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1825 
 

as to where they're prepared to move? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Have you got the numbers of the ones 
which we'd like to move? Because, by agreement, Mr. Speaker, 
we can move to some of the orders for return if . . . agreement with 
the other House Leader. Page 7 in the blues. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
 

Return No. 1 
 
Mr. Yew moved, seconded by Mr. Shillington, that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return no. 1 showing: 
 

For the period December 3, 1985, to March 18, 1986: (1) the 
number of out-of-province trips made by the Minister of 
Environment of Saskatchewan; (2) in each case his destination, 
the purpose of the trip, the name of each person who 
accompanied him at government expense; and (3) in each case 
the total cost of the trip separated according to costs incurred 
for each of the following: (a) air fares, (b) hotels, (c) meals, (d) 
taxis, (e) gifts, (f) gratuities, (g) entertainment, (h) expenses, (i) 
miscellaneous. 

 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Speaker, I move an order of the Assembly do 
issue for return no. 1 showing. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, just allow me a moment here 
to just look at the last couple of lines. Mr. Speaker, I would move, 
seconded by my colleague, the Minister of Economic 
Development and Trade: 
 

That return no. 1 be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word "trip" in subsection (3). 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 2 
 
Mr. Lusney moved, seconded by Mr. Koskie, that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return no. 2 showing: 
 

For the period December 3, 1985, to March 18, 1986: (1) the 
number of out-of-province trips made by the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation of Saskatchewan; (2) in each 
case his destination, the purpose of the trip, the name of each 
person who accompanied him at government expense; and (3) 
in each case the total cost of the trip separated according to 
costs incurred for each of the following: (a) air fares, (b) 
hotels, (c) meals, (d) taxis, (e) gifts, (f) gratuities, (g) 
entertainment, (h) expenses, (i) miscellaneous. 

 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Speaker, I move an order of the Assembly do 
issue for return no. 2 showing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this motion is one that we would like to see 
answered in this Assembly. We are aware of some of the 
expenditures of the Minister of Highways. He has decided to 
resign his seat because of some of those  

expenditures, and I think that the public should be allowed the 
opportunity to see just where he spent that money; why he spent it. 
And it's unfortunate that the former minister doesn't even attend 
the House any more. 
 
But I wish that the government would, and the Leader of the 
Opposition would see fit to let this motion pass as it stands without 
amending it, as they do in their general fashion by removing some 
of the last lines and not allowing the public to get the information 
that we are asking for. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, we have no problem . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Would the member please sign 
the return and give us the seconder for the return and send it here 
immediately after moving it. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — As I was about to say, we have no 
problem with providing the answers to these various questions, 
and I notice that most of them are the same, and the amendments 
will be the same in every case, Mr. Speaker. The amendments will 
provide the following answers, and I'll just read out the answer just 
so you'll see what will be provided, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The motion by the member from Pelly that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for a return no. 2 showing: 
 

For the period of December 3 (and so on) the number of 
out-of-province trips made by the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation of Saskatchewan. (2) In each case his 
destination, the purpose of the trip, the name of each person 
who accompanied him at government expense, and in each 
case the total cost of the trip. 

 
What more could anyone ask for, Mr. Speaker. There is all of the 
information on behalf of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. We're 
quite willing to provide it, and in doing that, Mr. Speaker, I would 
move that the motion be amended in the following way: 
 

That return no. 2 be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word "trip" in subsection 3. 

 
I so move, seconded by my seat mate, the minister from 
Kindersley. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to make a few 
comments in respect to this particular motion, but I think it's 
applicable to most of the motions which are seeking similar 
information. 
 
I ask the question, Mr. Speaker, and I put to the members here in 
the Assembly: if you in fact were running a business and you had 
an employee that was taking trips, travelling on behalf of your 
business, I wonder, as the business man or the owner of the 
company, what specific details would you want. Would you ask 
simply that they give you a ballpark figure, or would you in fact 
ask for the details to be set out in detailing the expenses? 
 
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1826 
 
 

And what we had been asking for, Mr. Speaker, is a breakdown of 
the total cost of the trip, separated according to costs incurred for 
the following: air fares, hotels, meals, taxis, gifts, gratuities, 
entertainment, expenses, miscellaneous. I think it makes eminently 
good sense to request the specifics of the details of the breakdown 
of the expenses. If indeed they say the global number includes all 
of these, I ask you: why is the government afraid to provide the 
specifics? That's the question. 
 
And the other thing, as has been indicated by my colleague from 
Pelly, he has indicated that in moving this particular motion, the 
very fact of the information that we're seeking is . . . There's a 
case, a proven case in the Assembly where the former minister of 
Highways . . . We haven't been able to get the specific details, but 
we did find, or at least he resigned, having misused the assignment 
of the plane. 
 
And what we need here is, on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan, all of the details. And I would say to you that if 
you're running a business, you would want the specifics, not just 
the global, because it's important to know whether or not people 
are living very lavishly in respect to hotels — there are different 
levels of rooms that can be purchased — meals, taxis, to gifts, 
gratuities, and indeed entertainment. I think that the taxpayers do 
have a right to know the specific details. 
 
And I can only say, Mr. Speaker, that the only reason that they are 
denying this is that they're ashamed of providing the details 
because it would be an embarrassment. This is the most travelled 
government in the history of this province; there's no doubt about 
it. 
 
And so what they are doing is preventing the people knowing how 
they are spending the taxpayers' money. And certainly I want to 
say the amendment reducing the amount of information that we're 
going to receive is totally unsatisfactory to the opposition. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to echo the comments of the member 
from Quill Lakes. This is the minister who spent $60,000 in travel 
expenses for the last year for which public accounts are available 
— a far, far higher figure than any minister has ever spent in the 
history of this province. And that suggests some explanation. It is 
not obvious to me, or a number of other people, how anyone could 
run up travel expenses of such a magnitude. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to travel expenses of such magnitude, 
we have a right to something more than a global figure. We have 
the global figure for 1984 - 85 and that's not terribly useful. With 
respect to a minister who resigns because of improper use of 
aircraft, we expect and deserve some additional detail. We expect, 
and I think have the right, to know what was spent under the 
various items. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that this is utterly inadequate. This 
government is hiding again from the truth. They're not prepared to 
be candid with respect to travel expenses and I think, therefore, 
Mr. Speaker, we can all simply assume the worst . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, the member from Kindersley can wind his 
hand or whatever  

he's doing, but I intend to make these comments because I think 
they should be made. 
 
Whether you know it or not, this government has suffered some 
damage through the travel expenses of your ministers. Your 
ministers have travelled in a fashion which is lavish beyond 
anything in the history of the province and beyond what's 
acceptable — beyond what is reasonable and beyond what is 
acceptable. And, Mr. Speaker, the attempts of members opposite 
— they may ultimately succeed in hiding it — but the attempts of 
members opposite to hide the facts, I think, is going to convince 
the Saskatchewan public that they have the right to assume the 
worst, and I think they do. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I, too, want to add my comments to this 
because I think it is a matter that cannot be ignored or passed over 
lightly. We have asked certain questions here dealing with an issue 
that is not new. It's dealing with an issue of a minister — a former 
minister — who himself has admitted to some misuse of certain 
privileges and, as a result, chose it upon himself to make a 
decision to resign from his office. 
 
In spite of that, Mr. Speaker, we have here a government that 
refuses to provide answers to legitimate questions which are being 
asked by the opposition and which, I might add, are being asked 
by the opposition because the questions are being asked by the 
citizens of Saskatchewan who pay the taxes that pay these kinds of 
costs that we are asking about. 
 
I don't understand why any government, who in a throne speech 
would announce a freedom of information Act, would want to 
undermine any little bit of credibility it might have on that issue by 
turning around and doing exactly and completely the opposite. Mr. 
Minister, this is not any different than the fact that the government 
on other orders for return which this legislature has passed, has 
now for over two years refused to provide the answer, and that 
deals with the travel of the Premier some two years ago. This 
Legislative Assembly ordered a return, and yet this government 
has not provided the answer. 
 
Here now, Mr. Speaker, they've adopted a new tactic. Instead of 
providing the answer — or sitting on the answer because they 
know it's politically now unpalatable — they make amendments 
so that the legislature will not order an answer to be provided by 
the government. I personally object to that, Mr. Speaker. The 
people of Saskatchewan object to that. This opposition objects to 
that. It is wrong. It is secretive. It's time this government stopped 
playing games with the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and provided 
the information that they have a right to know. 
 
Even the former minister from Regina South is not embarrassed 
about his $71,900 salary. That's been an OC that's been passed. 
That's public. Why can't this kind of information be public also, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I'm not going to speak at 
length on this. I am here in a rather unusual role, and that is to say 
something of merit about the Mulroney government. That 
government has not been over scrupulous in a good number of 
things, but it allows  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1827 
 

people to know what the travelling expenses of its ministers are. 
The circumstances surrounding Madam Blais-Grenier are 
well-known. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'll try to shout. I'm sorry that the Premier will not 
take any steps to get his members under control, and I'm sorry 
about that, but I am going to make this point. I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, and to the House and to the public of Saskatchewan, that 
at Ottawa, however difficult it was for the Mulroney government 
so to do, they told the public about what the expenses of Madam 
Blais-Grenier were, and they tried to defend them, and when they 
found that they were not defensible, steps were taken. 
 
Here in this House the government opposite takes the view that the 
public of Saskatchewan are not entitled to know about taxis, 
expenses, and entertainment expenses, such as was the warp and 
woof of the Blais-Grenier issue. And those facts were made 
known in Ottawa. The Mulroney government did not withhold 
them, even though they were likely to be embarrassing, and in fact 
turned out to be embarrassing. 
 
And here in this House, particularly when we're dealing with the 
activities of the member for Wilkie, this government refuses to 
give facts which the public are entitled to know, because surely 
suspicions have been raised by the previous conduct of the 
member for Wilkie and the size of his travel expenses as shown by 
previous public accounts. 
 
Now it seems to me very clear that the practice across Canada is 
clear. I remember an occasion when people asked the Premier of 
Alberta about what his expenses were in a particular trip to Asia. 
And within, I believe, it was three or four weeks, detailed copies 
of the expenses accounts were available. 
 
The Premier — the Conservative Premier of Alberta. I am saying 
what the practice is in Albert; I am saying what the practice is in 
Ottawa; and I'm deploring — I'm deploring the practice of this 
government; I'm deploring the practice of this government who 
refuses to give us some pretty reasonable information about the 
costs of hotels. 
 
And we have the experience of some other members who . . . The 
member for Souris-Cannington, the Deputy Premier, has 
acknowledged that he has, at least on occasion, rather expensive 
taste in hotels. And that seems to me to be a reasonable thing for 
the public to know, and similarly with respect to gratuities and 
entertainment and the like. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, my point is clear. The practice in Ottawa, we 
now know what it is, and it's been established; the practice in other 
jurisdictions has been to give this information; and when the 
government opposite decides that it will not give that information, 
then I think it is clear that they have something to hide. There is no 
other rational explanation for denying this information. The public 
will conclude that they have something to hide, and the public will 
conclude, rightly, that they have something to hide. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to add a  

couple of words to the debate that is going on, on whether or not 
this motion should be amended. And I want to say quite clearly 
that I am of the opinion, and my colleagues are, that this answer 
should be given in the form that the question was put by the 
members of the opposition. Because if the government is allowed 
to change the questions to suit their mood or their whim, then what 
are we doing talking about bringing in freedom of information? 
 
Here we have a government that, in their throne speech and in the 
budget speech, talks about freedom of information, to expand 
what is already available. And I'll tell you that this is reality. On 
the other hand we hear what they talk about doing, and here is the 
reality of what they actually do. And that's why the public of the 
province are saying: can you believe what they say when you see 
what they do? Obviously they're not in favour of freedom of 
information. 
 
This question that we're dealing with clearly indicates — what the 
cost of taking a trip that the minister took, and it says, how many 
people went with you and who were they? 
 
Now take this scenario to Ottawa and the filming of the life of 
Brian which has come up in the last week. That never would have 
happened if it had been in Saskatchewan. Let's say the Premier 
takes a video equipment team with him when he goes on his trips 
— and he may, he may. He wouldn't tell us because he doesn't 
have to. They simply amend the question so we can't get the 
information. How do you get the answer to that question? 
 
In the period that we're talking about for the Premier — and that 
question hasn't been asked for a long time; I use that as an 
example — what if there was a video team going with him to film 
it? How would you get the answer to that question? 
 
Well I'll tell you that the issue of Brian Mulroney, or the Prime 
Minister, and his use of a Hercules aircraft to transport seven 
individuals and all the video equipment that cost $44,000, I 
believe — and I could be corrected on that — to come to Regina 
and other points, I believe part of that for political reasons — 
never could have been found out in Regina under this government. 
No one could find out. You can't find out. 
 
(1615) 
 
This question simply asks for the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation — the individual who had to resign over the 
inappropriate use of an aircraft — it asks in each case his 
destination, purpose of the trip, name of persons who went with 
him at government expense. That seems to be a reasonable 
question for the people of the province who want to know. When 
you're talking about increasing my income tax with a flat tax, how 
are you using the money? And when you go on a trip, who went 
with you and who's getting paid? What is irrational about that? 
And it says, how much went for air fares, hotels? 
 
And my colleague from Elphinstone talks about the former 
minister of Economic Development giving out his  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1828 
 
 

list of places that he went, and the Beverly Wilshire hotel that he 
stayed at in Los Angeles. And when he was asked about it in the 
House, he said, I don't care if it cost 200 or 400 or how much it 
cost, because when I go, I go. 
 
Now this kind of an arrogant attitude of a government that's been 
in power for almost five years, well into its fifth year, I say that it's 
important to know. 
 
The yappy member from Saskatoon talks about trips that our 
members took. And the simple proof of the matter is that he 
knows what it was because it was a public document. We let you 
know. We let you know it. Of course we did. Of course we did. 
And I say to you that that proves the point, that the Mulroney 
government, the instances that we have talked about . . . 
 
I wonder, Mr. Speaker, could you get some control in here? You're 
allowing a lot of yelling to go on. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder, on a point of order, Mr. Speaker, 
do you think you could get any semblance of order in here? There 
seems to be a lot of yelling from the government side, 
continuously, for the five minutes I was talking. Do you think that 
it would be possible for you to get some control in here? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The point of order is not well taken. There has 
been yelling from both sides of the House all the way through the 
afternoon, and I think that the hon. member that is asking for order 
was probably one of the worst offenders. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The members opposite will know that I 
haven't been in the House during this . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. If the member has something 
further to say on the debate, I'll hear that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — That's what I'm going to do. Having just 
returned to the House, and having been out for most of the debate, 
some of the comments made in here are very difficult to 
understand about this debate. I don't know what some people are 
talking about when they say that the noise was coming from this 
side of the House. 
 
But I want to tell you that, in dealing with this problem of not 
getting answers from this government, that the proof is here — 
that the proof is here — that if there are crews of video cameras 
going with the Premier for political reasons around the province 
and around the country, there's no way that the taxpayers can find 
out because the opposition can't raise and get the answers. We 
can't do it; it's impossible. 
 
And I say, for a government that talks about freedom of 
information and then carries on like this in this Assembly, is a 
phoney government and one that doesn't deserve the support of the 
people of the province, and I say is the main reason we're not 
having an election, because they're afraid of the people. And I'll 
tell you, at the first chance, this is one reason why the people of 
the province will kick  

you birds out. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. When the member is 
referring to members on the other side of the House, they are not 
birds. He is to refer to them as hon. member or members of certain 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order. When I'm on my feet, I'll ask 
the members to be quiet. 
 
If the member wants to refer to any member in this House, you 
refer to him either as the hon. member or refer to him as the 
position he holds or the constituency he comes from. But the 
comments that you're using are out of order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to apologize for calling 
the members birds. But because they fly so much, they have this 
reputation out in the country. But I will try to refer to them as hon. 
members, as difficult as that is at times. 
 
But I want to say, in closing my remarks on this issue, Mr. 
Speaker, that this closed government, this closed government, the 
closed government of the Devine government, in not giving out 
information, secretive, I say, breaking promises at every turn, 
whether it's in Shaunavon or Maple Creek or Rosetown, that kind 
of breaking of promises, that kind of blatant spending of the 
public's money, and that kind of lack of credibility and explanation 
on your spendings will get its just deserts when you call the 
elections. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the comments of the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The member did speak on this resolution. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I listened with a great deal of interest, Mr. 
Speaker, to the comments of the members opposite who somehow 
are maligning members on this side of the House for travel. 
 
You may recall, Mr. Speaker, that some weeks ago I spoke from 
my place in the House about some of the vagaries and the travel 
that took place under former members of that administration 
sitting over there. And I hear that they're saying, yes, but we gave 
you the information; it was all public documents, public 
information. Balderdash! Any information we dug up, Mr. 
Speaker, on the travels of their ministers in the former 
administration was done by diligent research. 
 
And I'll point out, Mr. Speaker, that the kind of information that 
they're requesting now, they refused to provide in its entirety. For 
instance, for instance, Mr. Speaker, I attempted to find out who 
accompanied Reggie Gross, the former NDP member, the former 
minister of natural resources. I wanted to find out . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I just wondered who 
went with Reggie Gross on all these skiing trips — Reggie the 
skier. Reggie the skier, where did he go? Well January 19 to 22, 
1982, he went down to Denver . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Does the member have  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1829 
 

anything to say dealing with the amendment or the question before 
the House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Certainly, Mr. Speaker. As it relates to the 
question before the House, we are somehow being maligned as if 
we are creating a precedent. My point, Mr. Speaker, is we are in 
no way creating any precedent in answering the questions in the 
manner suggested by the Deputy House Leader. We are merely 
following the type of precedent that was set by the members of the 
opposition when they were in government. 
 
And what I was pointing out was the type of travel one of their 
ministers did — extensive travel he did all over the world; twice in 
Europe in the same summer, Mr. Speaker. And we couldn't find 
the information as to who went with him, gratuities, taxis, and 
such like information. All we got was a global figure, including 
the one of course where there was a bill that came in from the 
Playboy Club in New York city, and we had some trouble exactly 
pinning down where that one came from and how that came about. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I really feel I am speaking to the question and 
addressing the amendment. So I'd like to continue and point out 
that some of these trips that that former member took, which took 
an enormous amount of research to put together, didn't give us the 
conclusive, definitive type of information which they are now 
seeking, saying that we should be taking about taxis and so on. 
 
For instance, that former member took a bus load of people down 
to Cypress Hills, took over the lodge to have a party, and threw all 
the skiers out. And I can't find out who all accompanied him on 
that bus on that trip. And I'd like to find out who all was involved 
in that, when he took over the ski hill that day and closed it down 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You let him go this far; let him go. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — When I'm on my feet, I'll ask the member for 
Shaunavon to be quiet. 
 
The member is not dealing with the matter that is before the 
House, and that is the return moved, requesting information with 
regard to the Minister of Highways, and the amendment that has 
been proposed. If the member has something to say on that 
amendment, I'd like to hear it; otherwise, we'll move on. 
 
Amendment agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Tusa Maxwell 
McLeod Hodgins 
Hardy Morin 
Folk Muirhead 
Smith (Swift Current) Johnson 
Myers Young 
Hepworth Weiman 
Dutchak Rybchuk 
 

 
Dirks Domotor 
Embury Meagher 
Sandberg Muller 
Klein Gerich 
Currie Petersen 
Martens  
 

— 27 
 

Nays 
 
Blakeney Koskie 
Tchorzewski Lusney 
Thompson Shillington 
Lingenfelter Yew 
 

— 8 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 3 
 
Mr. Lusney moved, seconded by Mr. Koskie, that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for a return no. 3 showing: 
 

For the period December 3, 1985 to March 18, 1986: (1) the 
number of out-of-province trips made by the Minister of 
Telephones of Saskatchewan; (2) in each case his destination, 
the purpose of the trip, the name of each person who 
accompanied him at government expense; and (3) in each case 
the total cost of the trip separated according to costs incurred 
for each of the following: (a) air fares, (b) hotels, (c) meals, (d) 
taxis, (e) gifts, (f) gratuities, (g) entertainment, (h) expenses, (i) 
miscellaneous. 

 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that an order of 
the Assembly do issue for return no 3. showing. And I would think 
that the minister wouldn't be amending this one because there's 
hardly anything to hide in the travels of the Minister of Finance, at 
least I would believe there isn't . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Did 
I say Highways? Telephones. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we will be amending 
this one as with all of these motions which are in the same order, 
and in fact we will be providing the total costs of all of the trips 
taken by ministers in all of the cases as has been the practice of the 
House. And the amendment is as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That return no 3 be amended by deleting all the words after the 
word "trip" in subsection (3). 

 
I so move, seconded by my colleague, the Minister of Justice. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the member of the 
government that proposed the amendment would be prepared to 
take a question in respect to his amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Is the member prepared for a question? No. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, then I want to again just make  



 
June 10, 1986 

1830 
 
 

a brief comment to reaffirm again our position of the nature of the 
cover-up of the government opposite. All that . . . as I have said 
before and the arguments have been put before the House, Mr. 
Speaker, but I want to say that when the members opposite were 
in opposition rather than in government, they were asking for 
more and more information. Now that they have assumed the 
office of government they have taken the opposite position. And 
this is not the sole evidence of them decreasing the amount of 
information that I think the taxpayers are entitled to. We have 
other instances of this cover-up. A very recent one is in respect to 
Crown corporations where they are no longer going to disclose the 
global . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. The 
questions that we're dealing with here are the returns and the trips 
of members, and I don't think that it has anything to do with the 
public accounts and Crowns. I would ask the member to stay on 
the subject. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I certainly will do that. I wanted to point out the 
direction that the government is taking. There's one action here 
which demonstrates clearly the position of the government to 
disclose information which I think the public is entitled to. I am 
indicating to you and to the House that this is not the sole instance 
in which information has been withheld. 
 
Certainly I think the arguments have been put forward. It's evident 
that the minister won't take a question because he can't come up 
with a legitimate reason why he is amending it. And that's . . . I 
think the people of Saskatchewan will realize that he will not give 
the reason why he insists on this amendment. 
 
All he has done is move the amendment. He has not justified why 
he has moved the amendment. And I think that's it's clear enough 
to the public that there's a cover-up. When the election is called 
this will be a part of what the people of Saskatchewan will look at 
— the total waste, the lack of any respect for the taxpayers' 
money, a double standard for the cabinet ministers. 
 
And I think why it's so important that we get this information here 
in respect — and the details of it — is because of the tremendous 
amount of travel by this government. This is what we have been 
trying to do, is to track down and to disclose the extravagance of 
this government. 
 
Amendment agreed to on division. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 4 
 
Mr. Lusney moved, seconded by Mr. Koskie, than an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return No. 4 showing: 
 

For the period December 3, 1985 to March 18, 1986: (1) the 
number of out-of-province trips made by the Minister of Rural 
Development of Saskatchewan; (2) in each case his destination, 
the purpose of the trip, the name of each person who 
accompanied him at government expense; and (3) in each case 
the total cost of the trip separated 

 according to costs incurred for each of the following: (a) air 
fares, (b) hotels, (c) meals, (d) taxis, (e) gifts, (f) gratuities, (g) 
entertainment, (h) expenses, (i) miscellaneous. 

 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return no. 4 showing. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move the following 
amendment: 
 

That return no. 4 be amended by deleting all the words after the 
word "trip" in subsection (3). 
 

I so move, seconded by my colleague, the member from 
P.A.-duck Lake. 
 
Amendment agreed to on division. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 7 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney moved, seconded by Mr. Lingenfelter, that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 7 showing: 
 

For the period December 3, 1985 to March 18, 1986: (1) the 
number of out-of-province trips made by the Premier of 
Saskatchewan; (2) in each case his destination, the purpose of 
the trip, the name of each person who accompanied him at 
government expense; and (3) in each case the total cost of the 
trip separated according to costs incurred for each of the 
following: (a) air fares, (b) hotels, (c) meals, (d) taxis, (e) gifts, 
(f) gratuities, (g) entertainment, (h) expenses, (i) miscellaneous. 

 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return no. 7 showing. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That return no. 7 be amended by deleting all the words after the 
word "trip" in subsection (3). 

 
Seconded by member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
Amendment agreed to on division. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 

 
Return No. 8 

 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney moved, seconded by Mr. Lingenfelter, that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for return no 8. showing: 
 

For the period December 3, 1985 to March 18, 1986: (1) the 
number of out-of-province trips made by the Minister of 
Finance of Saskatchewan; (2) in each case his destination, the 
purpose of the trip, the name of each person who accompanied 
him at government expense; and (3) in each case the total cost 
of the trip separated according to costs incurred for each of the 
following: (a) air  

  



 
June 10, 1986 

1831 
 

fares, (b) hotels, (c) meals, (d) taxis, (e) gifts, (f) gratuities, (g) 
entertainment, (h) expenses, (i) miscellaneous. 

 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return no. 8 showing. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That return no. 8 be amended by deleting all the words after the 
word "trip" in subsection (3) 
 

Seconded by the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
Amendment agreed to on division. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 9 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney moved, seconded by Mr. Lingenfelter, that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 9 showing: 
 

For the period December 3, 1985 to March 18, 1986: (1) the 
number of out-of-province trips made by the Minister of 
Revenue and Financial Services of Saskatchewan; (2) in each 
case his destination, the purpose of the trip, the name of each 
person who accompanied him at government expense; and (3) 
in each case the total cost of the trip separated according to 
costs incurred for each of the following: (a) air fares, (b) hotels, 
(c) meals, (d) taxis, (e) gifts, (f) gratuities, (g) entertainment, (h) 
expenses, (i) miscellaneous. 

 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I move an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return no. 9 showing. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 
That return no. 9 be amended by deleting all the words after the 
word "trip" in subsection (3). 
 
Seconded by the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
Amendment agreed to on division. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 10 
 
Mr. Thompson moved, seconded by Mr. Tchorzewski, that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 10 showing: 
 

For the period December 3, 1985 to March 18, 1986: (1) the 
number of out-of-province trips made by the Minister of Parks 
and Renewable Resources of Saskatchewan; (2) in each case his 
destination, the purpose of the trip, the name of each person 
who accompanied him at government expense; and (3) in each 
case the total cost of the trip separated according to costs 
incurred for each of the following: (a) air fares, (b) hotels, (c) 
meals, (d) taxis, (e) gifts, (f) gratuities, (g)  

entertainment, (h) expenses, (i) miscellaneous. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to move an 
order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 10 showing, and I 
would ask the House Leader if he would consider not amending 
this. 
 
I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, the member from Turtleford who we're 
asking the questions about and the Minister of Parks and 
Renewable Resources would want to give all the information out 
to the taxpayers of this province, Mr. Speaker, who are paying the 
bills. And I'm sure that the taxpayers who are paying the bills, I 
say it's only fair to the House Leader that the taxpayers are entitled 
to know — not just a lump sum on the trip, but what it cost for the 
air fares, and the hotels, and the meals, and the gifts, and if there 
was any tips, or whatever it was. And I'm sure that the hon. 
member would want that information to be released. And I ask 
you, Mr. Minister to reconsider amending this motion. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That return no. 10 be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word "trip" in subsection (3). 

 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. When I'm on my feet and the 
House is doing business, I'm going to ask for order on both sides 
of the House. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 11 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski moved, seconded by Mr. Thompson, that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 11 showing: 
 

For the period December 3, 1985 to March 18, 1986: (1) the 
number of out-of-province trips made by the Minister of Social 
Services of Saskatchewan; (2) in each case his destination, the 
purpose of the trip, the name of each person who accompanied 
him at government expense; and (3) in each case the total cost 
of the trip separated according to costs incurred for each of the 
following: (a) air fares, (b) hotels, (c) meals, (d) taxis, (e) gifts, 
(f) gratuities, (g) entertainment, (h) expenses, (i) miscellaneous. 

 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return no. 11 showing. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That return no. 11 be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word "trip" in subsection (3). 

 
Seconded by my colleague, the member from P.A.-Duck Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. I'm going to ask the members to follow 
the rules of the Assembly. It's very difficult to carry on the word of 
the Assembly with this much calling back  
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1832 
 
 

and forth across the House. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I really do not intend to take long on this. I do 
hope we hear from the Minister of Social Services with respect to 
this matter. This is the sanctimonious minister, Mr. Speaker, who 
tells us how, when we are doling out a pittance to someone on 
welfare, there's normally not enough to buy food and clothing, we 
need exhaustive information with respect to the individual. We 
need all kinds of information which would offend, and I'm sure 
does offend them, except that they need it to stay alive. I really 
would like to hear from the Minister of Social Services as to why 
. . . He's leaving. Well isn't he a man of conviction. 
 
I really wish the minister had had the courage to tell us why he 
thinks those who can barely exist on their welfare and who are 
patently living below the subsistence level should give the public 
exhaustive information to make sure that there's nothing wasted; to 
make sure that there's not a morsel too much on the table. And yet 
when we are dealing with the minister himself and the lavish 
travel of this government, the public is not entitled to any 
information. 
 
I really wonder if the minister is going to be able to be that 
hypocritical, because that's what he's being if he doesn't stand up 
in this Assembly and justify, Mr. Speaker, why there should be 
one very rigorous standard for those who live below the 
subsistence level on welfare. Yet those ministers who live high on 
the hog, the same taxpayer paying the bill, the taxpayer is not 
entitled to any money. 
 
So I wonder if the minister is going to be sanctimonious and 
hypocritical enough to stand up to give us his information or not. I 
really look upon this with interest. If it isn't, we'll know what the 
so-called welfare reform is; it's an attempt to make a scapegoat out 
of those at the bottom of the ladder. 
 
So I wait, Mr. Speaker, for the minister to tell us why we need no 
information on him and a lot of information, Mr. Minister, on 
those who can barely keep body and soul together. 
 
(1645) 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 12 
 
Mr.Tchorzewski moved, seconded by Mr. Thompson, that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 12 showing: 
 

For the period December 3, 1985 to March 18, 1986: (1) the 
number of out-of-province trips made by the Minister of Urban 
Affairs of Saskatchewan;(2) in each case his destination, the 
purpose of the trip, the name of each person who accompanied 
him at government expense; and (3) in each case the total cost 
of the trip separated according to costs incurred for each of the 
following: (a) air fares, (b) hotels, (c) meals, (d)  

taxis, (e) gifts, (f) gratuities, (g) entertainment, (h) expenses, (i) 
miscellaneous. 

 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I move an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return no. 12 showing. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That return no. 12 be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word "trip" in subsection (3). 

 
Seconded by the member for Weyburn. Where is the member 
from Weyburn? P.A.-Duck Lake — sorry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 13 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski moved, seconded by Mr. Thompson, that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 13 showing: 
 

For the period December 3, 1985 to March 18, 1986: (1) the 
number of out-of-province trips made by the Minister of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs of Saskatchewan; (2) in 
each case his destination, the purpose of the trip, the name of 
each person who accompanied him at government expense; and 
(3) in each case the total cost of the trip separated according to 
costs incurred for each of the following: (a) air fares, (b) hotels, 
(c) meals, (d) taxis, (e) gifts, (f) gratuities, (g) entertainment, (h) 
expenses, (i) miscellaneous. 

 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I move that an order of the Assembly do 
issue for return no. 13 showing. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
hon. member from P.A.-Duck Lake: 
 

That return no. 13 be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word "trip" in subsection (3). 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 14 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski moved, seconded by Mr. Thompson, that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 14 showing: 
 

For the period December 3, 1985 to March 18, 1986: (1) the 
number of out-of-province trips made by the Minister of 
Education of Saskatchewan;(2) in each case his destination, the 
purpose of the trip, the name of each person who accompanied 
him at government expense; and (3) in each case the total cost 
of the trip separated according to costs incurred for each of the 
following: (a) air fares, (b) hotels, (c) meals, (d) taxis, (e) gifts, 
(f) gratuities, (g) entertainment, (h)  

  



 
June 10, 1986 

1833 
 

expenses, (i) miscellaneous. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for a return no. 14 showing. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member for P.A.-Duck Lake: 
 

That return no. 14 be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word "trip" in subsection (3). 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 15 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter moved, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Blakeney, 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 15 showing: 
 

For the period December 3, 1985 to March 18, 1986: (1) the 
number of out-of-province trips made by the Minister of Energy 
and Mines of Saskatchewan; (2) in each case his destination, the 
purpose of the trip, the name of each person who accompanied 
him at government expense; and (3) in each case the total cost 
of the trip separated according to costs incurred for each of the 
following: (a) air fares, (b) hotels, (c) meals, (d) taxis, (e) gifts, 
(f) gratuities, (g) entertainment, (h) expenses, (i) miscellaneous. 

 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for a return no. 15 showing. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from P.A.-Duck Lake: 
 

That return no. 15 be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word "trip" in subsection (3). 

 
Amendment agreed to on division. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 16 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter moved, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Blakeney, 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 16 showing: 
 

For the period December 3, 1985 to March 18, 1986: (1) the 
number of out-of-province trips made by the Minister of Supply 
and Services of Saskatchewan;(2) in each case his destination, 
the purpose of the trip, the name of each person who 
accompanied him at government expense; and (3) in each case 
the total cost of the trip separated according to costs incurred for 
each of the following: (a) air fares, (b) hotels, (c) meals, (d) 
taxis, (e) gifts, (f) gratuities, (g) entertainment, (h) expenses, (i) 
miscellaneous. 

 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for a return no. 16 showing. 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That return no. 16 be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word "trip" in subsection (3). 

 
I move, seconded by the member from P.A.-Duck Lake. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 17 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter moved, seconded by Hon. Mr. Blakeney, that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 17 showing: 
 

For the period December 3, 1985 to March 18, 1986: (1) the 
number of out-of-province trips made by the Minister of Health 
of Saskatchewan;(2) in each case his destination, the purpose of 
the trip, the name of each person who accompanied him at 
government expense; and (3) in each case the total cost of the 
trip separated according to costs incurred for each of the 
following: (a) air fares, (b) hotels, (c) meals, (d) taxis, (e) gifts, 
(f) gratuities, (g) entertainment, (h) expenses, (i) miscellaneous. 

 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I move that an order of the Assembly do 
issue for a return no. 17 showing. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That return no 17 be amended by deleting all the words after the 
word "trip" in subsection (3). 

 
Moved, seconded by the member from P.A.-Duck Lake. 
 
Amendment agreed to on division. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 18 
 
Mr. Shillington moved, seconded by Mr. Yew, that an order of 
the Assembly do issue for return no. 18 showing: 
 

For the period December 3, 1985 to March 18, 1986: (1) the 
number of out-of-province trips made by the Minister of 
Co-operation and Co-operative Development of Saskatchewan; 
(2) in each case his destination, the purpose of the trip, the name 
of each person who accompanied him at government expense; 
and (3) in each case the total cost of the trip separated according 
to costs incurred for each of the following: (a) air fares, (b) 
hotels, (c) meals, (d) taxis, (e) gifts, (f) gratuities, (g) 
entertainment, (h) expenses, (i) miscellaneous. 

 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by the 
member from Cumberland, that a return do issue for return no. 18 
showing. 
 
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1834 
 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That return no. 18 be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word "trip" in subsection (3). 

 
I so move, seconded by the member from P.A.-Duck Lake. 
 
Amendment agreed to on division. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 19 
 
Mr. Shillington moved, seconded by Mr. Yew, that an order of 
the Assembly do issue for return no. 19 showing: 
 

For the period December 3, 1985 to March 18, 1986: (1) the 
number of out-of-province trips made by the Minister of 
Culture and Recreation of Saskatchewan; (2) in each case his 
destination, the purpose of the trip, the name of each person 
who accompanied him at government expense; and (3) in each 
case the total cost of the trip separated according to costs 
incurred for each of the following: (a) air fares, (b) hotels, (c) 
meals, (d) taxis, (e) gifts, (f) gratuities, (g) entertainment, (h) 
expenses, (i) miscellaneous. 

 
Mr. Shillington: — I move a motion for return no. 19 showing, 
seconded by the member from Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That return no. 19 be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word "trip" in subsection (3). 

 
Moved, seconded by the hon. member from Prince Albert-Duck 
Lake. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 20 
 
Mr. Shillington moved, seconded by Mr. Yew, that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return no. 20 showing: 
 

For the period December 3, 1985 to March 18, 1986: (1) the 
number of out-of-province trips made by the Minister of Labour 
of Saskatchewan; (2) in each case his destination, the purpose of 
the trip, the name of each person who accompanied him at 
government expense; and (3) in each case the total cost of the 
trip separated according to costs incurred for each of the 
following: (a) air fares, (b) hotels, (c) meals, (d) taxis, (e) gifts, 
(f) gratuities, (g) entertainment, (h) expenses, (i) miscellaneous. 

 
Mr. Shillington: — I move a motion for return no. 20 showing, 
seconded by the member from Cumberland. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That return no. 20 be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word "trip" in subsection (3). 

 
So moved, seconded by the hon. member from Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
Amendment negatived. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! I'm going to ask the member for 
Shaunavon to apologize to the Assembly for refusing to obey the 
orders of this Chair. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I guess I was . . . after the 
defeat of that amendment, I was calling for an election. I guess I 
shouldn't have been doing that at the time. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I ask the member to apologize for his behaviour. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I do apologize for calling for an election 
from my seat. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — What I'm asking the member to apologize for is 
shouting right through the time when I'm trying to put a motion, 
and I would ask him for an unequivocal apology. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I unequivocally apologize. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 

Return No. 73 
 
Mr. Koskie moved, seconded by Mr. Lusney, that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return no. 73 showing: 
 

For the period December 3, 1985 to March 18, 1986: (1) the 
number of out-of-province trips made by the Minister of Justice 
of Saskatchewan; (2) in each case his destination, the purpose of 
the trip, the name of each person who accompanied him at 
government expense; and (3) in each case the total cost of the 
trip separated according to costs incurred for each of the 
following: (a) air fares, (b) hotels, (c) meals, (d) taxis, (e) gifts, 
(f) gratuities, (g) entertainment, (h) expenses, (i) miscellaneous. 

 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by my colleague, 
the member from Pelly, that an order of the Assembly do issue for 
return no. 73 showing. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That return no. 73 be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word "trip" in subsection (3). 

 
So moved, seconded by the member from Prince Albert-Duck 
Lake. 
 
Amendment agreed to on division. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 74 
 
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1835 
 

Mr. Koskie moved, seconded by Mr. Lusney, that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return no. 74 showing: 
 

For the period December 3, 1985 to March 18, 1986: (1) the 
number of out-of-province trips made by the Minister of 
Science and Technology of Saskatchewan; (2) in each case his 
destination, the purpose of the trip, the name of each person 
who accompanied him at government expense; and (3) in each 
case the total cost of the trip separated according to costs 
incurred for each of the following: (a) air fares, (b) hotels, (c) 
meals, (d) taxis, (e) gifts, (f) gratuities, (g) entertainment, (h) 
expenses, (i) miscellaneous. 

 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 
from Pelly, that an order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 
74 showing. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That return no. 74 be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word "trip" in subsection (3). 

 
Moved, seconded by the member from P.A.-Duck Lake. 
 
Amendment agreed to on division. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 75 
 
Mr. Koskie moved, seconded by Mr. Lusney, that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return no. 75 showing: 
 

For the period December 3, 1985 to March 18, 1986: (1) the 
number of out-of-province trips made by the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Manpower of Saskatchewan; (2) in 
each case his destination, the purpose of the trip, the name of 
each person who accompanied him at government expense; and 
(3) in each case the total cost of the trip separated according to 
costs incurred for each of the following: (a) air fares, (b) hotels, 
(c) meals, (d) taxis, (e) gifts, (f) gratuities, (g) entertainment, (h) 
expenses, (i) miscellaneous. 

 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for a return no. 75 showing. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That return no. 75 be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word "trip" in subsection (3). 

 
So moved, seconded by the hon. member from Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 76 
 
Mr. Koskie moved, seconded by Mr. Lusney, that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return no. 76 showing: 
 

For the period December 3, 1985 to March 18, 1986: (1) the 
number of out-of-province trips made by the Minister of 
Economic Development and Trade of Saskatchewan; (2) in 
each case his destination, the purpose of the trip, the name of 
each person who accompanied him at government expense; and 
(3) in each case the total cost of the trip separated according to 
costs incurred for each of the following: (a) air fares, (b) hotels, 
(c) meals, (d) taxis, (e) gifts, (f) gratuities, (g) entertainment, (h) 
expenses, (i) miscellaneous. 

 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for a return no. 76 showing. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That return no. 76 be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word "trip" in subsection (3). 

 
So moved, seconded by the hon. member from Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
Amendment agreed to on division. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 77 
 
Mr. Koskie moved, seconded by Mr. Lusney, that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return no. 77 showing: 
 

For the period December 3, 1985 to March 18, 1986: (1) the 
number of out-of-province trips made by the Provincial 
Secretary of Saskatchewan; (2) in each case his destination, the 
purpose of the trip, the name of each person who accompanied 
him at government expense; and (3) in each case the total cost 
of the trip separated according to costs incurred for each of the 
following: (a) air fares, (b) hotels, (c) meals, (d) taxis, (e) gifts, 
(f) gratuities, (g) entertainment, (h) expenses, (i) miscellaneous. 

 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for a return no. 77 showing. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That return no. 77 be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word "trip" in subsection (3). 

 
Seconded by the hon. member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
Amendment agreed to on division. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might ask for 
leave of the Assembly to move to government orders when we 
reconvene at 7 o'clock. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I would just ask the House Leader: I believe 
that we're moving back to Labour where we left 
  



 
June 10, 1986 

1836 
 
 

 off yesterday. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Our intention would be to go to committee 
of finance, but I believe there are two Bills. There's one in 
adjourned debates, as there was scheduled for earlier this 
afternoon. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


