


















































December 22, 1986 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 December 22, 1986 
 

429 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 5 — An Act 
respecting the Organization of the Executive Government of 
Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
opportunity to conclude my remarks addressed to Bill 5, Mr. 
Speaker, and just in the interest of continuity, if I may briefly 
reiterate, just briefly summarize, some of the points that I was 
making before adjournment. 
 
The Bill that’s before us, as has been said many times and by 
many more eloquently that I, is one which casts aspersions on 
the intent of the government in introducing Bill 5, a Bill which 
has been introduced with the stated intent of being an 
organizational Bill and stated specifically to facilitate the 
reorganization of the department of human resources, labour, 
and employment, combining together those departments as they 
currently exist, and adding the few secretariats to create one 
Bill. As we said before supper, Mr. Speaker, it is questionable 
as to whether that is the real intent of this Bill because if, as a 
matter of fact, that is the objective, then that can be much more 
easily accomplished by simply introducing a Bill to establish a 
new department, if that is the intent of the government. And so 
it certainly causes us to wonder why, if that is the intent, we 
find before us a Bill which allows for the government, for 
cabinet, simply on its own wishes, to not only establish but also 
to wipe out and reorganize the services as well as the employees 
of a number of departments, and to do all of that, Mr. Speaker, 
behind closed cabinet doors. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, as we look at this Bill and as I look at it, 
in particular, from the perspective as opposition critic 
responsible for social services . . . And as I said before, it’s 
questionable at this point today as to whether the Department of 
Social Services still exists because there are officials within that 
department who are already referring to themselves as officials 
from the department of human resources, labour, and 
employment. As we look at that, Mr. Speaker, we can only 
wonder. We can only wonder when we look at, in particular, a 
couple of sections of the Bill that would permit for cabinet 
ministers to contract with whoever it is they choose in order to 
carry out whatever it is that they decide, behind closed cabinet 
doors, are the purposes and the objectives of their government 
departments. 
 
And I also point out again, Mr. Speaker, I think of particular 
interest to people who are serving at the municipal level of 
government in the province of Saskatchewan, to the mayors, 
and the aldermen, and the councillors from every city and town 
and village in this beautiful province, that it appears to me that 
this Bill will permit the transfer of responsibility for delivery of 
social services from the provincial realm and will introduce that 
into the municipal level. And I say that particularly in light  

of the lack of response eliminating that possibility when 
addressed to the Minister of Social Services in question period 
some two weeks ago. 
 
And I also would like to add, Mr. Speaker, that there was a time 
in this province, as you are well aware, in which social services 
were delivered through the municipal level of government, and 
which it was decided after a great deal of negative experience 
by people who had particular problems, both recipients of social 
services as well as property taxpayers with a constructive 
approach, to providing social services at the municipal level. 
 
And I say that particularly because when we are delivering 
social services at that level then we find neighbours, friends and 
neighbours of people who are receiving social assistance, 
beginning to resent that because they see the charge for the cost 
of social services coming specifically from their own 
pocket-books. And it’s difficult; it’s difficult, in these difficult 
times that we have, to be as caring and as compassionate, 
understanding, as we would sometimes like to be, when we feel 
that someone who’s in difficulty and is just down the block 
from me is receiving benefits at my personal expense. 
 
And as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, you’d be well aware that 
there was a change in the delivery mechanism in the province of 
Saskatchewan some 25-odd years ago, which said that it just 
simply made more sense to the people of Saskatchewan to 
deliver social services through the provincial realm. By doing 
that it preserved and protected the dignity that those had who 
were the recipients, and it also preserved and protected the 
opportunity that those who were contributing to the public purse 
to still end up being respectful of those who were in most need. 
 
And so I am particularly concerned when it is stated that the 
purpose for this Bill is to simply introduce a new department, 
and that at the same time, if one is led to believe that there is 
nothing more to it than that, that the Bill itself seems to appear 
to facilitate the transfer of responsibility for delivery from the 
provincial level to the municipal level. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, before the supper break, I was attempting to 
familiarize the members in the Assembly here, but also the 
people of Saskatchewan, with the large amount of 
responsibilities that the Department of Social Services carries 
out in meeting the needs of its citizens. And the Department of 
Social Services, Mr. Speaker, is a department which personally 
and directly touches the lives of literally hundreds of thousands 
of Saskatchewan citizens — literally hundreds of thousands of 
Saskatchewan citizens. And simply when we look at the 
divisions within that department, it becomes obvious to all of us 
that the Department of Social Services has child and family 
services that it delivers to children to provide protection for 
those who are deserted by their families. It has youth services, 
Mr. Speaker, for troubled youths, and in particular, those who 
have come in conflict with the law and are of need of guidance 
and rehabilitation to change their lives and to become 
productive and contributing citizens in our society. 
  



 
December 22, 1986 

430 
 
 

The Department of Social Services also has an NGO, an 
non-government organization, section which facilitates and 
provides funding and support for a large number of 
community-based organizations around the province of 
Saskatchewan, community organizations which exist directed 
by and delivered by people in the communities for other people 
in their own communities. 
 
As well, there is the employment support and job creation 
responsibilities of the department. There is the whole 
administration of day care in the province of Saskatchewan that 
occurs in the Department of Social Services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve touched on those six, and I think with all of those, before 
we just wrap up and look at the other two . . . When we look at 
all of those, we simply ask ourselves: are those necessary kinds 
of services, are those the kinds of services that the people of 
Saskatchewan both need and want? And I think we very, very 
clearly, Mr. Speaker, say a resounding “yes” to that. 
 
But will they be taken away? Will they be taken away with the 
reorganization which occurs behind closed cabinet doors? And I 
say to you, Mr. Speaker, and I say to the members of this 
Assembly, I hope note, but we just don’t know. We just don’t 
know. 
 
And we won’t have the opportunity to carry out a review of the 
mandate and the objectives and the purpose of the Department 
of Social Services in this Legislative Assembly. We won’t have 
the opportunity to review those things in public if Bill 5 is 
passed because, first and foremost, Bill 5 enables the cabinet of 
the Government of Saskatchewan to make all of those 
reorganization and department creation and department 
wiping-out decisions behind closed cabinet doors. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I was just referring to the income security 
and employment development portion of the responsibilities of 
the Department of Social Services when we adjourned, and I 
think that we all have to agree, even those least objective 
among us in this Assembly, that the track record of the 
Government of Saskatchewan over the past five years has been 
anything but commendable in terms of providing a basic means 
by which the least fortunate of our citizens can meet their basic 
needs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also within that division, then, there is the responsibility to 
provide some hope for the future for a number of people, and 
particularly our young people. And so within that we find the 
Saskatchewan employment development program and 
Saskatchewan skills development program. Both of those, Mr. 
Speaker, are programs I think were introduced with positive 
intent under the very positive phrase of “welfare reform.” And 
to some extent I think they’ve accomplished some of their 
purposes. There would certainly be many. I know there are 
many who have spoken with me about their concerns for the 
ways in which those programs are delivered, and whether 
they’re delivered in a way that is sensitive to the needs of 
individuals to set their goals and attain their aspirations to 
become contributing members of our society. 
 
And so we have to ask ourselves, Mr. Speaker, when we  

look at income security and when we look at the Saskatchewan 
skills development program, the Saskatchewan employment 
development program — are those the kinds of services that the 
people of Saskatchewan need? And I think we say, yes. And 
will they be taken away with the restructuring of the 
Department of Social Services? We just don’t know. We just 
don’t know and we won’t have the opportunity to review that 
decision in this Assembly because those are the kinds of 
decisions with Bill No. 5 which can be made behind closed 
cabinet doors. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let me conclude with my review of the 
Department of Social Services by reflecting on services for 
senior citizens which at this point are essentially delivered 
through the seniors’ bureau. And at a time in which we have a 
growing seniors population and in which many, many people 
feel it is appropriate to build and co-ordinate on our services 
delivered to our senior citizens — those people who have given 
their lives to building Saskatchewan, to building the 
opportunities that we experience here now and provide the basis 
upon which we can build from here to our senior citizens, 
literally hundreds of thousands of senior citizens in this 
province, Mr. Speaker — many people are suggesting it would 
be most appropriate to establish a department whose sole 
responsibility it is to deliver and co-ordinate the services to our 
seniors. 
 
But what do we have now? We have simply the seniors’ bureau. 
And what is the seniors’ bureau, Mr. Speaker? It’s described as 
a one-stop point of contact in the provincial government for 
your questions and concerns about programs and services for 
seniors. So an information point. Kind of, in a sense, a library 
of services for seniors. And its objective is also to keep people 
informed about provincial government programs and services 
for seniors and to be a coordinator of services to seniors 
provided by many government departments and agencies. Now 
that’s not an onerous task by any stretch of the imagination, Mr. 
Speaker, but it is there and it exists within the Department of 
Social Services. 
 
And we ask ourselves, is that an important role? Clearly it is. 
Even as defined it’s an important role. And would that be taken 
away by a reorganization of the Department of Social Services? 
We hope not, Mr. Speaker. We hope not only that it would not 
be taken away but that it would be built on and enhanced. And 
we just don’t know. Because, as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, 
Bill 5 enables the Government of Saskatchewan, the cabinet of 
the Government of Saskatchewan, to make that decision behind 
closed cabinet doors. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, let me conclude my remarks this evening by 
turning ad looking at the situation that we have before us and 
offer some positive advice. Because it is the responsibility, Mr. 
Speaker, clearly it is the responsibility of the opposition to serve 
as critics, to examine the objectives and the proposals that the 
government is putting forth in this Assembly to meet the needs 
of the people of Saskatchewan, and to offer criticism for those 
things that we think are not consistent with the objectives that 
people want to see realized, but also at the same time, Mr. 
Speaker, to provide more positive alternatives, because it is not 
our objective to simply be critics; it is not  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

431 
 
 

our objective to simply offer negative observations. At times 
that’s appropriate, and with this Bill, Heaven only knows, there 
is reason and opportunity for providing a number of negative 
observations. But it doesn’t have to be simply that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(1915) 
 
When we look at this Bill, this Bill which calls for departmental 
reorganization to take place behind closed cabinet doors, and 
we ask ourselves: is it really true what the Deputy Premier has 
said, that this Bill has nothing more behind it than an attempt to 
provide a forum by which we can reorganize our governments 
and services as they exist now and create a new department 
called the department of human resources, labour, and 
employment? Let me be kind, Mr. Speaker — let me be kinder 
than a lot of the people of Saskatchewan — but let me be kind, 
Mr. Speaker, and assume that that’s all there is, that that is the 
meagre intention of the introduction of Bill No. 5. 
 
And so let me ask: when it is our objective here in this 
Assembly, no matter which side we sit on, when it is our 
objective through the services of the Government of 
Saskatchewan to meet the real needs of real people here in 
Saskatchewan, what is the best way of doing that? Do we take 
all of these secretariats and departments and boards that meet 
the needs of people who are most in need and lump them 
together? Is that the best way? Is that the best way to serve the 
real needs of the real people of Saskatchewan, people who are 
hurting? 
 
It’s take a long time — and I apologize for that, Mr. Speaker — 
it’s taken a long time to review all of the services provided by 
the Department of Social Services. 
 
And I highly commend the new minister of the Department of 
Social Services — if it’s still that — for taking on that 
responsibility. It’s an onerous responsibility, and I understand. 
It takes a long time to get a handle on the large number of needs 
that are experienced by Saskatchewan people and the vehicles 
by which we serve through government to meet those needs. 
That takes a long time, and I commend the new minister in his 
appointment for that. 
 
But let us be fair. Let us be fair to the member from Melfort, 
Mr. Speaker, in assigning his responsibilities to meet the real 
needs of the real people of Saskatchewan. And instead of taking 
the responsibility to meet all of these needs I have described 
from the Department of Social Services, and then add to that the 
services that currently fall under the Department of Labour, 
including the Worker’s Compensation Board; and then to add to 
that, the Women’s Secretariat; and then to add to that the senior 
bureau, which now exists within the Department of Social 
Services; and then to add to that the Native Secretariat; and then 
to add to that the Employment Development Agency, an agency 
that was introduced by the Premier about a year and a half ago 
and for which we were told there would be a single minister 
responsible only — only for the Employment Development 
Agency to address our number one concern in Saskatchewan, 
the creation of employment — and instead of taking all of those 
things and lumping them together in some gigantic  

beach ball, which is organized some way behind closed cabinet 
doors, and handling it to the hon. member from Melfort, and 
say, here’s your ball; grab it and run . . . Sorry. Member from 
Melville, Mr. Speaker. My apologies. And to say to the member 
from Melville, here’s the ball; here’s the problems; grab it and 
run with it; it’s your bag. 
 
And I don’t think that that’s fair to the member from Melville, 
Mr. Speaker, to expect him to have a handle on all the needs 
from people . . . from all of those departmental, and secretariat, 
and bureau responsibilities as they exist now, and to say, it’s 
your job to come up with solutions. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that we came to this Assembly, we 
stood for election because we came to serve people. And people 
in Saskatchewan have problems. It is our responsibility to find 
solutions, and the responsibility for that should not lie solely 
with one minister for whom it is an impossible task to get a 
grasp on the problems and to formulate solutions. 
 
And so it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, to be a much more 
constructive thing to do to form a special cabinet committee. 
And if we’re intent in the province of Saskatchewan to build 
and diversify, then let us build and diversify our services to 
people. Is that not one of the reasons we’re here for, is to 
provide services for people? 
 
And let us take, Mr. Speaker, instead of making this gigantic 
beach-ball of responsibilities that is bounced around behind 
closed cabinet doors, let us take those responsibilities, Mr. 
Speaker, and let us allow the cabinet ministers to work together, 
to use their creative minds; people who can get a handle on 
their responsibilities and their departmental objectives and who 
can understand the problems and who can work together 
collectively and creatively and co-operatively to find solutions 
for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And does it not make more sense, Mr. Speaker — and I toss this 
out for the members opposite — and if it makes sense, for 
heaven’s sakes grab this one and run with it and do it for the 
people of Saskatchewan. But does it not make more sense, Mr. 
Speaker, to allow the Minister of Social Services to understand 
the needs of that department and to sit down at a table, a special 
cabinet committee table, with the minister responsible for 
Labour, including the Workers’ Compensation Board; and to sit 
down and work co-operatively and creatively at that same table 
with the minister responsible for the Women’s Secretariat; and 
add to that group the minister responsible for the Native 
Secretariat; and to add to that group, Mr. Speaker, the minister 
responsible for the Employment Development Agency? And let 
those five people, who are able to get a handle on their 
responsibilities and the problems and some of the solutions, 
work together creatively to co-ordinate their efforts and to bring 
about some real solutions to real problems for the real people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because that has to 
be our objective. No one is opposed to reorganization. No one is 
opposed to realignment, but we  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

432 
 
 

are opposed to a step backward. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that 
we are taking a serious stride backward when we conglomerate 
all of those social, people problems together, and we give it to 
one minister and say, there you go, you’re now in charge of the 
department that unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, people are 
cynically referring to as the department responsible for 
oppression. So instead of doing that, allow them the opportunity 
to build and diversify in our services to people by working 
co-operatively and to work constructively at the table together. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I encourage the members opposite to 
reconsider, to reconsider, and in particular to the back-benchers 
opposite, because you haven’t tied your political can to this one 
yet, but to give some creative thought and to ask the members 
of the front benches on the opposite side: does it not make more 
sense to build and diversify services to people? Does that not 
make more sense instead of hiding them together in one? And 
to withdraw; and to withdraw or amend. Take away Bill 5, the 
Bill that provides the opportunity to make all kinds of decisions 
about all kinds of departments that exist now or don’t exist 
now, and to do that behind closed cabinet doors. Put it out front. 
Let the people of Saskatchewan see that you’re working 
creatively and constructively. Let the people of Saskatchewan 
see that you care. Let the people of Saskatchewan see that you 
want to provide for them an opportunity and a future and an 
opportunity for hope, Mr. Speaker; and to do that with a spirit 
of optimism and co-operation in constructive thinking. And that 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, is a much, much more positive move for 
the government to take today. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, let me conclude by coming back to an 
editorial that I referred to before. I refer to the editorial that was 
listed in the Regina Leader-Post on December 18. I simply 
come back, Mr. Speaker, to quote the final paragraph of that 
editorial. And the editor writes: 
 

We urge the government to reconsider. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I urge the government to reconsider. He writes: 
 

We urge the government to reconsider. Streamline, yes; 
reorganize, yes; but do it in the open where it can be seen, 
dissected, and clearly understood. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we’re faced with a Bill today which does not 
provide the opportunity for streamlining and reorganization in 
the open. It will not provide the opportunity for it to be seen. It 
will certainly not provide the opportunity for it to be dissected. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am afraid I must admit that it seems that it 
may be one of the objectives that the reorganization will occur 
in a form in which it is not clearly understood. 
 
And for all of those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I must join with my 
colleagues on this side of the House standing opposed to the 
passage of Bill 5 in its present form. If it is removed or 
amended to provide for some constructive directions for the 
people of Saskatchewan then, Mr. Speaker, I would be happy to 
support a Bill in an amended form which provides a positive 
alternative. 

And so for those reasons, Mr. Speaker, let me conclude simply 
by saying that as the Bill currently exists today, I must vote 
against it. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had not 
anticipated that I would take part in this debate. However I feel 
that it is such an important debate that I must say a few words. 
 
I suppose the debate on Bill 5 . . . If I may look into the future 
for a moment, at some time historians may look back on the 
essence of the debate on this Bill and say that this is a water 
shed in the government that is the Government of Saskatchewan 
today. They will say that this is a study in the use and abuse of 
power. Now history has yet to show whether this will be an 
abuse of power or a use of power, and that’s very important that 
we understand that. At this point we are, I’m afraid, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, of the opinion that this may be an abuse of power. 
Therefore on that basis we must rise and oppose it. 
 
This particular government is proficient in creating illusions. 
People will be aware of the election campaign where the 
illusion was created — with great amounts of public money, 
great amounts of Conservative Party money — to the effect that 
this government was building and diversifying for the future of 
Saskatchewan. Now far in excess of 50 per cent of the people of 
Saskatchewan did not believe that, whereas those same people, 
just a few year ago, had given this government an 
overwhelming mandate to govern in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In this particular session of the legislature the government is 
again attempting to create its illusions, and it is the illusion of 
efficiency and effectiveness. And in this particular document of 
despair that we dealt with last week, one section is entitled: 
 

Government Efficiency, Effectiveness and Reorganization 
 
My Government will address the problems of internal 
administrative efficiency and effectiveness. Government 
resource revenues have fallen. At the same time demand 
for government support and services has risen. 
 
My ministers will improve delivery of programs and 
services while constraining the cost to taxpayers. New 
legislation will be introduced to reorganize and 
consolidate provincial government departments and 
agencies to ensure maximum efficiency and effectiveness. 

 
And I noticed when the members that have spoken on this and 
that have spoken on other debates in this House, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, have repeatedly and repeatedly referred to efficiency 
and effectiveness. Now what I feel is before us at this time is a 
three-pronged attack on democratic institutions. I feel that what 
we have before us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a conspiracy against 
democracy. In the Bill 5 which is before us, it clearly talks 
about the  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

433 
 
 

government’s need to continue or vary any department, and 
determine the objectives and purposes of that department. 
 
Right at this moment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m more concerned 
about the objectives and purposes of this government rather 
than this legislation, and I shall examine this legislation in that 
light. What are the objectives and purposes of this government? 
 
It has been mentioned before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
government brought in a report which they attempted to have 
accepted by this House dealing with quorums on special 
committees, and Mr. Speaker properly ruled that the report was 
out of order in that part of the report that dealt with quorums. 
 
Now for some of the newer members this may be instructive. 
Don’t for a moment assume that the government is done with 
the question of the quorum on committees, because there are 
many other ways to accomplish what they sought to accomplish 
in that report which was ruled out of order. 
 
So don’t for a moment assume that that is done with. At some 
point in time government members may come back through 
some other means and attempt to adjust the quorum in 
committees. 
 
Take Bill 5. And I want to deal with how Bill 5 deals with the 
critic area, one of the critic areas that I am assigned. And that, 
of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, deals with the question of the 
property management corporation. 
 
(1930) 
 
In a speech previously given in this House, a member had said: 
 

Mr. Speaker, consistent with this government’s announced 
intent to increase government efficiency and effectiveness. 
(Well there’s those buzz words again, on behalf of the 
government member) as Minister of Supply and Services 
I’ll be undertaking the full establishment of the 
Saskatchewan Property Management corporation. The role 
of SPMC, Mr. Speaker, will be to satisfy government 
accommodation requirements and to provide financing to 
third parties for capital construction projects. 
 
The benefits of the corporation, Mr. Speaker, will be 
increased government accountability in the provision and 
use of government-funded accommodation; also increased 
management efficiency and a reduction in the cost of 
providing public facilities. A board of directors has been 
appointed, Mr. Speaker, with myself as the chairman, and 
we will begin immediately staffing the corporation in 
order to get it up and running. 

 
Now it appears, from what the minister in charge of this 
corporation has said, — the property management corporation 
— that we have a finely tuned athlete with his foot on the 
starting block ready to get up and running.  

Well I think an examination of what actually is occurring here 
would be relevant at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The corporation was established on March 1986, and by order 
in council 357-86. Now the corporation didn’t do a blessed 
thing, Mr. Speaker, until the 12th of November, 1986. Another 
order in council was issued. So this was 711 order in councils 
later. Another order in council was issued which changed the 
chairman of the corporation. And the only reason the 
corporation made a move at that point was because the people 
of Saskatoon Sutherland had sacked the chairman of the 
property management corporation. Now I don’t suppose . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I don’t suppose they sacked the chairman 
of the property management corporation because he was 
management of that corporation, because they could attach no 
blame to him whatsoever. The corporation hadn’t done a 
blessed thing, as I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now the property management corporation, as I said, was 
created by order in council in March 1986. The minister in 
charge says that this finely tuned instrument has got its foot on 
the starting block and it will begin immediately staffing the 
corporation in order to get it up and running. And as I said, this 
is 711 or 13 orders in council later they finally got around to 
saying, this corporation’s ready to go. 
 
Well what had this particular corporation done? Well the record 
shows quite clearly, Mr. Chairman, that the corporation had 
done nothing up to this point except two appointments to the 
corporation. And it was the previous chairman of the 
corporation — the one that got himself sacked — and he said 
when he was being examined way back in June 1986: 
 

At the present time, Mr. Chairman, (this was in 
committee) we have no staff with the corporation. We 
have two people on contract. We may in fact be hiring 
staff in the very near future, in the very near future. But as 
of now, that’s the situation. 

 
Then it turns out that they have two OCs there, each being paid 
$3,000 a month. And they have laboured mightily, yet we do 
not know what the corporation has brought forward. 
 
The corporation might to some appear to be a parallel 
development to what Bill 8 is suggesting be done, that things 
should be once removed from this Legislative Chamber. In this 
particular instance, the irony of the situation — that this 
government is creating a Crown corporation for that purpose. In 
the Bill 8 which is before us, the government, of course, is 
creating a situation whereby decisions similar to this can be 
made in the cabinet room and never be debated in this 
Legislative Chamber as has always have been done in the past. 
And we think that is a dangerous precedent. 
 
I want to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, deal for a few moments with the 
next item that appears in this conspiracy of three things: the first 
one being the special committee quorum,  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

434 
 
 

the second one being Bill 5, that seeks to do in the cabinet room 
which formerly had been done in this Chamber. And I say that 
the members of this Chamber, especially the new members, 
should go back and acquaint themselves with debate of a 
similar nature when there was a conspiracy against democracy 
in this Chamber. 
 
And I want to deal with that now for a few minutes if I can get 
the floor from the member from Weyburn. In this same 
document the government says a new electoral boundaries Act 
will be introduced to reflect the changes and ensure effective 
representation in all parts of the province. And we are watching 
with interest to see when this new Bill comes forward — this 
new Act. And this in itself should be alarming to members in 
this Chamber. It takes me back to the period 1969, 1971. And if 
I may just lay in a bit of background for you, Mr. Speaker, 
because you weren’t here at that time, and I was, and so were 
some of the other members. 
 
In 1964 the Liberal party had won a resounding victory in the 
province of Saskatchewan and formed a government. In 1967, 
aware that they were getting into a deepening financial crisis, 
the Liberal Party called an election after three and a half years. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And won again. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — They won again, as the Liberal in the 
back row says. They won again. Now why did they call a snap 
election in 1967? Because of the worsening financial condition 
which they didn’t want to disclose to the people of 
Saskatchewan. In the spring of 1968 came black Friday. The 
budget that was brought down by that particular government 
increased virtually every tax and fee before the people of 
Saskatchewan. Now here you have a government, one term, has 
a quickie election, a budget which is a desperate situation on its 
downhill slide into opposition. 
 
And what do you have here? You have a government which 
dillied and dallied for four and a half years before calling an 
election; is in a serious financial condition — their black Friday 
is still before us, Mr. Chairman, and it will come. Now this 
situation that we were faced with in 1970. What did the Liberal 
party do? Well, Mr. Speaker, in the back room of the cabinet at 
that time there was a lowly executive assistant to one of the 
Liberal cabinet ministers. And he was assigned the 
responsibility . . . He sat there with his cold, cold electoral map 
before him and a hot adding machine in his hand and it was his 
job to draw the boundaries. And that lowly Liberal executive 
assistant was one Gary Lane, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now this 
lowly Liberal executive assistant, Mr. Gary Lane, was working 
on this adding machine and he came up with some interesting 
boundary changes for the Liberal Party. And I have them here. I 
went back and I checked the record . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well I don’t know if he introduced the Bill or not but the 
Liberal Party . . . The front people for this executive assistant in 
the back room were Mr. D. G. Steuart, introducing Bill No. 86. 
And Mr. Steuart in his opening remarks said: 
 

I had the help of a committee composed of MLAs from all 
parts of Saskatchewan (this is one of the Liberal attempts 
at electoral reform) including the  

Hon. Allan Guy, (Athabasca), the Hon. Cy MacDonald, 
(Milestone), Mr. McPherson, (Regina), Robert Heggie 
(Hanley). 

 
So we had a four-member committee of the legislature deciding 
the constituency boundaries and they were working in close 
quarters with that lowly Liberal executive assistant in the back 
rooms of the cabinet, drawing up the electoral map. And what 
did they put on the electoral map? 
 
Well there’s some interesting boundaries came out of it. Let’s 
take a look at Moose Jaw. Moose Jaw North had 8,000 people. 
When that lowly Liberal executive assistant was done, they had 
6,200. At the same time, Moose Jaw South started with 11,4000 
and went up to 13,400. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sounds like a garymander. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes, yes, that was the garymander, the 
garymander. And it went on and it went on. Canora under the 
new set-up, the constituency of Canora, will have nearly 9,000 
voters as compared to Pelly which was reduced to 6,500 voters. 
And there’s other examples of this as well. If you took the 
Liberal members that were elected in the ’67 election, on 
average represented 8,500 voters. The NDP members on 
average represented 10,200 and those same Liberal members 
had the audacity to accuse the NDP of rigging the boundaries 
— of rigging the boundaries when the Liberals on average 
represented 8,500 voters and the NDP on average represented 
10,200 as a result of boundary changed by NDP government. 
Now I don’t wish to get back into that era because at this time a 
new era was opening up and . . . Just another comparison here. I 
should give you this one. This was in the constituency of 
Regina. Three constituencies across the North had a total 
population of 46,000 and the other four constituencies 31,000, 
or 15,000 less than in the three northern ones. So that was the 
situation in Regina, with this new attempt at independent 
boundary commissioned by the special committee set up by Mr. 
D. G. Steuart, assisted in the back room by one Gary Lane. 
 
Now, that would be a very bad situation. And I noticed in going 
over the debate here Mr. Lloyd, the Leader of the Opposition, 
was speaking and he talked about the Liberal Party having a 
principle and the only principle was that of an alleged divine 
right of the Liberal Party to govern. An interesting use of words 
there. And Mr. Lloyd also said that, “This Bill in itself was 
sufficient reason for the defeat of the government that sits 
opposite,” at that time. 
 
Now I was particularly interested in this garymander which was 
going on at that time because I was the member for Saskatoon 
Mayfair. And when the member who was drawing those lines, 
or the non-member who was drawing those lines in the back 
room had finished, the constituency of Saskatoon Mayfair had 
about 15,000 or more voters. The constituency of City Park, on 
an adjacent boundary, had 5,000 or less. I felt that was rather 
unfair and rather an attack on the democratic system. 
 
And the people who defended the democratic system at that 
time are the same people that are defending the democratic 
system now. I see a resolution here moved on  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

435 
 
 

an independent boundaries commission, by the member from 
Mayfair, Mr. Brockelbank. And I see amendments to the Bill, 
brought before the House moved by the member for Riversdale, 
Mr. Romanow. And they were there, along with other New 
Democratic members, defending the democratic system. And it 
was fortunate that the people of Saskatchewan not only saw 
through the economic mess that the Liberal Party was getting 
Saskatchewan into, but they saw though this democratic 
flimflam that the Liberal Party was trying to foist on the people 
of Saskatchewan with this four-member commission which was 
drawing electoral boundaries which were thoroughly 
undemocratic. 
 
(1945) 
 
An Hon. Member: — They paid for it, though. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Now . . . Yes, they paid for it. As a 
matter of fact they lost every seat in Saskatoon as a result of 
that and other things. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — And they lost almost every other seat in 
Regina, and they lost their government. And I want to warn the 
back members, the back-seat members in this House: think of 
your future. Think of your future. Because this government is 
putting you in exactly the same position that Liberal 
government put itself in back in the 1971 election. And I 
suspect that these members should think carefully about that 
because their future is at stake, not only the . . . If you just take 
the selfish point of view — forget about the democratic system 
for a minute, fellows — but you should take the democratic 
point of . . . You should take your own personal point of view: 
do I intend to be around this House very long? Because when 
this government starts to slide after the budget in the spring, 
when you see the defections — there’ll be one, at least one 
defection with a year after the budget in the spring and it’s 
going to be sitting right over there. There’s going to be one 
defection at minimum, maybe more. That budget in the spring 
will be the reason that the member, who leaves over there, will 
use to separate himself from the Conservative Party. 
 
I say to the government of the day: if you intend to carry out 
another one of these garymanders, do your worst, but be 
assured that every step of the way we will be fighting you, the 
way we fought the Liberal Party back in 1970, when the last 
attack on the democratic system took place. 
 
Now if you’re going to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if these members 
intend to go ahead, regardless, I would think that the obvious 
choice for heading up this committee would be the member 
from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. He’s had some experience in this 
area and I’m sure he hasn’t forgot how to use an adding 
machine. And if in fact that’s what the governing party has in 
mind, they should make good use of the talents of the member 
from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. 
 
And they should have an urban member on that committee of 
theirs, and I would suggest that, with all due deference, it 
should be the member from Regina South. Now I suggest the 
member from Regina South — and I  

know he’s listening to me now — I suggest the member from 
Regina South because he knows what it’s like to have the hot 
breath of the NDP on his neck. He’s got incentive, and he’s a 
survivor. He’s a survivor. He was out of cabinet, in cabinet, out 
of cabinet, in cabinet and, Mr. Speaker, he has, as we say, the 
ability of Superman, the ability to leap large cities at a single 
bound. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — For example, from Regina North to 
Regina South. And I wouldn’t be surprised if you scratch him, 
you’ll find a Liberal under the surface. 
 
Now I don’t want to take too much time this evening, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but I think that it’s important that especially 
the new members of the Assembly understand what is at stake. 
 
You can come out of this as heroes. All that’s necessary is that 
you bring your government to ground in caucus. You have a 
good serious talk with them about what I said here today. 
 
And I get that feeling of déjà vu. I’ve been here before; you 
haven’t. I want to give you the benefit of my experience. You 
are now back-benchers attached to a majority government that 
is on the slide. It’s financially in trouble. It is bringing in 
anti-democratic measures, three of which I’ve stated here this 
evening. It’s a conspiracy against the democratic system. 
 
If you want to be on the right side of this argument, I suggest 
you beard the lion in his den at the next caucus meeting, and 
come to some different conclusion than you have on this 
particular Bill. 
 
And I say that with all due respect for the members’ abilities in 
caucus to be able to turn around this government. Because I 
don’t think they should let this government, from the 
democratic point of view, make the same foolish mistakes that 
some of its members made back in 1970, 1971. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — What we have here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
is an agglomeration of power. This government is attempting to 
gather in, this cabinet is attempting to gather into its hand all of 
the power that’s necessary so that when that next budget comes 
down in the spring, they’ll be able to make what they believe to 
be necessary, fast moves. And there’s going to have to be some 
very fast moves made next spring when that budget comes 
down. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate this is a difficult subject to deal 
with, and it’s difficult to get the members across the way to 
understand the subject because they’ve had so little 
acquaintance with it in the past. 
 
And I don’t expect I’m going to convert the cabinet ministers 
and the front-benchers — maybe some of the new cabinet 
ministers. 
 
For example, the member from Saskatoon Mayfair comes from 
a wonderful constituency. I had the opportunity of  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

436 
 
 

representing that constituency for the first time in history. 
 
Mind you, at that time it was made like a Senate seat by the 
Liberal government by putting in all the parts of Saskatoon and 
thereabouts that voted NDP — putting it all into Mayfair 
constituency. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Senator Brockelbank. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes. And it was a wonderful victory. 
 
And I think that the member for Mayfair has a proud 
constituency to answer to. And I want to assure him that, in the 
event that he should insist on this conspiracy against 
democracy, I shall be talking to some of the people in Mayfair 
constituency. And I have a pretty fair knowledge of them 
because I’ve been representing parts of them for a long time, 
and I would welcome the opportunity to explain how the 
member for Mayfair acted on this particular Bill 5 that we have 
before us. 
 
And there are other members, new members, that are looking 
forward to a long career in politics and I want to assure you that 
the average career in politics is around maybe four years. After 
four years . . . And I hear that fellow from Regina South 
chirping from the back seats again. He says, more than mine. 
Well I tell you my career is much longer than the member’s 
from Regina South and I suspect I may even be around much 
longer than him. Could be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — And I’m welcoming the opportunity for 
the member of Regina South to get into his seat and say 
something in this debate because there has been very little said. 
The minimum amount of debate has been issued forth from the 
government side with the minimum amount of information. I 
know that the member from Souris-Cannington, the Deputy 
Premier, is a man of few words, but I was astounded the other 
day with the number of words he used to introduce this 
particular Bill. And he’s even cut his minimums lower because 
he told us very little about what was in the Bill and what would 
actually happen. 
 
And I want to just make a final plea to the members and 
especially those members that were in close seats. I think of 
Wascana. I used to live in Wascana. I lived in Wascana for 10 
years; it was a good constituency then. And we’ll be looking 
forward to hearing . . . There’s another one. I bet you scratch 
him and you got a Liberal underneath. I’ll just bet you, I’ll just 
bet you. 
 
And I’ve seen some of them laying the groundwork for the 
budget in the spring. And you just go back and read the member 
from Wascana’s speech. He’s laying the groundwork for that 
budget — just in case, just in case. 
 
But I know the member from Wascana comes from a family 
that has a long political history in Saskatchewan, and I’m sure 
he’s proud of that, as I am. And I want to encourage him to be 
on the right side in this issue. When you get in your caucus, if 
another meeting is required of your caucus, make your voice 
heard. Make your voice heard because afterwards it’ll be too 
late and you’ll be on  

the sinking ship. You’ll be on the sinking ship with all of those 
that went down in ’71. There are very few survivors. The whole 
thing went down in ’71, and it’s going to go down again. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for your allowing me to put 
forward my remarks. I hope it would have some effect on some 
of the newer members in this Chamber. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I did hesitate to get 
up because I really thought that the member from Regina South, 
or the member from Regina Wascana, might want to stand up 
and get into this debate after hearing the member from 
Saskatoon in his remarks. But, Mr. Speaker, I do want to say 
that I do rise, as many others before me have, with the words 
that I was not intending to get into this debate earlier. But as I 
studied with some care what this Bill really does and what it 
proposes to do, and as I listened to the articulate debate that has 
taken place from my colleagues on this side of this House, I felt 
compelled, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people of Regina 
North East, as well as, I think, as all of the rest of us, on behalf 
of everyone in Saskatchewan, to put on the record my concerns 
about what I see the government intending with this legislation 
that’s before us here today. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the implications of this Bill are such that no 
reasonable person who believes in the principles of a 
democratic, parliamentary system of government can ignore. I 
don’t think any reasonable person could ignore what this Bill is 
going to do. 
 
And I’m going to deal with some of those implications in my 
remarks later. But first I want to address, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the rather feeble defence of the legality of this Bill that was 
made here, I believe, on Friday, by none other than the Minister 
of Justice when he stood in this House. 
 
He stood, the Minister of Justice did, on Friday last and 
suggested that he had consulted with legal officials in his 
department and that he had been advised that this Bill is 
constitutionally legal. Well I’m not sure where he found a 
lawyer to write down what he had dictated in such a manner, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the fact that he made no offer to table 
that legal opinion when he referred to it, and he even chose not 
to read from that document, makes one question what kind of 
document he really had in his hand. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Speaker, that action on the part 
of the minister leads to the question: did he really have a legal 
opinion, or a defence of this proposed Bill by the government, 
or was he doing as his government has done for four and a half 
or almost five years? And that is, stretching the truth to its 
limits to attempt a political defence of his government’s actions 
which are questionable, wrong-headed, and contrary to that 
which any democratic system of government ought to be doing. 
 
Now here is what the minister said. The minister said that the 
delegation of power is substantially different from  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

437 
 
 

law-making power. And I can’t disagree with that. I don’t think 
anyone could. 
 
And then the minister went on to say that Bill 5 does not take 
powers away from the Legislative Assembly. On that, Mr. 
Speaker, he is wrong. He knows he is wrong. And I suggest to 
you that unless he, as the Minister of Justice, can provide 
evidence here to support his claim, no one can be blamed for 
believing that his intent was anything less than to mislead the 
legislature and the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, there are presently a 
number of statutes, each creating a department with a minister 
and outlining various powers and duties and purposes and 
functions. And these have, of course, been enacted by this 
legislature. What Bill 5 does, in short, is enable the cabinet, in 
effect, to change existing legislation by order in council. 
 
The Bill enables cabinet to establish new departments, and 
more that than, but also to determine the objectives and the 
purposes of the departments. And this, Mr. Speaker, is taking 
powers way from the Legislative Assembly and transferring 
them to cabinet which then has an absolute power to do almost 
anything without coming before this Assembly to seek the 
power to do those things. 
 
(2000) 
 
Now if you follow through this scenario and recognize that this 
Assembly is nothing more than the forum for debate, and the 
law-making body through which the people speak through the 
members who they elect, Bill 5 is in a major way taking power 
away from the people of this province, and giving it to a select 
few who might happen to be in the cabinet. 
 
Now I suggest to you that one does not have to be a master 
student in history to know that everywhere in the world when 
too much power is put in the hands of a small elite, abuses of it 
have been astronomical. And I predict that if this Bill passes in 
its present form, all of the lessons of history will be repeated 
under this present government here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the Minister of Justice and the House Leader of the 
government might say all they want, but there can be no doubt 
that this Bill grants to cabinet the power to obliterate the intent 
of the legislature in so far as the prescribed powers, duties, and 
functions of ministers and departments go. 
 
And when clause 12(1)(b) is considered along with sections 5 
and 22, it becomes apparent that the cabinet can indeed 
disestablish any department. And if this is done, the legislation 
setting up the department concerned would effectively be 
obliterated. 
 
Now while the departmental Act would still be on the statute 
books, there would be no vehicle in the form of a department to 
carry out the powers and the duties and the functions that are 
mandated in that departmental Act. 

Now the cabinet would be given the power to disestablish a 
department with no corresponding obligation on the part of 
cabinet to transfer the various powers, duties and functions of 
the disestablished department to another minister or department. 
 
Now this, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you, interferes with the 
mandate of the legislature in spite of what the Minister of 
Justice said the other day. It not only takes powers away from 
the Legislative Assembly, it also gives the cabinet the power to 
ignore the laws passed by this legislature when this Assembly 
exercises its power. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, this is 
clearly an attack on parliamentary democracy itself. It’s an 
attack which must be fought with all the energy and vigour that 
people who believe in freedom have displayed time and time 
again throughout the world. 
 
We are a democracy and we have some important rights that 
allow us not only to choose our governments by election. Those 
rights also allow us the right to determine how our elected 
governments act and carry out their responsibilities. And by 
taking power away from the legislature and giving it to the 
cabinet, by this stampede to centralize power and decision 
making in the hands of the Premier and those he surrounds 
himself with, those rights of a democratic society are restricted 
greatly. Other countries of the world have had parliaments and 
even do still parliaments today, Mr. Speaker, but in many of 
them because of too much power in the hands of the executive 
or cabinet, the parliaments are ineffective and they are 
powerless. 
 
And the most contemporary example, I suppose, would be the 
Philippines, which indeed has had a parliament for a long time, 
but during the time of the Marcos regime, I ask you, Mr. 
Speaker: did that parliament have any power in spite of the fact 
that it existed? I say to you, it did not. And it did not have any 
power because the executive and the president had too much 
and therefore were able to do what they wished in spite of the 
fact that there existed a parliament. And as a result, Mr. 
Speaker, the abuses of power grew and multiplied until the 
Philippines was a democracy by name only. And we must guard 
against this tendency by cabinet to provide ever-increasing 
power to itself; must vote against this Bill which is the greatest 
power-grab in the history of this province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And I want to say to the back-benchers 
on the government side, and I say it as sincerely as I possibly 
can — think carefully about what your cabinet wants you to do. 
If you really ran in the last election because you believed that as 
a legislator you can have a role to play in governing this 
province, you cannot support this Bill. If you don’t care, then I 
suggest you do this province and this whole democratic process 
a great disservice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
December 22, 1986 

438 
 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I say to those back-benchers, Mr. 
Speaker, that they have an opportunity — and they don’t need 
to do it publicly — they have an opportunity to prevent this Bill 
from passing. I say to them, do it in your caucus; do it in your 
lounge; do it in the hallway between the lounge and this 
Assembly; but do it. Stand up for something that is important. If 
you all say to the House Leader and to the cabinet on the 
government side of the House that you’re not going to stand for 
it, you can put a stop to it. But if you can’t, if your House 
Leader feels that he’s got to put the whip on you, then I say you 
have reason to become very suspicious about what’s going on 
and that this Bill, in your mind, should most certainly be wrong 
and therefore you should vote against it. 
 
I say through you, Mr. Speaker, to the members on the 
government side of the House who are not in the cabinet, that 
by supporting Bill No. 5 they will be giving the cabinet the 
power to effectively repeal and replace existing legislation. And 
the enactment of Bill No. 5 would amount to the legislature 
delegating broad legislative powers to the cabinet and even 
constitutionally, that is wrong. 
 
And the law is clear that the legislature can validly delegate 
powers, including powers that can be described as law-making 
or legislative powers to subordinate bodies. In all sorts of ways, 
the power to make rules is given to others and there’s been 
examples used of the Highway Traffic Board and Labour 
Relations Board and I know there are many others. But such a 
delegation, however, normally involves the grating of power to 
make rules within and subordinate to enabling or primary 
legislation. 
 
The body to whom rule-making power is granted can only work 
within the confines of the primary statute which creates it 
and/or gives it its powers. Bill 5 purports to do something else. 
It purports to delegate the power to make rules which would 
effectively amend, repeal, and replace existing legislation. And 
it gives to cabinet a carte blanche to legislate in very broad 
terms. And to do this, Mr. Speaker, therefore seems not an 
exercise in delegation to a subordinate body but rather the 
elevation of the delegate, or the cabinet, to the statute of the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Bill 5 would allow the law as set down by the legislators to be 
ignored, amended, nullified, and replaced by cabinet order. And 
this is more akin to primary law-making authority than to a 
valid exercise or delegation. This is what the Minister of Justice 
on Friday ignored in his speech to this House. 
 
And I say to the back-benchers again, and I say it particularly 
again to the new ones who hopefully have not yet been 
corrupted by the patronage and the high living and the scandal 
of those who took part in it during the last four and a half years: 
your cabinet has not been honest with you. Take this 
opportunity to let them know that you have some clout and that 
they will not be able to run over your for the rest of the term of 
this government. Show the cabinet that you intend to represent 
the people who elected you and not only the wishes of the 
power brokers in the Conservative Party and the members of 
cabinet who are their spokesmen. 

Mr. Speaker, the reason why I intend to oppose this Bill, and 
why other members of this side of the House intend to oppose 
it, I think have been made very clear. I don’t think it’s right that 
the cabinet should get such a kind of power under this Bill 
which would erode the proper role and the responsibility and 
the authority of the Legislative Assembly. And I don’t think it’s 
right that any Bill should be passed in this House that would 
seriously undermine the parliamentary government in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now there are those who in the early stages of this debate had 
different hopes for this Bill. And I want to quote to you an 
article that was written in the “Legislative Report” of the 
Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce which I think came out 
last week. And I think in all sincerity the author of the article 
said the following when they referred to this Bill. They said: 
 

Our understanding of this new Act is that it will be 
enabling legislation so re-organization can take place with 
the Legislature first placing its imprimatur on the plans. 
However, the Bill is expected to carry some clause which 
will require the Government to bring there-organization to 
the MLA’s for confirmation. 

 
Well since that time the Bill has come to this House and there is 
no such clause. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that even these people, 
who the members opposite always assumed to be their strongest 
supporters, are going to be very concerned. And they’re 
becoming very concerned about what this Bill intends to do 
because it does not address that one qualification which the 
Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce put into their 
expectations of it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when this kind of power is granted to a 
government and to a cabinet, there are certain questions that 
have to be asked. And I think one of the major questions that 
has to be asked is, what is the role of this legislature? And 
members must ask themselves, and I submit they must ask 
themselves on both sides of the House: is the role of the 
legislators simply to respond to the acts and to the actions of the 
cabinet, or do legislators have some role and some 
responsibility in considering and determining the legislation of 
this province and the services provided by government and the 
way in which those services are provided? 
 
I believe that we, each and every one as an individual member 
for our constituencies, have that role and we ought to protect it. 
As has been said by others this Bill, which is a power-grab by a 
power-hungry government to a large extent, takes away much 
of that role and reduces the members to asking of questions on 
things that happened after the fact. 
 
And I say to the House, and I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that is 
wrong. That is a total contradiction of the democratic 
parliamentary system of government, and this Bill should be 
opposed by all of those who support the British parliamentary 
system of government. 
 
Now I listened carefully the other day when the member, the 
Hon. House Leader, got up and he justified in a few brief 
remarks why this Bill was here. I was somewhat  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

439 
 
 

fascinated that his remarks were as brief as they were because 
one would have thought with legislation as broad and as 
significant as this one that the Hon. House Leader would have 
something to say. 
 
But he did say one thing, Mr. Speaker, that I think was 
significant. And he said that this Bill would give the 
government the power, the cabinet the power to do things even 
if the legislature is not sitting. And he used the example of the 
new human resources department. And he said that would 
accommodate government’s plans to create a new ministry of 
human resources encompassing the old portfolios of Labour, 
Social Services, the Employment Development Agency, and the 
Indian and Women’s Secretariat. 
 
Now I ask you, Mr. Speaker: why is it necessary to do this 
major reorganization with all of its broad implications which 
my colleague, the member from Moose Jaw North, referred to 
so well this afternoon and again this evening — why is it 
necessary to do this in such secrecy? Why is it necessary for the 
cabinet to be able to sit around the cabinet table with tow or 
three of their advisers . . . why is it necessary for them to do it 
without coming to this legislature so that the members here who 
represent all of Saskatchewan — and I’m talking about 
members from both sides of the House — might have an 
opportunity to scrutinize what it’s going to do and whether it 
will achieve and accomplish all of those things that those 
various agencies and departments were originally established to 
achieve? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Is it because the government has 
something to hide? I think . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 
agree, it must be. Is it because this government knows that it is 
in for some very hard times politically, and it has to find a 
mechanism by which it can silence the opposition as best as it 
can so that the voice of the people will not be heard in this 
Assembly and through the media when it is then brought to this 
Assembly? 
 
For a long time legislation establishing departments and 
agencies has been brought to the legislature and debated and 
considered. Somehow it has become essential with this 
government that that no longer be the case. 
 
Now I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the kinds of powers as 
proposed here would give the cabinet powers beyond any that 
our system of government in Canada should allow or ever 
intend to allow. Such powers in the lands of the cabinet would 
lead to a number of things: it would lead to decisions being 
made, not under the scrutiny of this legislature where the 
cabinet has to be accountable, but it would lead to decisions 
being made in the basement of the Premier’s office by some 
politically hired people who would be more interested in the 
preservation of the government than the needs and the interests 
of the people that the government represented. 
 
And you know, the member opposite have been known to state 
that they are great admirers of the American system of 
government. And I don’t mean to be critical of  

the American system of government. In their place and in their 
society, maybe that’s the kind of government that’s necessary. 
But what the members opposite fail to recognize with their 
complete support is that that system of government does not fit 
in a parliamentary system of government like we have in 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Their complete support of the fiasco that 
was paraded as free trade negotiations testifies to the fact that 
they exercise poor judgement in these kinds of things. There is 
more power in the hands in the United States in the executive 
branch than there is here in Canada. 
 
And this government is moving towards a system that is 
modelled on the political system which is the presidential 
system, because it is trying to take more power unto the cabinet 
and less power unto the legislature. And I simply have to ask 
this question: is that good for the people of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: No. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — You know, I agree. It is not good. 
 
We have had already other examples, and I will name you two 
which show that this government could not handle that kind of a 
system. We’ve already had the Pioneer Trust, to name one. And 
what happened when the issue of Pioneer Trust was brought 
before the Public Accounts Committee during the spring 
session of the legislature? Was the government forthcoming and 
say as the Provincial Auditor said: it could be considered; go 
ahead and consider it? No, the government refused to allow the 
members of the Public Accounts Committee to ask questions 
about the question of Pioneer Trust and all of the related issues 
to it. Hopefully, some time in the near future, we’ll be able to 
find out why, but the public should not have had to wait when it 
should have been considered in committee last time. 
 
We’ve had other examples about the secrecy of this 
government. We have had the Premier who’s refused time and 
time again in the last four and a half years to answer questions 
in this House, questions that were ordered by this Assembly by 
vote — orders for returns which were not answered for up to 
two years. 
 
What happens when we turn all of this power to the cabinet if 
this Bill passes as it is, Mr. Speaker? Does it mean that the 
amount of unanswered questions will even be greater than what 
has been the case in the past? 
 
I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that we don’t need the Watergate 
system in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — We don’t need the Iran weapons sales 
system, where someone in the privacy of the Premier’s 
basement offices will decide on the interests of Saskatchewan 
people without being responsible to the legislature. 
  



 
December 22, 1986 

440 
 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I have some other 
concerns about this Bill because I said I wanted to speak about 
some of the implications. 
 
Now in one of the sections of the Bill, it talks about 
disestablishing departments. Now what does that do? Or what 
can it do? Well I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that this kind of a 
power will lead in the hands of this government in particular to 
an unprecedented attack of the employees in the public service. 
They will have absolutely no protection at all. With the power 
in Bill 5 for Executive Council to repeal or amend fundamental 
statutory powers duly enacted by the legislature, cabinet will be 
able to do away with the departments and all of the employees 
in any department which may be affected. 
 
Now Conservative members opposite may relish that thought. 
They seem to have this strange view that it’s okay to make an 
attack on the poor because they’re defenceless. They seem to 
have this strange, perverted view that it’s okay to attack the 
unemployed because they are defenceless, or the public servants 
because they too cannot effectively defend themselves. 
 
I happen, Mr. Speaker, to believe, and have no hesitation in 
saying so, that the public servants of this province have served 
us well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And they provide services which no 
modern-day society can operate without. And it is just not 
acceptable, within all of the parameters of human justice, that 
any government of the day should be able to treat these people 
unfairly and treat them as scapegoats for the government’s own 
failures, which I think is what they intend to do if this Bill ever 
comes to pass, or take away all of their rights to job security so 
that the politicians in power can treat them in any way they 
believe the poll results would show to be popular for them. 
 
Now there’s another implication, Mr. Speaker, that I think is 
worth considering, and I suggest to you that the powers which 
this Bill provides to the cabinet will lead to even greater 
patronage than we have seen in the last four and a half years. 
Cabinet will not have to adhere to legislation dealing with the 
expenditure of money by department because Bill 5 will make 
the cabinet have the power to, in effect, change existing 
legislation which they see as being in their way by a simple 
order in council. And it is well known that in the last four and a 
half years we have seen patronage of such shameful magnitude 
in this province that it would have even made the conscience of 
Jimmy Gardiner twig just a little bit. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, close friends and supporters of the 
government would be rewarded, there is no doubt, but everyone 
else will be at the government’s mercy. Government by 
patronage, Mr. Speaker, has devastating effects. It has had 
devastating effects in the past, and it will even be more so in the 
future under the Bill if it becomes law. 
 
When appointments are made and contracts given with  

no consideration for the interests of the province and the people 
who live, over time there is a high price to pay. Oh yes, there is 
no doubt that the interests of those who are at the public trough 
will be well served, but the vast majority of people will have to 
pay for it. 
 
I say that government by OC, as this Bill proposes to do, will 
result in the interests of the Conservative Party being served at 
the expense of present and future generations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Let me suggest that there is no more 
vivid proof of this than the recent CF-18 example which 
involved the federal government and this government because 
of its support of what took place. It was a cabinet decision 
implemented by federal government order in council. It was 
politically motivated with no consideration for what is right. 
 
Well those kinds of things have happened in Canada for a long 
time, and let me give you one example of what the result has 
been. About three decades ago there was a thriving shipbuilding 
industry in the Atlantic provinces, and because of these kinds of 
patronage acts by the federal government — which has been 
going on also in Saskatchewan for the last four and a half years 
and with this Bill will even go on to a greater extent in the 
future if this Bill passes — that industry no longer exists in the 
Atlantic provinces; it’s in the province of Quebec. 
 
Now I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that that kind of 
patronage-motivated government in this province will lead to 
similar kinds of circumstances happening here as well. Friends 
of the government will be rewarded even though they’re not 
established in the province of Saskatchewan, and we’ve seen 
examples of that. Regions of the province because of 
government by cabinet and OC might be favoured over other 
regions. But I say to you, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
business and industry will wither and move away under those 
kinds of conditions in the same way that the shipbuilding 
industry withered and moved away from the Atlantic provinces. 
 
Now others have said it and I join them in saying that we’re not 
going to stand back and allow the government to set up a 
dictatorial regime which removes the important functions of 
this legislature from its role in the government of this province. 
And, yes, the government may eventually win on the Bill. They 
may win. They may win this one battle because of their 
majority, but as the member from Saskatoon Westmount 
indicated earlier, the whole war is not won in the battle. And 
there was a government here in the late ’60s which tried, which 
tried this kind of power-grab, and the people of Saskatchewan 
dealt with it, and they will deal with you as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — The public will know what you are really 
all about and they, in their fairness, I say to you, gave you a 
second chance — not the majority of them — but being fair to 
the electoral system, I will say that they gave you a second 
chance. And I think that they are already indicating their 
amazement at how quickly you would move to disappoint all of 
those who supported you  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

441 
 
 

by this kind of legislation. 
 
And the question is why? Is it because the government has 
already concluded, Mr. Speaker, that they have already 
concluded that come the next election, there will be no hope for 
them under the present rules as they exist in the electoral system 
and in the system under which we work in this House? Its plans 
in the future, Mr. Speaker, must be rather severe ones if they 
feel that they need to be protected by this kind of legislation. 
 
Now I suppose that the Bill, all by itself, would have been bad 
enough, but when one considers that this Bill is part of a 
growing package, then I think there is even more reason to be 
concerned. 
 
The throne speech announced that the government will 
introduce a new electoral boundaries Act. I’m not going to deal 
with that in detail except to say this: since we already have an 
independent boundaries commission that has served us well, 
why is it necessary for a government to ignore that and bring in 
an electoral boundaries Bill, unless they intend to undertake a 
gerrymandering of constituencies? Now if the former executive 
assistant to the provincial treasurer, now the Minister of 
Finance, is put in charge of that, I can understand why they 
would be doing it. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, there has been an attempt in this House 
to change the rules that regulate the committees of the 
legislature even thought there was no authority to do so. There 
was no consultation, no reasons were given for the those 
proposed changes. In fact, this happened after the 
announcement in the throne speech that there would be the 
establishment of a special legislative committee to look into the 
whole range of the rules of this House. 
 
(2030) 
 
And then of course, Mr. Speaker, there was a special committee 
with respect to rules and procedures and practices and powers 
of the Legislative Assembly, and other related powers. We 
welcome that. Rules of this House are not perfect and should be 
reviewed from time to time to suit the changing times and 
conditions. But one has to wonder, and I hope that this is not 
going to come to pass — one has to wonder whether the 
government opposite with a majority on that committee will 
carry on the old tradition where changes to rules happen 
because there was unanimity in the proposals and in the 
agreements. Now I hope that it will not be that the government 
intends to push through its own ideas of what the rules will be 
in keeping with the kind of proposals that they have in this 
legislation. 
 
And now we have this Bill, Bill 5, an attack on the very 
foundations of the parliamentary system of government, an 
attempt to neutralize the opposition, an attempt to create every 
opportunity to hide information on government activities from 
the very people who elected them. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as this Bill is — government by cabinet 
with reduced accountability to the legislature, more secrecy in 
decisions that affect every citizen in Saskatchewan, I cannot 
support it. I do not support any  

effort to reorganize so that the reorganization simply puts power 
in the hands of the cabinet. I do not oppose reorganization if it 
will bring about more efficiency and more effect give 
government. But I don’t believe that this Bill will do that. 
 
Now I say as others have said, if this Bill can be amended and if 
the members opposite on the government benches are prepared 
to look at some amendments or are prepared to provide some of 
their own which will indeed address the questions of more 
effective government and more efficient government, then of 
course I would want to reconsider my position. But I say clearly 
on behalf of the people I represent, and I’ve spoken to many of 
them about this, that as this Bill is, neither they nor I can 
support it when it comes up to a vote in this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too, along with 
my colleagues, want to make several comments with respect to 
this Bill, Bill 5, An Act respecting the Organization of the 
Executive Government of Saskatchewan. I want to talk about 
why I think this Bill is before us; what I think it means to us as 
legislators; what it will mean to the civil service in this 
province; and what it will ultimately mean to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a dangerous Bill. There is no other word for 
it, for this Bill will ultimately change the way governments 
have operated in this province for the last 81 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I look at the contents of the Bill, this Bill 
gives the cabinet in this province the power to establish, 
continue or vary any department of government, to disestablish 
or eliminate departments, and to determine the name of the 
department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a radical change from previous processes 
here in Saskatchewan because up until now, Mr. Speaker, every 
Saskatchewan government has had to come before this 
Assembly if they wanted to create a new department or 
eliminate a department. For example, Mr. Speaker, the 
Department of Co-Ops and the Department of Health were 
created by the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, not by 
the cabinet. The cabinet, or a member of cabinet, may have 
introduced the legislation necessary to establish these 
departments, but it was the entire Assembly, members of all 
sides of the legislature, that made the final decision as to 
whether or not a department was going to exist. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Up until now, Mr. Speaker, both sides of this 
House, all duly elected members of the legislature, have been 
given the opportunity to look at legislation establishing 
government departments and decide whether it was right and 
proper, or whether, Mr. Speaker, it served the needs of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The practice of this House has been to allow the opposition or 
the government members to review the legislation and to make 
amendments, if necessary. But no more, Mr. Speaker. In the 
future the cabinet will decide,  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

442 
 
 

and only the cabinet will decide. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 
centralization of power; that is centralization of decision 
making; and that, Mr. Speaker, is a power-grab. 
 
The people on the government benches show such disdain for 
democracy. This move, Bill 5, in my mind, is anti-democratic. 
And why, Mr. Speaker, would the members opposite want to be 
anti-democratic? Well I can only speculate that they either have 
something to hide, or they do have something to hide. 
 
They don’t want us to scrutinize their actions; they don’t want 
the people of Saskatchewan to know what they are up to 
because, Mr. Speaker, if the opposition has the right to 
scrutinize their actions, to bring it to the public’s attention, then 
the people will know. And they, Mr. Speaker, don’t want the 
people to know. They don’t want to disclose their actions 
because their actions are designed to help their friends. 
 
And what kind of friends am I talked about, Mr. Speaker? Well, 
I’m talking about friends like the banks, the oil companies, the 
Peter Pocklingtons of the world, and the Weyerhaeusers of the 
world. And these people, Mr. Speaker, don’t always act in the 
best interests of the people of Saskatchewan, for these friends 
often act in their own best interests, and those interests tend to 
be the pursuit of the almighty dollars. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Speaking of Tory friends, when I think of 
some of the debates that have occurred in this House in the last 
four years, I think of their PC friends. We all recall the debates 
that occurred around the Pioneer Trust fiasco and, of course, the 
debate around the give-away of PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp 
Company), a publicly owned company here in Saskatchewan, to 
the large multinational company, Weyerhaeuser. 
 
Now I know the Conservative Party wasn’t very happy about 
the debates because the public was able to find out how 
incompetent and how inept some of these people were and still 
are. I think the government would have preferred that my 
colleagues not have the opportunity to discuss these two 
particular disasters because, Mr. Speaker, the press was able to 
report the proceedings of the legislature and the public was able 
to find out. I even think that some of these very fine debates 
that have occurred on this side of the legislature the last four 
and one-half years led to a much reduced majority on that side 
of the House. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they don’t like it — they don’t like that we 
have 25 members sitting on this side of the House because, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re afraid that if the Opposition can debate and 
argue against some of their actions during the next four years, 
that we may well form a government, and they don’t want us to 
form governments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are 
afraid, and well you should be. They want to centralize power; 
they want to muzzle the opposition, and, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 
5 is nothing other than a gag order. They  

want to gag the opposition. This, Mr. Speaker, is an 
unprecedented grab for power. They want to transfer power 
from the legislature, all of the members of this House that sit in 
this legislature, to the cabinet, away from the scrutiny of this 
legislature — away from the scrutiny of the public. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, some may say, well, that’s okay, the cabinet 
and the Premier are elected, and they’re ultimately accountable 
to the people of Saskatchewan. But I’m not so sure, Mr. 
Speaker, because as we all know this government has one of the 
largest political or partisan bureaucracies of any provincial 
government in Canada. I think most members would know who 
I’m referring to. I’m referring to the political assistants, the 
executive assistants, the advisers and all those political hacks 
that the Premier and the cabinet members have. These people 
are the back room types, Mr. Speaker, they’re the Premier’s 
handlers, the cabinet handlers; they make many, many 
decisions. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that they make a lot 
more decision that a lot of the politicians sitting on that side of 
the bench do. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, maybe some of those political handlers aren’t 
very happy about the kind of power that they have, and they 
want more. Maybe that’s one of the reason why we have this 
Bill before us, because they don’t want the opposition to 
scrutinize their actions. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote to members of the House 
what the Hon. Perrin Beatty had to say about some of these 
political back room boys, and I quote: 
 

But it often happened, when I was in the cabinet, that a 
messenger would come from the Privy Council and say, 
‘We need your signature on this. We need signatures from 
four members.’ ‘What’s it about?’ you would ask, and the 
messenger would say, ‘Don’t ask me.’ 
 
So you’d find minister being asked to sign orders in 
council, creating laws without the benefit of any full 
discussion or briefing. And the minister assumes that his 
colleagues know what he is doing, so he goes ahead and 
signs it. 
 
The belief that cabinet gives adequate scrutiny to 
delegated legislation is false. The extent to which a 
bureaucrat is able to write laws is very great. 

 
This is what a member of their own party, the Progressive 
Conservative Party, had to say about their political hatchet men 
or women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also concerned about some of the 
ramifications on the civil service which, up until the time the 
people on that side of the bench got elected, was recognized as 
the very finest civil service in Canada. Mr. Speaker, the civil 
servants own union, the Saskatchewan Government Employees’ 
Union, have asked the Premier to withdraw the Bill. The very 
people who know those people best, and know all of their 
weaknesses, have asked them to withdraw the Bill. They 
believe, and I quote: 
 

If adopted, this Bill would constitute a radical  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

443 
 
 

departure from Saskatchewan tradition in the organization 
of government services, and the public’s right to scrutinize 
government decisions. As such, it warrants thorough study 
of its implications, and meaningful consultation with 
affected groups, before consideration of its passage into 
law. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I agree this is a radical departure from 
Saskatchewan tradition, a tradition steeped in the public’s right 
to scrutinize government decisions. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what happens to the civil service if some day 
some cabinet minister decides to eliminate, for example, the 
Office of the Rentalsman? What if some cabinet minister 
decides that the Office of the Rentalsman is an impediment to 
some of their friends? Where will those civil servants go, Mr. 
Speaker? To the private sector? Or will they go on to the 
unemployment lines? What happens to the legislation the 
Rentalsman administers if the cabinet decided to eliminate it? 
Where will tenants or landlords go to get their disputes 
mediated or arbitrated? 
 
An example, Mr. Speaker: what happens if a landlord has a 
tenant that has damaged his or her property and the Rentalsman 
has been eliminated. If, Mr. Speaker, he or she has to seek a 
judgement from the courts, which are already overloaded and 
overburdened, the landlord could wait months and months and 
months. A conservative estimate, Mr. Speaker it could well be 
nine months. I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the landlord won’t 
be very happy as he or she waits for the courts to deal with that 
person who is destroying the property. And the members 
opposite are going to have to deal with the political 
consequences. 
 
On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, what happens if a tenant has a 
landlord who steadfastly refuses to turn on the heat in the 
middle of winter? Under the present legislation administered by 
the Office of the Rentalsman where there are employees, the 
tenant has the right to go to the Rentalsman to have their rights 
enforced under The Residential Tenancies Act. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what happens if the Rentalsman is no longer 
and the members opposite, with the stroke of a pen, have 
eliminated the Rentalsman, and the legislation is still sitting 
there? Well, Mr. Speaker, that tenant will have to pursue her 
interest through the courts, and the courts, as I said earlier, are 
backed up. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, the tenant would have to move in the 
middle of winter because they couldn’t possibly wait until the 
next summer to have the heat turned on. Mr. Speaker, I think 
that if the government is allowed to do what they want to do, 
that landlords and tenants in this province will not be able to 
enforce their rights under the Office of the Rentalsman 
legislation or The Residential Tenancies Act. There’ll be no 
employees, no department. There will be legislation on the 
books designed to protect people’s rights but there’s no 
mechanism for the people to have their rights in force. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also now like to raise some concerns about 
what impact this legislation could have on The Department of 
Health should the Department of Health  

be disestablished, as it could well be if Bill 5 is passed. And let 
me give you an example of my concern. 
 
(2045) 
 
Let’s say the cabinet decides to disestablish or do away with the 
Department of Health and transfer parts of its mandate to other 
departments and outside private agencies. What would happen 
to The Department of Health Act? In particular, Mr. Speaker, 
what would happen to section 12 which refers to the oath of 
secrecy? And I want, Mr. Speaker, to read this section into the 
record. Section 12 says this: 
 

In this section the expression “board”, “commission”, 
“committee” or “council” means respectively, a board, 
commission, committee or council appointed under this 
Act or one of the Acts enumerated in section 5, or a board, 
commission, committee or council the members of which, 
or one or more of the members of which, are appointed by 
the minister or by the Lieutenant Governor in council upon 
the recommendation of the minister. 
 
(2) The minister may require any person appointed to a 
board, commission, committee or council to take an oath 
before entering upon his duties or at any time, that he will 
not, except as authorized by the minister, disclose any 
information received by him in the course of his duties as 
a member of the board, commission, committee, or council 
where such information relates to or consists of: 
 
(a) the name of a patient, his illness, injury or other 
physical or psychiatric condition, and the diagnostic or 
treatment services he has received, is receiving or is about 
to receive; 
 
(b) the name of a physician or other person providing 
professional services to patients and any particulars 
concerning the personal affairs or details of practice of that 
physician or other person. 

 
Mr. Speaker, section 12 requires that the minister and the 
employees of the minister or persons employed by commissions 
or boards keep this kind of medical information confidential. 
This section, Mr. Speaker, is there to protect people. 
 
Let’s say that this section — if the department was 
disestablished or transferred some place else — let’s say that if 
this section was not carried over to those new departments or to 
the new agencies, does that mean that there is no requirement or 
obligation to keep this information confidential? Mr. Speaker, 
could we possibly see people’s medical records spread all over 
this province? And is it possible, Mr. Speaker, that if this Bill is 
passed that there would be no obligation on the part of the 
minister, if this particular section was not transferred to some 
other department, to keep people’s medical records 
confidential? Because up until this time, Mr. Speaker, those 
records have been confidential. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we were to have the present regime, where  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

444 
 
 

if they wanted to transfer part of the department’s mandate to 
other departments or jurisdictions, we could review the 
legislation. We could point out some of the problems with the 
legislation. We could say, for instance, that we want section 12 
or the oath of secrecy section included in legislation. If this Act 
is passed, Mr. Speaker, there will be no obligation to carry this 
section over, and therefore it may not be done, and the 
legislature won’t have any power or opportunity to review it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this is unacceptable. This is a bad Bill. It’s 
undemocratic. It will ultimately take away powers from this 
legislature. I don’t think the people of Saskatchewan elected us 
to come here to, in essence, not really participate in the process 
if the cabinet is allowed to have the powers that they would 
have under this particular piece of legislation. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite should 
introduce some amendments that would accommodate some of 
our concern. I certainly would be interested in looking at those 
amendment if in fact they do accommodate those concerns. I 
would ask them to do that. This Bill can’t go forward in its 
present form, and therefore, because of the dangerous nature of 
the Bill, the anti-democratic nature of the Bill, I won’t be 
supporting it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Conventional 
wisdom, political wisdom, Mr. Speaker, and political pundits 
would hold that if a government were to enact potentially 
unpopular legislation, it would do so early in its term of office 
so that it might be forgotten by the time that its mandate had 
expired. 
 
And secondly, it would do so and should do so at a time during 
which the electorate will, to a greater extent than is normal, be 
preoccupied with other concerns. And it should go without 
saying, Mr. Speaker, that is also in the government’s interest to 
obfuscate the real intent of unpopular legislation by ascribing to 
it otherwise laudable and generally accepted objectives and 
virtues. And surely Bill 5, Mr. Speaker, and the process of 
introducing this Bill has all those attributes. 
 
No sooner had the members of this Legislative Assembly 
warmed up their seats, loosened up their vocal cords, when the 
government introduced the Bill that is staggering, when all its 
implications are understood. And what better time, Mr. 
Speaker, to introduce such a Bill, than at a time of year when 
the public is perhaps, and I think understandably, more 
interested in and concerned with all those activities associated 
with the Christmas season. What would appear to be the affairs 
of politicians and not affairs concerned with everyday life or 
affairs of the pocket-book simply does not capture the public’s 
attention to any great and abiding extent. And what better way, 
Mr. Speaker, could there be to mask the real intent of this piece 
of legislation than to talk about it blithely, as simply an 
accepted way for the government to begin to deal with issues of 
efficiency. Who could argue with that? 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, the government deserves a backhanded 
compliment for the manner in which it has  

handled Bill 5. If one were ever disinclined to be cynical about 
how the PC government operates, this Bill would certainly 
make you a sceptic, and quickly at that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that I’ve heard a more chilling 
comment emanate from his Chamber than the words of the 
Deputy Premier when, in introducing Bill 5, he stated what this 
Bill will do is eliminate the need for the legislature to consider 
government structures in its finest detail. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker, is it necessary to eliminate the need for the 
legislature in this respect? 
 
The Deputy Premier points to the past, and states, and I quote 
him: 
 

Weeks of time all this House had been taken up dealing 
with volumes of legislation required to effect the 
reorganization of the structures of government. 

 
Speakers on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, say that this is 
simply not the case. I ask, would the PC government please be 
more specific. When, in the past, has this House so burdened 
the Executive Council that it could not proceed to do its 
business. And more importantly, Mr. Speaker, is it not healthy 
for our form of representative government to involve the House 
in this type of deliberation? 
 
Is Saskatchewan such a large and complex jurisdiction that 
government can no longer function effectively if we involved 
the Assembly in something as basic as determining what the 
objectives, what the functions should be of government 
departments. 
 
Are we like Great Britain with a population approaching 48 
million, and with a House that has 650 members, and where it 
might make some sense to restrict the involvement of the House 
in the detailed affairs of government and restrict it to the 
broadest possible questions of policy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think it doesn’t make any sense, Mr. Speaker, and it’s just 
plain silly for the PC government to infer these things. And if 
not silly, Mr. Speaker, then the PC government is surely caught 
up in its own delusions of grandeur about what Saskatchewan is 
really all about. 
 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is a province of barely one million 
people. This Legislative Assembly has 64 members; that’s one 
member to present approximately 15,625 people. As members 
we are close to the people that elect us. Our greatest strength as 
a democratic institution is that we are close to the electorate, 
and because that electorate is sophisticated in its understanding 
of the political process, and interested and involved in its 
politics, more so than people elsewhere, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One only has to examine the vote of participation rates in 
federal, provincial, municipal elections in Saskatchewan and 
compare that with voter participation rates in other jurisdictions 
to know what I’m saying is fact, Mr. Speaker. Yet, the PC 
government would attempt to deny this  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

445 
 
 

interest and that involvement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members from this side of the House would claim 
that the people of Saskatchewan, through their governments, 
have made some notable achievements over the years. Indeed 
they have achieved a position, I think, of pre-eminence in 
Canada. And I would point to medicare as one example. And I 
say these achievements have come about because we are in 
touch with people and their needs, and certainly not because we 
distance ourselves from the people we represent. 
 
Even the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, will be inclined to 
point to noteworthy achievements, but I ask them, did these 
come about because we distanced ourselves from the people we 
represented. I think not, and they know that this is not the case, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we should all work to build on our traditions, not 
seek to destroy them. Mr. Speaker, it is my belief that the more 
opportunity we provide to people to participate in the affairs of 
its government, the stronger and more effective that government 
will become. We should look for ways, Mr. Speaker, to involve 
people more in running our province, to enable them to have a 
greater say in provincial government affairs. That’s how we 
become more responsive; that’s how we become more efficient. 
Just where the PC government gets this strange idea — by 
involving more people less you can make government more 
effective — is simply beyond me, and it also escapes all 
members on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the outcomes of this Bill is that the government will rely 
less on the opinions expressed in this Chamber and in their 
caucus about how government should be structured, and will 
rely more on the advice of unelected and appointed officials. 
And I think that is a regressive step, to rely more on the advice 
of the unelected than on the advice of the people through their 
elected representatives. 
 
Now I do not harbour any ill feelings, Mr. Speaker, about 
appointed people. Saskatchewan has had a record of having a 
first-rate public service. The public service, the civil servants 
serve Saskatchewan well, and even now under very trying 
circumstances and a morale that is less than desirable, civil 
servants continue to serve us well. But I think that it is 
important to draw a distinction between those who are elected 
to serve and those who are only appointed, Mr. Speaker. 
Elected representatives are directly accountable to the people 
who elected them. Every four years they must give an account 
to the people for their actions; they ignore the wishes of the 
people at their own peril, and appointed officials are not 
accountable in this way. 
 
It is the job of the elected representative to pay heed to the ideas 
and concerns of the people and to translate these with the help 
of appointed people into meaningful and concrete action. And I 
think we put the shoe on the wrong foot, Mr. Speaker, if we 
tend increasingly to rely on the ideas and the advice of 
appointed officials as to the needs of the people. 
 
The great advances in our society came from the ideas,  

the conditions, the needs as expressed by people, Mr. Speaker. 
One of the ways in which this Bill will frustrate the people is 
that it will make the job of the opposition more difficult. It is 
the job of the opposition to make certain that the government is 
responsive to the issues of the day, but also to ensure that the 
government’s spending plans are in order and that the taxpayers 
money has been well spent. With a “now you see him and now 
you don’t” shuffle of responsibilities for branches, agencies — 
indeed, whole departments — this Assembly will be hard 
pressed to keep up with the government’s real spending plans. 
Things such as comparative analyses of spending will become 
redundant. 
 
And frankly, I’m not surprised, Mr. Speaker. I’m not surprised 
that at the first sign of a strong and vigorous opposition that the 
PC government would turn tail and seek refuge behind closed 
doors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, we do not object to all 
portions of this Bill. As the Deputy Premier indicated, many of 
the provisions of this Act are carry-over provisions from other 
legislation. But we do object to the idea that it is up to the 
cabinet to determine what the purpose should be for any 
department, without debate in this Chamber, and to the stage 
that is being set without the opportunity for any further debate 
for the transference of government responsibilities, duties, 
functions to the private sector. 
 
Our traditions would hold that it is the place of the Legislative 
Assembly to become involved in these debates. And at this time 
I think we can only anticipate the worst. 
 
(2100) 
 
In the absence of a more complete explanation of what is 
intended, we can only assume that Bill 5 sets the stage for an 
unprecedented and massive transfer of responsibility from 
government into private hands. Now a more complete 
explanation of what it is the government intends to do would be 
welcome, Mr. Speaker. But on this issue the government has 
remained strangely silent, and I think it is a silence that in itself 
speaks volumes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We assume, therefore, that the PC government wants this 
legislation so they can, in their own twisted way, achieve 
government efficiency. What they will do is to examine any and 
all aspects of government operations with a view to turning 
these operations over to private hands. And I ask you, what will 
come first, Mr. Speaker? Will Dick Collver be invited to run the 
Regina General Hospital? Or will it be the sale of the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company, STC, to Greyhound 
Bus Lines? Or perhaps the functions of the Saskatchewan 
Securities Commission will be turned over to Will Klein, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I spoke before about the need to involve the 
members of this Assembly in these matters, involving the 
elected representatives through the Assembly in the affairs of 
government is healthy for democracy and, I would submit, good 
for government. 
 
  



 
December 22, 1986 

446 
 
 

Now, on the flip side, on the flip side, Mr. Speaker, it can be 
argued that the more you move these matters behind closed 
doors, the greater are the chances that the government will seek 
to reward their own friends. The opportunities for patronage 
will be tremendous, and as patronage escalates, the potential for 
corruption increases accordingly. 
 
I think everyone is aware that Bill 5 . . . And it is conceded that 
it will increase the power of cabinet. And I think, Mr. Speaker, 
people are also aware and not ignorant of sayings such as Lord 
Acton saying that power tends to corrupt, and absolute power 
corrupts absolutely, or the words of Edmund Burke: “The 
greater the power, the more dangerous the abuse,” or those of 
William Pitt: “Unlimited power is apt to corrupt the minds of 
those who possess it . . .” 
 
I think that one can safely predict, Mr. Speaker, that as their 
power increases, the PC cabinet will also indulge as never 
before in patronage and that corruption will become a hallmark 
of that government. 
 
Perhaps we do need one new agency, Mr. Speaker, and that 
would be a whole new hog marketing commission to look after 
their new friends that would be feeding at the trough after this 
Bill has passed. 
 
I would urge the Premier and the cabinet to rethink this Bill and 
to take to heart the words of Benjamin Disraeli, and I quote: 
 

I repeat . . . that all power is a trust; that we are 
accountable for its exercise; that, from the people, and for 
the people, all springs, and all must exist. 

 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s only been about 140 years since 
the people of Canada achieved a responsible government, and 
that came about as a result of a prolonged struggled, including 
actual rebellion in Lower and Upper Canada in 1837. And prior 
to that time, although we had representative government, 
executive power was in the hands of the Governor and his 
appointed assistants, something called the Executive Council. 
The people had only one body, the Legislative Assembly, under 
their control, but that Legislative Assembly did not have very 
much say in the affairs of government. 
 
And this Bill, I submit, takes us back to an unsavoury time in 
our history, and is it any reason, Mr. Speaker, that we would 
rebel? Is it any reason that we would oppose this Bill? 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join the debate 
on this Bill 5. This is an important Bill, an important Bill 
because it will make a major change in the relationship between 
the legislature and the executive. The House Leader, in 
introducing the Bill suggested that this was not the case. He 
stated some alleged facts which are simply not facts. He said, 
for example, that this Bill  

will give no new powers to the cabinet. Now that is simply not 
true. Even in his own remarks he negates his argument. He says 
that the regulations would permit . . . the regulations under the 
Bill before us would permit the disestablishing of departments 
that can not now be done. And I will seek to point out that that 
is a major new project. 
 
He suggests that the regulations committee would somehow be 
an appropriate safeguard, and he says that the regulations would 
be laid before the legislature, “they . . . will be tabled in the 
House for review by the regulations committee of the 
legislature.” He suggests, Mr. Speaker, that somehow that is a 
safeguard. Mr. Speaker, it is not a safeguard. And it is not a 
safeguard because the regulations committee has mandate to 
examine into regulations to see whether or not they are 
authorized by statute. That’s what the Regulations Committee 
does. It says: this regulation was not authorized by the statute; 
therefore it ought to be changed. 
 
Unfortunately, it would be very difficult to think of a regulation 
which wouldn’t be authorized by Bill 5. That is our whole 
objection to Bill 5, not that there will be regulations passed 
under it which are not authorized by it, but that the regulations 
passed under it would be far too broad because the Bill 
authorizes regulations which are far too broad and which, as my 
colleagues, have said, are an attack on the system of 
government as we now understand it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And I’ll come to showing exactly why 
that’s true, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other thing said by the minister who introduced it, the 
House Leader said that the Bill is based on The Executive 
Government Organization Act in our neighbouring province of 
Manitoba. The Act was brought in by the Schreyer 
administration in 1970. Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity to 
study that Act, and I find that that Act does not contain in it the 
powers and prerogatives which are so objectionable in this Act. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as my colleagues have indicated, and as I 
will attempt to illustrate, the nub of this Act is section 12, the 
power given to the cabinet to establish departments and 
determine their objects and purposes and to disestablish 
departments. That is what I object to; that is what my 
colleagues are objecting to, and that is what is not in the 
Manitoba legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — It is disingenuous. It is disingenuous 
— and that’s the politest word I can bring to tongue — for the 
House Leader to say this is based upon legislation such as there 
is in Manitoba when the core of this Bill is not to be found in 
the Manitoba legislation. And it is not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will also bring about a significant change 
in the relationship between the government and the press. There 
are in the statutes which can be repealed, effectively repealed 
by the government opposite, many  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

447 
 
 

many protections for the public. If the government were to 
come in with a piece of legislation to take away those 
protections for the public, there would be a vigorous debate and 
perhaps an uproar in this House. The information would be 
freely available to the press. When that may well be done by the 
cabinet behind closed doors, and perhaps in a way which will 
not easily be detectable, perhaps in a way not easily detectable, 
it is not certain that this information would be available to the 
press. 
 
I’ll give you one simple illustration. Suppose the powers of the 
Department of Social Services were transferred to a new 
department— a new department of human resources. And 
suppose they lifted out a number of the powers that are now in 
the Department of Social Services and shifted them over to the 
department of human resources. It is by no means certain that 
they will pick all the powers, and if they don’t pick all the 
powers, very significant protections now available to the public 
will be wiped out. Indeed I suspect, Mr. Speaker, even if they 
do pick all the powers, some of them will be wiped out because 
they will not have the statutory protection which they now have. 
I’ll come to that in a moment, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want to touch just a little bit on the history of our 
parliamentary system, and I won’t take long. But clearly, Mr. 
Speaker, we started out with a system of government a thousand 
years ago where the executive — the Crown, the King — did all 
the ruling, a gradually there evolved a talking shop, a 
parliament which could express views, but that’s all. Indeed it 
was a place where views were expressed and that’s where we 
get the word parliament. It comes from the old Norman French 
word, to speak — parlez-vous français. 
 
Gradually powers shifted from the executive to parliament 
through a whole series of particular constitutional measures, the 
Magna Carta, the Petition of Rights, the Bill of Rights, and so 
on. And then a movement whereby the ministers who advised 
the king has to be chosen from parliament. That’s something 
that came to us with the Georges — George the I and II. 
 
We had something of a similar evolution in Canada, the 
winning of responsible government in the 1840s in Canada the 
province of Canada under the Baldwin-LaFontaine regime, and 
in Nova Scotia under Joseph Howe. All of them designed, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to give the legislature — the organization, the 
arm of government which was elected — power over the 
executive. 
 
And these moves were aimed at doing three or four things: to 
make sure that no taxes were levied without parliamentary 
approval; to make sure that the cabinet, the executive, exercised 
no power except pursuant to laws passed by the legislature or 
parliament. Now there were still a few things they could do 
under the old royal prerogative, but there weren’t many, and 
they kept declining. And that’s as it should be. We, for over a 
period of several hundred years, and here in Canada over at 
least a hundred years, have put curbs on the cabinet, on the 
executive. We should not now start moving in the reverse 
direction. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — We should not return to a situation 
whereby the cabinet ministers can define its own powers — 
some sort of a new royal prerogative. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s bad government, and it may well be 
illegal. I heard the Minister of Justice give his views on the 
legality of this, and I had an opportunity to refresh my memory 
by reading the Hansard of December 19th. He based his 
argument on the fact that this Bill, Bill 5 before us, does not 
contain any primary lawmaking power. I dispute that judgement 
on his part. I believe it does. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Now he recited what we all know that 
cabinets can delegate, or the legislature can delegate to cabinet, 
and why discretion can be given to cabinets. And in our modern 
society that must be. But what the legislature can’t delegate is 
primary lawmaking power. They cannot say, you go ahead and 
make any law you like. 
 
The legislature or parliament must say, here is an area where we 
want to achieve some objectives, some purposes. We set out a 
very broad framework and then you, the cabinet, go and work 
out regulations which will achieve this. That’s well established, 
and no one quarrels. 
 
I do say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this Bill goes much farther 
than that. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill allows the cabinet to 
determine the organization of the executive arm of government 
and to do so, to establish departments, to disestablish 
departments, and to determine the objects and purposes of the 
department. 
 
Now it is in the establishing, disestablishing, and the setting of 
the objects and purposes that this Bill gives the cabinet, or 
purports to give the cabinet, primary lawmaking power. 
 
(2115) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if this 
were tested, there is an excellent chance that it would be found 
to be beyond the jurisdiction of the cabinet to accept those 
powers. 
 
Now let me be very clear. The arguments given for the Bill are 
all the arguments given for part of the Bill, but none of them 
direct their attention to the core of the Bill, section 12. It says 
the Premier can appoint the cabinet, or the minister says that, 
and we all know that, that the Premier can reorder departments. 
That’s what the Bill says, and we agree with that — and that the 
cabinet can assign and transfer powers from one minister to 
another, and we don’t quarrel with that. That has already been 
done. They can do that without in any way this Bill having been 
passed. 
 
No one is suggesting that in order to set up a department  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

448 
 
 

of human resources or department of human resources, labour 
and employment, perhaps you needs to give it that name, but 
you don’t need it in order to group all of those powers in any 
one department — you already have that power — I hope no 
one denies it. It is only if you want to give that department new 
and additional powers that you need this Bill. And it is the 
giving of this department new and additional powers which I 
think should be dealt with by this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I say again, we have no quarrel with 
the minister moving agencies of government from one minister 
to another or from one department to another. There is no 
strong objection to that. In our system of government the 
ministry as a group is ultimately responsible through the 
doctrine of collective responsibility, and it doesn’t matter that 
much whether or not a particular function of government is 
performed by one department or another. 
 
I have always felt that when you’re doing that by order in 
council, it would be desirable to have a sunset clause to say that 
the order only lasted for 18 months or so — let’s pick a figure 
— and that then legislation would be passed in order to make 
the whole situation clear in statute. I think that’s desirable 
because I think the system of transferring power as provided for 
in this Bill by section 5 will eventually get very, very confusing 
if we have orders in council stacked one on top of the other. 
And I think we all have an obligation to make clear that the 
public can find the law. So I think that’s desirable to have a 
sunset clause, and I would like us to think about that because it 
will make for better government. 
 
But I want to say again that is not necessary that this Act be 
passed — this Bill be passed in order to give the government 
power to regroup agencies. I have before me a piece of 
literature circulated by the minister. Somebody . . . actually by 
the Deputy Minister, Mr. Phil Richards, who describes himself 
as the deputy minister of the Saskatchewan human resources, 
labour and employment. Pretty obviously he didn’t think we 
needed this Bill. He didn’t think we needed it. There may be 
some small question as to whether it’s needed to give it that 
name, but there’s no question that under existing legislation all 
of these powers could be grouped under one minister, with that 
deputy. The orders in council here are all dated November 12, 
1986; it’s all been done. I hope no one suggests that the orders 
in council are invalid. Surely they have a law officer for the 
Crown who says that these orders in council are valid. Every 
cabinet does, and I’m sure you do. You passed the orders in 
council. It’s done. I hope no one suggest we need the 
legislation; we don’t. We don’t need the legislation to regroup. 
We do need the legislation to change the substantive law, and it 
ought not to be done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Let me illustrate a few things that can 
happen if this law is passed. First, I repeat that this law gives 
the cabinet — and it starts out notwithstanding any other law — 
the cabinet can disestablish departments, establish departments, 
and set their objects and purposes  

notwithstanding any other law. I want to underline that one, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Now disestablish a department, that’s perhaps 
a curious word. But I want to quote a portion of the Department 
of Energy and Mines, that statute, and it says: 
 

A department of the Government of Saskatchewan to be 
called the Department of Energy and Mines is established. 

 
It’s pretty clear that the person who drafted Bill 5 said, we want 
the cabinet to be able to disestablish the Department of Energy 
and Mines. We want them to be able to disestablish any other, 
any other department. And I think that is clearly wrong. At least 
it will create major confusion; at worst it will give the cabinet 
powers it ought not to have. And this is the core of my 
objection. It’s wrong for the cabinet to be able to determine the 
objects and powers of a new department— a very different 
thing from rearranging existing powers. 
 
Let’s concede again that we already have regulations and they 
contain broad powers, but they are always pursuant to umbrella 
legislation. The courts will contain the excesses if regulations 
are made under umbrella legislation and the regulations go too 
far. There is no way the courts can contain any excesses when it 
says you can set up any new department you like and set its 
own objects and purposes. 
 
Section 12 is very, very different from anything we’ve ever had 
before. Now let me give you a couple of illustrations. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I wonder if I could illustrate something here. I 
will try to illustrate it this way. Suppose we have the 
Department of Social Services, and suppose those powers are 
no longer with the Department of Social Services but over in a 
department of human resources. What happens, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to a power that says no file, document or paper that is 
kept by any person pursuant to any Act administered by the 
department can be disclosed publicly? What happens to that? 
These Acts are no longer administered by this department. 
 
Let’s take The Child Welfare Act. Suppose it’s administered by 
a new department. This particular provision no longer offers 
protection to the public, as was illustrated by my colleague. 
 
And I want to say one further thing, and I direct this to my 
lawyer friends. Suppose you say, ah, but we would be certain to 
put that power over in the new department by OC. I say this: 
while I am reasonably confident that in a court case, if an 
officer of the department was called as a witness and asked 
questions about confidential information on Social Services 
files, he would be able to say: I cannot answer; I will not 
answer; I’m permitted by statute to answer. And I think the 
judge would say: you’re right, I won’t make you answer. 
 
But if it’s in an order in council, I kind of think the judge would 
say, just a moment, I’m not letting the cabinet decide. I’m not 
letting the cabinet decide what evidence is going to come before 
my court; go ahead and answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
December 22, 1986 

449 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I think that’s a real risk — that’s a real 
risk. And there are many, many others. 
 
Let me give you a couple of other powers which I don’t think 
should be set up by order in council. Here’s a Department of the 
Environment. Suppose they wanted to disestablish the 
Department of the Environment and move all the powers over 
to another department. There are, Mr. Deputy Speaker, powers 
in this Act which have been carefully worked out, powers 
which say that the officers of the Crown can forcibly enter land, 
can shut down factories . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . They 
can, under this Act. 
 
Well, the member opposite says so can the Luddites. I think his 
history is a little bit faulty. Luddites were people who didn’t 
want factories. 
 
I am talking about the powers that are here which he says — he 
says — he doesn’t see any problem with allowing the cabinet to 
define powers of saying you can go in on a person’s land, you 
can forcibly enter, you can shut down his factory . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . the cabinet. I doubt whether that’s the sort of 
power which should be written into the mandate of a 
department by a cabinet. 
 
I think these ought to be drawn pretty carefully in this 
legislature because we have to balance between the need to 
protect the environment and the rights of the citizen, just as in 
the child welfare cases we have to balance between the 
protection of the child and the rights of the parent. These are not 
easy decisions. And the public doesn’t agree on how they ought 
to be defined, and they ought to be set out in legislation. 
 
If I wanted to take some relatively extreme cases, here’s one. 
Here’s the Department of Consumer Affairs. I would not wish 
to see the provisions that are in this Act enacted by order in 
council. I don’t think it ought to be done that way. 
 
In this Act, it is provided that a person who contravenes the Act 
can be, on conviction, fined $500 or can be imprisoned for 30 
days. These are fairly common. But these provisions which 
impose penalties which can lead to imprisonment have in the 
past been pretty carefully drawn. And I for my part don’t want 
to see this province move to a situation where the cabinet 
decides the penalties and whether people go into jail for 30 days 
or 60 days or 90 days. That’s the jobs of a legislature, not a 
cabinet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — The Deputy Premier says that this will 
not affect the financial affairs of government. Just postulate for 
a moment what would happen if they were foolish enough to 
disestablish the Department of Finance and attempt to put 
something else in its place— attempt to put something else in 
its place. This Act is absolutely full of protections for the 
public. It is full of protections — but keep very, very clear here 
now, the cabinet wants the power to vary all of the provisions of 
this Act, all of the provisions which protect superannuates and 
the superannuation plans. They’re all here, page after page of  

protections of these plans, provisions which say that the auditor 
must audit given books, that material must be submitted to this 
legislature. The very, very backbone of this legislative is 
contained in what the government must do under the 
Department of Finance Act. And these people want to be able to 
change that by order in council. They want to be able to 
disestablish it. 
 
(2130) 
 
Let’s assume that they wouldn’t do that. Let’s assume that they 
would either vary it or take the powers and move them over to 
some sort of financial administration department, but in the 
course of so doing, are they going to provide the same 
protections which have been built in here very carefully for 
superannuation plans and the like? We have no assurance of 
that. 
 
We have a government which wants to create offences by 
cabinet and imprison people by cabinet order — or at least be 
able to. It wants to be able to change the total financial 
administration of this province by order in council; remove 
protections of pension plans; remove the protections which the 
public have about the disclosure of their health records, as my 
colleague from Saskatoon Nutana has illustrated; remove the 
protections that people have about their social service records 
— particularly adoptions and these matters which have been 
carefully built into statute. 
 
Now I won’t take the time of the House to illustrate any further 
provisions. I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are 
sweeping powers and powers which have not here before been 
given to any cabinet in this province and, insofar as I’m aware, 
in any other province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want just 
to touch on one or two other aspects of this Bill. The core, as I 
say, is section 12 that gives all of these powers, but there are 
other disturbing provisions. 
 
Section 17 says that the minister may authorize one of these 
agencies which he creates to enter into agreements with any 
person, agency, or association, and it also provides that he can 
hand out money to that person, agency or association. Now just 
let your mind roam on that one a bit. We have a government 
which, at least in the minds of some, propose to take portions of 
the public service, package them into portions which can be 
contracted out, and then enter into agreements to contract out. A 
reading of the Speech from the Throne suggests that does not do 
any violence to the language of the Speech from the Throne. 
 
We have here then a provision which permits the packaging, 
permits the government to make agreements with respect to 
contracting out, and permits the movement of money from the 
government to the contractee. Does one wonder why many 
people in Saskatchewan are concerned about the powers 
contained in this piece of legislation? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I will recap what I said. I want to say again 
we have no quarrel with giving the government  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

450 
 
 

power to move agencies of government from one minister to the 
other. We say it already has; they say it already has; they’re 
acting on it. 
 
We say that they don’t need the powers of creating new 
departments with new powers. They don’t need that, and they 
put up no case for it. They should not be able to create agencies 
whereby the cabinet determines the objection powers, 
apparently unfettered, to be able to do away with audits and 
superannuation rules and public protections and the like; should 
not be able to levy fines and in default have imprisonment. 
 
Somebody may say, you’re drawing a long bow. I’m not 
drawing a long bow. I’m saying that we can reasonably assume 
that the departments created by the cabinet would have the same 
sorts of powers as the departments which now exist, and I 
illustrated that all of the types of powers that I have been 
talking about are in existing Acts. It’s not drawing a long bow 
to suggest that the cabinet would attempt to put them in their 
own cabinet-created departments, and I just suggest that’s 
entirely inappropriate. 
 
If you wanted to take a more extreme view, you could say that 
the cabinet could, by creating a department, endow it with 
many, many other powers, powers to — what? — bar students 
or faculty from education institutions if you don’t like their 
views, or whatever. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s a long bow, Al. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — All right, that’s a long bow. I would 
have thought it was a very long bow had I not heard the Premier 
of this province take the view that public servants, who work 
for this government, should not criticize the policies of this 
government even though they do not work in any area 
associated with those policies. And I’ve heard him say that 
again and again. 
 
It’s a relatively short step to say that people who were going to 
go to educational institutions paid out of the public purse ought 
to show the same respect for the Premier’s views. And I don’t 
feel that that’s appropriate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And I say to members opposite, 
particularly to new members, don’t look at this with a view to 
asking what your cabinet would do with this legislation. Ask 
what could be done by a cabinet composed of people whose 
views you do not share. 
 
Because this legislature is going to stay around for quite a while 
and it can be abused. I’m not suggesting it will be abused by the 
present cabinet. I do suggest that, but I don’t expect members of 
the government side to agree with that. 
 
Ask what might be done by a cabinet of a persuasion very 
different. And you, I think, will reach the conclusion — you 
will reach the conclusion that no cabinet of your view, or ours, 
or any others, ought to have those powers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the Bill 
fails the test. It fails because no adequate case has been put 
forward to justify the sweeping powers. I don’t think we should 
pass this Bill, and because of that, Mr. Speaker, I am going to 
move, seconded by my colleague, the member for Riversdale: 
 

That all the words after the word “Saskatchewan” be 
deleted and the following substituted therefore: 
 
Be not now read a second time, because: 
 
(1) It would erode the proper role, responsibility, and 
authority of the Legislative Assembly; 
 
(2) It would provide for an unreasonable and excessive 
increase of arbitrary power in the Executive Council; 
 
(3) It would therefore seriously undermine parliamentary 
government in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I just rise to enter this debate 
very briefly to draw to the attention of you, sir, and the 
members of the House, that through several days of debate now 
the only two people who have taken part from the government 
benches in on this have been the mover of the Bill and the 
Minister of Justice — not anybody even prepared to respond to 
what I think has been a very reasoned argument advanced by all 
the speakers on this side, but particularly by the Leader of the 
Opposition in the dying moments of this evening’s session to 
this reasoned amendment. 
 
I think that’s a commentary, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on what this 
Bill is all about. I think that’s a commentary on what this 
government is all about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — This government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
displaying an arrogance already only after four and one-half 
years in office which is best befitting a government of much 
longer reign, much longer government, period. It shows a 
contempt for the parliament and for the legislature. It says 
there’s nothing there to respond. It says that it is going to wait 
out an opposition, and it’s going to introduce its own legislation 
in its own good time, and according with its own agenda. 
 
And I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that all the fears that have been 
raised by those on this side of the House with respect to this Bill 
are justified by that silence by the members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — That silence is deafening, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. That silence is so deafening that it should give a 
message to all the people of Saskatchewan, in the civil service 
and outside the civil service, all of those who stand at risk by 
this proposed legislation, that it’s possible,  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

451 
 
 

maybe even probable, that if any objective run counter to what 
this government wants to achieve by this legislation, will 
simply bide its time and achieve its objectives notwithstanding. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and members of the House, I for one find 
this to be a very disappointing aspect of this debate. And I find 
it very disappointing about some of the new members of the 
House who have been on the opposite side who have apparently 
been either cajoled or misled by the government members as to 
what this debate is all about. Whatever it is, I find it disturbing 
that they’ll go back to their constituents, not having raised a 
word even in defence of this Bill. I find it a sad commentary on 
the state of democracy in this legislature and a damning 
indictment of this Bill No. 5 and the objectives of the 
government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 22 
 

Blakeney Kowalsky 
Prebble Atkinson 
Brockelbank Anguish 
Koskie Hagel 
Romanow Lyons 
Tchorzewski Calvert 
Rolfes Lautermilch 
Mitchell Trew 
Upshall Smart 
Simard Van Mulligen 
Solomon Goodale 
  

Nays — 32 
 
Duncan Martin 
McLeod Martineau 
Berntson Sauder 
Lane Johnson 
Taylor Hopfner 
Smith Petersen 
Swan Swenson 
Muirhead Martens 
Maxwell Baker 
Schmidt Toth 
Hodgins Gleim 
Gerich Neudorf 
Hepworth Gardner 
Hardy Kopelchuk 
Klein Saxinger 
Meiklejohn Britton 
  
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, in closing debate, I want 
to clear up for members opposite a number of points that they 
have raised earlier in the debate. 
 
Firstly, Mr. Speaker, we are fully prepared to take responsibility 
for what is done in the operation of government. We are also 
prepared to fulfil the mandate given to us by the people through 
the Legislative Assembly by fulfilling those powers and duties 
given to  

the executive by the Assembly and all the myriad Acts 
including the departmental statutes. 
 
To clarify, it is not our intent to dispose of the obligations 
placed on the executive by the Assembly. This Bill merely 
permits the reshuffling of existing powers and duties from one 
bureaucratic entity to another. None of those statutory 
obligations, Mr. Speaker, will be displaced. Most duties and 
powers now contained in departmental Acts probably ought 
never to have been placed there in the first place. 
 
The section guaranteeing academic freedom, referred to by the 
member from Saskatoon University, more properly belongs in 
the statutes creating the universities, not the Department of 
Advanced Education and Manpower — not in that legislation, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
When departmental structures are changed, changes to existing 
Bills will obviously be necessary. It is our intention to return to 
this Assembly with our proposals for repeal, for re-enactment in 
other statutes, or enhancement by creation of special Act, of all 
the duties and powers presently contained in departmental Acts. 
At that time, Mr. Speaker, all members will have an opportunity 
to debate what powers and duties ought to be carried on by the 
government. 
 
What this Bill will do is allow flexibility in the allocation of 
resources to ensure that the powers and duties are carried out in 
the best way possible, and that the moneys voted by this 
Assembly are used to their greatest advantage. 
 
The member for Regina Lakeview, Mr. Speaker, has raised a 
number of interesting points regarding Bill 5, and I’d like to 
address those points at this time along with other points raised 
by members during the course of this debate. 
 
The hon. member, Mr. Speaker, suggests that this Bill gives the 
executive power to legislate basic and fundamental rights 
outside the legislature. She also suggests that in allowing the 
executive to establish the objectives and purposes of a 
department, that in effect the executive will be able to give 
powers to minister and to departments. I say to her that 
precisely the opposite is the case. The executive will not be able 
to give to the minister the right to enter on property or seize 
articles unless it is otherwise provided for in law. 
 
In section 5 of the Bill, we have been very careful to provide 
that the Lieutenant Governor in Council may only assign 
powers, duties, or functions to a minister, or transfer any power, 
duty, or function already assigned to another minister. We have 
very carefully avoided allowing the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council to prescribe powers to ministers. 
 
Similarly, Mr. Speaker, in section 12 of the above Bill, we have 
specifically avoided providing that the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council may determine powers and duties of departments. The 
Lieutenant Governor in Council may determine the objects and 
purposes of the department; for example, it may frame the 
mandate for the department, but this is considerably different 
from  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

452 
 
 

actually prescribing powers that that department will exercise. 
The only way a department can exercise power is if it is 
assigned to it and is otherwise constituted by law. We are 
attempting to avoid any suggestion that the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council can by order give a department any power 
that is not already imposed by law. 
 
The member has objected to the phrase “objects and purposes”, 
suggesting that it is wider than the term “duties and functions” 
contained in the Manitoba statute. I would say that we 
specifically avoided the term “duties” because to prescribe 
duties can be perilously close to prescribing powers. When one 
determines objects and purposes, one is merely framing a 
mandate, and while conceptually the ability to frame objects 
and purposes may seem reasonably broad, it avoids the issue of 
allowing cabinet to determine powers of departments. 
 
So I think members opposite, Mr. Speaker, have missed the 
mark completely in their allegations on objects and purposes. In 
attempting to find fault with this Bill, the opposition seized on 
the major distinction between this Bill and the Manitoba Act 
and assumed a sinister goal, Mr. Speaker. In fact, our goal was 
to restrict the power of cabinet so evident in the Manitoba Act 
by restricting the assignment of duties to those already existing 
in law, not to allow, Mr. Speaker, determination of new duties 
or variations of existing ones. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, however if the opposition feels more 
comfortable with the phrase “functions and duties”, I would be 
willing to consider such a proposal because the phrase would 
accomplish the same goal that we’re trying to achieve, in that it 
would allow us to frame a mandate for the department. 
 
The member for Regina Lakeview, Mr. Speaker, asks how 
legislation will be affected by Bill 5. She asks whether 
legislation will be automatically repealed when a department is 
dismantled. The answer to the specific question is that no 
legislation will be repealed other than the sections that are 
repealed in the consequential Act, Bill No. 7. We regard this as 
the beginning of a transitional process. 
 
All department Acts will stay in place. If a particular 
department is disestablished and is rolled into another 
department, the departmental legislation of the disestablished 
department will continue to stand and will be assigned to the 
new department. Any special provisions that are contained in 
the department Act will continue to stand. Ultimately, all 
department legislation will be repealed. Special provisions will 
be rolled into appropriate Acts or will become Acts in and of 
themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note that the opposition has chosen to be very 
selective in comparing this Bill to legislation in other 
jurisdictions. No mention is made by the opposition that the 
Manitoba Act does not speak of the effective date of an order in 
council, or review by the Assembly. No mention is made of the 
fact that the Saskatchewan Bill ensures that an order in council 
under the Act is treated as a regulation and referred for review 
to a committee of this legislature, which has the ultimate power 
to recommend  

that regulation be set aside by this Assembly. No mention is 
made of the fact that the Manitoba Bill is completely silent on 
this point. 
 
The opposition is being very selective on the points it chooses 
to bring to the attention of this House. Members opposite have 
alleged, Mr. Speaker, that I have misled the House on this Bill. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, how can they allege that while in the same 
breath allege that this Bill, for example, will give the cabinet the 
power to abolish the Human Rights Commission. It is 
misleading, to say the least, Mr. Speaker, to suggest that when, 
by the simple definition section, it is clear that this Act only 
deals with the executive government, departments, secretariats 
and the like — not independent agencies established by statue 
by this Assembly. That, my friends, is misleading and 
misrepresenting this Bill for your own political ends. 
 
The member from Saskatoon University and the member from 
Regina Rosemont, Mr. Speaker, suggested that this Bill would 
permit destruction of a large number of agencies or branches of 
departments. 
 
Most interesting, Mr. Speaker, is the allegation that this Bill 
would allow the disestablishment or the dismantling of the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company. It may come as a 
surprise to the member that that corporation and many others, 
Mr. Speaker, were created under a statute passed by the CCF 
when they came into office in 1940. The Crown Corporations 
Act of 1945, Mr. Speaker, permitted the creation of Crown 
corporations for any undertaking advisable for the public good, 
and went on, Mr. Speaker, to give cabinet broad powers to 
assign duties to those corporations. 
 
Section 6 of that Act provided: 
 

A corporation shall perform such duties and may exercise 
such powers as may be prescribed by the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council, having regard to the efficient 
operation of its business. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that was the power prescribed by the CCF in 1940 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . ’45, I’m sorry. Crown 
corporations could then carry on any commercial or industrial 
undertaking considered advisable for the public good. The 
section was later expanded to permit the operation of any 
business, enterprise, or undertaking for the public good. 
 
If you want to talk, Mr. Speaker, about delegations of authority 
by the legislature, the enactment of that legislation in 1945 and 
its re-enactment in the present Act in 1978 went far beyond that 
proposed by this Bill for the departments. 
 
The member for Lakeview questions the constitutionality of the 
legislation before us. I would refer to the comments made by 
the Minister of Justice respecting constitutionality. 
 

It is not accurate to say that the legislature can only 
delegate routine and ancillary matters. 

 
Legislatures have, in the past, delegated very wide powers to 
cabinet. In fact the previous government, in  
  



 
December 22, 1986 

453 
 
 

legislating The Crown Corporations Act, 1978, gave to cabinet 
a far broader power in that it gave to cabinet the power to assign 
powers and duties to Crown corporations created by order in 
council. 
 
The member for Lakeview suggests there is no requirement on 
behalf of the executive arm of government to ensure that the 
powers and the rights contained in departmental Acts are 
carried over into a new department. That, of course, is 
inaccurate, Mr. Speaker, because the departmental legislation is 
not being repealed by this particular Bill. 
 
The member tries to find something devious in the agreement 
section suggesting that this is the delegation section of the Act. 
Mr. Speaker, the agreement section in this Act is very similar to 
standard agreement sections contained in virtually all 
departmental Acts. We specifically left out the delegation 
section because it had not been in the Saskatchewan legislation 
before. There is a danger that it would actually take away from 
common-law powers of delegation, and we felt it would raise 
too many question. Therefore, there is simply no delegation 
section in this particular Bill. The Interpretation Act and the 
common law will continue to apply, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member raises concerns about the grant-making section. 
She suggest that somehow the grant-making section is the same 
thing as giving cabinet new spending powers. Again I would 
say that the grant-making section is very similar to 
grant-making sections in the departmental statutes. 
 
The member must never lose sight of the fact that money cannot 
be spent under the authority of this particular section except by 
statutory appropriation following the estimates procedure. 
Special warrants are still possible, but they too have to be 
approved in supplementary estimates. There is absolutely no 
attempt to extend the ability of ministers of cabinet to spend 
money beyond that which exists at this moment. 
 
The member suggests that the regulations made under this Bill 
do not have to come before this House. She has noted that The 
Regulations Act applies in respect to any order establishing a 
department. The effect of that particular requirement is that the 
regulations come before the regulations committee of this 
House and ultimately can be brought before the House itself. If 
that member is unhappy with the particular requirement, then 
perhaps in committee she will be suggesting an alternative. 
 
The member suggests that departments will be totally destroyed 
and then, by regulation, new objects and purposes will be 
created. The member goes out of her way to try and confuse the 
public by suggesting that objects and purposes are the same 
thing as powers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what has happened in Manitoba and British 
Columbia with their legislation is precisely the type of thing 
that will happen here. This Act is simply an administrative 
mechanism to create new departments from old, to change the 
names of departments, to change the functions, and so on. If 
one carefully analyses the Manitoba statute and this particular 
Bill, one will see that  

there’s very little difference between the two. To suggest 
otherwise is simply to try to try to find spectres where they 
don’t exist, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, Mr. Speaker, also 
raises similar concerns, particularly in relation to spending 
power. Again I would say to that particular member that he 
must appreciate that money can not be spent in this province by 
government departments without approval by this legislature. 
Any money spent pursuant to the grant-making section in this 
particular Bill will be reviewed in Estimates as required by law. 
To suggest otherwise, Mr. Speaker, as the member has done, is 
simply to draw a picture that is completely inaccurate. 
 
I have found it interesting that various speakers in the 
opposition have agreed with the concept of streamlining the 
legislative scheme around departments, or consolidating 
existing departmental powers. Many have identified that many 
sections of this Bill do nothing more then is presently done in 
most departmental statutes. I only hope, Mr. Speaker, that those 
few will speak to their colleagues and explain to them the 
existing structure so that they will better be able to address the 
issues raised by this Bill. 
 
Another point raised in this debate that cannot go unanswered, 
Mr. Speaker, is the suggestion that this Bill is directed at the 
public service. I was quite frankly surprised at many of the 
experienced members, some of whom have served in cabinet, 
suggesting that this Bill would be used to ravage the public 
service, as was suggested by the member for Quill Lakes. 
 
It is irresponsible, to say the least, to raise concern in the public 
service that this Bill could in any way be used to override the 
rights of employees contained in The Public Service Act or 
collective agreements. Irresponsible, and I might add, Mr. 
Speaker, reprehensible. Nothing in this Act affects employment 
security. It is trite for me to even have to say that, but the tactics 
of members opposite oblige me to do so. Members of the public 
service will continue to be governed, Mr. Speaker, by The 
Public Service Act when this Act is enacted. 
 
I hope, Mr. Speaker, that my comments will assist members 
opposite in understanding this Bill before we enter into 
consideration of it in the Committee of the Whole. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 32 
 

Duncan Martin 
McLeod Martineau 
Berntson Sauder 
Lane Johnson 
Taylor Hopfner 
Smith Petersen 
Swan Swenson 
Muirhead Martens 
Maxwell Baker 
Schmidt Toth 
  



 
December 22, 1986 

454 
 
 

Hodgins Gleim 
Gerich Neudorf 
Hepworth Gardner 
Hardy Kopelchuk 
Klein Saxinger 
Meiklejohn Britton 
  

 
Nays — 22 

 
Blakeney Kowalsky 
Prebble Atkinson 
Brockelbank Anguish 
Koskie Hagel 
Romanow Lyons 
Tchorzewski Calvert 
Rolfes Lautermilch 
Mitchell Trew 
Upshall Smart 
Simard Van Mulligen 
Solomon Goodale 
  
 
The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 
Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:16 p.m. 


