


















































May 22, 1986 Hansard Evening


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 22, 1986 

  
 
 

1449 
 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Rural Development 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 43 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, you sent 
over your staff salaries and their names. In the last year since April 
1, have there been any increases in staff over . . . since last year 
this time, or are these . . . And what about their salaries? Have they 
changed, have they stayed the same, or can you give me a 
comparison with last year? It says, starting salary. Can you go 
back to the year or is this . . . The dates that you have in brackets, 
like you have starting salary August '85, August '85 and January 
6th. Is that the day these people came on employ with you, or is 
that the day a salary change took place? Could you explain that to 
me, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, that's the date they came on 
with us. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Does your Department of Rural Affairs have a 
Legislative Secretary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Yes, we do. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Can you give us his name . . . constituency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — John Gerich from Redberry. 
 
Mr. Engel: — What duty does this member have, and how much 
additional salary does he receive as a result of holding this title as 
Legislative Secretary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure. I think it's . . . 
I'm not sure exactly what it is. It's paid through the Legislative 
Assembly, so I don't know what it is for sure. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I suppose basically . . . I was wondering if there's 
. . . how much additional expenses you've incurred to date and 
what you expect will be involved as far as over and above the 
$6,000 plus he gets. You know, like how much travelling . . . It's 
7,000 now. How much extra travel and meals and other expenses 
do you anticipate he's going to have for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure, but we 
don't anticipate very much. Just whatever a Legislative Secretary 
would do if they go out to speak at some SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) meeting or at some 
ratepayers' meeting, or something like that. But not very much, 
just whatever has been under the normal procedure. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I agree that during Saskatchewan's history we've 
had as many as three or four. In fact I've had the privilege of being 
Legislative Secretary for a while, but how would you need 12 — 
you know — or 13? I'm wondering . . . 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order. That's not relative to this 
discussion. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Relevant, not relative. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I said it was not relative to this discussion. 
Would the member please contain himself and let's get on with the 
discussion. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I wasn't talking about . . . Mr. Chairman, if you 
think it's not relative to a department . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. The number of secretaries is not 
relative to that department. You asked if there was a Legislative 
Secretary, so that's fine. But as for any more, there is no 
relationship between that and this department. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, it takes four Tories to do the work 
of one NDPer, so I suppose it's not relative, and I won't talk about 
needing 12 secretaries where three could do the job. I won't talk if 
that's relative or not. All I'm saying is that you're either paying 
them too much money or he hasn't got enough to do because, you 
know, you said to him he isn't going to do that much for you. How 
many meetings has he attended since he's been appointed, on your 
behalf? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well probably, Mr. Chairman, about 20 so 
far since the first of the year. He travelled with us on the farm 
input cost committee, and he went to approximately — and I'm 
not sure of the exact number — but he goes to wherever . . . 
Sometimes there's two or three in an evening and he takes in one 
of those, so probably he would be 20 or 25 meetings. I'm not sure 
the exact number, but in that neighbourhood. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Does he use his own transportation or does he have 
a government vehicle? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — He uses his own transportation. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Can you give me a breakdown on what his 
additional expenses would be and a list of the duties he's attended 
up to this point, so that we can see, according to the chairman, 
whether it's relative or not? You have 12 of these birds running 
around the country, and I'm wondering if they're earning their 
keep. 
 
And I think it's important to show to the people of Saskatchewan 
how big and arrogant this government really is, Mr. Chairman. I 
think we've got a situation here where they're using a program that 
was designed way back and has been implemented through the 
parliamentary tradition where overworked cabinet minister would 
receive a Legislative Secretary to help them when they carried a 
whole long list of duties. 
 
And I think that when you have the largest cabinet in 
Saskatchewan's history and then you have 12 additional staff 
people running around spending money, I think there are programs 
suffering. There are programs suffering because you're not doing 
it. So I will appreciate it that you don't have the list of meetings 
that you've attended with you, but could you make those 
available?  
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1450 
 
 

Will you give us the assurance that you will make that available to 
us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — We'll make that available and send to them 
the cost of whatever they were. It wasn't very . . . It would be very 
insignificant in dollar values. 
 
The other thing that I should just mention that, I do have 
Co-operation and Co-operative Development. And there's a lot of 
co-ops around the province who request either the minister or 
Legislative Secretary to attend. And so we get a great number of 
requests, especially in the spring, this time of the year to attend, 
and it is sometimes two and three an evening — and the SARM 
meetings and the annual ratepayers' meetings. So we do get a lot 
of requests and there is a load out there, a lot of work to be done. 
 
Mr. Engel: — We're talking about the department of rural affairs. 
You're saying the same secretary applies to co-op development as 
well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well he certainly helps them with that. 
That's correct. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Does the Legislative Secretary have a secretary and 
personal staff? How many people are involved in that office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — No, he has nobody — just the Legislative 
Secretary. Anything that would be typed would be done in my 
office for him if it needs to be typed or whatever, or through the 
department. He works with them. 
 
Mr. Engel: — How much time of the department's secretary 
would you say is appointed to him or appropriated to him to do the 
extra typing and the political letters he's writing and the work he's 
doing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I don't know. I couldn't answer that. Just 
whatever is needed. If a speech needs to be typed up or a letter 
needs to be written, that's all. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well, that makes quite a bit of difference, Mr. 
Minister. There's eight of us, there's eight of us get one and a half 
or so — one staff and a part-time in our office. And we have to go 
outside to get letters typed and all. And you have the appropriation 
of how many there are. And then you have a Legislative Secretary 
who can then go into a department and I'd wonder if you could 
give us a breakdown about how much of an additional secretary's 
time, how many extra perks the legislative secretaries are getting 
that are not available to the opposition who are busy and who have 
a lot of places to go and a lot of meetings to attend to and things to 
do — that we don't have those extra perks and those extra little 
advantages where we get our mileage paid and all our expenses 
paid, like your legislative secretaries do. 
 
So I think the point I'm making, Mr. Chairman, — and I'm making 
it, and I'll leave it at that — as another example where your 
government is misusing a program that was designed to be 
meaningful: where three or four legislative secretaries would serve 
a cabinet, and those people would be responsible to a number of 
ministers and  

actually earned the 6 or $7,000 — $6,000, they got in those days. 
 
Today they have it assigned to them as likely a role where there's 
just extra pay involved. And I think it's a situation where, if you 
don't have a specific task or specific assignment where that person 
does, I think the taxpayers are asked to carry quite a little bit of 
load of big government that really isn't what you advertise and 
what you campaigned on when you decided to run for office. 
 
I didn't see any ads saying that, we're going to have a larger 
cabinet than the Blakeney government or the Tommy Douglas 
government or the Ross Thatcher government . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I fail to see where the member is 
staying to the topic. He's just wandering all over the place, and I 
am going to insist that you remain on the topic. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I understood, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, that 
the topic is rural development — talking about rural development. 
And we're talking about the administration and amount of 
government involved in running this Department of Rural 
Development. And if you fail to see the relevance of how many 
elected people are involved in running this kind of government, 
and you don't want me to talk about that area, there are many, 
many other areas we can talk about. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan know why we're not in an election in 
the last couple of months. And I think it's relevant because of the 
big government we have. The arrogance of this government, the 
arrogance of trying to keep us in line — and don't talk about 
anything that's politically sensitive; let's stay on the topic. So I'll 
switch to a new topic when they're hollering from the seats, 
particularly members that aren't running again — let them holler 
and bray away from their seats. I don't care. I can handle it, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
I would like to ask you a number of questions that relate to your 
department in areas that you are involved in. A lot of attention has 
come to our office particularly from the constituencies . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — In a brown envelope. 
 
Mr. Engel: — The member from Moosomin says in brown 
envelopes. Not all of it comes in brown envelopes. Some people 
are prepared to come and talk openly, in fact in this case, they 
even went to the press. And it's an article in the Leader-Post, 
Tuesday. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the member from Moosomin is braying away from 
his seat and I don't know if they get involved in estimates or not. 
Maybe he should. I can remember years past when government 
members would get involved and ask a question or two in 
estimates. But if the member from Moosomin does not be called to 
order, it'll just show the impartiality of the Chair who he doesn't 
show when those guys are braying away and trying to interrupt the 
proceedings of this House. 
 
But I was going to talk to you about some correspondence 
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1451 
 
 

and some mail, and some postcards that you've been getting, and 
let me just read a little bit out of the Leader—Post, April 15, 1986, 
Tuesday, Leader-Post, "Extended ferry service sought." 
 

Postcards have begun arriving in Rural Development Minister 
Neal Hardy's office in a campaign to have the government study 
ways to provide year-round service at the Riverhurst ferry 
crossing on Lake Diefenbaker. 
 
Lorne Sheppard of Lucky Lake, has taken the project on by 
himself, but he feels support is growing. Currently, towns on the 
west side of the lake are cut off from Moose Jaw and Regina for 
three to five months of the year, forcing people to travel about 
48 kilometres further in the winter. 
 
Those on the east side have to go around the lake by way of 
Central Butte to reach Outlook, where many farmers do their 
business, Sheppard explained in an interview Monday. That 
doubles the distance to 160 kilometres. Also, offices of the 
District 16 Agricultural Board, the agricultural representative, 
of the land's brand and irrigation branch of the Department of 
Agriculture are in Outlook. 

 
And so these people from Lucky Lake, Beechy, and area are 
isolated there because they don't have extended ferry service. Can 
you give me a brief run-down as to some of the options the 
department has studied or is looking at to provide year-round 
service to these people? I know a number of examples I could cite. 
In Kelowna is a popular floating bridge; there are some instances 
where they have used air to keep the ice melted so a ferry could 
continue running. Have you looked at some options to provide 
these people the necessary crossing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I'm told that we're looking at 
four different systems. The air-bubbler system which was installed 
back in 1982, or '62 rather, in Buffalo Narrows, where now they 
do have a bridge or culvert in. So that's one that we're looking at, 
and we've already done some testing on it for 20 years now. We're 
looking at the cost feasibility of a bridge. We've been looking at a 
floating bridge and doing some cost figuring on that; also looking 
at a hovercraft. We're looking at those four different areas that we 
may well, in fact, do some costing on it. 
 
(1915) 
 
We've got about 300 . . . You mentioned we had about 300 letters 
or names on petitions that have come in. I've sent a letter back to 
each one individually stating exactly what I've just said here. 
 
Mr. Engel: — How much would you expect a project like that . . . 
In what dollar frame would you say it would be feasible to go 
ahead with it? What is the department suggesting that . . . How 
much is it worth spending to try and provide these people with 
some service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, you know it's pretty 
hard to set a figure on what you think would be the  

right amount to go with. I suppose it would have to be, first of all, 
to get all the figures together. A bridge would be very expensive, 
as you are very much aware. And I don't have a figure on it, but it 
would be up in substantial amount of millions of dollars. The 
air-bubbler system would probably be much less, and the other 
two are certainly being looked at. And I really don't know. 
 
What I would like to do is get all the figures put together and some 
cost analysis of what it may cost, and we'll have some good ideas 
on the cost; sit down with, first, the Department of Finance to see 
if we can afford it, or the government can afford it; and then talk to 
the people out there and see how much need is out there. 
 
We're also going to do a survey this summer on the use that would 
be used, or look at during the survey the use that could be made if 
there was a 24-hour service in there. And I know some of the 
people out there have put together some information on what they 
think, and we'll be talking to those and others in the area in regards 
to how much it would be used. And that would be a better 
cost-fact figure in the economic terms to see what you'd put in. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well, that answer sounds to me as though you have 
no intentions of doing anything. You haven't studied and come up 
with a figure that say that this would be feasible to spend this 
much, and you're on your fifth year in office, and those people 
elected representatives to sit on your side of the House with the 
intention of getting some service. And I think that a community 
the size of Lucky Lake to come up with 300 letters to you, I'd 
suggest every family is concerned, and it's a big, big issue. Those 
are the people that are saying, look, we'll never get nothing done 
with these fellows unless we get an election. The new technology 
is there and it's time something is done . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . 
 
On the studies you've conducted . . . if you can hear me over the 
shouting of the member from Maple Creek, the Minister of 
Consumer Affairs, that is. She's trying to drown me out along with 
her sidekick, the member from Moosomin, who's not running 
again, are getting very, very loud her. The bingo minister isn't 
slowing down at all. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, would the hovercraft studies that you've looked 
at, would that be a year-round transportation crossing that would 
do on thin ice and thick ice, and so on? Is that safe? What studies 
have you done, and how far along are you as far as studying the 
hovercraft is concerned? Let's take one of these at a time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I understand that about six or 
seven years ago, they looked at a possibility of a bridge across 
there at Riverhurst, and they . . . at that time it was deemed to be 
cost prohibitive. So it wasn't done. That don't mean to say that it 
shouldn't have been done or couldn't be done now, but at that time. 
I understand it was in the neighbourhood of $20 million in 
estimate, and that was a rough estimate. 
 
The floating bridge is one that we're looking at. The air-bubbler 
system — the problem that they're trying to work out or looking at 
some in Ontario, is that the water  
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1452 
 
 

fluctuates about 30 feet from high to low during the winter-time. It 
can fluctuate that much, and it's hard to set a bubbler system in 
place that may be safe. So they're looking at that. And you know, 
that's about all I can tell you. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I guess you talked about all the other things except 
the one I asked you about. the studies you've done . . . You've said 
you've been looking at it, and all I asked is: have you, when you 
were looking at a hovercraft, have you decided, or have you come 
up with a safety factor? Is that an all-year vehicles? Is it good on 
thin ice, is the specific question I asked you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I don't know, Mr. Chairman. That's just one 
of the areas that we're looking and doing some research on it. I 
don't know if it's safe or not and I don't know the cost of it. 
 
In this just sort of a . . . And I've only been minister as you know 
for five months, and it just come up here in the last two or three 
months that I was aware of it. And the department's been aware of 
that need out there for a long time, but never really done any 
extensive studies on it or really looking into it other than a few 
years ago when I believe the former government was in at that 
time. 
 
So we're going to look at these alternatives and so some cost 
analysis on it, and the safety factor has to be looked at, definitely. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I think the point I'm trying to make is you . . . If I 
would have settled for the first answer you gave me, Mr. Minister, 
you said you were studying three options: a floating bridge, 
keeping the ice open, and a hovercraft, and then a fourth one is 
likely a bridge. The first one I talked about is a hovercraft: you tell 
me now that you have no studies, no option, no intention of 
looking at that any further. After the longest term in office of any 
government in post-war years you have nothing on a hovercraft. 
 
An air system, I understand, was ready to go and would likely 
have been built in '82 if you guys wouldn't have formed a 
government. The studies were done and the thing was in place. 
There was one operating in Ontario. I'm personally familiar with 
what's happening here, and I raise this issue as one of personal 
interest. The floating bridge, like you say, with fluctuations in the 
water, I think was written off as long as six years ago already 
because of the drastic changes in the depth of water, like you say. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, when you use the old handle that you 
tried to get by with the first three years you were in office: well 
we're studying it, we've got a study team out. You know, when we 
talked about this in the session earlier tonight, that you appointed a 
committee, you appointed yourself as chairman to look at the 
farmer's input cost, you appointed the rural law committee seeking 
fair tax system. You know, after you've been in office more than 
four years it's not time to study; it was time to demonstrate some 
action. 
 
And here's an example where a Mr. Sheppard single-handedly 
took you guys on and said, look, we need some action; we want to 
get out of there; we think  

we should be treated the same as anybody else in Saskatchewan. 
You've got the offices in Outlook where we deal with our ag rep 
and we deal with our people and why should we have to travel 160 
kilometres when we could get across an all-season, all-weather 
road. 
 
I think the people of Lucky Lake, Beechy, and area in around 
there are concerned that an election isn't being called so this matter 
can be dealt with. There are so many things that you're slipping up 
on, Mr. Minister, that it's really disturbing. 
 
A brand-new area, another area I'd like to talk to . . . And there's 
about three specific ones here I want to quickly touch on, and then 
I understand one of your own members has a question or two for 
you. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I would like to know what the status of the 
resort development project proposed by Boris Mamchur, 
M-a-m-c-h-u-r for Redberry Lake is. Does your department intend 
to continue to require an environmental impact study before the 
project proceeds, or do you have any concerns about wildlife 
habitat or water quality if this 125 cabins that are proposed as part 
of the Mamchur project go ahead on the south-west side of 
Redberry Lake? What is the status of that one? Can you give us 
some information that maybe you and your members have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I'll just answer your one about the bridge — 
just a little more information on that one at Riverhurst — and then 
I'll answer your second question. 
 
There had been no studies done previous on that area. There had 
been a lot of requests over a number of years, and I'm sure you're 
aware of it, in that area. And basically, we had been answering — 
and I'm sure it goes back many years — that it was just 
cost-prohibitive. And that's where it had been left. 
 
But we are looking at it. Like I mentioned earlier, the air-bubbler 
system has some problems because of the fluctuating of the level 
of the water; and the bridge is certainly one that has a cost factor to 
it. 
 
In regards to question, your last question there, in regards to 
Redberry Lake. Mamchur had appealed to the Provincial Planning 
Appeals Board and they had a hearing on May 8th, and they 
haven't brought in a decision yet. And so I don't know where it 
stands there. But the reason that it hadn't been approved to date, 
one of the reasons anyway: he hadn't completed an EIA, an 
environment impact study, in regards to the lake — or parts of it 
he hadn't completed anyway. And so therefore his approval hadn't 
been given. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well according to a Star-Phoenix report of May 
9th . . . And I was interested in that date you mentioned, that the 
hearing was held May 8th. But according to this one here: 
 

Redberry Lake resort developer, Boris Mamchur, trying to get 
his proposed cottage development back on track, argued 
Thursday the government rejection of his project should be 
overturned. 

  



 
May 26, 1986 

1453 
 
 

He said that the minister has no authority to reject his application. 
 

The government wanted Mamchur to do an 
environmental-impact assessment. Zatlyn said, (I guess that's 
his lawyer) and when he didn't respond just as they wanted, 
Rural Development said no. However, that department doesn't 
have the authority under the Planning and Development Act, 
and as such, the six-member appeal board headed by Saskatoon 
Planning Director Bert Wellman should give the development 
tentative approval. 

 
Any further update on that, or any reason why you['re holding that 
one up? Or is that in competition with other developments at 
Redberry? What is the story there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, an answer to the 
question is that that was Mr. Mamchur's opinion that he should 
have been allowed to go ahead, and that's why he took it to the 
planning appeals board on May 8th. And like I said, they haven't 
brought in a decision yet. The Department of Rural Development 
only follows the community and planning Act, and that's how it's 
set out. And we've got to abide by the laws and rules and 
regulation that's set out by the Government of Saskatchewan, 
which those have been there for quite a number of years. 
 
So there's nothing wrong with it. It's just that this procedure they're 
going through, if the planning appeals board rules that the 
Department of Rural Development is wrong, that is the law and 
we'll abide by it. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Since 1982, has your department or has the 
government removed any land in the Redberry Lake area from the 
critical wildlife habitat designation? Is there any of that land 
you've taken out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I'm sorry. I missed part of the last part of 
your question. Could you say it again? 
 
Mr. Engel: — Since 1982, has the provincial government 
removed any land in the Redberry Lake area from the designation 
that's called critical wildlife habitat? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — My understanding was there was some 
removed. I wouldn't know the description of the land on that. 
 
Mr. Engel: — We're aware of that, Mr. Minister, Now another 
topic that we'll pursue on another day, Mr. Minister: I would like 
to know about how much land that your department has been 
allocated, or that you have the responsibility for from the federal 
government, regarding CP and CNR rail right of ways. 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there has been . . . I 
don't have a breakdown whether it's CN or CP right here with us. 
We can get it for you and send it over to you — which was which. 
There's 17 lines have been completed. That's 365 miles, or about 
5,600 acres . . . 

An Hon. Member: — Being abandoned, you mean — being 
abandoned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — . . . that's been completed and that's 
disposed. The disposition of the right of way has been completed, 
and that's been given out to the farmers. There's another 36 lines, 
or about 8,650 acres, 552 miles, that's in the process now of being 
allocated out to the farmers through their local boards there. 
 
Mr. Engel: — What process do you use? Do you sell it, or do you 
transfer it to the adjacent owner, or what process is used? 
 
I could see where there'd be a different approach when you've got 
58 miles of track from point A to point B through farmers' lands, 
but when the land that's in town, is there a different allocation 
process? How do you allocate urban versus rural? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I'm just not sure how to answer that 
question, except that most of the rail lines are going through rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As you know how they're selected, they're selected by the local 
R.M. council. They pick a delegate from their own council and put 
on the advisory committee who does the allocation, total 
allocation. The only time there's . . . If there's some dispute and 
they can't settle it, then it comes back to an appeals board. And 
they make the final decision on it. 
 
As the government, we have nothing to do with who gets it or who 
shouldn't get it. It's strictly by the local R.M. councils whose 
delegates are on there and make the total disposition of all the 
lands to the farmer at no cost. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Just as a point of interest, is there . . . From your 
former offices as Environment minister, and also as member now, 
Minister of Rural Affairs, is there any restriction you place on the 
CPR-CNR when they abandon a grade? Can they leave it in the 
rough like that, or do they have to do something with it? 
 
What are you demanding of the railways when they move out of a 
line that has made them millions and millions of dollars in the 
past, and all of a sudden they just pull up stakes? What do you 
make these guys do when they leave the land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Basically, they just leave — they pick up the 
track. It's allocated over to the federal government who give it to 
the provincial government for allocation to the local farmer. 
 
To date, that I'm aware of, there's been some that's been retained 
for wildlife habitat because it's — specifically they don't want it 
disturbed; the people in the area don't want it disturbed; and some 
for roads, but most of it goes back to the farmers. And most 
farmers to date have sort of, would want it not . . You know, 
there's been a sort of a, not a problem, but certainly an area there 
that the farmers would like to take that land, as you know farmers 
would like to have it. A lot of it cut through quarters of land or 
whatever else, and they're working it all in, and so we haven't had 
no problems with the farmers in allocating it  
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1454 
 
 

back. They've been very happy to get it back. But the railroad just 
give it to the federal government; they in turn said the provincial 
government, you can do what you want with it. We're just 
allocating it back to the farmers, however that advisory board 
decides it should go. 
 
Mr. Engel: — You don't have any land-use policy in place for 
something that would demand that this would be partially flattened 
down, or left in an order that could be usable rather than an 
eyesore — going through what an abandoned grave looks like. I 
think I know when the Red Coat Trail was being rebuilt, and a lot 
of the highway there, when a portion of the highway was 
abandoned, the contractor that was building the new stretch of 
road picked that grade up, levelled it out, and you can't see where 
the old road used to be. 
 
And I think when you have valuable land, and land is a resource, 
that is something you should be demanding especially if the 
railways that are abandoning small communities, by picking up as 
many lines as you've allowed to go by the wayside. I think the 
least they can do is flatten it out so it can be used rather than leave 
a narrow steep little grade, and when the bridge is knocked out 
there is sharp cuts. And in many cases all I've seen done is put a 
couple of fence poles in with a plank across. And a sharp cut there 
and then that grade is open for using as a speedway or whatever. 
And I can see future trouble if you don't have some restriction or 
some land use policy in place. 
 
I can see here's another reason where it's time for a change of 
government to get some people in there that have long term in 
mind, rather than just a short-term profit if the railways pick up 
what they can salvage and leave the rest to the people of 
Saskatchewan to absorb the cost and worry about. Have you any 
comment on that or how you think it should be handled? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, we signed an agreement with 
the federal government in regards as to how this abandoned rail 
lines would be allocated, and that was signed back in 1977, so it's 
. . . we're just living up to an agreement and I believe it's a fair 
agreement. I don't see nothing wrong with it. 
 
The farmers I believe will make good use of it. They will probably 
keep it and put it back into the shape that is presentable to the eye, 
and some of the areas, like I say, may be left because of wildlife 
habitat requested by the wildlife federation and some biologists. 
So we're doing that specifically because of requests. The rest I 
believe the farmer will put it in pretty good shape and I think the 
agreement all of us signed in '77 is a good agreement. I believe it's 
fair, and I think it's good to give it back to the farmer the way 
we're doing it. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well, I disagree. I think that in light of the Tory 
government's position in Ottawa, and particularly your 
government's saying to Brian, keep up the good work, Mulroney, 
and pat him on the back, I think it's time . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . If the shouting member from Weyburn, Mr. 
Chairman, could be called to order I could continue my question. 
And I see I'm touching a pretty sensitive . . . I guess my colleague 
says he wasn't only shouting, he was hollering at the top of his 
voice,  

because if I can hear him he is being very loud. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the point I want to make is that if you fellows are 
left in control there's going to be a massive erosion of steel out of 
Saskatchewan, and that's putting it mildly, because I think that the 
railways are anxious to move out of their branch lines and there 
will be many, many miles. 
 
And I think that one of the restrictions should be that the land 
would be brought back to the same condition as it was before the 
railway was graded up. I think the gravel and cinders at the top 
should be hauled or put in the ditch and the grade spread evenly 
cross the area and left reasonable and responsible. 
 
When you do finish using something, you don't just drop it and 
leave, you leave the land in good order for oncoming generations. 
And I think that . . .here's another example where you're placing a 
charge on future generations and further causing hardship to 
people that can least afford it, and letting the railways get off 
scot-free — letting the railways get off scot-free. 
 
There's another issue that I want to raise with you, Mr. Minister, in 
the Department of Rural Affairs. And that has to do with hobby 
farms and people on small acreage and the R.M.'s ability to tax or 
not to tax. And I suppose the straight, short question I'd have for 
you: do you favour R.M.s having the right to taxation information 
on financial records to establish whether someone is primarily a 
farmer or not? Or how are you going to determine what his 
primary source of income is? Have you thought that thing through, 
and what is your position on the hobby farms and the locations on 
rural areas that are springing up that really aren't a source of 
income, but is likely somebody making a large income elsewhere? 
Have you a situation of how to handle that kind of a situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that's been an ongoing 
problem for the last 20 years. I'm sure the member is aware of it. 
And it's one that 's been hard to define. What is a farmer and what 
is a hobby farmer? And I know many governments have tried. I'm 
sure that . . . I sat on a local community planning group that tried, 
back in the '70s. It's a tough issue to deal with, and we've asked the 
law review committee to look at that and try to bring back to us 
some of the thoughts of the local R.M. people and how it could be 
defined or should be defined. 
 
I'm not sure that we would have an answer. I'm not positive we'd 
have an answer. But we'd like to hear how they would define it, 
because this is an issue —it's something like many other issues. It's 
hard one to really draw line on and say: what is a hobby farmer 
and what is a farmer? So if the member has some ideas of how he 
maybe thinks that we could do it, I'd be pleased to hear them. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well I'm going to tell you, we'll show you how to 
do it after the next election. Let's do it that way, okay? 
 
The second question, Mr. Minister: I know you're having 
problems on governing and how to do it and expecting  
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1455 
 
 

the opposition to run it for you. We'll do it when we get our 
chance. 
 
The second area I want to talk about is, there's been a desire 
expressed by some R.M.s to change the election procedure. 
Suggestions include election every three years to coincide with 
urban voters in the hope that turnout could be increased. And the 
other aspect is allowing all permanent residents over 18 to vote, 
regardless of whether the land is owned by them. Have you given 
some thought to amending The Municipal Act as far as elections 
are concerned and making it to a three-year term, rather than a 
two-year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, if the rural law review committee was 
to bring back and say three instead of two, I suppose we'd look at 
it. But the one thing I'd like to make clear is that as a minister, I'd 
be hard pressed to change them all at one time. 
 
I could see some problems out here in rural Saskatchewan, if you 
do it. And I would have to be convinced that we should change 
them all, as they do in the urban Saskatchewan. And so maybe 
they would bring it back, and maybe the R.M. council at a SARM 
convention would decide that's how they wanted it handled. Then 
I suppose we'd have to take a serious look at it. But until then, the 
two or three years would be an option I suppose that, you know, 
you could always look at. But whether it would all be changed at 
once, I would be hard pressed to be convinced to do it. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, another area that is of quite a bit of 
concern — and I know the present Minister of Highways has lost 
one voter that gave me his story on . . . He was cleaning wheat; 
and he loaded up his load of grain on a Sunday evening, I guess, to 
get it in early Monday morning to clean. And during the night the 
load ban went on and it cost him 1,200 bucks for that load of 
grain. 
 
If the Minister of Highways were in, he'd likely smile and know 
who I'm talking about, because there is a has-been Tory that is 
really upset with how weak the announcement was as to the load 
bans were coming on Monday morning. And he just was busy and 
didn't heed that particular announcement. I don't know if it was a 
Monday or a Wednesday or a Tuesday or what, but the night 
before, he wasn't home listening to his radio or didn't happen to 
see it in the paper. There's the one extreme. 
 
The other story I hear from R.M.s and particularly those that got 
involved in paving and that have paved their super-grid roads and 
some of their roads, and that is this business of enforcing load 
limits on municipal roads. R.M.s don't have the police force, and 
the RCMP has not been too interested in enforcing load limits. 
 
What is your department's position on helping R.M.s protect their 
roads from heavy truck damage, both in spring when there's frost 
coming out of the ground plus all year long when many, many, 
many farmers are overloading single-axle trucks even more than 
the larger units because of the lack of rubber on the road? Do you 
favour returning the authority to set weight limits to the  

rural municipalities themselves? Should they have the authority, 
rather than have someone else dictate what the load limits should 
be on their roads? 
 
And I hear R.M.s discussing that quite vocally with me. And 
they're coming . . . this is one of those situations . . . Like you 
asked last time what my ideas was on that; I was being facetious. 
But on this one, there's a real problem. And I'm not sure we've 
improved it by placing the authority in a central location rather 
than letting the R.M. dictate what the weight limit should be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well certainly the R.M.s have a lot of 
latitude there. As you know, they can go along with the ban if it's 
put on, or they can exempt themselves from a ban. The reeve has 
power the same as a policeman if he wanted to use it, although I've 
never heard of one doing it. I know there's a problem out there. 
They do have RCM Police that are assigned to rural 
Saskatchewan. And the enforcement of a lot of them, a lot of the 
roads where there is oil surface, I believe, is a problem. 
 
At the same time farmers are reluctant as their own elected 
representative to enforce it too much, because it's usually their 
neighbour or their friend or whatever that's travelling on it, and a 
lot of times themselves even, it could well be. So I don't know. 
Farmers I believe in a lot of cases use a lot of discretion when 
they're hauling on the roads. I think maybe some of the problem is 
from traffic that's coming from outside the area through their 
areas, in my area there there's some problems. 
 
(1945) 
 
And another major problem in my area, although we do live up in 
the bush land, in a forested area, where, if it's a rainy day, and it's 
often, that we don't have any oil surfaces, grid road systems. But if 
you live off of that, four by fours and stuff going in to hunt or 
going into camps really tear them up a lot and they've tried to 
enforce it up there to some degree. 
 
Mr. Engel: — The question basically wasn't so much to do with 
the enforcement of the ban in spring, but with setting the load 
limits. Apparently right now the rural municipalities are saying — 
and according to an article that I have here from the Star-Phoenix 
by Heather Macdonald on January 30th: 
 

Rural municipalities want to regain their authority to set road 
weight limits. 

 
And apparently even your chairman of the law review committee 
made that statement: 
 

This information comes from responses to questionnaires 
distributed to the municipalities by the committee. 

 
Basically, at the start of our estimates tonight, I was wondering, do 
you have an interim report, or is the Chairman just speaking from 
what he's heard at some of the meetings, or where is it at? 
 
I could go through more of this article here, but I think the concern 
there is that a certain grade is built up; it wasn't  
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1456 
 
 

really compacted, or not enough of a gravel base put on. The 
R.M.s do a better job of their rural oiling, I think, than a lot of the 
highways that just put that eggshell treatment on. I like the hot mix 
they put on, where they get a nice 2-inch layer on there. And that 
will hope up pretty good if you can do a reasonable maintenance 
of heavy loads, and especially closer to the edges of it. 
 
And I think, from some of the R.M.s I've talked to about, that got 
into oiling in my riding — and there's only three of them — that 
suggest that they'd like to set the limits. I think Coronach is unique 
in that they have very heavy equipment on their grid road down 
around the mine site. But that's an exceptional road because SPC 
originally took it over and built and maintained it. So it's not quite 
the same as if the R.M. is totally responsible for that access road to 
the mine site which is . . . I'm not sure what you'd call it; it's an 
abortion between a highway and a grid road. 
 
But the other oiled highways in my riding are ones that are quite a 
bit of concern. Basically because either the R.M.s have their own 
packing and maintenance equipment, and that they look to outside 
help to have them patched; and so they're quite concerned about 
load limits that are being used on those roads. And I'm wondering, 
should there be some flexibility that if an R.M. decides that the 
maximum load we want to place on a certain road is so much per 
inch, and instead of going to the 500 pounds for instance like you 
do on highways, they might want to set theirs at 350 or 400 
pounds to protect their expensive pavement. And I'm wondering if 
there's some flexibility there; if there's some change we could 
make that would allow each R.M. to dictate their own load limit. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, that's called an industrial 
road system, that one you're talking, into Coronach. If there's 
weather conditions or road conditions that they think would 
damage the road, the R.M. council has the right to set load limits 
on there. They have that right. And they also have the right to set 
load limits or road bans on during weather that is . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Like now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Like now, yes, if they wanted to. And they 
have that right to do it. So it's up to the R.M. council. We leave it 
at their discretion because a provincial government cannot go out 
and look at every road and every R.M. so we allow them to make 
their own decision, which they have the right to do and the power 
to do. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I 
know that, and I respect the fact that you're new in the portfolio of 
Rural Development, but I know also that your officials are well 
versed with my constituency, Cut Knife-Lloydminster. Mr. 
Minister, in fact the government does have a heavy-haul road 
program and that program fits into my riding. 
 
I do have some problems, Mr. Minister, with the fact that in light 
of the heavy oil situation and heavy traffic in my riding, I'm 
wondering in light of the letters that you have received and I've 
been cc'd on, what your response was to the north-west region, the 
group of R.M.s in my particular region, in regards to maybe 
enhancing that program, the heavy-haul program. 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, in answer to the hon. 
member's question: in that area we recognize that there's a real 
problem up there with the amount of oil traffic that's been in your 
area, especially in the last year or so. And so what we've done, 
we've allocated it sort of separately so it's actually double the 
allocation they can do to build, or use to build in their area now. 
 
It's probably not enough, but it's a lot more than it was, and it will 
allow them to build considerable amount more of road at the high 
quality standards that they would build at the heavy-haul, 
high-traffic volume road standards that we're asking for. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, yes, I recognize 
the fact. I do have some problems though, and we do as R.M.s, 
and representing the R.M., we do have problems with a shortage 
of gravel up in our area. It's becoming a thing of the past, and it's 
going to be come a thing of a long haul situation for our area. And 
I'm just wondering if your department has or is looking into any 
programs to help specific areas such as my area, where there is 
such shortages. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — We have two programs that we're looking at 
in two R.M.s up in your area. We're looking at a dust proof type of 
a commodity that was brought out at that . . . that was presented to 
us at the SARM convention. I don't have the name of it. 
 
We're going to do two roads up in two different municipalities in 
your area to see how that will work for dust proofing, because 
there's a lot of dust in your area, as you know. 
 
And the other one we have now is a gravel find program. In other 
words, we will help fund up to whatever your allocation is, 
whatever your grid road system percentage is, that would be to 
help you look for new gravel or more gravel in your area, because 
we know there's a real shortage up in some areas, and other ones 
such as Nipawin has the same problem, Carrot River, Arborfield. 
There's others in different areas that have problems trying to find 
gravel. We have that gravel research program which will help 
some to look for more gravel, but we don't have anything other 
than that. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, it's 
appreciated for those type of programs, but the types of conditions 
that my R.M.s have run up against in the types of lands, that we 
are in a fairly fruitful area, farm land area, and rightfully so. 
There'll probably be a lack of gravel. 
 
What I'm asking you, Mr. Minister, are you or your department 
looking into the fact of assisting R.M.s that, anywhere in the 
province then, that if there is no gravel within their areas, instead 
of the assistance of finding it, will there be an assistance to help 
transport gravels to maintain the roads that are being pounded out 
by the heavy traffic in those particular lines? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — As you know, we brought in that regravel 
program, which would help them on a short-term basis this year 
and in continued years, if we keep the program in place. And it's 
cost-shared 50-50,  
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1457 
 
 

whatever the cost may be to bring in the gravel from wherever you 
need to bring it, whether it's crushed or however. And that's on all 
designated road systems, and that would also apply to any roads in 
the area that's main farm access, primary grid, other than the oil 
surfaces. 
 
We do have the heavy-haul, high-volume assistance that we put 
out, and that does in fact allow up to a 3-inch layer of oil surface 
that we cost-share about 80 per cent, in the neighbourhood, main 
farm access plus 20 per cent, which can run as high as 80 per cent 
cost-shared, to try to help some of those areas up there that are 
having problems both with gravel and the heavy volume and 
high-traffic areas. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I agree, and 
it's a very worthwhile program, and I thank you and your officials 
for initiating such a program. It has been well received by all the 
R.M.s; I mean, they were ecstatic about it. And this is the first time 
they've been actually heard in many, many years. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, what I am trying to establish is that: are you and 
your officials in the future looking at instituting any new policies 
in regards to emergency road funding? It's a point where we're 
running short of gravel, which I've indicated. The cost of 
maintenance is sky-rocketing for the R.M.s — shortage of gravel. 
 
Would it not be cheaper, Mr. Minister, for your officials, your 
department, to maybe direct dollars for these particular type of 
R.M.s into channelling more road repairs, enhancing that program 
on a per-year basis so they can get into that 3-inch topping, more 
3-inch topping, and therefore lessen the burden of having to look 
or probably have to haul the gravel for a long distance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well I certainly appreciate the points you 
make, and certainly a couple of years ago we went to an enhanced 
maintenance system. And now we went into an enhanced 
gravelling type of a system, which helps somewhat on a short 
term. And we're certainly going to have to rationalize how we can 
put together the new or designated road system in this province. 
 
We're going to have to go out and take a look. The delivery points 
have changed, other than your area. Elevator systems have closed; 
rail lines have been abandoned. The roads that were used 
previously may not be used near as much now, so we'll have to 
take a whole look at the province of Saskatchewan in general, and 
then look at the areas that need it and in fact do more work in 
those areas. And we may well have to look at more high-volume 
or high-traffic-count roads that need the blacktop. It may be the 
answer up there. We're looking at that now. 
 
This is a test or sort of a pilot project to see if it's accepted first by 
the R.M.s, accepted by the public, and is it good return for a 
dollar. In our view so far, it's been all three. But, you know, we'd 
like to do a little more testing on it. But over the next few years we 
definitely have to come with a whole new type of a designated 
road system. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, yes I agree. 
And I thank you for that type of an answer, because  

then I know that I can tell our people that we can look forward to 
better things from your department. I do have some problems, as 
of the way the roads were built some years ago, with the fact that 
the compaction of the roadways had not been there before. 
They've brought topsoil in, and they built roads out of topsoil and 
everything else. And there is some problems with that for us to do 
to catch up — to catch up. 
 
Mr. Minister, your answer has brought me into the other subject 
that I wanted to raise with you, and that is also a problem in my 
riding and on the roads, in regards to the inconsistency between 
the Alberta and Saskatchewan weight system. Mr. Minister, is 
there any direction that your department is taking in being able to 
lessen the costs for our truckers, farmers, oil industry? Is there any 
direction your department is taking, along with possibly the 
Department of Highways, into the fact of, when they turn off the 
major arteries onto the rural roads, that the weights that our 
Saskatchewan contractors are bringing in from Alberta, instead of 
having to unload 6 metres of oil or whatever, that they're going to 
be able to be consistent and to make it a much more profitable 
situation for our truckers, our contractors? 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Certainly I understand, we're aware of it, 
that there is a problem out there where folks come in from Alberta, 
and there's weights even in Alberta to Saskatchewan. I understand 
Department of Highways has been working with SARM and with 
our department and with the Alberta department. In Alberta they 
have counties, so they have a little different system set up and it's a 
little easier to control. It's just not one R.M. here; like, we have a 
lot of R.M.s to make up one county, and so it's a little different 
system. 
 
But yes, there is a concern there and it needs to be addressed. And 
I understand the Department of Highways are looking at it now to 
see if they can in fact work with Alberta to set up a sort of a 
uniform type of a system, so it would be the same across. Some of 
the grid roads are not built, as you said, the standard that's needed 
to take a high volume, so I suppose there'd be some concern by the 
local R.M . And again it goes back to the local R.M.'s discretion, 
what they'd like to do. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Well, I'll be looking forward to some of those 
developments in the future also, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I was wondering if you could 
explain to me when the road bans go on, if that is the 
responsibility of the R.M.s to enforce the road bans, and if so is 
there a platform or certain type of legislation or something, R.M. 
legislation that they go with, or is each R.M. allowed to have a 
road ban on here and a road ban on there for six weeks and one 
other R.M. have a road ban on for four weeks, etc. This also has 
been posing a problem on my truckers out there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — It's similar to what the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg asked. They can . . . Each R.M. can in 
fact set their own weight limits when they have a road ban on. The 
only ones that could enforce it . . . Like I said earlier, the reeve 
could. He has the authority to, but  
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1458 
 
 

they never do. I've never heard of one ever doing it, and I don't 
think I'd want to do it if I was a reeve. The traffic officer, if you 
have a local officer, he can. And there is RCM Police who is 
designated to rural Saskatchewan who can enforce it. Now that is 
the only one unless they wanted to hire a traffic officer of their 
own which they have the right to do if they so wish. But I've never 
heard of them doing that either. 
 
Really it's a local traffic officer if there's one in the area, or any 
traffic officer, or the local RCM Police could in fact enforce it 
because there is some assigned to rural Saskatchewan as well as 
just urban Saskatchewan in every depot. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I guess . . . 
Well if you haven't heard of it, I have, and it has happened in my 
riding. it does pose a problem where if the boundaries of the R.M.s 
where you can haul 3 or 4 or 5 metres of oil or more in one R.M. 
and then you drive into the other, and all of a sudden there's a 
surprise thrown upon you that you're overweight, and there's no 
dumping station. Do we have any uniformity, I guess, is my 
question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, to do that they can, like I said earlier, 
they could set their own weight limits or they could issue a permit 
to operate at whatever weight they decide to allow that person to 
operate on. But there is a problem because each R.M. is only about 
nine townships in size and because of that, and because the area up 
there where you've got heavy oil traffic movement from one R.M. 
to another, there in fact could well be differences in the weight 
limits in one R.M. to another during types of seasons like spring, 
or heavy rain time when they decide to put a ban on. Normally it's 
the spring season when the breakup is on and the road bans come 
on. The rest of the year they're usually basically all the same. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I guess I 
probably what I'm suggesting is that although what you have 
answered may be correct, it still poses a problem on the firms 
operating out there, and it is a costly problem. It is either by ticket 
by the provincial body if they are policing it, or it's a problem with 
the R.M.s. 
 
Now what I'm asking is that the road bans are put on and off in 
one R.M. to another and there's no uniformity there. There's no 
real guide that our truckers can go with. Are we, and you and your 
department officials, are we working towards getting these areas 
together and developing some sort of a policy that we could live 
with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — One thing we've been doing over the last 
few years is trying to get the R.M.s into a block so that wouldn't 
happen. We've been working on it. The odd R.M. has the right, 
and they've used it to sort of opt out of it and say, I'm out of it. 
 
If you had a specific area up there, we could talk to the SARM, 
executive of SARM, and maybe work with them to try and see if 
we couldn't resolve it by doing . . . maybe putting in some more 
heavy-haul, high-volume roads, or whatever is necessary to do it 
to work with them. Because there is a concern by a lot of the 
people using it up there, where they use it day after day, that there 
should be some  

uniformity to it. And we realize that, and it's been getting closer 
together and a lot of areas go in in blocks now and we don't have 
that problem. There is still the odd area that we have one or two 
R.M.s who has the right to opt out and don't stay in it, and so there 
is a problem. But if we know about them, we can sometimes sit 
down and work it out with them. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, well in closing I 
would, as I'm sure the members of the opposition will not agree, I 
would just like to say to you and to your department, keep up the 
good work, and congratulate them. And I'm looking forward to 
some of these enhanced programs that we've just been talking 
about. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well the last few words of the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloyd congratulating the minister had the minister blushing. 
He was so embarrassed to be congratulated for such a dismal 
effort. Everybody in the province knows that it's less than an 
adequate performance. But what I was to ask you, Mr. Minister, 
specifically here in respect to super grids, could you indicate the 
number of miles that were built during the last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — In '85-86, our fiscal year, which was '85 
construction year, there was 440.2 kilometres built. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And can you indicate whether there has been any 
adjustment to the funding formula, that is the amount that the 
province puts up versus the amount that the R.M.s put up? Has 
there been any increase in funding in the formula, or is it the same 
as what it was before? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — It's the same as the program started quite a 
few years ago. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — What, basically, just for my understanding here, 
what basically is the formula of the contribution of the provincial 
government versus the R.M.? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — It's 10 per cent over whatever they'd be 
allocated under main farm access allocation, plus 15 per cent for 
anything over $15,000 a mile above that. So it's main farm access 
percentage. And as you know, they vary from R.M. to R.M., plus 
10 per cent, plus 15 per cent for any costs over $15,000 a mile. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Can you advise me whether or not any of the 
super grid have been incorporated into the highway system . . . 
well, over the past, since you formed government? Are there any 
municipal super grids that have since been incorporated into the 
highway system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — We don't have it with us. It would be with 
Highways, but we'll get it for you and send it to you afterwards if 
you like. The deputy minister believes there was one north of Gull 
Lake that was take over by Highways. But there may be other 
ones. We'd have to check it and see — since 1982. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Where is the one located that you're talking 
about? 
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1459 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — My understanding is it's north of Gull Lake 
up to Cabri. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Are there any plans at the present time for 
incorporating any other super grids or any other municipal 
highways, road system, into the regular highway system? Have 
you got any of that under consideration for this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — As you know, Mr. Chairman, we get a lot of 
copies of requests sent to the Department of Highways requesting 
take-overs of main farm access, or grid, or primary grid, I assume. 
But we haven't . . . We don't have a record of it because 
Department of Highways would have that, and they're the ones 
requested we do. We do sometimes get a copy of the letter sent, 
but the R.M. councils generally send a letter to the Minister of 
Highways, and request to take it over. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You're saying that you don't, you haven't kept any 
records of that, are you? You're not appraised of any roads that 
have been incorporated into the highway system. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, we'd have the record of the roads 
incorporated into the highway system in the office, and I said we'd 
get it for you. 
 
We'd also have any copies of the request that's been sent to 
Highways, that's been copied to us. We'd have them too. But 
they'd be over in the office. We'd have to get them for you. We'd 
have no problem getting them for you, but we just don't have them 
with us tonight. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Would you provide us with that information 
please, as soon as possible? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — We'll put it together and have it sent over to 
you in the next few days. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Okay. In respect to the R.M.s we had put into 
place, in 1981-82, or '82-83 budget I guess, some capital grants for 
the R.M.s. I believe that the capital grants have since been done 
away with. Is there any plans for incorporating or providing some 
capital funding for the R.M.s? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — No, Mr. Chairman, not in this budget. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — One of the other thrusts that you were talking 
about when you spoke to the R.M. convention, Mr. Minister, was 
helping to attract industry to rural Saskatchewan. And that all 
sounds attractive. 
 
(2015) 
 
I was wondering what efforts have you taken to put that program 
into operation. Have you taken any steps? Have you done 
evaluation of .. . .. can you tell us more about what you mean by 
assisting in bringing more industry to rural Saskatchewan? What 
are your concepts that you were purporting to put forward at the 
convention? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, we did just get the details put  

together here now, so we'll be bringing in to have ready for the 
House a rural development corporation, which will in fact allow 
communities — not only R.M.s but it's designed for R.M.s — but 
R.M.s, hamlets, villages, or even towns, to become part of a rural 
economic development corporation, where we would do funding 
to help them see what's needed out there. 
 
And they would do it on . . . It would be funded by us, or partially 
funded by us to help them look at what's needed in the area; how it 
could be designed in the area; to find out what businesses are not 
there, and could be put there, such as short-line distributers, or just 
everyday usage type of businesses; also looking at what could be 
brought in in the line of processing or manufacturing and tied 
along with economic development and trade. 
 
We'd like to put . . . It's just sort of a trial run. We have four 
communities now who have spoken to us that they'd like to take a 
look at going into it and working together as R.M. councils, towns, 
villages, hamlets — working together for the betterment of an 
area, not just necessarily their own town. They'd run it themselves. 
 
We're putting together all the information that we have in regards 
to what small business, whether it be welding shops or whether it'd 
be processing that's in Saskatchewan, Alberta, Manitoba, and the 
northern States. That'll be available for these people. We have a 
slide presentation that we've put together that we're taking out as a 
trial run to see how they would feel bout it. 
 
We're looking at four areas: Wood Mountain down in the southern 
part of Saskatchewan, I'm sure you know where it is; we're 
looking at Zenon Park; another area, we're looking at Moose Jaw, 
where a city is involved; and also P.A. planning district, up there 
wanting to take a look and see how it works. So we've got four 
communities interested. 
 
We have most of the stuff put together now to get it off the ground 
and running. We've been a couple of months working on it. We 
want to have the information available for the communities so 
they can in fact have something to draw on. Because, as you 
know, if you go out into rural Saskatchewan, really you don't have 
the ability to look into and find what might be available for your 
community. And we'll have some initial start-up type of a fund. 
We'll also have some ideas for them to look at. And then we'd look 
for more ideas from them. 
 
But it will be something run as an area development, not 
necessarily in any one particular R.M. or any particular hamlet or 
village. We'd like to incorporate it as an area because, as you 
know, farmers deal in the towns and villages as well as the 
hamlets and live in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well you know, this may be a noble direction to 
be following in attracting industry to rural Saskatchewan. But it 
seems to me . . . Are you co-ordinating the efforts of your 
department with some of the other departments? Because surely 
that has been a thrust of Tourism and Small Business. Certainly 
talking to the board of trade and the chamber of commerce 
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1460 
 
 

throughout my constituency, certainly they have been doing that. 
And they have been doing an assessment. And most of the towns 
around, and communities, have completed an assessment. And I 
wonder, are you in fact co-ordinating it, or is this some more 
hype? It's going on, and no results. 
 
I mean, as I have said more than once that, as I look throughout 
the rural Saskatchewan. I see a lot of manufacturing and farm 
equipment manufacturing and other processing that were there 
during our term. And as I go throughout Saskatchewan today, 
under your administration, I just don't see the efforts other than 
many businesses which have closed down. 
 
I go into Humboldt and I can find four or five businesses that have 
closed down. I can go into communities in my area, and 
implement dealers who have had to close down. I see the 
manufacturing — any manufacturing that is being done was 
established under our regime. If I look at all of the communities, 
and go to just about every community in my constituency, and 
there is some manufacturing going on — and I'll tell you, it hasn't 
been started under your office. And here again, I think, is some 
more hype. 
 
You got it advertised in your Tourism and Small Business that 
you're going out to communities and you're getting new businesses 
started. And you've taken up the torch too and start announcing. 
But again, it's just like your major megaprojects. Fertilizer plant — 
they announced they're going to have a fertilizer plant. And when 
you read through the press release, it was to enter into an 
agreement to look at the feasibility. 
 
And all I can say, Mr. Minister, is that rural Saskatchewan is not 
impressed with your efforts to bring any manufacturing. Certainly 
many of the small communities have lost businesses during your 
term of office. And I'll tell you, it's not a great effort that you have 
put in. 
 
I want to ask the minister, in respect to the heavy traffic roads, and 
I think the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd was referring to some 
of that in his constituency . . . But I take it that you have a general 
policy of application where special grants are given where a road 
is designated as heavy traffic, for special grants to the 
municipalities for upkeep where the road is encountering very 
heavy traffic. What is the . . . Have you got that in place as a 
general policy, and could you indicate the nature of that policy as 
it applies to the municipalities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I'll just give him some of the 
information. I'll send a copy over to him, so he has it as a copy. 
 
The high-volume roads are a minimum of 250 vehicles a day. The 
route should not parallel a highway by less than 6 miles. These 
routes should interconnect with highway network and provide an 
intercommunity service. And road lengths will be considered how, 
ever stub high-volume roads will be discouraged. That means 
little, short ones. We try to get it on a long type of a haul, where 
they're hauling from elevator to elevator or from farm to elevator, 
or where the area in the north-west up there where they have a lot 
of oil surface. 

I have a copy of it here and if you like I'll just sent it over to you. 
It's do with all . . . They have the oil access roads, the industrial 
roads, the gravel haul routes, the grain haul routes, and the 
high-volume roads. And if you'd just like it for your information, I 
can send it over to you. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, a couple of detailed questions on the 
estimates, and as I look at them . . . When we did Tourism and 
Small Business, at least they had a line in there that indicated the 
massive amount of money they spent on advertising. In your 
department here, I know you must have a communication 
allowance. You print grid road maps. You're spending some 
money. Where and under what subtitle would I find the amount of 
money you spend on communication, and how much do you 
spend and who is your advertising agency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — It would be under administration, and if 
you'd like, I've got a thing I could send over to you. The grid road 
maps are $22,000 abandoned railway right of ways is 9,000; 
season's greetings to The Rural Councillor was $310; and a 
brochure development was $1,300. A total of $33,000 for the year, 
for '85-86. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Did you use an outside firm to handle this contract 
work for you, or does the department hire it done themselves? Did 
you have an advertising firm? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — For this year we have Smail advertising 
company will do the . . . Smail advertising company will be doing 
whatever advertising is necessary for us. But we have $33,000 
total. 
 
Mr. Engel: — That is what you have budgeted for this year, or is 
that what you spent last year, or is it both? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I'm sorry. That's what we spent last year. 
Quite a bit of it, $10,000, was spent on advertising abandonment 
railway lines for the farmers in the area; meetings to be held, the 
public notices; call for proposals and disposal of right of ways. 
They had to be placed in the local . . . And certainly placed on 
behalf of the local advisory committee. So most of it was spent . . . 
Of the 33,000, 10,00 was spent by the local people out there 
advertising their meetings for the railways abandonment lines. 
 
Mr. Engel: — This year you said you're going to spend whatever 
is necessary. Should I take that literally and say that you're going 
to start an advertising campaign to try to turn the rural people 
around to support you, or how much of this is going to go? That 
gives you quite a bit of latitude if you're going to spend whatever 
is necessary. You might spend your whole wad, the whole 86 
million. What are you . . . How much is it going to be necessary to 
spend? It would be nice to be a little more specific than to say 
we're just going to spend what is necessary on advertising. 
 
Some departments are spending quite a little bit. I know Tourism 
and Small business went up by almost 30 per cent. How much 
more do you expect to spend? Did the new maps . . . The $22,000 
was that just . . . If I could get your attention, was that just to 
change the picture or were there other changes on the map? Did 
you print two maps last year, grid road maps, or was the new one 
printed  
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1461 
 
 

when you were assigned the ministry? So we had two sets last 
year, or what's the score on the municipal grid road map. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — First of all, I wasn't the minister last year. 
No, it was a heritage year and it was done as a heritage package 
for people travelling in rural Saskatchewan. And there was only 
the one map put out. 
 
You asked how much that we estimate this year. And I was just 
asking, and they feel it'll be about between 15 and $20,000. A 
portion of that would be because we've still got a lot of rail line 
abandonments to advertise and so really the rest would be grid 
road maps that's put out every year to all councillors and rural 
municipalities and any place else that's necessary. So that's what 
it'll be. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Who has the contract for printing the grid road 
maps? Do you put that out by tender or have you changed who 
prints that recently? Or is it the same people printing it all the time, 
or what's the score there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I don't know. It hasn't even been decided for 
this year yet. I don't know who's going to print them. But the best 
price will print them. That's what it'll be. It's very little; it won't be 
very much anyway. It's basically the same every year and it has 
been for many, many years — the same as yours. I think it's run 
around 20,000-and-some every year for a lot of years now. And it 
stays about the same. So I don't know who's going to print them, 
but the best price will print them, the same as before. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well not quite the same. I was almost embarrassed 
with some grid road maps, I'm not sure if that's why the minister 
was moved, but when they had the big "help" sign across here, 
that might be good. But most people that carried the maps thought 
it's just a little out of date. I'm not sure if that hasn't been done 
since. I don't know if you think that was a part of a gimmick or 
what you decided to do there. But I would have hated to have my 
picture on that particular map. But what changes are you 
planning? Are there tender calls let when you have this 
determined? You said you'd do it by the lowest price. Do you ask 
for proposals, or do you call tenders? What do you do? It's a fairly 
major advertising amount here, 22 to $25,000. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Okay, I understand it's being tendered right 
now through Supply and Services. And just to give you an idea. I 
go back to what the unit cost was over the years. And when I said 
it stayed consistent per map, and it depends how many maps you 
ordered . . . 
 
In '81 Midwest Litho was the printer; it cost 35 cents. In '82 was 
Centax of Canada; it was 25 cents. In '84 was Modern Press, was 
30 cents. In '85 it was Centax of Canada, which was more; it cost 
more to print that one — it cost 52 cents. And in '86 we're 
estimating that it would cost about 35 to 40 cents. So it's staying 
about the same as it was in '81-82, so that price per map is the 
same. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Other than the heritage map with the extra pictures 
and stuff on it, I suppose costs a little addition to print that. Okay. 
And this is an area where the department . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Would the member from  

Moosomin want to speak, or does he want to continue shouting? 
Does the department do their own placement, or do you hire an ad 
agency? I don't remember you giving me that answer? 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, it's done through Supply and 
Services. It's done through Supply and Services; I don't know how 
it's done there. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, you've got to know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well I'm just saying who the advertiser . . . 
or who done the printing before. And it appears it's the same ones 
you had; it was done in '82. And there's been different ones pretty 
near every year, and it's out for tender right now, so whoever gets 
the best bid. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Is the staff . . . have a reason why you're . . . Or I 
shouldn't word it quite like that. The member from Moosomin's 
shouting is distracting the debate here tonight. 
 
But I see you have a cut in the amount of staff in the planning and 
research branch, and a cut in . . . another $45,000 besides some 
positions cut there. Can you tell me why you need less people in 
planning and research? I tried to develop that theme earlier, that 
this new name for your department, the development of rural 
affairs — why you would need less people in planning and 
research. I was wondering, what are you cutting back or what have 
you completed in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I understand that it had 
been vacant for quite a few years, and it was one of the positions 
that hadn't been filled for quite a few years, so it was just a 
position cut without cutting anybody out of a job. And it hadn't 
been filled, and so it was decided there would be no need for that 
position. And there was nobody working it and so it was a good 
position. If you're going to cut a position with nobody working it. 
 
We have people there. We still have almost, well, eight people 
working; there's 7.9. I'm sorry, 6.4. There's still 6.4 people 
working there. And we have other branches there and they 
supplement each other, and it was a decision made because 
nobody had filled it for a few years. 
 
Mr. Engel: — And what are you beefing up as far as a 
community planning thing? It looks like about $100,000 extra 
over last year. How does that compare? And I didn't bring my 
Public Accounts with me. How does that compare with expenses? 
How much was your expenditure last year, and how does that 
compare with the $100,000 you're planning additional in 
community planning? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, those three positions 
came over from community planning services branch when the 
department . . . from urban part of a community service planning 
branch as part of a realignment. So there's three more people are 
doing extra  
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1462 
 
 

work over in there in regards to resort villages, and . . . Oh, I'm 
sorry, these three were particularly in regards to Qu'Appelle 
Valley because they were turned over to Rural Development 
instead of urban, because of the . . . Now the Qu'Appelle Valley, 
whatever the group that was set up, is not in place any more, so 
Rural Development is now doing it. We have three people to help 
work and make sure it's all put into place, the planning. It came 
over because of the deletion I guess, or the run-out, the expiry of 
the term of the Qu'Appelle agreement with the federal 
government. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Do you anticipate . . . I know both my colleague 
and the member for Lloydminster-Cut Knife discussed this a little 
bit here. Do you believe that earth-moving and construction costs 
are going to stay fairly static? Because I see that area is staying 
identical to last year — $2,272,830. That's staying flat there. Do 
you not anticipate a small increase in actual construction and costs 
going up? Or are you planning on doing a little less work there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in answer to your 
question: in '85 the average price for excavation was 87 cents a 
cubic metre, and that's what averaged out over the system as we 
went along. We anticipate not much of a difference. But it depends 
where you're doing your — where the work is being done. And if 
it's in an area that's pretty easy to get at, and the cost may be down. 
So it varies from area to area and where the roads are being built. 
 
We expect about the same number of roads being built each year. 
And some years it may go up, and some years we may get a lot 
more roads built for the same amount of money because of the 
cost of excavation is certainly, as you're aware, depends what the 
ground is like and rocks and muskegs and whatever else. So 
certainly it could vary, but we estimate it will be pretty well the 
same. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Another area I was going to talk to you about 
tonight, Mr. Minister, and that is in the revenue-sharing formula. 
The R.M.s are complaining that they're not getting quite as good a 
deal as the urbans did. Do you feel that . . . And can you give me, 
send it over, the percentage and the amount you've been involved 
in in the revenue sharing as it's developed over the yeas, and how 
that compares with what the urbans are getting? 
 
I was wondering if you could make that up because the argument 
I'm getting is that the urbans were getting a little better deal there 
— revenue sharing was increasing — while the R.M.s actually 
stayed flat or even maybe decreased in light with inflation. So I 
think there's a discrepancy there in how you're treating our country 
folk versus the city folk. And I wonder if you can give us a 
breakdown on that, if you haven't got it with you, because I know 
it's doing a comparison with the urbans. But I wonder if you've 
done that kind of a study or if you could get me that number. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, I don't know what the urbans were and 
I couldn't really give you that study because I can't really tell you 
what the urbans was. I can't really give you that study because we 
haven't done a study in comparison. I did tell you earlier that since 
1982 that we  

have, in fact, increased revenue sharing under the formula that was 
brought in by your administration by 24.4 per cent over the last 
four years. And it has varied from anywhere from 11.5 to 3 per 
cent, and it has been varying in there. But on the average over the 
last four years it has been 24.4 per cent total over the last four 
years, increase in revenue sharing. 
 
And it is revenue sharing. The urbans don't have revenue sharing. 
They have it added directly to their . . . It's on a conditional type of 
a grant, so it's a little different. We have conditional-unconditional; 
we have revenue-sharing formula. It works quite well because 
R.M.s that are better off get less, and R.M.s that have 
harder-to-build roads, whatever else, gets more. And it was a 
pretty fair formula. It hasn't been changed, and I don't believe it 
will be changed. I think it's a good formula; it's been there for 
quite a few years. The R.M.s are satisfied with it, and we don't 
really intend to change it. But, yes, it's been 24 per cent over the 
last four years. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well the point I'm making: if the accumulated total 
for the R.M.s was about 24 per cent, the amount of money that 
went into helping the urbans maintain a tax level, just as a guess, 
would likely be more than one-third more than that. And that's the 
argument I'm getting that the R.M.s have had to cut programs and 
services to try and maintain the same kind of level of tax increases 
as their counterparts did in the urbans. And I feel that if you could 
show that in a paper that I could get another day, not only to 
satisfy myself but also possibly to make an argument to defend. 
 
Like you said, I appreciate your straightforward comment that the 
revenue sharing that was implemented and the program that we 
did work out, it took some hard-nosed bargaining and it took a 
good selling job to convince an R.M. that we're not going to give 
you so much money for snow removal, and so much for this and 
so much for that, but we'll give you a blanket amount to deal with 
in revenue sharing, which has been very successful. And I 
appreciate the fact that you would comment and make that 
assessment. But the key is, how do you measure if it's enough? 
 
And the only measure they have is: are we staying in line with the 
amount of money that's allocated to the R.M.s in comparison to 
what the guys are getting and for the services they can provide in 
the cities? I know that squabbles have arisen, or have come up, 
and I could even name some of if you like me to mention them. 
But say an example where a community project was being built, 
say a skating-curling rink complex or something, and the R.M.s 
were accused that you're not putting in your share compared to 
what the urban is contributing. And part of the reason was that the 
urbans had a richer formula they could work with and were 
actually getting more help from the provincial treasury that they 
could put in and kick in a larger amount and look better to the 
community raising the funds in the rurals. I think you've been a 
little bit slack there. 
 
I just want to emphasize that point that revenue sharing works 
good if you keep the fund fluid and not get skimpy and hold it 
down. I think 24 per cent over four years is a  
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1463 
 
 

little bit negligent, is a little bit negligent when you think of the 
four years, the cost increases, and the inflation rate that's been in 
place . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
If the member for Weyburn wants to keep hollering from his seat 
and talking about things he doesn't know anything about, I think 
you better go back to counting grasshoppers, Mr. Minister, 
because that's the only thing you're good at. That's the one 
comment I wanted to make. 
 
The other question that I had to ask in summing this up: could you 
give me a list of the people that acted for your department in 
consultants and under contractual services? If I could have that 
same list as Tourism and Small Business provided for me, that 
would be very nice so that we could keep track of how much you 
spent over and above your staff positions — the consultants and 
those that were hired under contractual services. I think that would 
complete my questions. I think my colleague have a few more 
questions they want answered. 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I don't think we have 
anybody under contractual services. We do have two consultants 
hired and I'll send them over to you. One was Mr. Jake Brown, the 
chairman of the task force on rural development, and the other one 
was John Marusiak who is now out on the rural law review 
committee. I'll send them over to you. 
 
Mr. Engel: — How much did you pay those guys, if you want to 
read it in the record? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Jake Brown got $7,000 for his, that's 
'85-86 contract; and Mr. Marusiak got $22,000. 
 
I'll just basically respond to your concern about the revenue 
sharing. I know that revenue sharing . . . We've done, I feel, quite 
well, and I suppose you're to your own opinion, but since 1980 . . . 
compared to 1980, and going back from 1980 to the present time, 
the percentage of revenue sharing compared to what the R.M.s 
spent in '81 was 32 per cent; 32 in '82; 32 in '83; 32 in '84; and 34 
per cent in '85. So it's basically held about the same. 
 
The mill rates, the average weighted mill rates around the 
province, and that's average weighted, in '80 the increase was 3 per 
cent; in '81 it was 16 per cent; in '82 it was 11 per cent; in '83, 6 
per cent; '84, 4 per cent; in '85 it was minus 1 per cent; and we 
anticipate about a minus 6 in '86 because of some of the things 
we've done. So it's been relatively stable I would say over the 
period of years going all the way back to 1980. I think that's all the 
questions you asked at that time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I just want to review one other matter with you, 
Mr. Minister. And that has to do with the change in the taxing 
policies regarding trailer courts, and the trailers within the courts, 
of course. 
 
Can you outline what particular changes that you have introduced 
to The Rural Municipality Act which has caused some concern to 
the trailer owners because there has been a very substantial 
increase in the amount of tax  

that they have paid. 
 
It is my understanding that it was your government that introduced 
a provision which changed the basis of charging a fee to the trailer 
owners, and now they are being assessed and a very, very 
substantial increase is taking place across the province. 
 
And I'd like to ask you: is that accurate that The Rural 
Municipality Act was amended this past year, in '85, and that in 
fact you changed the basis of charging the fee to the trailer court 
owners? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, that was always an option 
that's been there for quite a few years. I own a trailer court and my 
trailer owners have paid their taxes directly to the municipality for 
at least 10 years now. 
 
What we did change, for the hon. member's attention, is that we 
. . . It was changed. Before, it was based on the square footage of 
the trailer. Now it's based on the value of the trailer, as per the 
square footage, because some of the trailers, as you know, were 
maybe 19 or 20 years old or so, and they had a very low value to 
them. And a trailer of the same size might be brand-new and it 
would have a high value. So now it's not based on the square 
footage. The assessment is now based on the value — the same as 
your farm or your house. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, has that brought about an increase of charge 
of fee to the trailer owner as a result of the amendment that you 
brought in? This is what I'm asking you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, to some municipalities. Some places, 
municipalities didn't charge any fee at all, or didn't collect the 
taxes, didn't . . . weren't even assessed. 
 
But what it did, it made it more fair. If you owned a new trailer, 
like you owned a new house, you paid more than if you owned an 
old trailer or you owned an old house. And it's the same thing. 
 
If your land is only . . . If your land is poor it may be assessed at 
$500 or $1,000. If it's good land, it may be assessed at $5,000. It's 
just fair value. And it's just fair. I don't think it changed, other than 
to make it fair. 
 
For those who were in the lower . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
No. It made it fairer for those who were in the lower income — 
the lower-income people who in fact had usually the poorer 
trailers. So what it did was made it fairer for those who were in the 
lower income type of a trailer, and using the lower income bracket 
of income. And I think it's fair. 
 
And some would have paid more, and probably some would pay a 
considerable amount less. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I don't think you're going to convince the 
trailer owners up in Prince Albert, for instance. 
 
And I want to give you something from the report here, 
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1464 
 
 

and this deals with the driftwood trailer court in Prince Albert. 
And the member of Prince Albert-Duck Lake was in contact with 
them. And you know what is happening in respect to the 
assessments in the driftwood trailer court in Prince Albert? It goes 
on to indicate that there will be increased taxes by as much as 
$160 net year, according to the assessments that they have 
received. 
 
And in the article it goes on and it says that the change from a 
licensing fee to an assessment was instituted by the rural affairs 
. . . by an amendment introduced to The Rural Municipality Act. 
And I'll tell you when it was introduced, just for your information. 
The third reading to the amendment, which increased substantially 
the taxes on trailer owners in trailer courts throughout this 
province was introduced. The Rural Municipality Act, Bill 90, 
which was given third reading on June the 6th, 1985. 
 
So don't start saying that you have made an amendment here for 
fairness because what you have done, just like they are saying in 
Prince Albert, is increasing very substantially the taxes on the 
trailers. And don't start . . . This is sort of some more of the Tories' 
fairness — increase the taxes substantially and say it's fair. 
 
Well I'll tell you, the trailer court owners and the families living in 
those trailer courts, paying as much as $160 more in taxes, don't 
like your fairness, Mr. Minister, because it isn't fair. What you're 
doing is taxing and increasing the tax burden on lower-income 
people in trailer courts. That's what you have done. 
 
And why don't you own up to it instead of trying to disguise it in 
some muted way of saying it's fairness. Big deal. Tory fairness, 
that's what you're giving us. A hundred and sixty dollars a unit 
increase, in one trailer court alone, and you say fairness is the way 
in which you're going. Well I'll tell you, to the families who are 
living here, low-income families, they don't believe it's fair, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
And I'll tell you, when you call an election, you'll find out how fair 
you have been because these people will be voting to get rid of 
these unfair taxes, which have been imposed by your regime. 
 
And don't start standing around and saying that it was the same 10 
years ago. This problem resulted directly — directly — from your 
amendment last July. and so take blame. Own up to it. Quit trying 
to deceive the public, saying it's fair when you increase their taxes, 
as though you . . . It's some kind of a privilege to have to pay more 
for less. 
 
This is the new Tory way of attacking the low-income families. 
This is what they're doing. Striking out against those who can't 
defend themselves, who can't afford mansions and large homes, 
but have to settle for trailers and the crowded conditions in a trailer 
court. 
 
And what you have done is impose a very severe increase in taxes. 
And it was done by your amendment and you can't deny it. And 
we're sending out the release to every trailer court throughout this 
province to indicate the unfairness of your government to the 
families who are living in trailer courts. And I want you to stand 
up and be a  

man and admit what you have done. And it was your amendment, 
and it wasn't the same for 10 years. 
 
I'll tell you over here in Prince Albert, the member from 
P.A.-Duck Lake is on the run because he can't get into that trailer 
court, because you know what those families are saying? They're 
not saying you're fair; they're saying, get off the premises, you're 
no good. Get off, you're not fair to the families living in trailer 
courts. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister: isn't it in fact this so-called Tory 
fairness that you allude to, wasn't it in fact introduced in the 
amendment of The Rural Municipality Act in July 6, 1985? That's, 
in fact, when it was brought into effect, this new Tory fairness. Is 
that not correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm not going to get 
into a debate over the trailer assessment. But I'll say this only, that 
10 years ago in my trailer court we went on to an assessed value 
for each trailer in my trailer court, and I have 85 units. They have 
been reassessed this year, and I don't know how it's worked out. 
But I do know that under the old system, especially in the R.M. of 
461, they were charging less than the R.M. of 491. So there was 
two R.M.s side by side and had two different systems. 
 
So what they did is they went to the new system when they were 
reassessed and they all came in under one type of a program for all 
the province of Saskatchewan. But remember — I want to make it 
very clear — that the R.M. of 461, in Prince Albert, has the option 
of abating the taxes and putting them to whatever they want. They 
always have that option if they feel it's unfair or not fair to the 
residents. And that's always an option that they have. 
 
The assessment branch that was set up, this reassessment that was 
set up, was set up 10 years ago, in 1976, by the former 
administration, to go out and reassess all the province of 
Saskatchewan. There's bound to be some problems. There is 
bound to be some problems when you do a reassessment of the 
entire province; there's bound to be some problems. And some of 
these problems may have to — some of these things may have to 
be changed. 
 
We have now contacted SARM and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) in regards to what changes could and 
should be made, but in fact any time you bring in a new 
reassessment across the province, you will have some problems. 
 
But in this area, in my belief, is what it does is equalizes the 
low-priced trailer. It brings it down to where it should be and 
brings in the higher-priced trailer at its value. Now what it does is 
give it to the lower-income person, in my view, and the 
higher-income person may well pay more. I don't know — but 
what it does — it's a fair way of doing it. 
 
It's the same on all things whether you're assessing your car, your 
land, your house, your home, whatever it would be, there has to be 
a fairness there and it has to be honest value. 
 
There's only . . . You can't go by a square footage. I know trailers 
out in my trailer court — in my trailer court — that would only be 
worth 2 or $3,000. I have trailers in my trailer court that would be 
worth $40,000. The size, they  
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1465 
 
 

may only be half the difference in size. And would it be fair to 
charge one-half of what the other one is worth — compare 2,000 
to 40,000? I don't believe that would be fair, Mr. Chairman. And if 
this isn't right, well then if he's got an idea, the member may have 
an idea on how we can make it better. And if he has, I'd certainly 
welcome that opportunity. 
 
We can go back to the old system if that's what he's suggesting 
and be — in fact, tax the lower-income one same as you tax the 
lower-income type of trailer, the same as you tax the better value 
trailer. And if that's what he'd like, I mean I'd like to hear from 
him, because whatever it is, whatever you do, will not always 
please everybody. And I know that. And he knows it too. 
 
And certainly the assessment that was brought in 10 years ago and 
is just finishing now, a lot of people's been very unpleased with it, 
but there happened to be some changes made. And any time you 
bring it in, no matter what administration brings in something, 
there's always some problems that may have to be resolved. And if 
he has an idea of how to resolve it, to go back to the old one — if 
that's his suggestion — change it, I'd like to hear it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I have a way of resolving it, 
and that is calling an election and letting the people of 
Saskatchewan choose a government that twill represent them 
properly . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That's right. And that will 
be a solution. and I guess in due course it'll come, whenever you 
get the nerve up to call it. 
 
All I want to ask you: have you had any representation from other 
trailer court owners throughout the province, your department, as a 
result of the change? I refer you here to a specific problem that 
exists in Prince Albert — the driftwood trailer court. And I ask 
you, have you had any representation from any other trailer courts 
in respect to the amendment and the effect that that amendment 
that you've introduced last year has on increasing the amount of 
taxes they're liable for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm not aware of any 
from any trailer court in the province in regards to requesting or 
concerns about the change. I may have missed one, but I've asked 
the department people and they're not aware of any either. So, no, 
if it is, if there has been one, I've missed it. But I don't believe 
there has been any request from any trailer court in regards to the 
concern about the change of the assessment or the way the 
assessment is handled. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — There's a cut in staff in administrative services of 
1.5 person-years. I wonder if you could indicate what positions 
were cut. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, the one person was from my 
office; we cut one out of my office. And the other one was from a 
part-time secretary that we haven't been using. So that's the 1.5. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Just under administration . . . and you may be 
providing this information, but I want to be clear; and if you are 
already from my other colleague having asked it. Under 
administration, do you have any other persons under personal 
service contracts? 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — No, we don't. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Again, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could 
explain, you have reduced here under planning and research, from 
7.9 to 6.4, if you could indicate what positions were in fact 
deleted, or were they vacant positions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I did explain it a minute ago, but the 
member might have missed. I did explain that a few moments ago. 
The member might have missed it. But was it two vacancies — a 
full-time research person and a part-time secretary that were 
vacant. So there were just two vacancies that were cut. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Item 3 agreed to. 
 
Item 4 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, under the municipal 
financial management services, under other expenses, the increase 
there from 436,000 to 89,000, close to 100 per cent increase. What 
would that be? Is that computers or some changing of systems? 
Can you explain what increase is taking place there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, it's the rural law review 
committee that was $47,500. That's total anticipated cost for the 
total year. 
 
Item 4 agreed to. 
 
Items 5 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(2100) 
 
Item 11 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — This grant of $6,000, is that for convention, 
or what happens to that money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — It's been a normal fee we've paid over the 
years just to defray normal operating costs to the association. 
 
Item 11 agreed to. 
 
Item 12 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, if you could explain here, we 
have an 80 per cent increase in grants for construction of roads on 
Indian reserves from 110,000 to 196,000, or about an 80 per cent 
increase. What is going on there? Is that a change in the grant 
structure where all reserves will get an increase, or is this a special 
project? Can you outline why there would be? And I'm not 
arguing with it, but why you would have an 80 per cent increase in 
this one area of grants for construction of roads on Indian 
reservations? 
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1466 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — It's an area under Indian land entitlements 
where up in the north-west where the municipalities have given up 
some of the community pasture for some Indian land entitlements, 
and the government has agreed to pick up the total costs of 
construction of 2 miles of grid road to there. The municipality 
would be totally refunded, and it's an estimated $86,000. It's an 
Indian reserve access road leading to the reserve, and it will be 
totally funded by the Government of Saskatchewan — part of the 
whole settlement claim. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — As I understand the settlements that are 
taking place, they're basically financially the responsibility of the 
federal government. Will that money be rebated by the federal 
government, or is this money that Saskatchewan government or 
Saskatchewan taxpayers put in as their portion of this land 
settlement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — There's a total of 6 miles being built. We 
would get 80 per cent back on 4 miles of it form the federal 
government as part of the cost-sharing. The 2 miles we'll totally 
cost-share of our own within the municipality because the 
municipal roads are our responsibility. It'll just give them access 
out of that end. 
 
So 4 of the 6 miles being built — 4 miles will be 80 per cent 
cost-shared by the federal government. The 2 miles remaining out 
in the rural municipality will be totally cost-shared by the 
Government of Saskatchewan, Rural Development. 
 
Item 12 agreed to. 
 
Item 13 
 
Mr. Koskie: — This is a new item. I wonder if the minister would 
outline what this item, grants to community development 
corporations, is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I outlined briefly what it 
was. And I was saying that we would have in place shortly for the 
House a program or a development or a strategy for how we 
would implement the program. 
 
It is designed to create an area, rural area development, within 
rural Saskatchewan. In other words, it would incorporate hamlets, 
villages, if they wanted to come in. But it's designed for hamlets 
and rural municipalities, and incorporating areas around it so that 
they would look at the feasibility of setting up where there would 
be a processing plant, or where there would be just some type of 
retail outlet, or whether it would be some kind of a distributorship, 
or whatever. 
 
It's strictly where the government would help the municipalities 
establish it, and they would be operated totally by the local 
municipalities when it's set up or by the area development 
corporation which they will have. We'll call it a rural area 
development corporation, which will be . . . municipalities. There 
would have to be at least one municipality in it — certainly we 
would like to see more — and then some of the small villages and 
hamlets incorporated. If a town, city, or village wanted to come in 
and they could make it better for the area, I'd certainly  

look at it, but it's designed for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And have you set out the criteria by which, you 
know, you'll give this grant? Is it on a per capita basis or it just . . . 
What is the criteria under which you make the grants to the 
community development corporations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the formal proposal is 
going before treasury board very shortly, in fact new week, I 
believe. It will be a flexible type of a situation where we will sit 
down and work with the communities to try and make it better for 
them, to try and help them establish what is needed in their area. 
And certainly in areas such as Wood Mountain where they're 
looking at a major company coming in there to develop something 
there's a need for maybe services in a town where we can help, or 
the little village or hamlet. We can also put together the other 
towns around it, and the municipalities, and look at what is needed 
in that area for the farming, for the local hamlet person or the local 
urban folks, as well as the area around it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well saying it's going to be very flexible . . . What 
I want to know is: you can say it's going to be very flexible, and 
that may have some meaning; but I think what I'd like to know is, 
is it going to have a basic fairness to it? Fairness. Because many of 
the programs that you've introduced, and when you were in 
Economic Development and Trade — the minister sits there and 
grins — and I'll tell you, there was many a grant that was given 
out that other communities couldn't get, only certain ones. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, you're dealing with this, and it's going 
to treasury board. What I ask you: when you have established the 
criteria, will you undertake to send to the opposition a copy of 
what is approved, in order that we can monitor to see whether or 
not this is going to be another program for the betterment of the 
promotion of the Tory party, rather than its main purpose of rural 
development and development in the rural areas? And so I ask you 
for your commitment to send over the basic criteria so we can 
examine it, because this government isn't fair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I'll gladly send him a 
copy of the criteria when it's put together, as we'll also send out to 
all the R.M. councils around so they will also see it. 
 
And it will be fair. It is a new area. It will take a lot of work. I 
believe that there's a need for it. I believe there's more to rural 
Saskatchewan than just roads and bridges. I believe there's people 
out there. And I believe it's time that we took a serious look at 
what we can do to maintain rural Saskatchewan and in fact better 
it. 
 
So this is one step forward. It's a pilot project. And I would ask 
them to help as much as possible. If they have any ideas when we 
send the criteria over to them, if they have an idea, certainly send 
it back and give us their ideas. We'd welcome them. 
 
Item 13 agreed to. 
 
Vote 43 agreed to 
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1467 
 
 

 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Employment Development Agency — Rural Development 
Employment Development Fund — Vote 65 

 
Item 14 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Rural Development 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 43 

 
Vote 43 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister like to thank his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Yes I would, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to thank 
the opposition for some good questions, and their nice, formal way 
that they represented them. I'd also like to thank the officials for 
supplying me with the answers that's needed to keep Rural 
development a very high spot in Saskatchewan. So I'd like to 
thank the officials and thank the opposition. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to, Mr. Chairman, if I could have your 
attention, I want to also join with the minister to thank the officials 
and to indeed indicate that we appreciate the minister's 
straightforward approach, working under very difficult 
circumstances of underfunding, but nevertheless being very 
straightforward. And so we thank him for the way in which he 
handled his estimates here this evening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Co-operation and Co-operative Development 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 6 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister like to introduce his 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — To my left here, Mr. Chairman, I have Bill 
Reader, deputy minister of the Co-operation and Co-operative 
Development. And over here, further on my left, I have Carmen 
Dybwad in charge of administrative services. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I ask this question, although I 
think we already have the answer. The personal staff that you have 
in your office that you've already given to us, you had a short list 
of three individuals. Have you got other personal staff in your 
office that would deal directly with Co-operation and Co-operative 
Development? Do you have another personal staff, or EA or 
secretary that would deal with that? And if you have, can you give 
us that list and send the amounts that they had paid across to us? 
 
The ministerial assistant — the names you've given to me — I'll 
just quote the salaries that they're getting: one is $2,266 a month; 
and another one $2,696. I wonder in the  

past year, have they had an increase in their salaries, and if so can 
you give me the percentage increase for both of those individuals? 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, the secretary, Gloria Bedier, 
didn't get any in '85 — no raise in '85; in '86 she got $87 a month. 
And Jocelyn Davies had no raise since she came in — that's 
almost two years; and she got $241 a month in '86. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, we 
would appreciate the salary of your deputy. You can supply that in 
writing if you like, and any raises that that individual might have 
gotten in the last 12 months. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, the deputy gets $5,891 a 
month. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — How about any increases over the last year, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, no; none in '85. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, could you give me the details of 
any new loans guaranteed under the co-op guarantee board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — None, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That in itself raises another issue which I'll 
get to in a moment. Mr. Minister, can you give me the status of . . . 
can you give me a list of the loans on which payments on interest 
or principal are not current? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, all loans are current with the 
guarantee board. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Minister, when was the last time that we 
had a loan guaranteed under the guarantee board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, 1982. What was the last one? 
We have two pending right now — have application in and 
pending. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It doesn't strike me as exactly a frenzy of 
activity, Mr. Minister. I rather suspected that the last two might 
have been in 1982. 
 
Tell me, have you had any applications which have been refused 
since April 26, 1982 — to just pick a date out of the air. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, none. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, that leads me to another 
question: that is, the number of new co-operatives formed in 
1985-86. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, 46. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And in 1984-85. Do you have that figure with 
you, Mr. Minister? 
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1468 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I could go back to '79-80, 
there was 28; '80-81, there was 34; '81-82, there was 38; '82-83, 
there was 41' '83-84, there was 35; '84-85, there was 55. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And the figure last year: would you give me 
it again, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, 55. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, can you give me, for those last 
year, can you give me a breakdown into the type of co-ops? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, the breakdown for '85-86 
was: agriculture, 13; forestry, 1; transportation and storage 2; 
communications and utilities, 1; wholesale and retail, 7; finance, 
real estate and business services, 7; education, health, and social 
services, 8; recreation and personal services, 6. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Do I take it the 13 agricultural co-ops are . . . 
What are these? What kind of co-ops are they, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, the 13 agricultural are five 
feeder co-ops, 6 soil conservation co-ops, 1 far, and 1 machinery 
co-op. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I gather the department still 
does the inspection of credit unions in Saskatchewan, do they? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — That's correct. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I don't wish to start a run on the 
credit unions anywhere, so let's try and avoid mentioning specific 
credit unions. I would like to know how many credit unions are 
experiencing financial difficulty, I'll put it that way. I know there's 
a number which . . . the media have bandied about a number of 
credit unions which have had financial difficulties. Mr. Minister, I 
would like to know how many there are. I'd also like to have a list 
of their names. I wouldn't necessarily want you to give me that list, 
but I wouldn't mind having a list of the names of the credit unions 
which are experiencing financial difficulty. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there's six that had 
some problems. They have been worked out and they're on the 
road to recovery. They're under supervision is all. 
 
I don't really believe I should make the names public for those 
credit unions' benefit. If the member wants it in confidence, I 
would send it to him in confidence, if he wouldn't make it public. 
But I don't think it would be to the credit unions' benefit to make it 
public here. I wouldn't want to do that for that reason only. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — If you're prepared to supply that, Mr. 
Minister? I give you my undertaking that it will remain 
confidential. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you believe the inspection system is 
adequate. We've learned, rather painfully, the  

inspection system, whatever it may be, for trust companies is not 
adequate. The problems sneak up on us, and then the taxpayer 
winds up picking up the pieces and it is enormously expensive. 
We've learned as well, somewhat to our surprise, that the 
inspection system for chartered banks is anything but adequate. 
We haven't yet had the report of Mr. Justice Estey from the 
Supreme Court on the chartered banks. But I think it's generally 
agreed that the inspection system by the Bank of Canada — it's 
not the Bank of Canada, it's the inspector's branch — was not 
adequate. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister — I would appreciate a comment from you 
on the inspection system of credit unions. If I remember my 
statistics correctly, about 60 per cent of the banking business in 
this province is done by credit unions. It's an enormous sum of 
money. I'd appreciate, Mr. Minister, a comment from you on the 
adequacy of our inspections. Do we believe that we are as immune 
as humanly devised system can be from the kind of mess in which 
we found ourselves with respect to Pioneer Trust, and from the 
kind of unpleasant surprise that the Mulroney government got 
with the two failed western banks? 
 
In this province, the credit unions are an overwhelming financial 
institution. As I say, I believe they have 60 per cent of the banking 
business in this province. And if the only inspection system is 
provincial, if I'm not mistaken, the province is a legal guarantor of 
the deposits on deposit with the credit union system. So there are 
few items, I think, Mr. Minister, more essential with your 
department than to ensure your inspection system is all it must be. 
 
In this province, the credit unions are an overwhelming financial 
institution. As I say, I believe they have 60 per cent of the banking 
business in this province. And if the only inspection system is 
provincial, if I'm not mistaken, the province is a legal guarantor of 
the deposits on deposit with the credit union system. So there are 
few items I think, Mr. Minister, more essential with your 
department than to ensure your inspection system is all it must be. 
 
I don't pretend for a moment — and I want to point out in this 
regard, without casting any aspersions on the credit union — that 
the inspection system which was set up for the chartered banks 
just suited the chartered banks right down to the ground. It was a 
very small inspection system. They said that was adequate because 
they were basically inspecting themselves, We found out to the 
tune of a billion dollars, I believe, that a self—inspection system is 
no inspection system at all. Now I know that we do do something 
of an inspection system here, but I would like, Mr. Minister, from 
you your comments on its adequacy since the fiasco with Pioneer 
Trust. Last year the fiasco with Pioneer Trust really came to a 
head after the Co-op estimates were done, so I wasn't able to raise 
this with your predecessor, the member from Saskatoon Centre, 
last year. But I do want to raise it with you, and I would appreciate 
your comments on its adequacy, if it's adequate. It seems to be the 
only inspection system for financial institutions in Canada that is. 
So if you wish to make that claim, I'll give you an opportunity, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, just to . . . I'm  
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1469 
 
 

sure the member knows how it works. I'm sure he's very familiar 
with it, but there's three levels of security in the guaranteeing of 
the credit union system. The first one is the credit union itself. 
Then you have the Credit Union Deposit Guarantee Corporation 
where they have their own inspectors who do the inspecting, and 
then you have the registrar where we have our own . . . the 
Department of Co-ops inspects it sort of like on a check basis. 
What it does, these inspectors, I'm sure you're aware, have been 
there for many years. They have been monitoring what's been 
happening to the banks and being very much aware that they're 
right on top of everything that's going on within the system. 
They're working very, very closely with the credit unions 
themselves to make sure that all deposits are secure. Under the 
new Credit Union Act it allows our inspector to inspect the Credit 
union deposit Guarantee Corporation as well as the credit unions 
themselves. There's sort of a triple or four-way system there of 
guaranteeing that we shouldn't miss anything, and I don't believe 
we are. 
 
I believe we have a really sound system. It's been there for years 
and has been improved on over the years by basically the same 
inspectors who have been working the system, and I believe 
they're doing a very good job. I'm sure they've learned from the 
banking problems that have been across Canada, and we'll keep a 
handle on it. I can't say more, expect I believe it's very, very 
sound, the system we have, and they're monitoring it very closely. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Do you have a staff, Mr. Minister, to inspect 
all credit unions every year? What level of inspection are you 
doing? 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — We do sort of, like a spot inspections of 
credit unions, but we do more inspections of the guarantee — 
deposit guarantee corporations, more so than the credit unions 
themselves, although we have the right to do it, and we can do a 
spot inspection for any reason at all we believe we should go into 
there. But we do our inspection on the deposit guarantee 
corporation which is part of the credit union itself. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — How many inspections, spot inspections, 
then, did you do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — We don't have the exact number, but the 
best guess is about 70 or better that was spot inspected last year. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — You obviously have the number, Mr. 
Minister. What you're saying is you don't have it with you. Is that 
what you intended to say? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — That's correct. the deputy didn't have it right 
with him. We can get it for you. But he estimates it was 70 or 
better. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Okay. I doubt we're going to finish these 
tonight. Would you then, Mr. Minister, have that answer for me 
tomorrow morning? I assume it's readily available during normal 
working hours by simply phoning the branch, the registry and 
inspection branch. Would you give me that undertaking, Mr. 
Minister? 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, if we do finish tonight, I'll still send it 
to you anyway, regardless. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, how many credit unions are 
there? How many credit unions are there in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, there's 217 credit unions and 
140 branches. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — So what you're saying is that at this rate of 
going we inspect credit unions, each one, about every three years. 
Except I assume that doesn't happen, because I assume there's a 
cluster of some number that you want to inspect every year 
because they're a bit — some of their operations are a bit dubious. 
So I assume there's some that get an inspection every year. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, how long it is before you have a complete 
inspection of the system from stem to petal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, as you know we get a 
continuous paper flow on how they're stacking up and what the 
trend is within the credit union. The reasons they would go spot 
check one — and there may be other reasons — but one of the 
reasons is that if they see the trend changing a little bit, they may 
decide to go out and do a spot check to see if, in fact, it is true. 
 
At the same time they don't intend to inspect. There may be credit 
unions they never inspect for years. If they're sound financially . . . 
the deposit . . . the guarantee corporation says they're in order, the 
paper flow shows they're in order, and unless for some reason, we 
may not inspect that particular credit union. There may be other 
ones we would inspect on a fairly ongoing basis if the trend isn't 
just right; if they see a trend falling or there's a problem coming. 
We try to anticipate a problem before it arises and not after, and 
that's the reason it's done that way. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, I wonder if that's 
adequate. Again, without casting any aspersions on the Credit 
Union Central or the management thereof, one thing we learned 
from the inspector of banks that a self-inspection system is not an 
adequate protection for the taxpayer. Who would have thought — 
when I say I'm not casting aspersions on the management of the 
Credit Union Central — who would have thought that the charter 
bank system needed any inspection system at all. The inspector of 
banks told the Estey commission that it was basically a 
self-inspection system supervised by his department. That turned 
out to be inadequate, Mr. Minister. It seems to me that's basically 
what you're telling us we have here. And I wonder again, Mr. 
Minister, if that's adequate. The sums which the province would 
have to pick-up are enormous — just enormous. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister, in light of the rash of troubles which 
have hit Canada's financial institutions in these times of Tory 
prosperity . . . give me a bit of that good old NDP depression and 
stagnation to work our way out of some of these problems; but we 
don't have it. We've got Tory governments virtually in provincial 
and federal governments. So we got this good old fashion Tory 
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1470 
 
 

prosperity. It seems to me since we have these economic problems 
which are impacting in a serious way, which are impacting very 
clearly on financial institutions, it behoves those who are 
inspecting the financial institutions to be doubly careful. 
 
I note, Mr. Minister, that your staff in the inspection branch has 
been cut by one. And I really wonder if that's prudent. I would 
have thought, given the problems which have beset banks, trust 
companies and admittedly . . . and, you admit, the credit union 
system, I wonder if it's wise to be cutting your staff by one. I 
would think, Mr. Minister, it would have been more prudent to 
augment your staff. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, whether or not you think the system 
you described is adequate? You're obviously going to say it is. But 
I would appreciate something with more depth in it than just 
saying, yes, I think it is. I wonder how, Mr. Minister, you think 
that in light of the difficulties which other areas have experienced, 
and the taxpayer hasn't picked up any pieces from the credit union 
system . . . But the cost of a problem to the taxpayers is simply 
something that can't be tolerated. We couldn't tolerate ignoring the 
problem, and it's almost beyond the capacity of the province to 
pick up the pieces. The only option therefore open to us is to make 
absolutely certain, so far as any humanly devised institution can 
do so, that the problem doesn't occur. We know, Mr. Minister, as a 
result, in the light of recent events of the last two years, that the 
finance institutions we once thought were absolutely unassailable 
are not. chartered banks are; trust companies in this province 
which everyone had implicit faith in have gone bankrupt — a trust 
company which everyone had implicit faith in has gone bankrupt. 
 
And I say, Mr. Minister, we can't afford a mistake. The 
consequences of some . . . A problem with the credit union system 
— I'm not suggesting one is imminent — I'm saying the 
consequences of a problem would be too horrendous to ignore and 
too large to be dealt with; and if it ever happened, I just don't know 
what we would do. All we can do is to be dead certain, so far as 
we can, that it doesn't happen. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you think 
you are meeting that standard, which I admit is very, very high? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I believe we're meeting 
that standard. I believe the record speaks for itself. There were six, 
I believe it was, that we were looking at that . . . checking to be 
sure there's no problem. Out of almost . . . you must remember, 
that's out of 217 credit unions and 140 branches. I think that in 
itself speaks very closely. 
 
We monitor all the rest on a very, very close basis. The Credit 
Union Central monitors the credit unions themselves out there 
through their system. We have inspectors who, on a day-to-day 
basis, if there's anticipated a problem in the area, that monitor. 
They go out and spot check just to be double sure. 
 
I believe our system is good. It protects . . . The system's designed 
to protect the deposits of the people depositing money in there. It's 
also designed to protect the province of Saskatchewan. And I 
believe that the system that's  

been there for many years — the inspectors who are doing the job 
who have been there for many years — are very competent. I 
believe they're doing an excellent job, and I believe they are, and 
have a very, very fine system out there. And I suppose no system 
is absolutely foolproof, but I believe that it's as close to being that 
as possible. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well in light of the apparent need for more 
through systems, how is that you're reduced the staff in this branch 
by one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, there wasn't a reduction of an 
inspector. It was a secretary moved from one position over to 
another to do work. so that's got nothing to do with the inspection 
part at all. And that happens within departments; they allocate 
secretaries back and forth and between one department or another, 
second them or whatever. So that's how that happened, and it 
wasn't an inspector. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I didn't follow that. You said 
there was no reduction in an inspector, you moved a secretary 
from one to another. Are you saying you transferred a secretary to 
another branch of the department and eliminated the position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, the secretary of the guarantee 
board moved to another branch and that's — within the 
department, and that's how that came about. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Which branch, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well it moved to support service in the 
administration branch. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, of the . . . Let me deal then with 
a different area and that is the co-operative securities board. Can 
you give me the number of issues which were reviewed upon, and 
I'd appreciate a list of them as well actually, if you'd supply that to 
me. If for some reason it should remain confidential I'd be 
prepared to give you that undertaking. I'm not sure I know why it 
would remain confidential, but I'll . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, the securities board approved 
nine issues for a total of $102,593,200. And it's with some other 
material in here, but if he really wanted to . . . in fact, I see the 
member's name on here. But if he really wanted to have the 
information, I could sent it over to him, but I'd have to get it typed 
out because there's some other writing on it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What, the Minister has some obscenities or 
some crib notes or something, does he, at the bottom of the page? 
 
I would have to be a good deal more affluent than I am to . . .I 
don't know how an individual would make an application to the 
co-op's securities board. I don't know how that would work. But 
presumably the member from Souris-Cannington knows more 
about that than I do. 
 
I would appreciate that list, Mr. Minister. If you wish to supply 
that to me in writing later, I would be prepared to accept that. 
  



 
May 26, 1986 

1471 
 
 

Mr. Minister, you have budgeted for co-op development, grants 
for co-op development, $152,000 last year, and 150 — if I can 
find the page again, the book has closed on me — $152,000 last 
year, $152,000 this year. I wonder, Mr. Minister, with respect to 
that which was budgeted for 1985-86, how much of that was 
actually spent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, there was $129,500 actually 
spent in grants last year from the Department of Co-ops. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I'm sorry, the sound system is pretty good, 
but I could not hear what the minister said. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — A hundred and twenty-nine thousand, five 
hundred dollars actually given out in grants last year. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Can the minister send me the list of grants 
that was actually given? 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I could. I could just read that . . . There was 
only three. One was co-operative youth in Saskatoon for $5,000. 
One is Le Conseil, and I don't know if that is the right 
pronunciation of it, but it's in your constituency, for $5,000. And 
one was the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon for 
$119,500. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I don't, Mr. Minister . . . I note that that grant 
to the University of Saskatchewan was also made in the '84-85 
year. I saw that in the Public Accounts. What is that large grant to 
the university for, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — it's a five-year agreement and this is the 
fourth year of it. It's for co-operative studies at the University of 
Saskatchewan at Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — When was the agreement entered into? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — In 1982. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What date in '82 then, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I don't know, Mr. Chairman, but I'll get the 
date for him and send it over. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, there's an issue here, Mr. Minister, and 
if the former member from Kinistino was the author, so be it. The 
purpose of those . . . The philosophy once in existence behind the 
grants for co-operative development was not that we would fund 
. . . I think you are using these grants for a purpose for which they 
are not really intended. I'm not in a sense being critical of 
co-operative studies. It maybe a worthwhile activity, but for many, 
many years grants in aid of co-operative development was a fund 
to assist co-operatives in getting going. 
 
The theory was, Mr. Minister, that the co-operative system had a 
unique value to this province and that it was a worthwhile 
expenditure of public funds to assist co-operatives to get going in 
various areas. Thus grants  

were given, during the period of time that I was a minister, for a 
funeral co-op in one area, co-ops for a seed cleaning plant in 
another, etc. I note that those have disappeared and haven't been in 
existence since 1982. What you're now using the grants for the 
co-operative development for is essentially educational purposes. 
That may, Mr. Minister, be worth while, but it's not what those 
grants were conceived for. 
 
It strikes me that once again, Mr. Minister, you're using a fund 
which was designed for purpose A to cover a purpose B. 
 
And I think, Mr. Minister, if you felt that there ought to be 
additional moneys go to the University of Saskatchewan — I 
assume the College of Agriculture — then you ought to have 
found that money in Advanced Ed, and not have robbed this fund. 
This fund, I think, Mr. Minister, at one point in time had a purpose 
quite different from what you apparently now conceive it for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the one, the conseil in 
the member's riding, the $5,000 that went there was for the 
development of French within the French francophone sector, so 
that's one area that we're working on or have been working with 
the people to develop. 
 
The co-op sector itself has started to take on a lot of responsibility 
in the development of co-operatives within Saskatchewan. And 
we're going to work with them. And I know what you're saying — 
the grant was set up as a part of an overall system to train for 
co-operatives. And they're continuing to do that, and I believe they 
will. But they also want to take a very active role in the 
development of Saskatchewan. And we've been working with 
them over the last — well the last six months since I've been 
minister, and before that when Mr. Sandberg was the minister. 
We've been working with them to, in fact, bring forward more of 
their own initiatives and their own ideas into the sector. And it's 
there. And what they're doing now is they're looking at such things 
as a co-operative venture capital project, and we've been working 
with them for the last three or four months in regards to that. It 
would be a new area — or a new era in Saskatchewan if it comes 
about, and I believe it's a very positive thing. 
 
And those are the areas that we can work with them to make it 
better for them and for the people of Saskatchewan. And they've 
been taking on a lot of responsibility of their own. They feel they 
can handle it; they feel they're competent to do it; we do too. we 
feel they'll do an excellent job of it as they've proven over the 
years. And so we're just working with them, and we'll continue to 
work with them. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, if you want to do educational 
work, if you want to do research — I gather that's what you say it's 
for, is for research. First of all, with respect to the council, that 
grant has been in existence for some time. That's not an innovation 
of this government, Mr. Minister. It's been around for some time. 
It's not an issue. Nor is it a very large sum of money. 
 
Mr. Minister, the purpose of the fund and the reason why we have 
voted this fund — at least the reason why  
  



 
May 22, 1986 

1472 
 
 

members of the opposition have voted the fund, I think I can say 
on behalf of my colleagues — is we believe there's a role for 
assisting new and innovative co-ops in getting started. A funeral 
co-op, a seed-cleaning plant; new and different co-ops — 
sometime they need assistance. We do that, Mr. Minister, with 
respect to the private businesses. The department of industry and 
commerce — Tourism and Small Business it's now called . . . The 
Department of Tourism and Small Business and Economic 
Development do have grants they give to businesses; these are the 
grants that go to co-ops. It serves much the same purpose. 
 
And you, Mr. Minister, because you don't understand co-ops, nor 
do you understand their parallel role, nor do you understand — 
you seem to understand their parallel role with private business, 
have taken this way and you're using it for something else. 
 
If you want to do research, there's another subvote for that, Mr. 
Minister. You're using these funds for something that you're taking 
away from the co-operatives — their seed money. I think you're 
doing it because you don't understand what co-operatives are 
about. And you don't believe in them. And Mr. Minister, this is 
going to be a recurring theme with these estimates. 
 
Here we have an instance of the department, of the minister, 
taking away money, taking away seed money only the year before 
an election. The year before an election they'll say any number of 
kind things about the co-ops. For the next three years they will 
beat up on them, they will, they will . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well, we're going to get the upgrader in due course. 
 
They're going to . . . you take away the seed money which is 
important to starting new co-ops, important to getting new and 
different co-operatives started. This is anything but the best year; 
maybe the best year since 1982. But 55 co-ops is anything but the 
best year in co-ops. 
 
The Minister wouldn't know — the member from 
Souris-Cannington who is yelling from his seat wouldn't know a 
co-operative — screaming from his seat — wouldn't know a 
co-operative if it left tire tracks in his face. 
 
Mr. Minister, this money and these grants for co-op development 
is seed money and ought to be used for that. I say, Mr. Minister, 
that you ought to restore this fund to the purpose for which it was 
originally intended . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now the 
member from Maple Creek is yelling from her seat, as she has 
been all night. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all to make it 
— first of all, Mr. Chairman, to make it very clear what this 
$119,000 was for, it was start-up money for the development of 
co-operative studies in the University of Saskatchewan in 
Saskatoon. And it's a five-year program to be sure that it gets set 
up. 
 
And you're speaking about the lack of setting up co-ops or the lack 
of co-operative development within the party and within this 
province. And if you look over the last three years, and over the 
last four years, there's been more co-operatives set up than there 
ever was previous to that 

 in any one year — in '82, 41; '83, 35; '84, 55; '85, 46 — that tells 
me that, in fact, private sectors, co-ops, can work together as a 
working group to serve the people of Saskatchewan. And when 
you go back to — you talk about parallels. I believe that rural 
development and co-ops can parallel each other in this province in 
many, many ways. The co-operative sector and rural 
Saskatchewan are one and the same. 
 
You belong to the Wheat Pool; you belong to the local co-op; you 
may belong to United Grain Growers; you can belong to a lot of 
folks out there. But those two, the Wheat Pool and local co-ops, 
are the two major co-ops that serve most of this province in many, 
many ways. And they are — they're serving our rural people. And 
they are parallels; they're the same; you're serving the same 
people. And that's why I believe that they can be paralleled with 
each other to better serve Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well what on earth does that have to do with 
the question, Mr. Minister? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order, order. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:58 p.m. 
 


