


















































April 28, 1986 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 28, 1986 

901 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

University Funding for Capital Projects 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to address a 
question to the minister responsible for Advanced Education 
and Manpower. Earlier this year the University of Regina 
presented your government with a list of major capital projects 
which it feels need to be proceeded with on an urgent basis. At 
the top of the university’s priority list was the construction of a 
new fine arts building and a major addition to the Education 
building. 
 
Can the minister tell the Assembly the status of this request, and 
can he assure us that the approval for at least these two major 
projects will be given in the next few days? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m really pleased to 
see a concern about the universities being expressed by the 
members opposite. Mr. Speaker, the university renewal and 
development fund, which was announced in last year’s budget 
as one of the four pillars of our government’s economic 
development of this province, indicated that there would be 
$125 million put up in that university renewal and development 
fund for the two universities to sit down and plan their priorities 
over a period of five years. 
 
That process has gone on extremely well through this first year. 
There are some major announcements have been made at the 
University of Saskatchewan. The University of Regina, to 
which the member refers, had some priorities which are under 
discussion at the present time. 
 
Those priorities were several. Restoration of Darke Hall, which 
I heard members opposite talk about for some time — that’s 
now under way, Mr. Speaker; an addition to the Education 
building, which is a part of discussion right now; a fine arts 
building, which is under discussion; and a student union 
building, which is also under active discussion. 
 
So certainly, Mr. Speaker, we have had some excellent response 
from both of our universities in this province to the initiatives 
taken by this government. Those negotiations go on. The 
committee, which is made up of members of this government 
and the representatives of the two universities, are very, very 
actively pursuing the priorities of both campuses, not only for 
now but on into the future. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well if anybody could find an answer to the 
specific question that I asked, out of that jumble-bungle, I 
would be surprised. 
 
I want to ask you further, Mr. Minister, a new question. We are 
aware of your government’s pre-election announcement 
committee and its activities. We’re aware that you have shipped 
out thousands of invitations out of the Premier’s office for this 
week at taxpayers’ expense to  

attempt to provide this week’s announcement with the 
appropriate hype. 
 
But my question deals with the . . . not with your pre-election 
plans; it deals with the university needs. And I ask you 
specifically: will you announce approval this week for the new 
fine arts building at the University of Regina, and for a major 
addition to the Education building on the campus? And when 
will you give these projects provincial support? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod; Well, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to any 
invitations which may have been sent out by this government, 
or by the University of Regina for that matter, as it relates to 
announcements coming this week or announcements coming 
any time into the future, the one thing that is very, very clear in 
all of this, Mr. Speaker — this is the government that is 
delivering to the universities, not only this University of Regina 
but the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. Both 
universities know that. The university community knows that 
this is the government that delivers to the university 
community. And that was the government that did not deliver 
over 11 years of office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well a further supplement. I ask the minister 
again, specifically: will you announce the approval this week, 
or within a short time, of the approval of a new fine arts 
building at the University of Regina, and a major addition for 
the Education building on the campus? It’s twice I’ve asked 
you. Can you address your mind to the specific question? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, as I have made clear, any 
announcements that are made at either campus of the 
universities in this province are made in consultation with the 
universities and according to the priority lists which are 
submitted by the universities. Anything that is done . . . 
 
And I would invite the hon. member to ask the university 
administrations what their view is as it relates to any 
announcements that are going on, and we’ll see within a couple 
of days, Mr. Speaker, whether or not that hon. member is on 
track as it relates to the priorities of the University of Regina or 
the University of Saskatchewan, or whether this government is 
on track, as I believe this government is on track, and so do the 
university communities in both of our universities. 
 

Closure of Northern Camp Grounds 
 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I direct my 
question to the Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources. 
And my question is: can the minister inform the Assembly why 
his department has decided to close camp ground facilities in 
northern Saskatchewan, specifically the camp grounds at 
Beaupré Creek and Shirley Lake? And can he tell the Assembly 
how many other camp grounds or rest stops operated by his 
department have been slated for closure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I missed the first part  
  



 
April 28, 1986 

902 
 

of the member’s question. I think he said that there were two 
camp grounds being closed in Doré Lake and that area. Yes, we 
are planning on closing down two that are very much 
underutilized. We asked the local communities if they were 
interested in operating them. They’re not. There are five camp 
grounds in the vicinity. Three will be left to service that area. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
for many years the department has maintained dozens of camp 
grounds, picnic sites, and rest stops along Saskatchewan roads 
and highways. These are important facilities for our tourist 
industry. And when you talk about closing down Beaupré 
Creek, that most certainly is an old camp ground that has been 
used for 20 or 30 years by people all over this province; that 
they also protect our wilderness areas by reducing fire hazards 
and pollution in the North; and they are important sources of 
local employment in the summer months. Why would you want 
to cut back in these important facilities at this time? And how 
widespread are the proposed cut-backs? Are they just in the 
North, or are these plans to cut back in other areas of the 
province? You indicate a number of five in that northern area, 
but do you have any plans to cut back on every other camp site 
in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I think the record will 
show there’s been some public discussion and there’s been 
papers put out around to MLAs and others indicating the overall 
plan of action for the system. I’d like to point out that we are 
bringing in five new provincial parks, including the very first 
new wilderness park in Saskatchewan in this year. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Speaker, when the minister indicates 
that he’s opening up five new provincial parks, that has nothing 
to do with campsites along our major highways and our roads. 
These are important facilities for the citizens of this province 
and citizens from other parts of Canada and the United States 
who use them on a yearly basis. I have a letter, Mr. Minister, 
from the council at Doré Lake indicating to you their concerns, 
and I will just quote for information, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The council and residents of Doré Lake are extremely 
concerned with the Department of Parks and Renewable 
Resources’ decision to close the camping facilities at 
Beaupré Creek and Shirley Lake and respectfully request 
that this decision be reversed immediately . . . 

 
as they indicate how important these campsite are. 
 
The letter goes on to note that your department has even 
suggested that if the community wants the campground kept 
open it should take over and operate it itself. Will the minister 
now check his facts and report back to this Assembly on just 
how many of these facilities he is going to close, and why you 
intend to close down, especially historic campsites like Beaupré 
Creek, which is a historic campsite in this province that’s used, 
not only in Canada as I indicated before, but from tourists who 
come up on a yearly basis from Canada and the United States? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the hon. 
member’s concern, because it’s in his own constituency.  

There are in fact probably some other picnic sites, recreation 
sites, that are very much underutilized around the province. If 
the numbers were there to justify keeping them open, at great 
expense to the taxpayers, we’d have no hesitation in doing it. 
 
We have priorized, Mr. Speaker. I’ve already said there will be 
five new parks brought into the park system this year, including 
the first new wilderness park — which, according to the natural 
history society, the wildlife federation, and other groups 
interested in conservation, the members opposite paid not one 
word of attention to that area in all the years they were in office. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister 
of Parks and Renewable Resources. As you indicate, Mr. 
Minister, that I am concerned because the campsites are in my 
constituency, I say this, Mr. Speaker, that I’m not concerned 
only because they’re in my constituency, but they are there to 
serve to the public of this province, all over the province. 
 
And you talk about regionalism — Shirley Lake and Sled Lake 
and Beaupré Creek are all in the same region. You shut them 
three down and then the folks who are . . . the tourists who are 
travelling in that area have no campsite to move into at all 
because you’ve closed down that whole region. And I just ask 
you once again, Mr. Minister, will you reconsider this decision 
to close down these campsites, especially the Sled Lake, 
Beaupré Creek and the Doré Lake one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I already indicated there 
are three open campsites in that vicinity. However, that wasn’t 
the remark that tended to upset me the most; it was a catcall 
from the member from Quill Lakes who indicated I just haven’t 
been in this province long enough to have visited them or 
understand them. And I really take that as a slam against the 
fact that I’m a new Canadian, sir. And I’m an immigrant and 
I’m very proud of it, and I chose this country and I love it very 
dearly, and I don’t need those kinds of remarks from the 
member from Quill Lakes. 
 

Hardships Caused by Changes to Welfare System 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
question to the Minister of Social Services. Mr. Minister, there 
now has been another group which has joined the growing list 
of Saskatchewan people who are calling for an independent 
review of your changes to the welfare system. The committee 
on poverty and its effect on health, which has made public a 
study this morning, shows that your changes have created real 
hardship for some of the poorest people in our province. And 
I’ll give you one example. The study shows that one community 
clinic in Saskatoon last year had to get special letters from the 
doctors of more than 75 pregnant women and nursing mothers 
to force your department to provide them with additional food 
allowances to bring their diets up to a minimum standard. Have 
you, Mr. Minister, checked into this fact, and can you explain 
how this has happened? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, we provide additional 
assistance, special needs allowance, in response to medical 
opinions that come to us as soon as is possible —  
  



 
April 28, 1986 

903 
 

as quickly as possible — and if the member opposite is aware 
of a particular case where that did not happen, then I certainly 
would ask him to provide me with that information in order that 
we could respond appropriately. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the 
uninformed minister. I just indicated to you that there were 75 
of these kinds of cases. The report that was released, I believe in 
Saskatoon, this morning, Mr. Minister, is supported by such 
people as the inner city support committee of the Saskatoon 
Presbytery, United Church; the church and society committee, 
Saskatoon Presbytery United Church; the Saskatchewan health 
care coalition; Saskatoon Community Health Unit; the National 
Farmers Union; and the list goes on. 
 
In light of this kind of concern by the communities in the 
province and those who have endorsed this brief, Mr. Minister, 
do you not believe that you ought to be better informed and that 
the call for an investigation, or an inquiry, into your changes to 
the welfare program is a valid request? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated last week that I 
would not be pursuing a public review of the welfare program 
here in the province. I think that the course that we have chosen 
to provide education and training and job preparation and direct 
job experience for literally thousands of welfare clients is very 
appropriate. I would remind you, Mr. Speaker, and the member 
opposite and all members of this Assembly — indeed, the 
members of the public of Saskatchewan — that Saskatchewan 
has the highest welfare rates for families here in Canada. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, any government that hides 
from the public is obviously a government that’s got something 
to hide. And that’s what we’re witnessing here today and have 
witnessed for some 29 days . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Does the member have a question? 
The member is making statements rather than asking questions. 
If you have a question, get directly to it. 
 

Emergency Food Bank Assistance in Saskatoon 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. I will get to my question. Mr. 
Minister, this Saskatoon study which I have referred to and 
which you are ignoring shows that last year alone the Saskatoon 
food bank had to provide emergency food assistance to more 
than 11,000 children in that city. Can the minister explain why 
his department was unable to provide enough assistance for the 
basic food and shelter requirements of these young Saskatoon 
families when you say that your rates are high enough to do 
that? They have to go to the food bank; and are you proud of 
the fact that in Canada’s bread-basket more than 11,000 
Saskatoon children are in need of food bank assistance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated in my answer to 
the previous question that the welfare rates here for families are 
the highest in the country, here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And there will always be some debate . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . there will always be some debate, 
Mr. Speaker, as to whether or not welfare rates should be 
increased, and there are those  

who even believe that they should be decreased. I don’t believe 
that; I think we’re at the appropriate level. Our rates are the 
highest here in the country. 
 
As it relates to what people do with that particular assistance, 
we know that unfortunately there are those individuals who, for 
one reason or another, aren’t able from time to time to manage 
their funds appropriately, and we do know that there are a good 
number of people who do spend their dollars in bingo halls and 
buy lottery tickets and so on, and I wouldn’t want to suggest 
that all welfare clients do that, not for a minute. I believe that a 
good number of them are responsible citizens. I think that’s the 
appropriate position for us to take. Nevertheless, I think the fact 
that we do have the highest welfare rates for families here in the 
province speaks for itself. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — How can you deny, Mr. Minister, that your 
welfare rates are inadequate when you have thousands of people 
going through the food bank, and you now have doctors writing 
letters to your department requesting additional assistance for 
pregnant women. I would have thought some things would have 
been sacrosanct. And when you have groups such as the 
Saskatoon presbytery of the United Church requesting a 
reconsideration of this matter, how on earth can you maintain, 
in the light of that sort of evidence, that your rates are adequate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I’m all in favour of additional 
assistance for those people who require it. And the member 
opposite knows that under his administration there were 
requests from doctors to provide additional assistance for 
special-needs individuals on assistance, and that’s the same 
today. Those regulations haven’t changed, and that kind of 
special-needs assistance is there today as it was then. 
 
As it relates to food banks: we know that if free food is going to 
be available, people are going to utilize it, and spending 
priorities are going to change as a consequence of that food 
being available. I mean, that simply is a fact of life, and we 
shouldn’t ignore that. Having said that, I would remind the 
member opposite and all members of the Assembly that our 
welfare rates here for families are the highest in Canada. 
 

Pornographic Telephone Messages 
 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question of the Minister 
of Finance in his responsible for SaskTel. Toronto Globe and 
Mail raised a point that some 1-900 numbers are used for 
pornographic messages, and I was wondering what the action of 
the government was going to be in response to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I have asked, Mr. Speaker, my officials to 
look into the technical possibilities of cancelling access to some 
of the 1-900 calls that are being used for pornographic 
purposes. Some of the telcos in Canada have been able to 
cancel access, and I have asked for a review from my officials. 
 

Welfare Reform 
  



 
April 28, 1986 

904 
 

Mr. Shillington: — New question. Mr. Minister, will you 
admit, in the light of evidence such as this brief, that welfare 
reform — which you used three times in your first response to 
the question — will you admit the word “reform” is a 
catchword for punishing people who are unfortunate enough to 
find themselves without any other means of subsistence but 
your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, it’s difficult to believe how 
providing families in Saskatchewan with the highest welfare 
rates in the country is punishing them. Here in the province of 
Saskatchewan we provide people with the highest welfare rates 
for families in the country, and that is the simple fact. 
 
As it relates to welfare reform, in addition to providing the 
highest welfare rates for families in the country, we’re also 
trying to take people off the social assistance by providing them 
with education and retraining and job preparation and direct job 
experience in the order of thousands of opportunities — 
productive opportunities, that were never provided by the 
members opposite. Surely that is sound social policy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 
want to refresh your memory with some statistics that this 
committee got together. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Is this a question? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It’s a background to a question. Then I 
want to ask you a question based on that. In January of 1984 
there were 2,617 people served by the Saskatoon Food Bank; in 
January, 1986 there were 3,867 served by the Saskatoon Food 
Bank; and in 1985, 28,000 — of which 11,000 were children. 
 
How, Mr. Minister, do you maintain in the face of that sort of 
evidence that welfare reform is anything other than 
double-speak and an attempt to make victims, to make 
criminals, out of those who are, in fact, victims of a system that 
they can’t control? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I have indicated, I don’t 
know how many times to the House today, that Saskatchewan 
provides the highest welfare rates for families in the country. 
Now if the member opposite is suggesting that Saskatchewan 
should increase its welfare rates substantially, then I suppose he 
should stand up and say so. We do have the highest welfare 
rates in the country, and I suspect that even if you increased 
them higher, that the food banks would still exist here in the 
province. We know that’s the case. 
 
As long as you provide free food and make it available to 
individuals, some will reorder their spending priorities to take 
advantage of that. Some, for one reason or another, may not be 
able to effectively manage their money and they will use it. 
Others may, on occasion, because of a particular emergency at 
that point in time, need to utilize the food bank. 
 
And for that reason — for that reason — to have the charitable 
impulse in our society which suggests to some people that I 
should provide some food or some benefit to someone else, I 
think that’s a reasonable thing. We  

wouldn’t want to stifle the charitable impulse in our society. 
There’s nothing wrong with that whatsoever. 
 
Now if the member opposite wants to substantially increase 
welfare rates for families, which already are the highest in the 
country, perhaps he should stand up and say so. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. The food 
banks in Saskatchewan became a growth industry after your 
predecessor in office introduced the welfare reform in May of 
1984. It was after that period of time that the food banks began 
to grow by leaps and bounds. Mr. Minister, do you not think 
there’s a connection? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, if I remember correctly, the 
food bank here in Regina was actually started before welfare 
reform ever took place. But I would simply reiterate to the 
member opposite, if he wants to continue to talk on this 
particular topic today that, once again, we have the highest 
welfare rates for families in the country. We are providing, at 
the same time, literally thousands of productive opportunities 
for people through education and retraining and job preparation 
experiences to get people off of welfare. We increased by 10 
per cent the income supplement for low-income working 
families. We doubled; we increased, in other words, by 100 per 
cent the supplement for low-income seniors. So certainly we are 
concerned about providing an appropriate level of service and 
funds for low-income people and, at the same time, providing 
them with opportunities to get off of welfare. 
 

Reconstruction on Highway No. 9 
 

Mr. Hampton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Highways, and it deals with the 
reconstruction of No. 9 Highway, the portion that passes 
through my constituency north of Preeceville. 
 
By way of background, Mr. Speaker, in the last two years, Mr. 
Minister, under the previous minister, there was a piece of it 
reconstructed. There still is a portion of approximately 10 miles 
that is badly in need of reconstruction. In the project array there 
is nothing shown for this year. The people of my constituency 
and I would like to know, sir, is there tenders going to be called 
for that final little bit on that No. 9 Highway this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, on that particular 
stretch of road I would believe that if it was not on the project 
array that you could safely assume that that particular piece of 
road will not be under construction. Unfortunately, I am not 
able to have with me or carry in my mind a complete intimate 
knowledge of all the highways in our province. But if this 
particular road is of serious concern to yourself, I would 
encourage you, the member from Canora, to please come to my 
office, please do your job as a representative MLA in this 
legislature, come to my office, bring representation to me, and 
I’ll be more than happy to chat with you about that particular 
chunk of road. 
 
Mr. Hampton: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
under a previous minister that was to be a three-year project. 
After many visits to his office, etc.,  
  



 
April 28, 1986 

905 
 

etc., it was to be done. There was a change in ministers and all 
of a sudden it’s fallen flat. Now I can gladly come up to your 
office, sir, but the question I ask you is: is it going to be 
tendered this year or, if it is not, will you please tell the people 
of the constituency why it would not be tendered this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I believe, in all fairness, that I’ve 
already answered the question, Mr. Speaker. And I did 
thoroughly state that if that project was not on our announced 
project array that I’m sorry to advise you that no, in this 
particular year, that particular piece of road will not be under 
construction. But I can assure the member opposite that I will 
give it full consideration and more consideration if you do 
indeed take the time out of your very busy schedule and come 
to my office and chat about that piece of road. Thank you. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, as the Premier announced on 
March 12th, SaskTel has embarked on an essential and 
ambitious program to replace multi-party line service in rural 
Saskatchewan with urban-quality, individual line service. This 
improvement to the system will benefit some 70,000 
multi-party line subscribers in our province, and they have 
waited a long time for this enhanced service. 
 
All across Canada telecommunications carriers have been 
studying the feasibility of a program such as ours and have been 
pressured increasingly by their subscribers for better services. 
Our new program will once again place Saskatchewan in a 
leading position and re-emphasize SaskTel’s status as a 
world-class communications company. This is the right time to 
introduce this program. It is economically feasible. The 
technology is at our command, and our rural citizens need and 
deserve a better quality of service. There are many benefits to 
be derived from this initiative. 
 
Now I know that the members opposite do not want to hear 
about rural individual line service, Mr. Speaker, but I would 
like to continue my remarks and discuss what we believe to be a 
very important program for the people of rural Saskatchewan. 
Let me quote to you from a letter recently received by SaskTel: 
 

I’m definitely in favour of private lines being put into the 
rural communities because there are times when my 
husband needs the phone for business purposes, especially 
during the spring, summer, and fall months when he is 
phoning for parts. Do you know what it’s like when a parts 
man at a business says, I’ll phone you back right away, 
and then the line gets tied up? Yes, I’m definitely in 
favour of private lines in the province. 

 
And this is only one of the many problems encountered  

for many years by our patient and hard-working rural citizens. 
Let us not forget, Mr. Speaker, that SaskTel went ahead with 
the work involved, and Saskatchewan emerged as the first 
province in Canada to have all its toll lines buried. This of 
course has meant steady, dependable delivery of services even 
during the worst winter months and sleet storms. 
 
The present program to eliminate multi-party line service and 
all its annoying shortcomings, is being greeted by a far more 
positive anticipation than was the rural service improvement 
program, and there are good reasons for this. Individual line 
service is the very least that we owe the people who for 
generations have been the backbone of the provincial economy. 
 
This program will eliminate the existing disparity between our 
rural and urban services. It will ensure equal access by our rural 
residents to the latest in telecommunications technology. It will 
give them the opportunity for unlimited access to their own 
telephone lines and assure them that anyone wanting to reach 
them, for any reason, will be able to do so without hindrance. It 
will give them access to computer communication for enhanced 
education for their children, or instant access to commodities 
and crop information for weather reports, for banking purposes, 
and for all the reasons people in our cities and towns want and 
use such facilities. It will ultimately allow them to program the 
modern telephone sets that they will be able to have in their 
homes so calls can be forwarded to whatever neighbour they 
have gone to visit or assist. They will be able to select from all 
the models of phones, now available to their urban friends, 
when they want an extra set for decorator or convenience 
purposes. This is little enough to offer them in return for their 
perseverance and determination to make the land work for our 
benefit. 
 
The easements which were used to implement the rural service 
improvement program of the last decade were essential to that 
program. As I have stated, Mr. Speaker, it placed our province 
in the leading edge of today’s technology. It was through the 
understanding and co-operation of the thousands of rural 
residents and landowners that the program met with its historic 
success. The same understanding and co-operation is once again 
anticipated as we embark on a five-year program of ploughing 
in the cable necessary to provide the individual line services. 
 
It is true, Mr. Speaker, that we already have some cable in 
place, and it is also true that some of the ditching and ploughing 
was done within the last decade. It is also true that we prevailed 
upon people’s good nature and tolerance when SaskTel asked 
for the right to enter their property to do our work. When we 
did it was to enhance their telephone system and to provide for 
their future. And what a future we now encounter. 
 
Few experts in the field of telecommunications could have 
predicted in the early 1970s that electronic switching facilities 
would have become so commonplace. SaskTel is well on its 
way to total conversion of the province’s switching facilities 
just one decade later. We can’t stop this progress. The modern 
world is converting to electronic telecommunication  
  



 
April 28, 1986 

906 
 

switching so that instant access to information is possible, and 
without this access, success in any field of endeavour is 
virtually impossible. 
 
In order that our rural residents can benefit fully from this 
access to information, we must connect them to the new 
switching technology. But it cannot be done using the lines 
currently ploughed into their properties and along the rural 
roads. It is necessary that we again use the easements we have 
used in the past to bury their service cables. 
 
Many questions have been asked by our rural customers since 
the announcement that we were extending first-class service to 
them, and I would like to address a few of them at this time. 
 
A question commonly asked: why can’t you co-ordinate your 
work with the power corporation and use the same ditches they 
will be digging? The answer is simply this. Even if it were 
possible to co-ordinate our work-force so that they were in the 
same areas at the same time, it is not possible to lay telephone 
cables in the same trenches. The power cables produce an 
induction current which is picked up by nearby telephone cables 
and renders conversation difficult, if not impossible. It would 
have a far worse impact on the transmission of computer 
information. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Standards Association 
prohibits burying any other services in the same trenches as 
natural gas pipelines. So we have to go in separately and lay our 
cable, using the highly efficient method of slitting a narrow 
trench, into which the new cable is laid automatically at the 
speed of a tractor pulling the plough. 
 
We have further been asked if landowners will be paid for the 
easements we need. Since the implementation of the rural 
service improvement programs, subscribers have not been 
entitled to compensation for installing facilities necessary to 
provide them with the service. Hence, Mr. Speaker, it has been 
a requirement that a rural landowner provide free easements to 
the corporation. Registration is used only where toll lines or 
critical facilities are involved or where expropriation is 
necessary. In these cases, compensation is offered, usually at a 
modest rate, subject to adjustment. 
 
Certainly SaskTel intends to pay all crop and property damage 
incurred on an easement. And in addition, SaskTel or the 
contractor is responsible for the restoration of land conditions 
after maintenance and ploughing crews complete their work. 
 
Generally the easements provided to SaskTel under the rural 
service improvement program will be relied upon for this 
individual line service program. The present provisions of the 
SaskTel Act allow for the use of easements only to maintain, 
inspect, and replace the line installed in them. They do not 
make reference to the installation of additional cables. 
 
The easements in place, on the other hand, are broad enough to 
permit the installation of additional cables. The proposed Bill, 
Mr. Speaker, will see the legislation  

coincide with the permission granted by the easements already 
in existence, ensuring that additional improved and expanded 
cable facilities may be installed in the existing easement. 
 
We have established two conditions in subsection (7)(a) and (b) 
for the installation of additional cables, namely, that additional 
cable is installed to serve subscribers in the area, and that the 
additional cable is installed within the boundaries of the 
easement originally granted to SaskTel. 
 
These provisions will ensure that the landowner’s property 
rights are respected and protected by ensuring firstly, that the 
easements in place are used only for local service 
improvements; and, two, that new easements will be obtained in 
the event that buried cable cannot be installed in the existing 
easements. 
 
Swift passage of this Act, Mr. Speaker, is essential for the 
completion of the program begun last month to install 
individual line service in place of the multi-party line services 
now encumbering our rural residents. 
 
The wording will be altered only slightly from what the SaskTel 
Act now contains. We simply want to clarify the use of 
easements already granted to SaskTel and ensure that we can 
get on with this long overdue enhancement to what is one of the 
best telecommunications systems in the world. 
 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
think there’s anyone in the province that doesn’t agree that we 
need private line service. We’ve said that last year yet, that we 
should be putting private line service into rural areas. And I’m 
glad that the minister agreed with us and decided to do that. He 
is, at this point, apparently proposing that he wants to be using 
easements that were formerly acquired for burying cable in the 
different areas. 
 
I would think, Mr. Minister, that if you want to keep the 
relations between the farmer and the corporation going 
smoothly, that what you would be doing is contacting these 
farmers again. I think we can do that much for them and make 
sure that everyone knows what is happening, when that cable is 
going to be buried, so they can plan their operation accordingly. 
 
You’re going to be going across crops, without question, and 
you’re saying that you would like to just use the old easements 
and move in there and bury your cable. Now this is fine; I don’t 
think anybody’s going to disagree with it. But you should be 
going in there and telling the farmers that you’re going to be 
coming through at a given point, and that if they want to cut 
that crop down for feed or do whatever with it, move it out of 
the way so it would be a lot easier for the corporation to do the 
work they have to do, and it wouldn’t be that great a loss to the 
farmer. In the past, and it’s only even last year I’ve heard 
complaints, and I’m aware of some of them, where they said 
they were going to be going through at a given time and that 
they were going to notify the farmer when they do it, and they  
  



 
April 28, 1986 

907 
 

refused to do that. They went right through before the farmer 
even knew what was happening. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, it’s incumbent upon you and your 
department to notify the landowners and tell them what you’re 
planning to do, when you plan to do it, and make sure that they 
are all aware of it, because the farmers are not going to be run 
roughshod like you have done in many other areas. I think it 
would be more beneficial to everyone concerned, and to the 
program itself of burying of private lines, or providing private 
line service, by making sure that everyone is aware of what’s 
happening and that everyone is contacted by the department. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, Bill read a second time and 
referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 22 — An Act to amend The Education Act 
 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, today we have before us 
The Education Amendment Act. It is a housekeeping Bill; 
therefore I will keep my comments relatively brief. 
 
Subsection 7(2) is simply being transferred to The Department 
of Education Act, and there is an amendment to The 
Department of Education Act to come, which is before this 
Assembly. 
 
The amendment to section 125 within this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
clarifies in simple terms that the board of education of each 
school division is ultimately responsible for the appointment of 
the school district returning officer, and consequently 
responsible for the conduct of all school board elections within 
the school division. During the recent elections for local boards 
of trustees, there was some doubt in the minds of several boards 
of education regarding, in fact, whose responsibility the 
appointment of the school district returning officer was. 
 
(1445) 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, within section 5 of the Bill, we have section 
146 of the Act. This is an amendment, and last year there was 
some question with the addition of clause (f) during the 
Assembly’s consideration of the proposed amendment. 
Members of the Non-Controversial Bills Committee asked the 
department to monitor and reconsider the phrase, “the pupil 
who is 18 years of age or less.” While this phrase, Mr. Speaker, 
has not been of great problems, it neither adds nor detracts from 
the intent of the section. The key element is whether or not the 
pupil is dependent on the parent or the guardian, not whether 
the pupil is 18 years of age or less. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the 
phrase is being deleted. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, the amendment to section 279 allows for the 
gradual introduction of reassessment in Saskatchewan 
municipalities. The concept is similar to that that is being 
employed by the city of Saskatoon. 
 
One last one, Mr. Speaker, is the amendment of subsection 
319(6). It clarifies that a resolution cannot amend a by-law. Mr. 
Speaker, this wording is simply one that we consider to be 
strictly housekeeping. I so move. 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will be 
adjourning debate on this because I will want to, as I usually do, 
contact the school trustees association and the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation and others about their view on the 
provisions here now that we have had a brief explanation from 
the minister. 
 
I note that the minister has indicated all of these are 
housekeeping. That may be so, but it seems to me that every 
time we talk about assessment or reassessment — as you will 
know, Mr. Speaker, having been involved with school boards 
and municipalities — I wouldn’t rush and jump to the 
conclusion that that’s simply housekeeping. Assessment and 
reassessment has some rather major implications. Many people 
who have had an experience with it in recent years and months 
will tell you that. Municipalities have had no end of difficulties. 
The assessment work by the government has not been 
particularly laudable, leading to the confusion and the kind of 
difficulties that some municipalities have had to face. 
 
So I just make some of those comments. I will have more to say 
on this later, after I have had some consultations with the 
appropriate people, and then I will have more to say on this 
Bill. For now I simply would like to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 23 — An Act to amend The Department of 
Education Act, 1983 

 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again my 
comments will be brief. Mr. Speaker, what we have before the 
House today are amendments to section 8 and 9 of The 
Department of Education Act. 
 
It is simply a transfer, Mr. Speaker, to The Education Act, 
which we dealt with just before this Bill with subsection 7(2). 
In combination, Mr. Speaker, these amendments represent the 
transfer of the authority which is necessary to operate the 
educational media services branch of the Department of 
Education from one Act to another. Mr. Speaker, members of 
this Assembly will be aware that the educational media services 
branch provides films, video and audio programs in 
multi-media lists to the province’s schools. These amendments, 
once again, are strictly housekeeping. Subsection 7(2) of The 
Education Act is the only component of the department’s 
authority which is not in the Department of Education. I 
therefore move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, because as the minister has 
indicated these provisions are consequential and are therefore 
tied in with other legislation, I think it would only be 
appropriate that if I adjourn debate, consider what the minister 
has said, and then consider these consequential amendments 
along with the previous ones, and then we can deal with them 
in, I think, a more adequate fashion. So I adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
  



 
April 28, 1986 

908 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Urban Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 24 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
on Friday we were discussing the issue of funding for the city 
of Saskatoon for 1986 under the various categories of funding 
that urban municipalities receive funding from, and I indicated 
at that time that I was going to ask you today for some further 
information. And I assume your staff has had an opportunity to 
gather it together. 
 
Can I ask, therefore, Mr. Minister, can you tell me what amount 
of revenue sharing was provided to the city of Saskatoon — and 
this is revenue sharing, operating — in 1981 and 1982, each of 
those years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — 1981-82 — 11,775,787; ’82-83 — 
13,215,484. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Can you give me the information for the 
transit assistance operating for ’81-82, and transit assistance 
capital grants for ’81-82? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Saskatoon, ’81-82 operating, 870,775; 
capital, 702,160. That’s ’81-82. ’82-83, Saskatoon operating, 
843,164; capital, 655,757. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — The 1981 figure for capital, what was 
that again, Mr. Minister? I didn’t write it down quickly enough. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Seven-zero-two-one-six-zero. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. One other question, and I 
indicated I would want this as well. Urban assistance. In 1981 
and 1982, what funding was provided to the city of Saskatoon 
under urban assistance traffic safety, or would that be under the 
Department of Highways, or would you have that? You don’t 
have that with you? Okay. 
 
Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, what amount of money did the 
city of Saskatoon receive under the community capital fund 
which I think then later became the provincial capital fund? In 
’81 and again in 1982. And what do you anticipate they might 
receive in 1986? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Rural community capital fund, ’81-82, 
2.675 million; ’82-83 — did you want that figure? 
 
An Hon. Member: — ’81 and then ’82, yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Yes, so ’81-82 was 2.675 million; ’82-83, 
4,673,851; and I’ll just check this figure for you on the other 
question . . . ’86-87 — we’re projecting possibly the balance of 
the commitment, which would be 6,332,567. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Would that be part of the funding for the 
arena in Saskatoon, or is that a special, separate funding 
arrangement that will be done through the Department of 
Culture and Recreation? 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — That does not include the new arena 
funding. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Can you tell me where I might ask 
questions about that funding? Which department will that come 
under? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Supply and Services. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. Well, Mr. Minister, I 
appreciate the fact that you are able to provide me this 
information. I think it’s important to have it because I think it 
provides us in the House to make a very interesting comparison 
between that period of time and 1986-87 which we are in now. 
 
And I just want to, before I do that, ask you another question 
which deals with something that the council in the city of 
Saskatoon has had to consider recently. And I’m wondering if 
you were aware of it, but the council in the city of Saskatoon in 
the month of April has had to consider imposing a special $1 
million levy to repair and upgrade Saskatoon streets, sidewalks, 
and sewer catch basins. And the reason that they’re doing that 
— it indicates in an article here in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix 
that the taxpayers will be contributing this money because the 
money formerly was provided by the provincial government 
under the urban assistance program. 
 
This is not going to be an insignificant move on the part of the 
city. I think it’s almost going to be . . . well, if you add it on to 
other tax increases that are taking place, it does not tell a very 
positive story about the kind of funding that your government 
has been providing to urban communities. Are you aware of this 
$1 million levy that the city of Saskatoon has been considering, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I have heard of discussions in that regard. 
Whether or not they have actually chosen to levy or not to levy, 
I’m not aware of that yet. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I’m informed, Mr. Minister, that 
this — and I quote — this proposal was at that time only a final 
approval away. So I don’t think it was something that was being 
considered lightly. 
 
Now let me explain, Mr. Minister — since your Minister of 
Finance obviously did not think this serious enough to provide 
your department with sufficient money to fund our urban 
municipalities — so let me explain what has happened here. 
 
If you consider the funding provided to the city of Saskatoon in 
1981 for the community capital fund, the recreational/cultural 
facilities grant program, the urban assistance program, the 
transit assistance (and transit assistance both capital and 
operating) and revenue sharing, the city of Saskatoon and the 
taxpayers of that city received from the province under revenue 
sharing and these other programs $26,153,232 in 1981. 
 
In 1982, under all of those same programs, which are the main 
funding that municipalities receive from the province, it was 
$25,857,854. In 1985, Mr. Minister, that  
  



 
April 28, 1986 

909 
 

amount had dropped to $21,423,301 — a very significant 
reduction in funding to the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Now if you narrow that down to just a fewer category of 
programs, Mr. Minister, and include the figures you gave me on 
Friday — and I will only talk about revenue sharing, urban 
assistance, and transit assistance — here is what happens in the 
city of Saskatoon. And I could do the same kind of analysis for 
the city of Regina, and to some extent I will do that later, as 
well as some other communities. 
 
But under revenue sharing — and I will only use the first year 
of your government so that it’s easier to follow here — under 
revenue sharing in 1982 the city of Saskatoon received $13.2 
million. We’ve already talked about that. In 1986 you told me 
on Friday that the city of Saskatoon will receive $15.2 million. 
Under urban assistance in 1982 the city of Saskatoon received 
$7.9 million. It is going to receive in 1986, estimated, $1.5 
million. And if you take those two only, together, Mr. Minister, 
there is a net reduction of funding to the city of Saskatoon in 
your budget for this year from 1982 of something like between 
4.3 and $4.8 million. 
 
Now how can you justify that kind of lack of priority for our 
people who live in our urban communities, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I would simply respond to the 
member opposite by saying that for comparative purposes here 
in Urban Affairs — if you want to talk about other departments’ 
funding, of course, you can do so — but in Urban Affairs we 
had about 16 million-plus in ’81-82 under your administration. 
Today, $24 million-plus, ’86-87 under this administration. 
 
So clearly there’s a substantial increase in terms of Urban 
Affairs funding, and this does not include things like the 
substantial multi-million dollar commitment for the new 
Saskatoon arena, which is clearly something that they have 
decided is a priority in that city, and they want to put dollars 
towards that. And obviously when you talk about $26 million 
figures or whatever, clearly you don’t build bridges every year 
in the city of Saskatoon. You might do that once a decade or 
maybe once every two decades, and obviously the 42nd Street 
bridge would have had a substantial amount of money included 
in there during the past years for their particular budget 
purposes as well. 
 
So there are a large number of items that you can take into 
consideration when you start comparing urban assistance under 
the Department of Urban Affairs or under any other particular 
department’s appropriations. But I think the figures that I have 
quoted in terms of this particular department, a $25 million-plus 
in this year, compared to 16 million-plus about five years ago, 
clearly there’s a substantial commitment on the part of this 
government to maintain and increase funding for the city of 
Saskatoon in order to enhance Urban Affairs services in that 
community. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I think there are an awful 
lot of people who wouldn’t agree with what you are saying. 
And I think that the council in the city of Saskatoon, as well as 
the citizens of that city who are  

going to have to make up the difference because of your 
government’s tax shift from the province to municipalities and, 
therefore, to the people who own property and pay property 
taxes — that tax shift has been very dramatic. And this $1 
million levy that the council of the city of Saskatoon has had to 
consider in order that it is able to repair and upgrade Saskatoon 
streets and sidewalks and sewer catch basins, and so on, is clear 
proof, Mr. Minister, that the priorities that your government has 
given on the needs of our municipalities have been very, very 
low on the scale of the priorities of your government. 
 
No one needs more proof than to consider the fact that in 1985, 
which was last year, you froze revenue sharing, your 
government did, your previous minister of Urban Affairs did, 
and you’re not changing a great deal in your capacity as the new 
minister. 
 
Wouldn’t you agree, Mr. Minister, that a $1 million levy by a 
city such as Saskatoon to do some work on some very important 
facilities that the city must upkeep, is an indication that the 
province is not providing adequate funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would simply 
reiterate the statistics that I presented just a few minutes ago to 
the member opposite — $24 million to the city of Saskatoon, 24 
million-plus in this year, compared to $16 million out of Urban 
Affairs approximately five years ago — a very substantial 
increase. 
 
Property taxes here in the province of Saskatchewan are 
estimated to rise in the order of around 2.8 per cent increase this 
year — a rather modest increase. Last year revenue sharing did 
not increase. Property taxes, in fact, at that time increased only 
0.4 per cent, so hardly any increase in property taxes across the 
province last year. And I think people appreciate that when 
Saskatchewan is hit with a very substantial drought — and 
agriculture being the backbone of our economy — that clearly 
the dollars should be provided as much as possible to assist 
agriculture in order that all of our communities, large and small, 
can be sustained over the long haul. 
 
When you consider the property tax increases under the former 
administration, just for comparative purposes, from ’79 to ’82, 
about a 28 per cent increase; and then from ’82 on to ’86 
estimate about a 14 per cent increase, a substantial reduction in 
the rate of increase of property tax. And I think that indicates 
our commitment to provide adequate funding for municipalities. 
I’m sure they would want more. I have yet to hear of any 
particular organization or individual who never wanted more. 
 
Nevertheless, I think it’s incumbent upon senior governments to 
provide what is considered to be a reasonable level of increase, 
given fiscal realities which face the province in terms of 
drought, and I think the course that we have chosen is indeed a 
significant course, a prudent course if property tax increases 
will be kept to a minimum. And as I indicated, the $24 
million-plus figure of assistance provided by Urban Affairs this 
year, in comparison to 16 million back in ’81-82, certainly 
indicates a very substantial commitment on the part of this 
government to assist urban municipalities. 
  



 
April 28, 1986 

910 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, if it wasn’t a point of 
debate, I would almost be compelled to say that your comments 
are an attempt, a deliberate attempt, to mislead. Because you 
know very well, sir, that the property tax increases in 1982 to 
1986 have not been what you have said that they have been. 
You know it. 
 
For you to stand here and argue that only it’s important to 
consider the funding for municipalities that come from the 
Department of Urban Affairs is somehow considering the whole 
picture of funding that comes to urban municipalities, I think, 
Mr. Minister, is highly irresponsible. 
 
I know, and you know, that urban municipalities, like other 
municipalities, get funding from places other than the 
department which happens to have the name urban or rural. 
There is assistance that’s provided from the Department of 
Highways; there’s assistance that’s provided from the 
Department of Culture and Youth; there’s assistance or funding 
that’s provided from the Department of Urban Affairs, and what 
we established here, Mr. Minister, using your figures which you 
have given me and which you have confirmed, is that in 
1980-82 — and I’ll stick with the ’82 year for consistency — 
$25,857,000 was provided to the city of Saskatoon under 
various funding; whereas, in 1985 it was $21,423,000, and that 
that figure has not changed in 1986. That’s what you have 
established with your statistics, and your figures, and not mine. 
 
Now how you can justify that to be an adequate performance by 
your government I’m not sure that I am capable of being able to 
figure out here. And I’m not sure that the taxpayer in the city of 
Saskatoon is capable to do so, likewise. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you answer me this question, because you 
referred to the tax increases and the mill rates from ’79 to 82, 
and ’82 to ’86. Would you not consider, Mr. Minister, that the 
removal of the property improvement grant was a tax increase 
on property? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well of course, one of the problems with 
educational funding in years gone by was that under your 
administration, if I remember correctly, the provincial level of 
overall funding to education went down year after year after 
year in terms of an overall figure . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
It certainly did. The percentage was going down year after year, 
and what was happening, of course, was that the tax burden was 
being substantially transferred to the property owner as a 
consequence, and the figures will bear that out, as much as you 
may stand to your feet and want to deny that. 
 
There was a time when the provincial government’s share of 
educational funding under your administration was significantly 
higher, and during the latter years of your administration that 
went down, down, down. And of course the property taxpayer, 
through increase in educational mill rates, had to pick that up. 
 
Now we believe that it was appropriate for us to provide the 
best possible education system to our children and to our 
grandchildren here in the province of Saskatchewan, rather than 
taxing on one hand and rebating back on the  

other hand and paying the bureaucracy in the middle to do that. 
It would be more appropriate to take that money and put it 
directly into education funding, and that is exactly what this 
particular government did. 
 
There were some people of course who didn’t want that to 
happen. We felt that education had been substantially 
underfunded under your administration; that it needed a 
long-term focus, and of course we took that money, and we put 
it there. That, of course, significantly alleviated pressure on 
educational mill rates, and you will recall that last year there 
were actually some jurisdictions that reduced educational mill 
rates here in the province. 
 
So I think that governments have to consider not simply 
short-term — giving cheques to people — but rather long-term 
policies in terms of providing a sound educational system. And 
today under this administration the amount of overall 
government funding in terms of a percentage of educational 
funding is, in fact, beginning to go back up. 
 
So that trend under your administration of being reduced year 
after year after year, that trend has halted. And under this 
administration it’s going back up. And certainly I think people 
in the education field, while they would naturally like to see 
more, are pleased to see that that trend has halted and that we 
are moving back in the other direction. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, would you consider the 
removal of a property tax rebate — which is what the property 
improvement grant was, a property tax rebate — a form of tax 
reduction on property. When you remove that property tax 
rebate, would you not agree that that was a tax increase on 
property? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — No. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I guess, Mr. Minister, that answer 
tells everyone how little you know. Maybe the problem with 
having a part-time Minister of Urban Affairs is the problem 
we’re faced with here. How can you stand here in your . . . I 
don’t know whether it’s the large majority or what it is, but this 
is the height of arrogance for you to stand in this House and say 
that in 1984-85 the citizens of this province had a property tax 
rebate of $230 a home — and I can go into all the different 
categories, but we’ll stay with this one — they paid their taxes, 
property taxes; they received from the provincial government a 
rebate of $230, which reduced their taxes; so therefore you take 
away that from the amount of taxes they pay. How can you 
possibly stand up here and say that, when you have done away 
with the property improvement grant, that’s not a property tax 
increase . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I heard him do it too, 
Mr. Member from Moosomin. But that really puts . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well maybe it was the member 
behind you. I’m sorry. The member from Wascana, probably, 
then. The former member of Urban Affairs who was 
responsible, along with the former minister of Finance, for 
doing away with the property improvement grant. 
  



 
April 28, 1986 

911 
 

But the point I’m making, Mr. Minister, and I don’t want to 
make a long speech of it — that I am surprised and shocked that 
any responsible minister of the Crown could stand, in his own 
estimates, and say that a taking away of a property tax rebate of 
$230 a home is not a property tax increase. This is what you 
just said. And I know why you’re doing it, Mr. Minister, 
because you’re not prepared to admit to the failure of your 
government to provide adequate funding so that you can 
provide relief for some other people and make a shift of 
taxation from places like oil companies, where you should have 
been collecting it when the oil industry was doing well, and you 
shifted it to the property tax payer. 
 
A little while ago you said that last year property tax increased 
by 0.4 per cent. Well, once again you use selective numbers 
only; you mislead, because that was not the increase when you 
add the $230 that the people lost in property tax rebates under 
the property improvement grant. That cost Saskatchewan 
people $80 million. That was $80 million of increase in 
property tax, in one piece of legislation, one announcement by 
your government in that infamous budget which supposedly 
was called the most intelligent budget. 
 
Nobody believes you, so why do you continue to persist in that 
argument about the kind of modest tax increases that there have 
been? We have seen in the last four years the biggest tax 
increases in property and other taxes that this province has ever, 
ever seen. And that’s why your polls have gone the way they 
have gone, Mr. Minister, and that’s why you are not prepared to 
call an election, even though you are now in the fifth year of 
your term — highly unusual — and it will be the first time since 
the Second World War. 
 
Let’s just take a look at this year, and I’ll tell you what your 
policies have brought about. If it comes to pass, and I think it 
probably has by now, that in the city of Saskatoon the library, 
the school, the special levy, and municipal taxes go up by about 
$62 a home — which is what the projection was, and I’m not 
sure what the final setting of the mill rate has turned out to be 
— that would be a 5.5 per cent increase. If you add to that $230 
on the property improvement grant which they can’t claim this 
year, you have increased, though your policies, the tax on an 
average home in the city of Saskatoon by $292. Now how can 
you stand here and say that that’s a modest tax increase, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite can 
throw various kinds of statistics around all he wants to in an 
attempt to bolster his particular argument. The reality is that 
here in the province of Saskatchewan we have taken a number 
of steps to reduce taxation on the Saskatchewan populace, 
whether it be removal of the gas tax a number of years ago. And 
every year that provides anywhere from an additional $250, if 
you have one car in your family, and upwards if you have a 
two-car family, back into the pockets of the particular family. 
 
The sales tax off of power bills significantly puts dollars back 
into people’s pockets. Certainly the sales tax removal off of 
clothing substantially benefits people here in the province. And 
I think those are the kinds of things that people are speaking 
about very positively. And when  

they compare that to the record of the former administration . . . 
and I remind myself as I stand here, and I also remind all 
members of the Assembly, that I could never remember a time 
under the former administration when taxes for the average 
person were reduced. I cannot remember income tax ever being 
reduced, but I do remember it for ever going upwards and 
upwards and upwards, from 34 per cent to 51 per cent if I 
remember correctly. 
 
And I never remember the gas tax being reduced or being 
abolished. Certainly not. But I do remember it escalating year 
after year after year, an automatic escalator built in under the 
NDP administration. I do remember paying a sales tax on 
clothing purchases year after year after year. 
 
So certainly this administration has taken numerous steps to 
keep the tax burden on individuals and families here in the 
province. I think everybody recognizes that governments do 
require funds to provide for over a billion dollar health budget; 
to provide literally hundreds of millions of dollars for education 
and for agriculture and for advanced education. All of that 
substantially costs money. And we have increased taxes on 
large corporations and banks, so that today large corporations in 
Saskatchewan pay a higher tax in this province than anywhere 
else in the Dominion of Canada. 
 
So I think that we’ve taken the reasonable course in an attempt 
to keep the tax burden down; in an attempt to increase taxes 
upon the large corporations that can pay; in order that we can 
continue to provide the kinds of services that are essential here 
in the province; and to provide those services in as best a 
quality as possible. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, if you want to get 
into the debate on taxation, we’re quite prepared to do that. 
What you have done is . . . what you have done with public 
accounts and budgets and so on, is that you put figures here and 
put them in different columns, and then you try to make an 
argument ignoring all other aspects that you have hidden 
somewhere else. 
 
Well let me just respond to those so-called tax reductions that 
you have talked about, sir. Why don’t you talk about the sales 
tax on used cars which collected some $6 million from people 
who bought used cars for a six-month period of time? Why 
don’t you tell us about the flat tax which you imposed? And 
people all of this month have been filling out income tax, and 
on their income tax forms have had to fill out separate forms in 
which they are paying hundreds of dollars a year in flat tax. 
And I might remind the taxpayers and yourself, sir, that that’s 
only for half a year, and anybody who paid $300 in flat tax this 
year automatically knows that next year it’s going to be $600 
million because they only paid for six months, because you only 
started collecting it since July. 
 
Your removal of the property improvement grant which 
increased the tax burden on property owners by $80 million a 
year . . . You talk about the removal of the gas tax, but you 
don’t mention the other side where you have collected more 
than the people have paid on the gas tax. That’s the other 
argument — where the deductible on  
  



 
April 28, 1986 

912 
 

insurance that you buy through your car insurance have 
increased from $350 to $500, an increase of 43 per cent; where 
other rates have gone up in fashion, and rates that never before 
has been known. 
 
You don’t talk about the Saskatchewan Power Corporation 
electrical rates for farm and residences which has had an 
average increase of something like 38 per cent. That’s a form of 
cost to the home owner. And the list goes on. 
 
Mr. Minister, even the people who build the highways, the 
contractors’ association, has proved and shown you statistically, 
and your government refuses to listen, that because of the poor 
maintenance of your roads, the increase of maintenance on cars 
— because of the damage that’s done to them on the highways 
of Saskatchewan since your bad policies have caused them to 
deteriorate — costs $119 a year. 
 
Your tax increases, Mr. Minister, have been atrocious, and 
when you talk about them you refuse to talk about the tax 
increases that municipalities have had to put on because you 
haven’t provided sufficient funding. When you add all that up, 
Mr. Minister, this province has seen massive tax increases and 
reductions in services, and that’s the point here. There is 
nobody that agrees with you. 
 
And I wish the minister . . . And I apologize to the member 
from Wascana. A little while ago I didn’t mean to say the 
member from Wascana. I meant to say the member from 
Lakeview. But the member from Lakeview was here a moment 
ago and I wish he was still here — maybe he is somewhere in 
the House — because in 1985 he was the master-mind of Urban 
Affairs. Along with the minister of Finance they put together 
the budget for urban municipalities. 
 
Well the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association 
became so concerned that they had to, in a fashion which is not 
usual of such an organization, they felt they had to respond. 
And so they wrote to the minister of Finance expressing the 
concern that they were feeling. And I’m going to take some 
time, Mr. Minister, and I’m going to read this to you, because 
maybe that’s what it takes to get you off your sort of position of 
arrogance as a government as a whole, and begin to realize what 
the real world is like out there. 
 
And you always keep talking about consultation. Well here is 
what the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association in 
1985 thinks about your consultation. They said: 
 

We express disappointment at not being included as one of 
the partners for progress for we have some grave concerns 
about our own fiscal capability to move forward in 
assisting that progress in the years to come. 

 
This is a letter dated April 23, 1985 to the then minister of 
Finance. And they say that after talking about the four pillars 
which you talked about, your government talked about, and 
after talking about the so-called consultations that the former 
minister had with SUMA. They went on to  

say, and I quote again: 
 

The Provincial and Federal orders of government seem to 
have turned away from programs of assistance to local 
government in the past two or three years. 

 
And I submit to you, Mr. Minister, that is the pattern that you’re 
still continuing to carry on. I quote further: 
 

Through our own minister we expressed concern about a 
replacement capital program for the existing program that 
was due to expire at the end of the 1984-85 fiscal year. As 
well, we asked for continued negotiation on the Operating 
Revenue Sharing Program so that we would not 
experience a “freeze,” so to speak, on everything while the 
deliberations of the commission were in effect. 
 
Conversely, we did not want, and we expressed this 
concern, the introduction of piecemeal types of solutions, 
a bit at a time, preferring to “wait until the final report” 
was submitted by the Finance Commission in June of 
1986. 

 
There was talk of consultation, but it never happened. They 
continue to say: 
 

It seems, however, that our requests have been largely 
overlooked in this current budget, (that’s the last budget, 
and I’ll come to the present budget in a minute) for there is 
no change in our operating revenue sharing pool which 
amounts, in essence, to a reduction for 1985-86 when 
inflation and other increased operating costs are taken into 
consideration. 

 
The property rebate system, Mr. Minister, you claimed was not 
a tax increase. SUMA said, I quote: 
 

The property rebate system has been totally revamped 
which is a direct impact on our property tax payers. 

 
The people who actually pass on mill rates and determine mill 
rates are arguing that the removal of the property improvement 
grant was a tax increase, and they stated it in a letter to the 
former minister of Finance. They went on to say: 
 

The “urban surface transportation” provision under the 
Department of Highways and Transportation has been 
slashed in half. This latter move has simply shuffled funds 
from one program to another, and from a conditional to an 
unconditional grant. 

 
And I mentioned this to you on Friday, Mr. Minister. And I 
quote again: 
 

The urban surface transportation commitment through the 
Department of Highways and Transportation has been 
slashed from $18.5 million two years ago to just over $5 
million in the current fiscal year. 

  



 
April 28, 1986 

913 
 

(1530) 
 
That letter was written in 1985, Mr. Minister. In 1986, and we 
talk about your budget, I quote from a newsletter sent out — it’s 
called The Urban Voice — to all urban municipal councillors. 
And do you know what the Urban Municipalities Association 
has to say about that program? Well listen and I’ll tell you. 
They say: 
 

The urban assistance program that was modified and 
drastically cut back in the past year remains at the same 
level this year as 1985. 

 
So your government in 1985 cut that program from $18 million 
to $5 million with some hokery-pokery and playing of figures. 
And in 1986, in your new budget, nothing has changed; it’s 
frozen; it’s still a cut. This is the great financial commitment 
you’re making to urban municipalities, Mr. Minister. I quoted 
to you last day, on Friday, when you said that you had a 25 per 
cent increase to community capital fund, and that you had taken 
all kinds of money from other programs and put it into this new 
fund, and that now there was a big increase — when you knew 
very well while you were saying it, while you stood in your 
place and you were saying it, that there, in fact, had not been an 
increase but, in fact, had been a $2 million cut — a $2 million 
cut. 
 
So what we’re saying, Mr. Minister, is only what others have 
said. We are only saying to you what the urban municipalities 
association and councillors who are trying to maintain the 
services in their communities have said to you — that you have 
made substantial cuts in funding to municipalities. And the 
statistics from the city of Saskatoon are a very good example: in 
1982, $25,857 million from your government; in 1985, $21,423 
million from your government; and in 1986 that figure has not 
changed in any significant way. 
 
How, Mr. Minister, do you expect municipalities to be able to 
maintain services when you are not prepared as a government to 
share some of the provincial wealth and carry some of that 
burden? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I’m delighted that the member ended 
his comments by saying, share the wealth. Because I wonder 
how many people in this Assembly and how many people in the 
province of Saskatchewan remember when interest rates were 
18, 19, 20 per cent how much wealth was shared with the 
people of this province when they needed assistance in their 
pocket-book to the tune of 200 or 300 or $400 to help them 
keep their homes, and how much wealth was shared by the 
NDP administration at that time — none; not one red cent. 
 
And when the gas tax continued to escalate year after year 
under the NDP administration, how much assistance did the 
NDP administration give to people to help cut inflation costs at 
that time? Not one red cent — zero, a big zippo from the NPD. 
Oh, you had sufficient money to buy uranium mines, and you 
had sufficient money to buy potash mines, but you never had 
one red cent to help people when interest rates were going 
sky-high. 
 
It was a Progressive Conservative government that shared  

the wealth so that people didn’t have to have the burden of 
interest rates on their shoulders, and the people of 
Saskatchewan will remember it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — And you talk about sharing the wealth. 
Well, I wonder, did your administration ever provide 6 per cent 
loans to farmers? Did your administration ever provide 8 per 
cent money to small-business people? Did your administration 
ever provide thirteen and a quarter per cent assistance to home 
owners? Did your administration ever freeze SaskTel bills? Did 
you ever freeze SaskTel rates in the province of Saskatchewan? 
Well they’ve been frozen the last two years; they’re frozen this 
year; they’re going to be frozen again next year. And at the 
same time this administration is going to be putting in 
individual line service. Now if that isn’t helping people share 
the wealth of this province, I don’t know what is. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when you talk about SGI — and you 
mentioned it — well SGI’s insurance rates have been frozen. 
And I want you to know that, in fact, the cost of licenses has 
gone down under this administration. And it wasn’t too long 
ago that people in this province remember that insurance rates 
were going sky-high because of the inefficiencies and the 
incompetencies of the former NDP administration when you 
were running that particular corporation. 
 
What about the sales tax on clothing . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . What about the sales tax on clothing? If that doesn’t help 
people in the province of Saskatchewan to put money back into 
their pockets . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you talked 
about the full gamut of taxation, and you talked about the full 
gamut of putting money back into people’s pockets. Well I’m 
simply saying that in all fairness you’d better take everything 
into account when you talk about putting money back into 
people’s pockets. 
 
And when I talk about frozen SaskTel rates, frozen SGI rates, 
licence costs down, no gas tax in the province, the sales tax off 
of clothing, the income tax down from 51 to 50 per cent, 13 and 
one-quarter per cent assistance for home owners, 8 per cent 
assistance for small businesses, 6 per cent assistance for farmers 
— if that isn’t sharing the wealth, I don’t know what is. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Chairman, isn’t it interesting, 
after having a calm discussion here and asking calm, intelligent 
questions, the minister, when he finds that he cannot answer the 
question, has to stand up and rant and rave and bring the 
decorum of this House, along with some of the colleagues who 
shout with him, down to a new low. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, it is interesting that when the ministers of 
this government find themselves pressed, instead of responding 
to the substantive questions which are being asked, feel that 
they’ve got to get up and make irrelevant speeches that have 
nothing to do with what the question was that was made from 
the opposition side of the House. 
  



 
April 28, 1986 

914 
 

Not only have we established this afternoon, Mr. Chairman, that 
this government has been negligent in its approach to urban 
municipalities, but also this government is not prepared to even 
as much as to consider the concerns that are brought to their 
attention, either by the opposition or by the public. Because I 
spent a little time a little while ago relating to the minister, Mr. 
Chairman, the concerns of the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association. Well you notice, Mr. Chairman, not 
once in his tirade that he just gave us did he refer to the 
comments of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association. 
 
Now why would he not do that? Because he knows that they’re 
right. But in his usual way, Mr. Chairman, everybody in the 
world is wrong, but he’s right. That’s the attitude of this 
minister, and that’s the attitude of this government. 
 
He talks about SaskTel rates being frozen. Well why wouldn’t 
they be frozen? Heavens, the public has a right to expect that 
when in the last four years they have increased those rates by 21 
per cent . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you check the 
figures. Ask your minister of telephones. The basic rates for 
telephones have gone up by 21 per cent. Now the minister 
stands up and boasts that they’re frozen this year. They 
shouldn’t have been frozen this year; they should have been 
reduced. 
 
He boasts about SGI rates being frozen. Well it’s funny how 
election years bring about a lot of freezes. But putting all that 
aside, I would hope that SGI rates might be frozen when they 
have increased the deductible on cars by 43 per cent in the last 
four years. There should have been a reduction, I say to you, 
Mr. Chairman, and I say to the member and his colleague who 
is the minister in charge of SGI, that not only should SGI rates 
be frozen, but that deductible which was increased from $350 to 
$500 over the objections of the Public Utilities Review 
Commission established by this government — that deductible 
should have been reduced, because the deductible that there is 
now is unreasonable. It is unreasonable. And it has increased 
the revenues of SGI to the point, and at the cost and the expense 
of people who shouldn’t have to carry all that burden. 
 
Four years they increased taxes. Four years they increased rates 
for SGI and the Saskatchewan Transportation Company and 
SaskTel and power corporation. And then in the last year they 
freeze the rates. Now isn’t that interesting? It doesn’t take much 
figuring to understand what the game has been. This 
government seems to think that it can punish the population 
with taxation and bad services for four years, and then in an 
election year kind of make up; and then they will get all the 
people to forget, and therefore it will all translate in votes for 
the Conservative Party. 
 
Well I say, Mr. Chairman, that’s a fool’s game. And if those 
members opposite want to continue to be fools, that’s quite all 
right with us, but that’s the kind of game they’re playing. And 
the member from Kindersley who sits over there knows better 
than anybody else the kind of price you have to pay for trying to 
take away from the people of Saskatchewan more taxation, and 
under an  

unfairer system than they have ever had to experience in the 
past. The member from Kindersley no longer sits as the minister 
of Finance, and you would have thought that other members of 
the treasury benches would have learned from that. 
 
Now why wouldn’t you, Mr. Minister, talk about the concerns 
of SUMA? Why wouldn’t you respond to the fact . . . And I’ll 
quote you another section from their letter. And they say that: 
 

The larger cities that were receiving some substantial 
grants under urban assistance have lost (that) grant. 

 
That’s not what I’m saying; that’s what SUMA is saying. I’m 
only repeating that. That was for 1985. And then they go further 
in 1986, in the most recent news-letter, say, “and it still remains 
the same in 1986.” They went on to say that: 
 

We are now led to believe that the Department of 
Highways has forwarded a letter to communities . . . what 
they are doing was at the request of SUMA. 

 
And isn’t that interesting? — because I want you to listen to 
what they said afterwards. This is the famous consultation 
process that you pretended to undertake. I quote: 
 

I can assure you that we did not request that our 
communities be subject to reduced financial support from 
the Provincial government and we are not very pleased at 
being used as the reason why the Provincial government 
has shifted monies such as I have just described. 

 
This is from the president of SUMA. They went on to say, and 
they said: 
 

We also point out that during the past several months the 
utilities, which are Crown corporations . . . 

 
And that’s why I’m glad you raised that, Mr. Minister, because 
I wanted to respond to it. Well here is SUMA telling you, and I 
repeat again: 
 

We also point out that during the past several months the 
utilities, which are Crown corporations under the control 
of the government while having to go before the Public 
Utilities Review Commission, have indeed imposed 
substantial rate increases on the consumers who are also, 
of course, the property tax payers that we endeavour to 
represent. 
 
To sum up, then, (I keep quoting) it seems to us that the 
overall attitude toward local urban government is to hold 
the line insofar as provincial contribution is concerned, 
and to let the property tax burden increase and increase 
substantially I might say, by this line of reasoning. I 
reiterate that we are in favour of having a review done by 
the Local Government Finance Commission, that you  

  



 
April 28, 1986 

915 
 

appointed (and he’s talking to the member of Kindersley 
here — that you appointed) but that we not be ignored 
during the time that the Commission was doing its work. 
This is certainly what has happened in this 1985-86 
budget. 

 
And I submit to you at the end of this quote, Mr. Minister, 
that’s what’s happened in the 1986-87 budget. 
 
And I just simply conclude by what I thought were particularly 
interesting closing comments in this letter from the president of 
SUMA: 
 

The property tax payers are going to be severely burdened; 
in our view, this year by virtue of the fact that you have 
put on a 1 per cent flat tax on net income, you have 
removed the property tax rebate, you have increased our 
local tax burden by simply not providing any more funds 
through revenue sharing, (the) library services, (the) 
ambulance services and no apparent pressure on the school 
boards to reduce their demands on the property tax payer. 

 
I quote again: 
 

It is difficult to understand what the objective of the 
Provincial government is in its relationship to local 
government operations, when we have been so severely 
dealt with in your current budget. 

 
This is, I grant you again, 1985-86. They even refer to your gas 
tax. I quote again: 
 

We know when your government came into office in 1982 
that you promised to remove the burden of fuel tax on 
motive fuels, and you did indeed do that. The resultant 
loss, however, has contributed, in our opinion, 
substantially to the deficit that you are now facing. We do 
not, as local government, feel that you and your 
government should transfer the cost burden to 
municipalities because of (the) political decisions you 
undertook to remove a source of substantial revenue that 
you have available to you and choose to do without. 

 
They’re not arguing with your policy of the removal of the gas 
tax. They’re simply arguing, as we’re arguing, that having made 
that decision, you were wrong in transferring that source of 
revenue onto property taxpayers. You did not reduce taxes, Mr. 
Minister. You just made a shift, so that now property taxpayers 
pay more than they ever did before. That’s what you did. 
 
Now that was 1985-1986. And you would have thought with a 
brand-new minister and a brand-new Finance minister and the 
kind of flack you took over these issues, resulting even in the 
dismissal of the Finance minister to another portfolio, that you 
would have listened. Well, did you listen? 
 
(1545) 
 
Here is what 1986 is being said by municipal people: 
 

Operational revenue-sharing pool increased by 3 per  

cent. These funds are to be distributed level across the 
board so that each community should receive 3 per cent 
more this year than it did in 1985. This, of course, is a 
departure once again from the revenue-sharing distribution 
formula that has been used over the years to apportion the 
funds available in the revenue-sharing pool. 

 
Next quote, 1986 news-letter: 
 

The urban assistance program that was modified and 
drastically cut back in the past year remains at the same 
level this year as for 1985. 

 
And finally, quote: 
 

Funds available under the water corporation or municipal 
water and sewer projects have been reduced somewhat this 
year, 1986-1987. 

 
Well, Mr. Minister, in light of all of this . . . And I really am 
sorry I have taken so much time to read it into the record and 
read it to you, but listening to you I’m not sure you’ve seen any 
of this stuff. So I thought it would be useful to familiarize with 
you. 
 
In light of these concerns, don’t you think that these people who 
get elected at the municipal level merit being listened to and 
have their concerns taken into consideration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I have had numerous positive 
consultations with people in the urban municipalities 
association and have had the opportunity to speak with many 
mayors across this fair province. Indeed, this morning I met 
with the mayor of Saskatoon to consult with him on an issue of 
particular importance to his jurisdiction. 
 
And we have had productive discussions concerning liability 
insurance, for example, which we talked about last time. We’re 
in the process of talking about, and have been for some time 
and will continue to be, the revenue-sharing formula which 
should come into place over the next period of time. We’ve had 
significant discussions concerning the need for the federal 
government to be involved in providing funds to upgrade and 
enhance our municipal infrastructure here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So our commitment to consulting with the organizations 
involved in the urban municipality scope of things here in 
Saskatchewan is certainly a fundamental and significant 
commitment. And I think that that commitment is evidenced by 
the fact that this year revenue-sharing is increasing in the 
amount of some 3 per cent. And I indicated previously 
Saskatoon, for example, will be receiving in ’86-87 an overall 
total amount of some $24 million-plus, which is a very 
significant amount of money. 
 
And I’m sure that there will always be those individuals and 
those organizations who would wish that there was more money 
that was available for them. I can recall when I worked in the 
education field that school boards and educators were always 
asking for more money. And I  
  



 
April 28, 1986 

916 
 

can understand that and appreciate that. One never has enough 
money to fully do all of the things that you wish you could do. 
 
And in the field or urban municipalities, I have yet to hear of an 
organization or a particular council that did not wish that they 
had additional funds that could assist them in meeting the 
particular needs of their jurisdiction. 
 
So certainly those kinds of things are natural. One expects that 
regardless of the level of funding that is provided people always 
wish that they received more. However, the senior government 
does have a responsibility to look at the overall priorities of the 
province. And certainly, during these days, agriculture is a 
number one priority. We need to shore up the backbone of 
Saskatchewan’s economy. And I think it’s fair to say that at no 
time in Saskatchewan’s history has agriculture ever received the 
magnitude of assistance nor was that assistance every as 
justified as it is today. And I think people appreciate that. 
 
And I think people in the municipal scheme of things 
understand that agriculture does need the level of assistance that 
it is receiving today. Having said that, I think that the 
magnitude of assistance that we are providing these days to our 
municipalities — the 3 per cent increase; the special funds that 
are provided to various municipalities for special projects; the 
consultation that we are involved in, whether it be liability 
insurance or revenue-sharing or whether it be for the need for 
the senior Canadian government to be involved in financing the 
enhancement of municipal infrastructure — all of those things 
together, that entire orbit of activity and commitment certainly 
is substantial on the part of this provincial government. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, I don’t disagree with you 
that people usually would like and would appreciate more than 
they often get. I don’t think that that’s an overwhelming kind of 
force that exists out there. 
 
I think it is fair to say that if people feel that they have been 
fairly dealt with, because they generally understand what the 
economic situation is, whether they’re individuals in 
Saskatchewan, who are usually well-informed, or whether it’s 
municipal organizations or school boards, they usually will 
accept what the provincial government does if they feel that 
they’ve been unfairly dealt with. I suggest to you that the reason 
municipal people have been so concerned, and then therefore 
have become vocal in their concern — and this is not a usual 
kind of a letter, Mr. Minister, to be written by the government 
from SUMA — the reason that this was expressed in such 
strong terms is because a lot of people out there in municipal 
government have concluded that they are not being fairly dealt 
with. And that’s really one of the major things that’s an issue 
here. 
 
You mention that the revenue sharing is increasing by 3 per 
cent. Wouldn’t you agree, Mr. Minister, that in light of the fact 
that last year revenue sharing was frozen — there was no 
increase — that therefore over this two-year period of time 
that’s really only an increase of 1.5 per cent per year? Would 
that not be an accurate conclusion to draw? 
 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I believe that last year, while there was no 
increase in the revenue-sharing pool, that capital was up 
somewhere in the magnitude of 5 to 6 per cent. And at the time 
that SUMA wrote the particular letter that you were referring to, 
that they may not have realized that. So there was a significant 
increase in capital last year. 
 
There of course is an increase in capital in terms of the 
provincial capital fund over a two-year program — up 25 per 
cent from the old capital fund — a 3 per cent revenue sharing 
increase. Certainly all of those things assist on the municipal 
side. And then when you take a look at the assistance that has 
been provided to individuals, which in a sense is a form of tax 
relief — if you want to use those terms — certainly whether it 
be SaskTel rates frozen, or SGI rates frozen, or not having to 
pay a gas tax in the province, or no tax on clothing, or no tax on 
power bills, or income tax going down from 51 to 50 per cent, 
or 8 per cent assistance to small business, or 6 per cent 
assistance to farmers — on the individual side you see a 
substantial array of assistance being provided to people to keep 
the tax burden down. Then on the municipal side you see 
capital increase; you see revenue sharing increase. I think that’s 
a reasonable way to go. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, once again, after the first 
day we began these estimates, it became quite clear that your 
comments about the increase in capital are really not in line 
with what actually happened. I will agree with you that indeed 
there was an increase of a $5 per capita in the provincial capital 
fund. We’ve established that; nobody can argue that. But what 
you failed to say, that after you consider what was taken out of 
the urban surface transportation funding, because you put $5 in 
the capital fund but you took several million out of the 
transportation side, and when you add all that up, Mr. Minister 
— that’s why you can’t just take one subvote at a time — 
municipalities actually were cut in capital assistance by $2 
million. You may have put $5 in one place, but you took a lot 
more than that out of somewhere else. So the net has been a loss 
in 1985-1986 of $2 million. And you have already indicated 
that in this year on that end there is no increase, so that cut still 
remains. 
 
You didn’t come around to answer the question. So I’m not 
going to make another speech here. I’m just simply going to ask 
you once again the question: if there is a 3 per cent increase in 
revenue sharing . . . We’re talking here about operating money, 
not capital. Capital you provide, something is built, something 
is done, and it’s done. But the operating goes on. The operating 
is continuous. So that’s a very significant item and is of some 
interest to taxpayers and municipalities. If you had an increase, 
and you have an increase of 3 per cent in this year’s revenue 
sharing, and you had a freeze in revenue sharing last year, 
would you not agree, Mr. Minister, that’s only an increase of 
one and a half per cent per year over the last two years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, if you want to talk about particular, 
you know, year-over-year increases and the amount of money 
that was provided, and if you want to talk about ’85-86 where 
the revenue-sharing pool was kept static and then a 3 per cent 
increase this year, I mean, the year prior to last year there was a 
5 per cent increase; and the year prior to that a 7 per cent 
increase; and the year prior to that an 11.5 per cent overall 
increase, so  
  



 
April 28, 1986 

917 
 

there’s been a significant increase over time in the 
revenue-sharing pool. 
 
And you may wish to want to zero in on a particular year or a 
particular program, but I think, in all fairness to the public, it 
makes more sense to zero in, not on individual years or 
individual programs, but on the larger picture and on the overall 
amount of dollars that are being spent in all of the programs 
over a period of time. And when you do that, when you treat 
statistics fairly like that, then I think that you find that this 
government has provided a substantial amount of money to 
urban municipalities. 
 
I wish it would have been more. I’m sure everyone wishes it 
would be more, as individuals wish they would naturally 
receive more. But as I said, when you compare the entire array 
of funding programs over the last four or five years, and you 
take a look at the overall revenue-sharing dollars, I think we’ve 
seen a reasonable increase in the amount of money going to 
urban municipalities. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I want to assist you in 
understanding why you are of the same pariah to the 
municipalities that the Minister of Health is to the doctors. I 
began the discussion Thursday night and want to pick up where 
I left off. 
 
In 1985 . . . In 1982-83 when you took office . . . Since 1982-83 
when you took office the total amount of revenue sharing has 
increased by 10 per cent during a period of time when the 
inflation has been 27 per cent. The minister, when I related that 
fact to him Thursday night, then stated: but the increase since 
1981, when you were not in office, was 25 per cent. That’s 
right. But the rate of inflation since we were in office, the total 
cumulative inflation is 40 per cent. You conveniently forget, 
Mr. Minister, those were years of relatively high inflation. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is no wonder the municipalities are upset. You 
have left them with significantly less money in real dollars than 
when you began office. Mr. Minister, it doesn’t matter how you 
cut the cake, you have been short-changing them; you have not 
been giving them grants which have anywhere near kept pace 
with inflation. You have assumed crassly that the populace will 
blame the local governments, and not you. I think you assume 
crassly and wrongly. I think the public do understand that a 
large part of the problems the municipalities face begin and end 
with you and your successor. 
 
Mr. Minister, I can go on, and unless you’re prepared to deal 
with the issue, I’m going to do that. During the period of time 
that you have increased the urban municipalities’ funding by 10 
per cent, government revenues have increased by 32. During 
that same period of time government expenditures have 
increased by 33. You’ve given them one-third of the increase in 
revenues which you’ve enjoyed. Again, quite crassly you 
assume that it won’t catch up to you. I think you’re wrong. The 
member from North East, his overwhelming election victory in 
November of last year, I think, points out how wrong you are. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you: how on earth do you expect  

municipalities to provide the same level of services when the 
grants which they have got under revenue sharing have been 
less than one-third of the rate of inflation? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think that the 
pattern is beginning to become obvious as we go through 
estimates. This particular department is not receiving enough 
money. That particular department is not receiving enough 
money. This particular individual, that particular organization, 
and on and on and on and on the opposition goes — everybody 
is not receiving enough money, and at the same time taxes are 
supposed to be cut. Cut taxes here, here, here, and here, and 
increase money for everybody. 
 
Well, my friend, when you do that you lose all credibility — all 
credibility. The populace out there are not so stupid as to think 
that somehow you can reduce taxes and at the same time 
dramatically increase funding for every last organization and 
individual out there. They realize that one and one makes two 
and not five. 
 
So I would suggest to the member opposite that it’s the 
responsibility of a senior government, the provincial 
government, to reasonably and prudently determine where the 
funds should go, and to allocate them appropriately. When you 
have a drought in the province, then clearly it makes sense to 
put a fair amount of assistance into agriculture. When you have 
educational institutions that for years and years and years were 
underfunded by a former NDP administration, then it makes 
sense to take some of that revenue and put it into a university 
renewal and development fund or put it into an education 
development fund. 
 
When you have a health jurisdiction which was ignored for a 
good period of time in terms of renovating old hospitals and 
building new hospitals, and when you have a moratorium on 
nursing homes, then clearly it makes sense to put a substantial 
amount of money into those particular areas in order to shore 
them up because they were ignored so sadly during your years 
when your priority was not urban affairs or health or education 
or agriculture; your priority was to buy potash mines and buy 
uranium mines. 
 
Now there’s a substantial difference between this government 
and your administration and this difference is certainly going to 
continue for a significant period of time as well. 
 
And I wish the member opposite would stand to his feet and 
acknowledge, as he should if he were honest with the public 
and with himself, that in fact you cannot do everything that you 
want to do in terms of increasing funding for every last 
organization out there and at the same time dramatically reduce 
taxes for everybody out there. It simply doesn’t work. 
 
And I have to chuckle a little bit at the Leader of the Opposition 
when he suggests that in fact it’s legitimate for him, and it is 
credible for him, to offer to the populace of Saskatchewan a 
billion dollars in election promises and somehow say, but it’s 
not going to cost the government  
  



 
April 28, 1986 

918 
 

anything. What absolute nonsense. What absolute nonsense! 
 
You cannot offer people the moon — which is what one 
editorial writer has accused the NDP opposition of doing as we 
approach an election — you can’t offer them the moon and 
somehow suggest that you’re not going to increase your deficit. 
You can’t speak out of both sides of your mouth at the same 
time, as much as you would like to try and do that. You’re 
simply not credible when you do it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I wonder if the minister would like to deal 
with the issue. The issue before this Assembly is that your 
revenues have gone up 33 per cent; what you have given the 
municipalities has gone up by 10 per cent. I ask you, Mr. 
Minister, to justify that. 
 
I’m a little surprised that you are flying health as one of your 
flagships when the doctors are in a foot race to get their hands 
on the Minister of Health and tear him limb to limb. You’re 
flying universities as one of your flagships when they are 
having enormous problems — and nursing homes in which 
there is a huge waiting list. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you to deal with the issue that I raised. Your 
revenues have gone up by 32 per cent; your expenditures have 
gone up by 33 per cent; what you’re giving to municipalities 
has gone up by 10. How can you describe that as fair? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I suppose in response 
I could say that: how do you call it fair when the former 
administration, in a supposed heyday of revenue increases in 
the province in the late ’70s, would allow the amount of money 
going to education from the provincial government as a 
percentage of the overall dollars to be reduced, so that the 
property tax burden was increased on the average home owner? 
 
I mean, you know as well as I do that you’ve got a certain 
amount of money, and from that pool you determine what the 
priorities are going to be. And if you people ignored health, 
then obviously we have to shore it up. And if you people 
ignored education in terms of universities, then we obviously 
have to shore that up. And we have a $125 million renewal 
development fund in the universities to do that. 
 
If you people ignored the pressing burden of interest rates for 
farmers, then obviously we have to shore that up, and that’s 
what we’re doing. And if, of course, a drought happens to come 
along at the same time and we happen to take some money and 
spend it over there, I think people say that’s a reasonable thing 
to do. 
 
Now I’ve long learned that the statistics quoted by members 
opposite aren’t necessarily statistics that reflect the entire 
picture. So I can say that the amount of money that we have 
provided in terms of revenue sharing increases to municipalities 
over a period of time has been fairly reasonable — 11.5 per 
cent, then 7 per cent, then 5 per cent. And then we hit a drought 
and so the revenue-sharing pool is static; then a 3 per cent 
increase this year. I think we’re talking about reasonable levels 
of increase, given the fact that we had to shore up a number  

of areas which you people sadly ignored. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I happen to have this 
document lying around. It is the Estimates from the first year 
you people were in office. If the minister wants to talk about the 
year before you took office, I’d be delighted to do that. I have 
that sitting on the desk of the member from Cumberland. But I 
think it’s more relevant to deal with the progression of events 
during your term of office. 
 
I ask you to look at the figure in the ’82-83 Estimates for 
revenue sharing — $60,113,160. Mr. Minister, the figure in the 
Estimates for 1986-87 is $67,126,900. That amounts to an 
increase of about 10 per cent. I ask you, Mr. Minister, I ask you 
to deal with the world as it is and not as you wished it were. 
 
In a moment, Mr. Minister, I’m going to get on to the question 
of the total grants provided to local authorities. It is an even 
sadder story than this, because while you have not decreased the 
grants under revenue sharing, the amount of money actually 
going to local authorities has decreased over the four years. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, to deal with the facts. The facts are: 
in the first set of estimates which you tabled in 1982-83, you 
estimated that you do spend $60,113,160, and that’s almost 
exactly what you spent. That is not out by a thousand dollars, if 
you check the Public Accounts. 
 
What you’re estimating to spend this year is $67 million — 
$67,126,900. How does a 10 per cent increase in revenue 
sharing over a period in which we’ve had 27 per cent inflation, 
how is that reasonable? How is it reasonable that your revenues 
increase by 32 per cent, but the amount of that revenue that you 
pass on to municipalities increases by only 10 per cent? The 
system which has been in effect in this province for some 
period of time has been that a part of the revenue which 
municipalities spend is raised by the provincial government. 
There are a variety of reasons for that, not the least of which is 
that the provincial government can raise the money in a more 
efficient and a fairer manner. Municipalities do not have at their 
disposal easy means to raise money. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, if you’d deal with Urban Affairs, 
first of all. I know you’d much rather talk about education. Well 
we’re going to get there, Mr. Minister. If ministers continue to 
behave as they are, and that is talk about anything except the 
subject under discussion, then it’s going to take a while, but 
we’re going to get there. We’ve already dealt with health. I 
don’t think the Minister of Health felt that health ought to be 
the flagship of this government’s efforts to re-elect itself. There 
aren’t a huge body of people saying grand things about you and 
the health care system. 
 
And education is in the same sphere, but the member from 
Swift Current can deal with that, and she will probably do so 
quite ably. I would suggest, Mr. Minister, you let her deal with 
the matters with respect to education. We will, if you please, 
deal with Urban Affairs. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I ask you to deal with the facts, and I just 
  



 
April 28, 1986 

919 
 

finished giving them to you. If you want me to read the figures 
out of the Public Accounts for what was actually spent, I’ll do 
that as well, but it doesn’t vary materially. They got 10 per cent 
and their revenues are supposed to increase proportionally to 
ours. If that isn’t your program, if you have a new program in 
effect in which their revenues, the grants going to local 
authorities, does not increase proportional to our revenues, then 
I wished you’d say that, and then we could join the debate on 
that issue; but you’re not. 
 
You and your government have pretended that revenue sharing 
is in effect. You retain the name and, I may say, nothing but the 
name. You retain the name but you don’t retain the program. I 
want you to admit that, Mr. Minister, and then this debate can 
assume a more sensible level, instead of us asking fairly simple, 
straightforward questions, and ministers of the Crown playing 
hide-and-go-seek with us and talking about anything but the 
estimates under discussion. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, let’s deal with the Urban Affairs 
estimates and not every other minister’s estimates — I know 
you’d love to talk about anything else but your own department 
— and let’s deal with the facts. The facts are that you’ve given 
them a 10 per cent increase during a period in which inflation 
has been 27 per cent. How do you call that revenue sharing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, if the members of the 
opposition, when they ask their questions, would keep them to 
the Department of Urban Affairs and Urban Affairs only, then I 
am more than willing — indeed happy — to respond within that 
framework. However, the former member was asking questions 
which strayed quite far afield from the Department of Urban 
Affairs in an attempt to draw certain conclusions. And I think it 
certainly is appropriate to attempt to respond to those questions 
as best I can with the information at hand. 
 
The member opposite has asked a question about revenue 
sharing, and the information that I have at hand is that in the 
’81-82 year, the last year of your administration as you came to 
an end, 53 million-plus dollars spent on revenue sharing. This 
year we expect 567 million-plus dollars spent on revenue 
sharing — somewhere around a 25 per cent increase in revenue 
sharing, certainly a substantial increase. 
 
But whether or not you believe it is enough is debatable. As I 
indicated to the member opposite and to yourself, there will 
always be those times and those places and those people and 
those organizations who would wish more. And I suspect that if 
I were working in the field of urban municipal government, I 
would like more and would ask for more as well, and I 
understand that. That’s a very natural sentiment, and the reality 
is that the needs are always greater than the amount of money 
which is available. But I think when you take a look at the 
overall funding picture for the last four or five years, then 
certainly the level of amount of assistance has been significant. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, if you want to deal with the 
last year we were in office, we can do that just as easily. The 
increase is about 25 per cent versus a 40 per  

cent increase in inflation. You arrive — although the figures 
were higher, because that was a period of high inflation — you 
arrive at precisely the same problem. The problem is, your 
grants have fallen woefully short of the rate of inflation. 
 
Mr. Minister, let’s deal with your last year — and believe me, 
this is going to be your last year in office. Let’s deal with your 
last year versus the last year of the former administration. The 
increase is 25 per cent; the rate of inflation is 40 per cent. How 
do you call that revenue sharing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the inflation statistics 
that we all hear about take into account a number of things such 
as the cost of housing — and of course municipalities don’t buy 
houses; they may buy material, but they don’t buy houses — 
and the cost of cigarettes, and the cost of liquor, and a host of 
things that goes into the make-up of the index. So a good deal 
of that doesn’t necessarily apply to municipalities at all; in fact 
it may have nothing to do with municipalities. 
 
(1615) 
 
But that isn’t to say that inflation doesn’t hit municipalities. Of 
course it does. We all know that. But the amount of assistance 
that we have provided, I think, is a reasonable level of 
assistance, given the fiscal times in which we live, given the 
amount of revenue which government has, given the 
deficiencies that the members opposite left us with, given the 
drought which we have had to put up with during the past two 
years. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — No, you’re quite right, Mr. Minister. 
Municipalities don’t experience the same rate of inflation; no 
two people experience exactly the same rate of inflation. The 
inflation experienced by municipalities would be much higher 
than the CPI (consumer price index) because a very large 
portion of their expenditure is on salaries, and the industrial 
wage index has increased more than the rate of inflation. If you 
want to deal with the industrial wage index, we’ll deal with that, 
but I think that might get a bit cumbersome. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you a question. Do we still have 
revenue sharing? Does this government believe in a program 
where revenues . . . the grants to municipalities are increased 
proportional to the revenues of the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — As the member knows, the municipal 
financing commission was put in place and is dealing with a 
number of issues pertaining to local government finance. And 
during that particular period of time the normal revenue-sharing 
formula has been suspended until such time as they make their 
final recommendation to the government. 
 
In the meantime, we are in the initial stages of revenue-sharing 
formula negotiations with the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association. However, I would remind the 
member opposite that the actual increases over a period of time 
from ’82-83 to, say, ’85-86, the actual plus the increase in the 
pool amounted to about 23.5 per cent. The increase, if only the 
escalator  
  



 
April 28, 1986 

920 
 

or the formula has been used, would have been around 21.4. So 
I think we’re in the ball park in terms of what would normally 
have been provided to municipalities. And as I indicated, we’re 
in a consultation process with them right now, the initial stages, 
as we await the final report of the commission as it pertains to 
local government financing. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I take it then, that we don’t have — that’s 
your position — we do not have a system of revenue sharing. 
But you are reinventing the wheel and you’re going to 
renegotiate another system of revenue sharing. Is that what 
you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, if we’re not providing $67 million to 
municipalities this year — revenue from the provincial coffers 
which we are sharing with municipalities to the tune of some 
$67 million — if that’s not revenue sharing, then certainly 
you’ve got a different definition for revenue sharing. 
 
Now if you’re talking about a specific formula applied to a 
specific year, this particular year the old formula has been 
suspended and we are awaiting the report of the Local 
Government Finance Commission with regards to matters of 
local government taxation. And we are in the process of 
discussing formula with the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association as it pertains to the future. 
 
So it’s important to realize that there is $67 million that is being 
shared with local governments here in the province. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I had hoped that we might abbreviate these 
discussions by having the minister deal with the issue rather 
than trying to avoid it. Mr. Minister knew full well that when I 
said, do we have revenue sharing, I meant: do we have a system 
of revenue sharing whereby municipalities’ grants increase as 
proportional to provincial revenue? Of course you have a 
subvote called revenue sharing; I can see that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I take that . . . I don’t take it. That’s an admission 
that you don’t have revenue sharing in the sense that you have a 
formula. What you now have is a tin cup ad hoc system 
whereby they come and do the tin cup routine and you give 
them moneys depending on the spirit that moves you. And it is 
patently obvious that the spirit has not made itself known very 
forcefully over the last four years. 
 
It is no wonder that municipalities are writing the kind of letters 
to which my learned friend referred. The city of Regina and the 
mayor have written their own letters saying this simply won’t 
do. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you tell us what was wrong with the 
concept of the old revenue sharing whereby grants to 
municipalities moved in lock-step with the increase in 
provincial revenues? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well the old revenue-sharing formula did 
have some tie-in to the old infamous, stiff NDP gas tax. We 
remember that NDP gas tax, and there was some tie-in on the 
formula to that gas tax. And when that gas tax  

of course was removed, when the Local Government Finance 
Commission was implemented, it was felt appropriate to 
suspend that normal formula operation for a period of time 
while we were engaged in those discussions with the Local 
Government Finance Commission. 
 
And of course each year we do meet with the urban 
municipalities association to talk about their particular 
financing needs. And I’m sure that while they would have liked 
more than 3 per cent this year, I can remember the mayor of 
Regina telling me, well if we got 2.9 per cent I’d be happy. 
Well we did provide 3 per cent and I’m sure he would have like 
more. But I think that was a liveable amount of money. 
 
We are of course, as I indicated, in the initial states of 
discussions, consultation, and negotiation with the urban 
municipalities association on the escalator factors and the 
formula and everything involved in that for the next period of 
time here in the province. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well I don’t know what the mayor said to 
you privately, but he’s been noticeably reticent to compliment 
you in public. In public his stance has been very, very different. 
It’s probably . . . with no disrespect to the mayor of Regina, it 
may have something to do with the fact that anyone who said 
anything good about this government could not hope for 
re-election. And that may indeed have affected the mayor’s 
comments, although I doubt it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He’s a smart politician. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — He’s a smart politician. He’s also an 
honourable man. And I think if he genuinely felt you had done 
anything good, I’d think he’d say so. But his public posture has 
been very different. So perhaps once again, Mr. Minister, we’ll 
leave the mayor of Regina out of it and deal with your 
performance and your estimates. 
 
Mr. Minister, I can only assume that ministers of the Crown . . . 
We’ve only had two of them, but I can only assume that 
ministers of the Crown are filibustering their own estimates. I 
can think of no other explanation for the behaviour of you and 
the member from Indian Head-Wolseley in prolonging the 
estimates the way you have. You have ignored virtually every 
question we’ve asked. 
 
I accused the Minister of Health the other day . . . I’m sure that 
if I’d have said, what’s the time, I’m quite sure he’d have said 
to me: now I am so proud of the way Saskatchewan people 
learn to tell time; I am just so proud of it; I go all over this 
province; they learn to tell time; but if you’re saying they 
shouldn’t be taught how to tell time, if that’s your position . . . 
 
Mr. Minister, you’re every bit as bad as the Minister of Health. 
You are every bit as bad. You blissfully ignore the facts. The 
facts, Mr. Minister, are that the municipalities did not get a 
share of the gas tax. The gas tax was . . . and The Income Tax 
Act and the corporation income tax Act and the sales tax were 
part of a formula, and it was simply a tax base. What they got 
was a percentage of provincial revenues based on that as a 
formula. 
  



 
April 28, 1986 

921 
 

I know of no reason why the formula couldn’t have continued. 
It would have been relatively easy, Mr. Minister, to calculate 
the amount of the revenue sharing using the same formula. The 
same formula could have been used. But you blissfully ignore 
the fact that it wasn’t the percentage of the tax; it was simply 
used as a tax base. And the minister of Urban Affairs before 
you took the same position. That is not the case, Mr. Minister. 
 
I’m unable to figure out with any degree of certainty what the 
grants would have been under the old formula because I don’t 
have your statistics. If I had, and if I had the information which 
the Department of Finance have and which revenue, supply and 
services have, I think I could arrive at a reasonable 
approximation in a matter of a few minutes. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, don’t tell us that the old formula was 
somehow or other destroyed by the abolition of the gas tax. The 
tax itself was no part of the actual moneys they got; it was 
simply used as a tax base. But at least, Mr. Minister, I thank you 
for the admission that you don’t have a revenue-sharing 
program in place whereby municipalities’ grants increase 
proportionately, in direct proportion to provincial revenues. 
That is patently obvious from what I have said with respect to 
the growth in revenue sharing from ’82-83 to ’86-87. It’s 
equally apparent if you include our last year in office, from 
’81-82 to ’86-87. It’s equally apparent. 
 
It’s painfully apparent, Mr. Minister, that you believe that the 
blame for the bad streets and the general deterioration in the 
quality of services provided by municipalities and the increase 
in taxes is never going to find its way to your doorstep. All I 
can say is, I don’t know what you were doing when you were 
pretending to be canvassing out in Regina North East, when I 
ran into you on a number of occasions, but you weren’t 
listening. Because that is precisely what the people of Regina 
North East were saying. That’s precisely what — that’s exactly 
what they were saying. They were complaining about taxes and 
they were laying the blame to your door for the problems the 
municipalities have, of which they all complain. SUMA 
complains, Regina complains, Saskatoon complains. They’re all 
complaining about this government’s performance. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you now tell me that four years into your 
term — this is the fifth year of your term . . . In the second year 
of your term . . . 1983, if my memory serves me correct, was the 
year that revenue sharing was buried, that it ceased to exist as a 
formula for moving grants in locked step with provincial 
revenues. It was done away with in 1983. Lo and behold, in 
1986, three years later, we now find out that you’re negotiating 
with the municipalities. If you don’t believe that municipal 
grants ought to increase proportional to provincial revenues, 
what do you see, if any, as the relationship between provincial 
revenues and municipal grants? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well we continue with our discussions 
concerning revenue sharing with the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association —  

concerning the whole matter of what would be an appropriate 
formula, what would be an appropriate means of bringing 
forward to municipalities a reasonable amount of money to fund 
their ongoing needs. 
 
The whole issue of how much money, what size of the pie, what 
percentage, should go to urban municipalities — that is a fair 
question, I think, for us to consult with them on. That is the 
issue that we are presently dealing with them about. We have 
been doing that for some time. We continue to do that. I think 
you need to take into consideration that when you do have a 
particular difficult year, for example in the field of agriculture, 
then it certainly behoves the senior government to take funds 
and put it there. 
 
So whatever the particular issue is of the day that government 
needs to be able to respond to, it needs to be able to do that. 
And I think those kinds of things need to be taken into 
consideration as well when you’re talking about an overall 
revenue-sharing formula with the municipalities. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you’re going to 
deal with the question rather than the drought and the 
grasshoppers and every other conceivable problem under the 
sun. The question is, Mr. Minister, what do you see to be the 
relationship between provincial revenues and municipal grants 
— or do you see there being no direct relationship? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I think generally speaking as a matter of 
large principle, as you see provincial government revenues 
increase, you would want to see some kind of increase to 
municipalities. And I think when you take a look at the overall 
record of this particular government — moving from 53 million 
in your last year to 60, and 62 and 65 and so on up to 67 million 
this year — indicates that in fact revenues have been increasing 
to municipalities as they have been increasing to the provinces. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I don’t think the public are going to believe 
that we waited for several minutes for that answer. I think a 
child in elementary or high school would probably have 
guessed that, if provincial revenues go up, there might be some 
opportunity for provincial spending to go up, including 
spending on municipalities. 
 
I asked you not whether or not you felt that the two might 
coincide; I asked, is there a direct relationship between 
provincial revenues and municipal grants? That was the 
program which was brought into effect in the mid-1970s. Do 
you still see that as a goal you want to achieve in your 
negotiations with the municipalities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well your question is no different and my 
answer is no different. I told you: in broad, general terms, as 
government revenues increase, you would want to see 
municipal revenues increase — and that’s what’s been 
happening. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Then why has your performance fell so 
short of your goals? Why, if you believe the principle of the old 
revenue-sharing formula to be desirable, why, Mr. Minister, 
have the grants increased at one-third the rate of inflation? 
  



 
April 28, 1986 

922 
 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well that brings up the point that I was 
mentioning previously. You know, they went from 53 million to 
67 million. They could have gone to 90 million or 120 or 150 
million. And then of course we may have made the decision not 
to put any money into universities, or not to build any nursing 
homes, or not to provide farmers with drought assistance. But 
we decided that those were appropriate priorities for this 
government, given the mess you left us with and given the fact 
that we have had a drought to deal with. At the same time that 
we made those priority decisions, we increased revenue sharing 
from 53 million up to 67 million, an increase of $25 million — 
rather substantial in anybody’s books. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It’s not an increase of $25 million. The 
minister . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Twenty-five per cent. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That’s right. The increase is not 25 million 
at all; it is 25 per cent during a period of time when inflation 
was 40 per cent. That fact shouldn’t come as a great surprise to 
the government, since I got the figure out of your own 
documents. 
 
Mr. Minister, how can an increase of 25 per cent during a 
period of inflation of 40 per cent be described as keeping 
provincial grants increasing proportional to provincial 
revenues? For that matter, how can it be said to be the case 
when your provincial revenues have increased by 32 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I would just respond to the member 
opposite that I certainly question his use of statistics with 
regards to inflation — not anywhere near what he talks about 
over the period of time in ’82, where we’re at 9 per cent, and 
then 6 per cent, and then 4. And 3.7 inflation is indeed much 
closer to the overall amount of money which was provided in 
the revenue-sharing pool at that period of time which, as I 
indicated, was about a 25 per cent increase. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The minister obviously wasn’t . . . The 
minister obviously didn’t teach mathematics. I’m not sure what 
he taught, but it certainly wasn’t algebra. If you total those 
figures as if you’d simply add them up, of course it’s not 40 per 
cent. But the figures are compounded, of course. In 1981 there 
was 12.5 per cent inflation. The figure for the next year . . . This 
is your budget document. You compound the figures; you don’t 
simply add them. If you add them, you’re right; but you 
compound them, and it makes an enormous difference. And it 
makes an enormous difference, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you won’t accept our comments with respect to 
revenue sharing, then I wonder if you would deal with revenue 
sharing as a percentage of your budget. I note, Mr. Minister, 
that the amount you have spent on administration, subvote 
number 1, has increased by 27 per cent in those four years. 
From ’82-83 to ’86-87, the amount you have spent on your own 
office, your own employees, has increased by 27 per cent — 
exactly what inflation has been. Why was it appropriate for 
administration in this department to keep pace with inflation but 
not appropriate for municipalities to do the  

same thing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Chairman, there’s been a 
centralization of various expenditures under the administration 
subvote, a number of those which were not there previously 
under former administration subvotes, so you’re really 
comparing apples and oranges when you make that kind of a 
statement. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Would the minister give me those items 
which have been centralized under administration? 
Administration is administration. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well things like advertising, printing, 
duplicating, CVA (central vehicle agency), aircraft and vehicle, 
telephone and messenger, registration fees, training fund — 
those kinds of things were brought into the administration 
ordinary expenditure subvote. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Would you give us the figures for each one 
of those? If you have comparative figures for 1982-83 I would 
love to have them, but I don’t think the . . . The minister’s had 
enough problem giving us answers to relatively straightforward 
questions that would have been expected. I would be surprised 
if you could give us the figures for ’82-83, but if you can, I 
would love to hear them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We don’t have those. It would take a fairly 
substantial period of time to get them. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — You have just finished telling me that that 
was the explanation for the fact that the administration of your 
department, the cost had increased proportional to inflation. 
You felt that appropriate, I gather, because each year you have 
brought to this Assembly estimates in which the cost of running 
your department has exactly equalled inflation. But you think 
that’s inappropriate for municipalities. Why? Because there’s a 
drought, the universities are falling down, the grasshoppers are 
getting bigger, and all the other problems you cite. 
 
My essential point is, Mr. Minister, if it is appropriate for the 
expense of running your department, i.e., administration, to 
keep pace with inflation, why is it not appropriate for 
municipalities to do the same thing? The excuse you offered to 
me was there was a whole lot of other things brought in. I say, 
fine; how much is it? Because frankly, the things you listed, I 
doubt — apart from advertising which is an enormous 
expenditure, the other things I doubt would add materially to 
the cost of administration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well the member knows that wonderful 
things can be done with statistics sometimes. I’m not sure what 
he’s trying to do with them, but as I indicated, there were a 
number of items which were transferred into the administration 
subvote of this particular department, and estimated ’86-87. 
I’ve just given you some of those. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I just don’t believe you, Mr. Minister. I 
want the figures with those items. If you don’t have the  
  



 
April 28, 1986 

923 
 

figures I don’t know how you can put the fact forward as an 
assertion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, Mr. Chairman, for the edification of 
the member opposite, for example, CVA aircraft and vehicle, 
this particular year the budgeted figure here is something in the 
order of 98,000. 
 
Now in years gone by, that total amount would not have been in 
the administration subvote. So I don’t know how you can in fact 
compare administration subvotes over the years to say that you 
have had this particular percentage increase and then compare it 
to inflation. 
 
Now if you want to require the senior officials of the 
department to spend hours and hours going back through 
document after document to find out what particular amount of 
money was spent in this particular subvote of this particular 
branch of this particular agency and then try and add them all 
up and bring them to you so that you can attempt to make your 
point that this particular department, in your estimation, is not 
keeping up with inflation — if you want that to be done, then I 
suppose I could request the officials to do that. 
 
But that is one awful lot of work to do, and I question whether 
or not that is significant or appropriate to the argument being 
made. If you think it is, if you want all of that to be done, I 
suppose we can put that onerous burden on them. 
 
But you make the point that you believe that inflation has been 
at this particular level and that grants have not kept pace for 
municipalities. I present the argument that we have been 
making a substantial commitment in terms of funding, over a 
five-year period of time, to municipalities. They naturally wish 
it would have been more. I wish it could have been more. But 
we have given a very reasonable commitment to municipalities. 
And given the overall spending priorities of government, 
including such things as the drought which we have just had to 
live with, I think we’ve provided a fairly reasonable amount of 
assistance. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, that is unmitigated nonsense. 
You have to do all of that for public accounts. I want to show 
the minister something. That is the Public Accounts for 
1984-85, and that is the Public Accounts for ’81-82. I can take 
these two documents and in a few moments compare what is 
included in administration because it’s set out. You’re going to 
have to do it by midsummer anyway. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just don’t believe that your officials do not have 
that information with them. It is relatively routine, 
straightforward information which is provided each year to the 
Provincial Auditor, and each year it appears in Public Accounts. 
You are saying there’s things that are new and different, that 
your department really hasn’t increased lock-step with inflation. 
I say that’s nuts; I say that’s not accurate. I say when the Public 
Accounts are published next year we will find out that while 
there may have been some new things included, there will have 
been some old things taken out, and the whole thing will 
balance. 

You make this bald assertion in the Assembly that the reason 
why your administration has increased so much more rapidly 
than the grants to the municipalities is because there were new 
things brought in. Presumably, if you can make the assertion, 
Mr. Minister, you can give me the figures. So I want the 
figures. You’re going to have to have them in a few months 
anyway. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I would provide the member opposite 
with the following information. If you compare 1982-83 
program services, which includes administration of all branches 
— and we’re really talking about the services that we are 
providing to municipalities — program services was 
$5,460,270. And when you look at program services today in 
the budget under consideration, $5,622,950, a 1.8 per cent 
increase over a five-year period of time, now that is a very 
significant indication of the efficiencies of this particular 
department — at the same time not reducing services to 
municipalities but indeed enhancing them, and doing so over a 
period of time with only a 1.8 per cent increase. 
 
And I certainly want to commend the Department of Social 
Services and all of those involved for being able to accomplish 
that particular objective. And at the same time I want to 
commend all the municipalities here in the province, and the 
senior officials and those who work underneath them, who have 
done such a commendable job to restrain expenditures during 
difficult times when revenues have not been as generous as 
everybody would like them to be, whether it was into the 
provincial coffers or whether it was into the coffers of the 
municipalities. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, will you provide me with 
those items which are not included in administration, which 
weren’t previously? It is just nonsensical to suggest that that’s 
going to take hours and hours and hours and hours and hours. 
You’re going to have to have it for the Provincial Auditor in 
less time than you would have us believe it would take you to 
get it ready. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, will you provide that to us? Will 
you also . . . One of the things you mentioned which have 
ballooned out of sight was advertising. I will agree with that. 
Would you at this point in time tell me what your department 
spent on advertising — what you estimate you will spend on 
advertising in the ’86-87 year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — I will provide the information to the 
member in terms of printing the necessary brochures; providing 
updates to municipalities in terms of administration and 
financial management and council procedure; guides for 
newly-elected officials and municipal audits; in terms of 
provincial assistance for local government; municipal 
directories; notice of incorporation; planning and development 
Act; news releases; correction notices; the Municipal Scene, a 
document; the annual report; staff news-letter; various 
certificates of kinds; statistical returns and so on; the 
Saskatchewan heritage program for seniors. When you add that 
all up, the estimate is approximately $124,000 for ’86-87 year. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you’d give me 
the breakdown of what is included within  
  



 
April 28, 1986 

924 
 

administration. Would you give me those figures, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Are you talking about advertising in 
administration? What are you talking about? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — No, I’m talking about everything. Will you 
give me the breakdown of how you arrived at a figure of 
$1,285,960 for administration in 1986-87? 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — If I might take the liberty of correcting the 
member opposite, I believe the figure for administration for 
1986-87 is $1,633,030. Is that the figure the member opposite is 
referring to? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — By mistake I read from the ’82-83 book of 
Estimates rather than the ’86-87. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well I can understand why — ’82 was a 
difficult year for you people. But I could provide the member 
opposite . . . 
 
I believe that in terms of the overall expenditure in the 1.6-plus 
million figure: salaries, about 758,000. I’m just giving you 
rounded figures here if that’s fine. Miscellaneous professional 
and other services, 60,000; computer services, 28,000; 
equipment rentals, computer, 83,000; advertising, 39; printing, 
duplicating, 114; travel, approximately 1,617; CVA, around 98; 
telephone and messenger, around 106; relocation, 14; 
registration fees, training, 40; materials and supplies, 68; 
northern construction revolving fund operating deficit, around 
155; miscellaneous, 38 — for around 1.6 million. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Okay, that’s satisfactory. 
 
Mr. Minister, the amount budgeted for the Meewasin Valley 
Authority, Wakamow Valley Authority, and the Wascana 
Centre — those figures are all lower than they were when you 
took office. Why is it, Mr. Minister, that you assume that . . . 
Well there’s the former minister of Urban Affairs applauding 
the reduction. I wonder, Mr. Minister, why your colleague, the 
member from Saskatoon Sutherland I believe it is, applauds the 
reduction. I wonder why you have reduced the amount to these 
three authorities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Well, we’re simply talking about a 
priorization of funds to municipalities and to authorities, and 
the decision was made at that time to priorize accordingly. The 
decision is made today to priorize as we are at present. And of 
course we are doing a significant number of things for 
municipalities, including revenue-sharing increases and 
including things like providing assistance to Saskatoon for their 
new university. And we’ve provided dollars to fix up the water 
problem here in the city of Regina. 
 
So certainly those kinds of priorization decisions go on within 
each government. Your priority was to buy potash mines and 
uranium mines, for example. Our priorities of course have been 
different. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


