













































April 7, 1986 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 7, 1986 

 

385 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Removal of Federal Tax on Farm Fuel 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to direct a 

question to the Deputy Premier in the absence of the Premier, 

who, as we know, had an attack of cold feet and didn’t call a 

provincial election on Saturday night. Instead he isn’t here to 

answer; he’s off in eastern Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The member is making 

statements rather than asking questions, and if he has a 

question, we’ll take the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I am indeed making statements, and 

everybody else in Saskatchewan is making the same one. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — My specific question is this: during the 

Premier’s trip to eastern Canada, will he publicly and privately, 

demand that the Prime Minister live up to the 1984 federal 

election campaign promise to take all federal taxes off farm 

fuel? Will he be demanding that in his trip to Ottawa, or not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I can understand the 

sensitivity of the members opposite not wanting to lose the 

advantage that they might have otherwise acquired by blowing 

their whole advertising budget in what they believed to be a . . . 

(inaudible) . . . 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the Premier’s visit to Ottawa 

and his discussions with the Prime Minister, I’m sure that he’ll 

be prepared to answer any questions that may come out of that 

discussion upon his return, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. As the 

Deputy Premier will know, so far the federal government has 

failed to deliver on the promise to remove all taxes on farm 

fuel, and today the federal sales tax and the excise tax add 

nearly 6 cents per litre or 27 cents per gallon to the cost of farm 

fuel. And I ask again: is it the position of your government that 

you pressure the Prime Minister to keep this campaign promise, 

or is it not the position of your government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier of the 

province of Saskatchewan is on record publicly, across this 

province, in calling for the elimination of taxes on primary 

production inputs, including federal taxes on gasoline, and I 

fully expect that he will continue to pressure for those input cost 

reductions, Mr. Speaker. I would expect that the Premier would 

be more than willing to enter that discussion upon his return to 

tell you just exactly how the Prime Minister responded. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Deputy Premier. 

Will you tell me whether the Premier has been 

on record within the hearing of Prime Minister Mulroney, or 

does he go on the record only when the Prime Minister is at a 

good distance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, I believe, Mr. Speaker, whatever 

the distance, the Premier of this province will have far more 

impact than members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Capital Gains Tax Exemption 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Deputy 

Premier, and it has to do with the trip of the Premier to Ottawa. 

What I would like the Deputy Premier to advise this House is: 

is it the position of the government, and will the Premier be 

pressing the Prime Minister with respect to another broken 

promise, and that’s the one to provide retiring farmers with a 

$500,000 capital gains tax exemption. Because, as the minister 

will know, while there purports to be a $500,000 capital gains 

exemption, when it is coupled with the minimum tax and the 

flat tax, farmers are facing very substantial tax payments, and 

they do not have anything resembling a $500,000 capital gains 

exemption. Will the Premier be pressing that point with the 

Prime Minster? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, 

the $500,000 capital gains exemption that farmers are eligible 

for in Canada wouldn’t have happened in the first place had our 

Premier not advanced those arguments to the Prime Minster. 

And I understand as well at that time that those exemptions 

were opposed by your party, so you’re going to have to decide 

which way you want it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I ask a supplementary 

question to the Deputy Premier. Does he not acknowledge that 

the combined effect of the Mulroney taxes is that if a farmer 

makes a capital gain of $250,000 on the sale of a farm, he is 

frequently facing taxes for the year 1985 of 50, 55, and $60,000 

on that capital gain? And do you not agree that is a breach of 

the promise made to the electorate in 1984? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, not having had the 

personal experience — I haven’t sold my farm, and I haven’t 

had a real tax problem of late either — I can’t speak from 

personal experience. But I just remind all members, Mr. 

Speaker, that the capital gain benefit that now can accrue to the 

farmers of Canada would not exist had it been in the hands of 

that party to make the decision. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I take it 

the Deputy Premier will not acknowledge that farmers in this 

province . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — I said I didn’t know. 

 

Nielsen Task Force Report 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — You will not acknowledge that in this 

province farmers are facing 50, 55, and $60,0000 tax bills in the 

circumstances which I have outlined. Perhaps I can find 

something with which you are familiar. 

  



 

April 7, 1986 

386 

 

Mr. Deputy Premier, will the Premier be demanding at Ottawa 

that the federal government repudiate the recommendations in 

the Nielsen task force report as they relate to agriculture and 

more particularly the recommendations that there be a 20 per 

cent jump in crop insurance premiums, the end of interest-free 

grain cash advances, the introduction of variable freight rates 

and the end of farm fuel tax rebates? Those are four things in 

the Nielsen report. I ask you, sir: is your Premier going to raise 

with the federal government the deleterious effects of those 

recommendations, and will he ask the federal government 

repudiate those recommendations forthwith? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes. 

 

Oil Pricing in Canada 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the evening in 

which the Premier got cold feet — and by the way I have 

something to assist the Premier with his cold feet and I’ll ask 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Displays are not allowed in this 

Chamber, and I’ll ask the member to have that removed from 

the House. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I would apologize, Mr. Speaker. I was 

overcome with compassion at the Premier’s cold feet. 

 

Mr. Deputy Premier, on the evening in which he displayed his 

cold feet, the Premier referred to the “ruthless robber barons” in 

the Organization for Petroleum Exporting Countries and said he 

was going to stand up to them and said, I’m going to do 

something about it, and I’m going to start tonight. I wonder, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, if you would tell us what it is the Premier has 

in mind that’s going to strike terror into the hearts of the OPEC 

nations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — In fact, Mr. Speaker, I think the words 

of the Premier were that he would be prepared, in co-operation 

with the federal government and other producing provinces in 

Canada, to come up with any scheme that will bring stability to 

oil pricing in Canada so that the predatory effects of world 

pricing today would not close down our oil sector and leave us, 

Mr. Speaker, to the whim, then, of OPEC, following the 

collapse of our domestic oil sector. And having said that, I also 

would remind all members that that party, and certainly their 

counterparts in Alberta, in fact support floor prices, and they 

argue that that will bring some stability to pricing in the energy 

sector. I don’t know if floor price is the answer, Mr. Speaker, 

but I’m sure that reasonably brilliant men around a table with an 

understanding of the industry will come up with some solutions, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Training and Employment Opportunities for Social 

Assistance Recipients 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 

Premier, Grant “Decline,” I have a question to the Minister of 

Social Services. Last September, Mr. Minister, Ottawa and the 

provincial governments reached an agreement to target 30 per 

cent of the training and 

employment spaces under the federal government’s major job 

creation program for social assistance recipients. At that time, 

Mr. Minister, the national Health and Welfare minister, Jake 

Epp, described the 30 per cent target as only fair, since 

employable social assistance recipients make up about 30 per 

cent of the total unemployment populations. Federal-provincial 

negotiations were supposed to be completed by the 1st of April 

of this year. I ask you, Mr. Minister: was that deadline met in 

Saskatchewan’s case, and if so, how many Saskatchewan social 

recipients will be able to take advantage of training and 

employment opportunities through the federal government’s 

Canadian jobs strategy program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased that 

Saskatchewan is the only province that in fact advanced welfare 

reform on to the national agenda last year. And as a 

consequence of our efforts to enhance training and education 

opportunities for people on social assistance, we were able to 

reach a general umbrella agreement in principle between the 

provinces and the national government. 

 

As I understand it, Mr. Speaker, we are the only province to 

date that has come anywhere near close to finalizing the details 

of that specific agreement, and I expect that in the very near 

future we will in fact have signed that document. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I would 

like the minister to clarify, because he was not clear in his 

answer. Are negotiations, in fact, still under way, or have they 

broken off? Is it not true that Ottawa has temporarily broken off 

negotiations with Saskatchewan because the federal Minister of 

Employment and Immigration, who happens to be Flora 

MacDonald, sees the welfare changes announced in the 

provincial budget as “workfare”, which is illegal under the 

Canada assistance plan. Isn’t that why these negotiations are at 

an impasse, Mr. Minister, and Saskatchewan welfare recipients 

are caught in the middle, unable to take advantage of the federal 

training and employment programs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — No. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 

minister still hasn’t answered the question. I once again ask him 

— I ask the minister, Mr. Speaker — would he clarify. Are 

negotiations in fact still under way or have they broken off? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — We’re in the process of finalizing the 

agreement. 

 

Job Creation for Social Aid Recipients 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I find that strange, Mr. Speaker, because 

I have here a copy of a confidential memo from Ottawa — in a 

new question to the minister — and this memo discusses the 

negotiations between your government and the federal 

government over how to help social assistance recipients take 

advantage of job strategy programs. And I want to quote from 

the document in my 

  



 

April 7, 1986 

387 

 

new question. This refers to the provincial government: 

 

. . . which has a major disincentive in place which require 

social assistance benefits to be decreased by the amount of 

any additional income received, including adult training 

allowances. 

 

This, too, is listed as one of the stumbling blocks in the federal-

provincial negotiations. It’s clear in the confidential document 

that I have here. If your goal is really to help Saskatchewan 

people who are on welfare break the welfare cycle, Mr. 

Minister, can you explain why your policy is to penalize 

welfare recipients who have entered job training programs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, the reason why we entered 

into negotiations with the federal government, to begin with, 

was because Saskatchewan social assistance recipients were not 

able to have access to the training programs provided by the 

federal government. That was the primary rationale behind our 

wanting to get social assistance recipients into more education 

and training programs — which, I might add, Mr. Speaker, they 

were not able to get into at all under the federal government. 

 

As it relates to this particular memo, my officials indicate to me 

that this is something rather from the past. Negotiations are at 

the finalization stage, and we’re very pleased that Saskatchewan 

will likely be the first province for which social assistance 

recipients will be able to have significant access into federal 

training programs which they previously didn’t have. 

 

Saskatchewan Population Trends 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Deputy Premier, and it has to do with the Saskatchewan 

population drain. According to Statistics Canada, Saskatchewan 

suffered a net loss of 4,701 people during the first nine months 

of 1985. And when the final figures are released in a few days, 

it’s likely to show an even larger net population drain. 

 

I ask the minister: are you aware of your government’s own 

internal figures that show, so far in 1986, Saskatchewan is 

losing population at the rate of more than 1,700 people a month, 

or 57 people a day? And these are according to your own 

statistics, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — First, Mr. Speaker, I long ago learned 

not to just accept figures thrown out by the members opposite 

as gospel. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP and their negative 

attitudes about all of the projects that we talked about — if they 

can be put on hold and turned around and become as positive 

about the opportunity in Saskatchewan as we are, there will be 

people flocking to Saskatchewan in the next two or three years, 

Mr. Speaker, just to fill the positions — just to fill the positions, 

Mr. Speaker, in the bacon plants, in the upgrader, in the paper 

plant, in the Phillips Cable at Moose Jaw, Canapharm at 

Wolseley, Shackleton Engineering at Cut Knife, and many, 

many more, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Supplemental, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you 

can deny the facts all you want, or try to cover up. But 

are you aware the figures published by your own government’s 

Bureau of Statistics show that during January and February of 

this year, a total of 5,897 people left Saskatchewan while only 

2,471 people moved into the province for a net loss in 

population of more than 3,400 people? 

 

Are you not aware of these figures, and are you not shocked, in 

fact, by the exodus of young people from this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the population of 

Saskatchewan is higher today than it was at any period in time 

that the members opposite were sitting over here. That’s one of 

the reasons, Mr. Speaker, that they will never have the 

opportunity to sit over here again. And if I can be flippant for a 

moment, Mr. Speaker, I kind of suspect that little blip in the 

population decline numbers was NDP campaigners moving 

over to Manitoba just prior to the last Manitoba election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Supplemental. The people of Saskatchewan are 

looking for a blip that will give them some jobs. Are you aware, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the essential drain, the people that are 

leaving the province today are young people with young 

families who are leaving in search of a job elsewhere. 

 

Can the Deputy Premier tell us what, in fact, are the new 

projects that will be under way in the next few weeks that will 

offer some hope to these people to get jobs, until we can have 

an election and get a government that will, in fact, provide job 

opportunities? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I have no doubt that after 

the next election we will have a government that will provide 

that opportunity. I have no doubt of that at all, Mr. Speaker, 

because it will be the government of Grant Devine and the 

Conservatives in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how they can continue to 

demand having it both ways. Our Premier is in Ottawa talking 

about stabilization mechanisms for agriculture and the energy 

sector this very day — this very day — and they’re saying: 

what’s he doing in Ottawa? Why is he down there? Why is he 

trying to stabilize the oil sector? Why is he trying to stabilize 

the farm sector? 

 

We’re talking about jobs, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan and 

we’re talking about . . . we’re talking about major projects; 

we’re talking about the paper plant in Prince Albert; we’re 

talking about Shand and Rafferty down in Estevan area, and the 

Alameda dam on the Moose Creek in my constituency. And I 

appreciate that very much, as do the people in that area. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Ammonia. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Ammonia plant here in Saskatchewan, 

here in Regina, that they have opposed, Mr. Speaker. I just 

wish, Mr. Speaker, I just wish that members opposite would 

decide on which side of each of  

  



 

April 7, 1986 

388 

 

these arguments they want to be on, and pick it and stay there. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Supplemental, Mr. Speaker. I was wondering 

whether the Deputy Premier, in light of all the announcements 

that you have been making during the last two or three months, 

trying to convince the people, or deceive the people, into 

believing that there is economic development here in 

Saskatchewan, can you indicate, you know, how many new jobs 

have been created in the last month with all of these 

announcements? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I don’t know how many created in the 

last month, Mr. Speaker, but if it’s important to the member, I’ll 

find out. But February, Mr. Speaker, February to February, year 

over year, 17,000 brand-new permanent jobs in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Questions Regarding Government Spending 

 

Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for 

the Deputy Premier. Mr. Minister, my question has to do with 

the government policy of hiding information from the public. 

The recent provincial budget was a clear attempt to hide the real 

size of the deficit. And the recent Public Accounts, Mr. 

Speaker, made the same attempt to hide from the public your 

government’s spending. Mr. Minister, in addition, there are 

some 42 written questions which have been ordered answered 

by motions of this Assembly and which your government has 

failed to answer. In fact, there are 13 written questions, which 

this Assembly ordered to be answered in the spring of 1984, 

which you have failed to answer. When will you, Mr. Speaker, 

come clean and finally respond to those long-standing requests 

for answers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — My understanding, Mr. Speaker, by my 

staff, is that there are some ready now and they’ll probably be 

tabling them tomorrow, and there will be some more tabled 

following tomorrow, and the day after, and in due course, and 

we’ll provide them as they’re ready, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Lusney: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 

there have been some that are about two years old. The 

common practice is to have them answered by the end of a 

session. When, Mr. Minister, are you going to have those two-

year-old questions answered? Will you make a commitment to 

this House that you will have this information in here — surely 

it’s ready — that you will have this information in here by 

tomorrow? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I will make no such 

commitment. I will undertake to provide them with all due 

haste. 

 

Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, supplementary. Will you then be 

prepared to make sure that some of the questions to be 

answered and brought into this House will be the amount of 

money paid out on advertising or to advertising firms by your 

government through departments, Crown corporations, and 

other agencies; and the amount of money paid out to law firms 

by your government; the  

employment arrangements for one René Archambault, the 

Premier’s brother-in-law, and the employment arrangements for 

Terry Leier, the former PC candidate who, at last report, was 

making more than $100,000 from Saskatchewan taxpayers; and 

the full cost breakdown of the Premier’s out-of-province trips, 

including his trip to Europe in January of ’85. Can you make a 

commitment that these two-year-old questions will be answered 

very, very soon in this House? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to reply in this 

way. I’m going to reply in this way because I heard more of 

what the member from Quill Lakes was saying from his seat 

than the member from Pelly was saying on his feet. So the 

question — I didn’t hear all of it, Mr. Speaker, so I’ll answer it 

this way. Those portions of the question that I hear, I think I can 

provide the answers in due course. By that I mean in a short 

term. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will make the 

usual motions on interim supply prior to the appropriation Bill. 

Firstly: 

 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $292,309,960 be 

granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 

ending March 31, 1987. 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 

service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1987, the sum 

of $292,309,960 be granted out of the consolidated fund. 

 

Resolved that a sum . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — One at a time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — One at a time? That’s the first resolution. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, I wish to make a number of 

comments about the resolution. I’m sorry, to the purist from 

Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. 

 

I say with respect to this resolution, if any further evidence 

were needed, that you planned an election and got cold feet at 

the last moment — the presence of this Bill here today, I think, 

establishes that. 

 

You obviously didn’t expect to be here; you didn’t expect there 

to be a legislature in session, and thus you expected to handle 

these by other means. So I say that among other things this 

resolution, I think, is ample proof that you intended to call an 

election, did a poll, I gather got the results on Wednesday night, 

and got cold feet. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to make a comment or two about this 

government’s management of our fiscal affairs. The  

  



 

April 7, 1986 

389 

 

management that this government has given our fiscal affairs is 

absolutely frightening. It is absolutely frightening, Mr. Minister. 

 

Over the weekend I had occasion to add up the addition to the 

provincial debt which this government has brought upon us in 

the last year, and I would think, Mr. Minister — and I’m going 

to ask you in due course — I would think, Mr. Minister, in the 

last year you’ve probably added 20 to 30 per cent to this 

province’s total debt in the last nine months. 

 

The list of . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — They should be kicked out. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well indeed they should be kicked out. 

They will if they ever have the nerve to call an election. 

 

One of the reasons why the Premier needs a heavy pair of wool 

socks, one of the main reasons, is because of the 

mismanagement which this government has given to our fiscal 

affairs. People in this province are genuinely concerned. I hear 

people from all walks of life saying just that: my heavens, if 

these people are elected, there isn’t going to be a province in 

four years. I hear people saying that from all walks of life. I 

may say though that it tends to come more frequently from 

people who are a little more mature, a little better educated, 

often with a business background. Anybody who can read a 

financial statement, a lot who cannot read a financial statement, 

can figure out for themselves that this government is seriously 

amiss in this fashion in which it has managed our fiscal affairs. 

 

We have before us an interim supply bill which will 

undoubtedly add to that debt, Mr. Speaker. While the project in 

North Battleford, giving $20 million to a former candidate for 

the leadership of the Conservative party — about which 

Maclean’s magazine reports that the Royal Bank is foreclosing 

on his house in Edmonton — to give that person $20 million is 

galling enough, but the figure is a trifling sum compared with 

the other dollops that you’ve been handing out here, there, and 

everywhere. 

 

I want the minister to add up — indeed I’m going to ask him to. 

I want the minister to add up the development projects: the 

upgrader in Regina, the upgrader in Lloyd. — there are now 

two of them going — the project at . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — The ammonia plant. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well there’s a lot of natural gas and hot air 

connected to the ammonia plant. It’s a long way from being 

ready. 

 

You have the Rafferty dam and the Shand project, Mr. Minister. 

You have a trifling 250 million at North Battleford. These are 

very large sums of money. In Prince Albert, these are very large 

sums of money. Seventy million at the university. Again, 

anything which is stated in millions and only needs two digits to 

state it is scarcely worth mentioning, Mr. Minister. 

I wonder, Mr. Minister, if . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Are you against agriculture. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Am I against agriculture? Well I’m against 

bankrupting the province. I am against bankrupting the 

province, and you are well on the way towards doing that, Mr. 

Minister. The member from Meadow Lake says, are you against 

it, are you against it, are you against it. I say to him, it’s not a 

question of what we’re against, it’s a question of managing our 

resources, being able to pay for what we’re doing, and being 

responsible. And this government has been totally and 

completely irresponsible with respect to this province’s debt. It 

is out of control, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, you ran a completely irresponsible election 

campaign. You promised free money during that election 

campaign. And lo and behold, when you get into office, the law 

of gravity still applied, and so, to your everlasting surprise, did 

the law of economics. And you found you couldn’t print money 

and there wasn’t any room full of money. There was no 

Heritage Fund as you thought it was — there was no room full 

of money. There was a Heritage Fund. There were annual 

reports published, and you people didn’t have the wits or the 

brains to read the annual reports. Because if you did read the 

annual reports, then you were lying in the middle of that 

campaign. And since it’s unparliamentary to say they’re lying, I 

won’t say that, Mr. Chairman. I’ll simply say they didn’t have 

the wits to read the annul report because they were either being 

grossly stupid or they were being dishonest, one of the two, in 

that campaign. The party was lying. 

 

Mr. Minister, your irresponsible behaviour has continued 

unabated. You have never once given any consideration to the 

fiscal health of this province. You took over a province which 

had fiscal affairs that were the best-managed in Canada — and 

if the minister denies that I can provide such well-known NDP 

house organs as The Financial Post, which said just that, Mr. 

Minister. You took it over, you’ve been spending like drunken 

sailors, and now we find ourselves with our credit rating having 

been lowered twice in as many years. And I am fearful, Mr. 

Minister, that that may happen to us again this year with the 

rapidity at which you are increasing this province’s debt. 

 

Mr. Minister, we have no idea as a result of that budget what 

the net deficit is going to be for this year. I will venture to say, 

Mr. Minister, that the net deficit for this year, when the public 

accounts are finally filed, 18 months hence . . . Because in 18 

months there is going to be a different administration in office 

and these public accounts are going to be filed on time, I can 

tell you that. We’re not going to be waiting until April to get the 

public accounts. 

 

In 18 months, when we get the public accounts for your term as 

Finance minister, I will venture to say, Mr. Minister, that 

Saskatchewan will have the highest . . . The deficit will be the 

highest per capita west of Quebec. I’ll venture to say that’s true, 

Mr. Minister. I’ll venture to say that the deficit will be in the 

neighbourhood of 8, $900 million — 8, $900 million — and 

that will make it the  

  



 

April 7, 1986 

390 

 

highest in Canada. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wonder if you genuinely believe that provinces 

are exempt from the economic laws of gravity. I wonder if you 

really believe that all of human experience has no application to 

the management of public affairs; that you can go on spending, 

Mr. Minister; you can go on spending like a drunken sailor; not 

worry about the deficit, when you find yourself in a bit of a 

corner electorally — and it may be more than a bit of a corner; I 

think you’re finding yourself in a pretty big hole — when you 

find yourself in a hole electorally, you start spending money in 

a fashion which is hitherto unknown. 

 

I don’t think one could point to a similar period in the history of 

this province when the public debt has increased as rapidly as it 

has over the last 12 months — not for any good reason. Some 

of the projects . . . Indeed, if it were for good reason, I think we 

would get some of the information about some of these projects, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, contrary to previous practice and experience, no 

details are given out about these enormous development 

projects which add so massively to our public debt. We don’t 

know what the deal is at Rafferty. We don’t what the deal is at 

P.A. We don’t know what the deal is in North Battleford. We 

just don’t know. I would think, Mr. Minister, if you felt that 

these projects were in the best interest of this province, that 

you’d start giving us some of the details. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’m going to have some questions to ask of you 

with respect to this province’s financial affairs because I, for 

one, want to know whether or not the additional debt which is 

represented in this interim supply bill can be afforded by this 

province. If you people haven’t got the wits to ask yourselves 

whether or not the province can afford this, then the opposition 

will be doing that for you. In due course, Mr. Minister, I will 

have some questions which I want to address to you. For now I 

invite the minister to enter the debate and begin to tell the 

people of this province how and why you are pursuing this 

course. Why you are pursuing a course which has every 

appearance of bankrupting the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Maybe I should 

explain to the hon. member that this is interim supply. It’s one-

twelfth of the budgetary funds to be voted on during this 

session; that there’s amply time to vote both the Department of 

Finance estimates . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh you can 

debate it. I suppose the difficulty I have when you talk about the 

law of gravity, I think what we’re seeing over there is political 

Murphy’s Law. If the other party does it, it’s wrong, but if you 

do it, it’s right. If it’s wrong for this government to have 

removed the gas tax, then why do you not maintain consistency 

in your consistent position which for three and a half years was 

that you were going to reimpose the gas tax. Now you say 

you’re not going to do it. Then you say it was fiscal 

irresponsibility for this government to propose thirteen and one-

quarter per cent mortgages, and you’ve maintained that position 

for nearly four years, and then all of a sudden in a panic you say 

you’re going to get them down to 7 per cent. 

 

Now, for heaven’s sakes, be consistent. You can’t have it  

both ways, attacking the programs on the one hand and saying 

that they’re fiscal irresponsibility, and now turn around and say 

you would maintain them or continue them. So having said that, 

as I indicated, this is the one-twelfth interim supply. It’s not a 

new practice. I suppose I could get the historical records of 

going back for some time, and we’ll get full chance to debate all 

of the issues, including the particular projects in mind. 

 

I do say, in defence of the projects, that I hope the hon. 

members opposite, at least in the interest of the people of 

Saskatchewan, if they have concerns or doubts about the 

projects, at least will express the hope that the projects go 

ahead. Because they are in the interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan: they’re in the long-term interest . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well, obviously now the member from Quill 

Lakes has maintained the positions that the projects are not. I 

guess we will have a difference of opinion. 

 

(1445) 

 

I suppose we can get into debates. But I didn’t raise the issue 

about the gas tax or the 13.25 per cent, the hon. member did. 

And I think in fairness that I’m responding fairly. So having 

said that, this is the interim supply; it’s the one-twelfth; it’s the 

traditional motion, and I’ve made the motion. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I just made note of the 

minister’s comment which he took and gave in the rather 

lackadaisical way and in the usual arrogance of this government 

when he said: it is really not very significant what we’re doing 

here today because it’s one-twelfth of the government 

expenditures. Well I might say, Mr. Chairman, that that is an 

attitude that I think is far from becoming of any Minister of 

Finance in any government in this province. Whether it’s one-

twelfth, or whether It’s 100 per cent, the fact is it’s the 

taxpayers’ money. The people of Saskatchewan will have to 

stand for that money: they are going to have to pay the taxes, 

and they have a right to expect and they have a right to be able 

to hear from the Minister of Finance and this government how 

that money is going to be spent. And for the minister to stand 

up, in his remarks on this resolution, and say it’s only one-

twelfth of $3-billion-plus, I think is highly irresponsible. 

 

If these projects . . . I will give the minister the benefit of the 

doubt, and I will say, okay, the projects that have been 

announced and costs that are astronomical — if they are so 

beneficial, then why is the minister and the Premier and this 

Conservative government so afraid to table the documentations 

which will provide to the people of Saskatchewan the 

information that they ought to be able to know about the costs 

of those projects, and what it’s going to cost them or what the 

deal is. What is so unusual about these deals that this 

government doesn’t want the people to know what they are? 

 

I would like the Minister of Finance to answer that question. It 

has already been said in this House, and it’s been said by the 

media, that this government has become the most secretive 

government in the history of Saskatchewan. Surely, every time 

the minister stands up and the Premier stands up and the Deputy 

Premier stands  

  



 

April 7, 1986 

391 

 

up and then refuse to give straightforward answers on the 

financial arrangement that implicate the Saskatchewan 

taxpayer, that supports the argument. 

 

I think that this government knows that the people of 

Saskatchewan are concerned about that, and clearly that’s the 

reasons they have now declined to call an election. If they are 

so confident, then they should have called an election, or should 

do it very quickly. We are now past the stage where normally 

— which will be over four years — Saskatchewan people go to 

the polls to pass judgement on the government of the day. 

 

This is now the fifth budget of this government. And the 

Minister of Finance, after he and his colleague, who was the 

previous Minister of Finance, have accumulated a deficit of $2 

billion or more — after this budget, they still are able to stand 

up in this House and say one-twelfth of the total expenditure is 

insignificant, well I say, Mr. Chairman, that that’s an 

irresponsible attitude. 

 

The minister asks this Assembly to pass on money which will 

be spent to pay for what he called a $389 million deficit. Well I 

want to simply point out, as he has been pointed out by others 

of my colleagues, that that $389 million deficit is not that 

amount. It’s probably anywhere between $700 million and $900 

million because of the hidden numbers and the hidden 

expenditures in this budget, and also because they were not 

listed as they normally would be. 

 

In 1982 this province had a debt of $3.3 billion — not bad 

considering the assets of the province and the wealth of this 

province. In four short years that deficit, that debt, has increased 

from $3.3 billion to 8.7 accumulated debt. How can the 

Minister of Finance say that one-twelfth of that, or one-twelfth 

of his proposed budget today for this coming fiscal year is not 

really significant, and he doesn’t really understand why we 

want, in this Assembly, to debate that and ask him some 

questions? 

 

They have a deficit now accumulate at $8.7 billion. This fiscal 

year it is proposed that it will be, I submit, well over $700 

million, even though the minister says $389 million. 

 

And what do we have to show for it? We have unemployment 

— the unemployment rate which has increased every year since 

1982 so that there are well over 40,000 people out there looking 

for work, who are on unemployment rolls. There are many 

more who are no longer on those rolls, so I even question those 

statistics. 

 

There are over 60,000 people who are recipients of welfare. In 

1982 there were 4,500 of those recipients of welfare who were 

employables. In 1986 there are over 14,000 of those people who 

are employables. Do you think, Mr. Chairman, that those people 

are not concerned whether it’s one-twelfth of the expenditure 

that the minister asks for today in his arrogant way or whether 

it’s 100 per cent? Of course they are. They’re concerned about 

finding work for themselves and for their children. They’re not 

being assured very much by the comments of this government 

and that minister. 

 

Now there are other ways in which this great debt burden  

that the people of Saskatchewan are being saddled with which 

does not ever show up in any kind of budget. Let me give you 

one example. Let’s take a look at our highways which the 

minister is asking for some money to pay for. Well because of 

the neglect by this government, the maintenance of our 

highways has been an absolute and total disaster. And anybody 

who’s done any travelling in Saskatchewan will be able to tell 

you that. And everywhere I go people say to me: what has 

happened to our highways? We have holes where there were 

perfectly good roads before. 

 

Well, I’ll tell you, Mr. Chairman, and the people of 

Saskatchewan, what happened. Because of this government’s 

neglect and reduction in the maintenance, our highways are 

deteriorating. And here is what the cost is going to be. Because 

maintenance is not adequate, we’re going to have to rebuild 

those highways at a much earlier time than we would have had 

to rebuild them if the maintenance was there. That’s going to 

cost the Saskatchewan taxpayer a lot more money down the 

road, because these people ignore those kinds of important tasks 

that any government has an obligation to live up to. 

 

So we have this huge deficit. The minister stands up in the 

House today and wants more money to help contribute to that 

big deficit, and he says it really doesn’t matter. Well I submit, 

Mr. Chairman, it matters. It matters. It’s almost unheard of in 

any budget that any Minister of Finance or any government 

would be so blatantly misleading in what they say, and in the 

documents that they present, that they would not clearly show 

the true extend of the deficit. 

 

Oh, I know that there’s been a creation of a new Crown 

corporation which will borrow money on behalf of taxpayers, 

and then it supposedly will buy off the different kinds of 

projects. Well, is the minister prepared to stand up in the House 

and say that will not be part of the mortgage or part of the 

deficit? I don’t think he’s prepared to do that. At least, I hope 

he’s not, because if he is, he should resign. 

 

This government talks about a business approach to 

government. Well I’ll tell you, most business people will tell 

you that if their approach to their business was done in the same 

way as this government has approached government and the 

budgeting of taxpayers’ money, they would last for one year in 

business. 

 

And yet this government continues to pursue this line: it doesn’t 

matter, it doesn’t matter. We’re just going to spend this money. 

We’re going to have nothing to show for it. We’ve got all kinds 

of money that were gong to give to the Peter Pocklingtons of 

this world because they’re friends of ours. And the taxpayer, the 

low- and middle-income people who carry that biggest burden, 

is just going to have to pay for it. And even though I’m only 

asking, the minister says, for one-twelfth of it, it doesn’t really 

matter. 

 

I hope the minister might be able to stand up and explain one 

other thing. And I’ll ask this again when we get into estimates 

with the Minister of Health. Why is there in this budget not any 

indication of how much money there is for  

  



 

April 7, 1986 

392 

 

health capital projects? 

 

Oh I know that the minister might stand up and he might say, 

well you know, in 1985-86 we developed a new approach, a 

new capital health fund. Well then I would ask the minister to 

say why, in 1986-87, is there no money listed in the budget for 

that new five-year capital health fund — not one, single penny. 

And he asks for one-twelfth of the budget to spend this money 

— some of it which is not even existing because it’s not listed 

in the Estimates. Well now this year they’re going to have a 

new fund. But again, in this new fund for capital projects, no 

money is listed. 

 

And I’ve talked to people since this budget, and people have 

called it all kinds of names. Taxpayers are concerned. They’ve 

called it jiggery-pokery. They’ve called it fraudulent — and 

that’s a kind of strong term. They’ve called it deceitful. And 

they simply want to know the answers. 

 

And I guess one of the best ways that we might have been able 

to get that answer and an opportunity for people to express their 

deep-felt concerns would have been if that Premier and that 

government had had the courage to call an election, or will soon 

do so, instead of hiding in the wood. As somebody said during 

question period earlier, they might run, but they can’t hide, 

because the voters of Saskatchewan are waiting to pass 

judgement, and they’re waiting to be able to say: we’ve had 

enough. We can’t afford another four years of this arrogant 

approach of spending our money without telling us what you’re 

spending it for; of spending our tax money and increasing our 

taxes but having our services deteriorate while the deficit 

grows, so that we, the present generation and future generation, 

will be burdened with it, only so that these Conservative 

members of this House can desperately try to get themselves re-

elected. 

 

And I simply say, Mr. Minister, that that will not work. The 

longer you run, the faster will those who try to catch you run to 

catch you, and they’re going to get the chance to vote 

eventually because you can’t hide from that day inevitably. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I don’t know how much of the debate of the 

total budget the hon. member wants to get into . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well, that’s the democratic process. Obviously 

we are getting two conflicting messages about the budget. 

That’s also very much part of the democratic process. The 

people I hear from think that it was a very sound budget. So we 

can debate that for, as I say, some considerable period of time. 

 

I did not say that the amount was a smaller amount, and I left 

absolutely no impression. What I said was: this is the usual 

practice of interim supply. It’s not a new practice. It’s not 

something that was invented in the last four years. 

 

In 1981, for example, and ’82 — I don’t know, you may wish to 

identify the Finance minister of the day — in 1981-82. He may 

still be sitting in the Assembly; he may be sitting across from 

me, and he may have just spoken. But in 19081-82 there was an 

interim supply passed by the Assembly, a request for one-

twelfth of the amounts budgeted, passed on March 31st. There 

was . . .  

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, we’re later than March 31st. 

 

Secondly, there was a second request in 1982 for interim 

supply, on April 27th for two-twelfths. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Make that ’81. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Sorry, ’81-82. No interim supply in ’82-83. 

In 1981-82 there was two-twelfths. So again, all I’ve simply 

said, and I’ve now repeated it several times, that the usual 

practice . . . If the hon. members are standing up saying that 

they do not intend to pass interim supply, we will simply be 

prepared to take that message back to those affected by not 

having the funds passed. Again, we can debate that for some 

time. 

 

But the hon. member knows better than most that this in no way 

stops the members. We will have the first estimates, if we finish 

interim supply today, the Department of Health. You’ve already 

indicated some of the questions. I have every confidence that 

the Minister of Health will respond to them in the appropriate 

manner. 

 

And having said that again, interim supply is, I would suggest, 

certainly in the modern history of the province, an annual 

request. If you wish me to, as I say, take back to the groups it 

effected, that will not be paid or not received the funds to which 

they’re, I believe, entitled, then we will be more than pleased to 

do that. 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I have a few questions, 

and members opposite must understand that this opposition has 

to use such opportunities as are available to get some 

information because information is not normally forthcoming 

from the government opposite. And I just want to highlight this 

in respect of two issues. One has to do with the capital cost of 

. . . I’ll use an example: the St. Paul’s Hospital at Saskatoon; 

and to use another example, the cost of the college of 

agriculture at Saskatoon, which one would anticipate would be 

in the budget, the one, of the Department of Health, and the 

other, of the Department of Advanced Education. The minister 

will know that while these projects have been announced, not a 

penny has been budgeted. 

 

The minister will know that in the Estimates books there is a 

note saying something about a Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation. The minister will also know that he 

can look high and low in this budget and find no money 

appropriated for that corporation. He can look in the front and 

he will not find in the summary of budgetary expenditure any 

money for that corporation. So the net effect, therefore, is that 

notwithstanding the fact that the Minister of Advance Education 

and others, the Premier, talks about an announcement for a 

college of agriculture building, when they have to put up the 

money, the money is zero in the budget. 

 

And others talk about the St. Paul’s Hospital in Saskatoon, but 

when it comes times to putting their money where their mouth 

is, there is zero in this budget. Member opposite  

  



 

April 7, 1986 

393 

 

says 44 million. I challenge him to find 44,000 in this budget 

for the St. Paul’s Hospital, and if it’s there, please correct me. If 

it’s there, please point out where the money is. If it’s there, 

please point out on what page it is. It obviously is not there, not 

set out in the way that every other project of a similar nature has 

been set out since World War II. It is not there so far as the 

university building is concerned. It is not there in the way that 

every similar project has been set out since World War II. I say 

it is not there. 

 

Now we will be wanting to question the individual minister, and 

there are other ministers. I used two examples only with respect 

to these projects. I want to say, very frankly, that we do not 

want to hear from them that it’s from the other corporation, and 

when we ask them where the other corporation is getting the 

money, they say they don’t know. I would expect that the 

ministers involved, the Minister of Advanced Education and the 

Minister of Health in the two examples I have given, will be 

frank with this House and explain the method by which they 

propose to finance projects of this magnitude. 

 

In the case of the Department of Advanced Education, it is a 

project announced at 75 or $80 million. In the case of the 

Department of health, it is announced variously at 30, 40, $50 

million. These are not trifling amounts and ought to attract the 

attention of the minister, and the minister ought to outline with 

some care just precisely how these projects are going to be 

financed. 

 

But in case the ministers indicate that it’s not within their 

department, in case they say that it’s somebody else who’s 

responsible and not they, I’m going to ask the Minister of 

Finance to outline how he proposes to finance the extension of 

St. Paul’s Hospital to finance the construction of the college of 

agriculture for 60, 70, $80 million. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the hon. member is quite correct when 

he states that there is a reference at the back page of the 

Estimates to the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation, a concept that I had stated publicly, which has met 

with, I might say, some public support. And it states the 

amounts of capital expenditure for health, 75.4 million; for 

Education, 50.4 million; for government generally, 21.4 

million. 

 

Just so that the hon. member is not forced into the situation of 

running all over the place in case that is one of the questions, 

the minister responsible for the property management 

corporation is the minister responsible for Supply and Services. 

And he will, as I have indicated, be the appropriate minister to 

respond to those details. 

 

Certainly you may object to the establishment of a property 

management corporation. I suppose we can debate that in the 

appropriate forum. I think that there is some merit to a property 

management corporation. It’s not something that we’re the only 

province in Canada with a property management corporation . 

the ultimate question which the hon. member, in my view, 

should be asking, or the one that should be responded to is: are 

the projects to be built? And certainly the projects are to be 

built. And the projects, as a matter of fact . . . Many of the  

third party that are affected by the establishment of the property 

management corporation believe that there is a far better chance 

for speedy construction, better control of construction, better 

control of the total construction project, through the use of a 

property management corporation. Time will tell. 

 

I happen to believe that the property management corporation is 

the correct way to go. So having said that, the ultimate question 

is: will the projects be built? Obviously we believe they will be, 

and we are assured that they will be, and we are very confident 

that they will be. and we say categorically that they will, in fact, 

be built. 

 

So having said that, I’ve indicated to the Leader of the 

Opposition where the minister responsible for the property 

management corporation, and that’s the appropriate estimates to 

debate, the existence of the property management corporation if 

you oppose it; to debate the financing, funding, and what not of 

the specific projects, the projects, the proposed date of 

construction, the tenders — if they’re at that stage — whatever 

details one wishes. That’s the appropriate estimates to get into 

those questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I am 

not now wanting to argue about the merits or otherwise of a 

property management corporation. I want to know where the 

money’s coming from. I simply want to know whether you’re 

providing this money out of your budget, or are you going to 

borrow the money? Now that’s a fairly simple question. 

 

With respect to the money required for, let us say, St. Paul’s 

Hospital, is it proposed, Mr. Minister of Finance, that that 

money be provided for out of budgetary revenues, or is it 

proposed that that money be borrowed? Or do you have another 

source of money? Would you please indicate that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — As I’ve indicated, the property 

management corporation is under the minister responsible for 

Supply and Services, and the financing and funding, funds . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . No . . . on specific projects will be 

detailed at those estimates, whenever you, or whenever the 

estimates are brought forward. So they will vary. The means of 

financing will vary. 

 

I have argued in the past, and I suppose we can debate the 

principle again, of a property management corporation that, in 

terms of the capital, at least some of the capital projects, that 

there is merit in debt-financing of projects that . . . and perhaps 

be amortized over a much longer period of time. 

 

Again, we can debate that. Academics are debating whether 

that’s a proper course or not. But the concept and the 

amortization of some of the major capital projects fight, and in 

the case of the thrust of the property management corporation, 

we’ve made it clear we’re talking about buildings, that may be 

amortized over longer periods of time, and maybe debt-

financed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister,  

  



 

April 7, 1986 

394 

 

do I take it that you simply decline to tell me where the $80 

million is going to come from that the college of agriculture is 

going to cost? I ask that question again, and I ask you: is there 

any money provided for in this budget by way of appropriation, 

or by way of borrowing, that your department will do for the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I have indicated that several of the projects 

will be debt-financed. The specific funding for the college of 

agriculture building will come from different sources, and I’ve 

indicated that in the budget speech. 

 

We expect a public contribution. There’s some discussions with 

the university as to the amount that they believe they can raise. 

We expect some contribution. I don’t have the details from the 

senior level of government, province, and the various sources. 

So the projects will have different sources of funding and 

financing, and as I’ve said now three or four times, that the 

minister responsible for Supply and Services would go through 

the detailed projects. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I am 

not interested in the detailed projects. I used those as examples. 

I ask you, sir: where is money provided in this budget for this 

corporation? Mr. Minister, you have here laid out the money 

you propose to spend that has been raised, or will be raised by 

taxes. You have here set out the money you propose to spend 

that has been or will be raised by loans, advances, and 

investments. I find neither of them providing money for this 

corporation. I ask you: where is this corporation going to get its 

money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I assume that if the projects are debt 

financed, the corporation would borrow. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — So that what you’re telling me is that 

the corporation will borrow the province’s share of the St. 

Paul’s Hospital. Is that what you’re saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — No. What I said is that there will be various 

sources of financing. Over time we see the corporation as 

generating income from some of the projects that are now in 

existence. I can think of commercial buildings. If it’s got a 

positive cash flow, it’ll be funding that way. So it’s as I said — 

the details of the projects are going to come from various types 

of financing. It may come from the cash flow of the 

corporation; it may come from surpluses in the corporation, 

when the corporation is up and operating; it may come from 

debt financing, so it’s going to vary according to the project. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, this 

corporation is an integral part of your budgeting package. As an 

integral part of your budgeting package, it is a part of your 

estimates. It is part of the Lane cook book. Now I ask you, sir, 

will you not state . . . 

 

And this is the problem that people have with your government. 

These are perfectly proper questions that we ought to be able to 

get answers to from you — clear, coherent answers as to how 

you propose to use this  

particular corporation, this management corporation, to finance 

the construction of capital works. I am sure that you must have 

an answer. You must know where the money is coming from. 

You must know where the money is coming from. Why will 

you . . . 

 

Look, Mr. Minister. You have set out here $151.2 million. Now 

that’s a very specific figure. And when I ask you where is the 

$151.2 million coming from, you say, well some of it may 

come from cash flow, and some of it may come from 

borrowing. Nonsense, Mr. Minister. You know where you 

propose to get that money. And I ask you to tell the House 

where you propose to get the 151 million. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well as I’ve indicated to the hon. member, 

there are different sources for the corporation to get the funds. 

I’ve said there’s debt — debt financing. I made that clear. I’ve 

indicated, as well, the cash flow from the corporation that will 

fund these. 

 

(1515) 

 

You asked me about the college of agriculture. I’ve already 

indicated that public contributions is going to be a source. So, 

you know, there are the various sources. I don’t know where the 

difficulty lies in that the corporation will start out obviously 

with a debt. It will borrow to start. The amounts of the various 

projects is going to, as I say, be better answered by the minister 

responsible for Supply and Services, the minister responsible 

for the corporation. 

 

But having said all of that, we see the corporation, over time, is 

going to be generating a positive cash flow. And should that 

happen, it may self finance some of the projects. That option 

will be there. That happens, I believe in the province of British 

Columbia and the province of Quebec. 

 

So the sources . . . I’ve indicated to you that the corporation will 

borrow, that many projects will be debt financed. Others will be 

financed through positive cash flow. Some, particularly the 

agriculture college, we expect a public contribution as well as 

contributions from the Government of Canada. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, the 

minister desperately tries to divert the discussion. I’m not 

talking about whether or not the sodbusters are going to 

contribute some money to the college of agriculture. I’m talking 

about the government’s share of these projects. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, as you will well know in your estimates — 

and I will just refer to page 105 — the money that is going from 

your government, which you are borrowing for the agricultural 

credit corporation, and the Crown investments corporation, and 

the potash corporation, the crop insurance corporation, Sedco, 

the municipal financing corporation, the power corporation — 

they’re here. 

 

Now we have the property management corporation that’s 

going to borrow $158.76 million. Do you acknowledge, sir, that 

this $158.76 — if you had  

  



 

April 7, 1986 

395 

 

set up your estimates as you did last year — would have meant 

that your deficit was increased by $158.76 million? Will you at 

least admit that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I note very, very carefully that the 

Leader of the Opposition is not debating the merits or the 

demerits of a property management corporation — and it’s for 

obvious reasons. 

 

The fact that we establish a corporation that may make some 

financial changes does not take away from the merits, in our 

view, of the corporation. The fact that we believe that the 

corporation to be a good idea, that we believe that the 

corporation is good management, that we believe that the 

corporation will bring about some substantive savings to the 

people of Saskatchewan in its operation, should not take away 

from the effects. And we believe it be a good idea. We believe 

it to be a very sound idea. I wish we had thought of it first but 

we didn’t. The province of British Columbia’s had one for some 

time, the province of Quebec has had one for some time, the 

province of Manitoba, for other reasons, had one. It’s got some 

merit. So the fact that it has different effects should not take 

away from the soundness of the idea, and I don’t believe that it 

does. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’ll 

ask my question again. Do you acknowledge, sir, that the $158 

million which you are borrowing for the property management 

corporation would, if you set up your books this year the same 

way as you did last year, would have increased our deficit by 

$158 million and would have produced a combined deficit of 

$547 million? Do you acknowledge that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I’ve indicated that the soundness of 

the idea should not take away from the effects. For you to 

argue, or the opposition to argue, that Crown corporations were 

not used in the past to affect budgetary transactions . . . I refer 

you back to your transfers of Ipsco shares in the past, which had 

an effect on the budgetary bottom line, if I can use that phrase. I 

take a look at the grain car corporation as having some effect on 

the budgetary bottom line. So you know, if you want to call the 

budget a “cook book,” I mean, I could . . . I think that perhaps 

you guys are the Betty Crockers of budgetary budgets, and so 

your argument, I don’t think, is a fair one. 

 

Again, if you want to debate the merits or demerits of the 

existence of a property management corporation, fair debate. 

The fact that a good idea has certain effects, I don’t think takes 

away from the merit of the idea. And secondly, the use of 

Crown corporations in the past, not only by your government or 

the federal Liberal government or anybody else, has been a 

practice. We believe that there are some fundamental benefits to 

the people of Saskatchewan through the use of a property 

management corporation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I take 

it therefore that you are acknowledging that your deficit, if you 

calculated your books this year the same way you did last year, 

would be $547 million. And if you’re not acknowledging that, I 

would ask you to explain why it is not true. 

I look at this property management corporation and I look at the 

list of items, and so far as we have any information on them 

they are all items which in previous years covered by tax 

money. Now again I want to use as examples — examples only 

— just how you propose to move this $158 million which 

you’re going to borrow for the property management 

corporation and how . . . to move that over to St. Paul’s. I want 

to just use that as an example. 

 

I want you to explain the financial transactions — and I’m not 

interested in the Health transactions now: I direct this to the 

Minister of Finance — how this money is to be moved to St. 

Paul’s, and roughly how it is to be recorded in the books of the 

province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Let’s assume a project that is debt financed, 

that the property management corporation borrows on the credit 

of the province to finance a capital project. The capital project 

may well be, depending if — let’s assume a hospital — that the 

government will pay the annual grant, whatever level that will 

be, to the hospital board. The hospital board will make its 

annual payment, whatever it is, to the property management 

corporation. That I expect to be a typical example of how it will 

flow through on hospitals. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Do I take then that the proposal is that 

money would be lent by the property management corporation 

to St. Paul’s? You speak of debt financing and that St. Paul’s 

would then pay back that money over time and that St. Paul’s 

would get the money, presumably, from the Saskatchewan 

Hospital Services Plan. 

 

And I’m talking now about St. Paul’s because it is a project 

which is there and we can all see it. I don’t see much action 

there in four years but there’s some hoardings up there in any 

case. But we’ll debate that again with the Minister of Health. 

 

Right now I’m interested in the financial transactions. And you 

are saying now, Mr. Minister, that there will not be a grant to 

St. Paul’s but there will be a loan to St. Paul’s for the hospital 

project. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — The property management corporation will 

build. The grant will go to the hospital or whatever the 

traditional funding — to the board — and it will pay the 

property management corporation whatever the annual costs 

are. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Do I then understand you to say, sir, 

that the property management corporation . . . It may well build, 

but I want to press you on this point. On this type of project — 

and there are many like it — are you saying that the property 

management corporation is going to do the building, meaning 

going to do the contracting? Or alternatively, are you saying 

that the property management corporation is gong to own the 

asset? What are you saying with respect to that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — That is that you have to pick and choose the 

asset, because the hospitals, the hospital board, will continue to 

own their facility. It will be financed, built by the property 

management corporation, owned by the hospital, funded 

through the consolidated  

  



 

April 7, 1986 

396 

 

fund through the annual grant. 

 

There are others where it may choose to finance it out of cash 

flow. Supposing the hospital has its own source of funds. It may 

want to make some payment towards it. It may not be the sole 

source. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’m 

dealing with only the Crown’s interest. And it seems very clear, 

therefore, that the money will be lent by property management 

corporation to St. Paul’s, and St. Paul’s will no longer get a 

grant to expand its hospital. There is no way that St. Paul’s has 

to pay back anything to the property management corporation 

unless somebody lends them money. It follows therefore that 

the property management corporation is lending money to St. 

Paul’s for the construction project. If this is not true, then I 

repeat my first question. 

 

Take $100,000 and follow it through from page 107 in the 

Estimates to its incorporation into St. Paul’s Hospital, the 

project which is there. And as I say, this is one example. I could 

go through others, but I want to use one hospital and one 

university building. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well again, I mean, you take the project of 

a hospital. The property management corporation would borrow 

the funds to build. The government would continue to fund the 

hospital through the normal budgetary process. The hospital 

would then pay off the loan to the property management 

corporation. 

 

That may not be the sole source. The hospital may have 

generated some funds. I mean, it’s going to be dependent on the 

project. It’s going to depend on the negotiations with the 

particular third party in this case, whether it be the university or 

whether it be the hospital. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I 

think we’ve established that point; that what we’re now going 

to see is that the Crown, the minister is going to borrow money 

for the property management corporation. That’s what page 107 

says: consolidate fund loans, advances, and investments. That’s 

your department, Mr. Minister. And it says that you are going to 

advance to the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation $158 million. That’s what it says. Now you tell me 

that the corporation is going to lend that money to St. Paul’s. 

That’s exactly what you said — exactly what you said. 

 

Look, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I am dealing with a 

Minister of Finance who’s a lawyer, and he has got an 

obligation to explain the nature of the transaction. Mr. 

Chairman, I want to nail this down, because he is not asserting, 

he is not now asserting — in fact, he denied — that the property 

management corporation would own the addition to St. Paul’s. 

 

(1530) 

 

He said the hospital board would own the addition to St. Paul’s. 

He says that the property management corporation is going to 

put up the money — I say, lend it — and has got a right to get it 

paid back. The property management corporation has a right to 

get the money  

back from St. Paul’s. If any of those statements is not true, I 

wish the minister would indicate which is not true. 

 

We are now talking about the Crown share, and I’m not asking 

the minister to deal with whether or not any auxiliary is 

providing some additional moneys. I’m talking solely about the 

money which is flowing through the property management 

corporation. I say to you that what you have told me, sir, is that 

your department is borrowing money; were going to advance it 

to the property management corporation; the property 

management corporation is going to lend it to St. Paul’s; and St. 

Paul’s in due course will repay the property management 

corporation with interest; and they will presumably get their 

money from the Crown since they don’t have other sources of 

income — any significant sources of income. 

 

Therefore what we see is the hospital is not longer getting 

grants for capital purposes but only loans for capital purposes. 

And they are going to pay back those loans from grants from 

the operating costs of the hospitals. That, I think, is exactly 

what you told me, and if that is not accurate, I would like you to 

clear that up and then we can go on to see whether the same 

policy applies to universities. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — That will probably be the way it operates. I 

can’t envisage every project as to the exact financing in every 

project. As I say, the property management corporation from 

time to time may be doing it out of its own positive cash flow, 

so that that option we expect may well be there from time to 

time as well. And that’s something it can decide to do. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — So far as the recipient of the loan is 

concerned, the people that used to get grants — the hospitals 

who used to get grants but who will now get loans — for them 

it doesn’t matter whether the property management corporation 

gets the money from a cash flow or not. Presumably they’re 

going to have to pay it back with interest. If this isn’t the policy 

of the government with respect to these very substantial sums of 

money that are listed on page 134 of the Estimates, then I think 

it would be helpful if the minister made that clear. 

 

Now moving on to the university, is the same thing equally true 

with respect to the college of agriculture? And I’ll use that 

example. Is it proposed that the property management 

corporation would own the college of agriculture building or 

that they would simply lend the money to the university who 

would own the college of agriculture building? And again I’d 

say, Mr. Minister, these are large sums of money. These are not 

picky items. And this is a brand-new concept that is much more 

a part of the budget than it is to be directed to the minister in 

charge of the property management corporation since he can 

hardly be expected to explain how this is going to fit into the 

fiscal plan. 

 

I’m asking you again, sir, with respect to the university, is it 

proposed that — again, I’ll take the example of the college of 

agriculture, and again dealing only with the Crown’s share: is it 

proposed that that money be advanced to the university, that 

they borrow it from the property management corporation, or is 

it proposed that  

  



 

April 7, 1986 

397 

 

the building would be owned by the property management 

corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — My understanding is that the building be 

owned by the university. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, do I 

take, therefore, that what used to be grants for university 

buildings now are loans for university buildings from the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. I look at 

something like the college of agriculture which may have a 

Crown loan . . . carrying a Crown loan of $70 million. I don’t 

know what it will turn out to be, but let me use that figure. And 

the carrying cost of that loan would be perhaps 12 per cent, 

perhaps 10; but I’ll say 10 per cent, then. Then the university 

grants will have to be increased by 7 million for that building, 

and a given amount for each other building which is financed in 

the same way, quite apart from other costs that the university 

might have. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well any project would be funded that way. 

That’s how it would in fact operate, that the grants would have 

to increase to deal with the added carrying cost of amortizing 

that particular project over a much longer period of time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — So that, Mr. Minister, and I use that 

one example . . . Next year, if this method of financing should 

be continued, and I trust it will not be . . . and this is a very 

different argument from whether we have a property 

management corporation. You can certainly have a property 

management corporation without massive debt financing. It’s a 

very, very different argument. 

 

But I come to the issue of interest on the public debt. Would the 

minister agree, therefore, that in a few years the figure of 

interest on the public debt will state only a small part of the 

interest on the public debt, and in fact we will have to hunt for 

interest on the public debt in the estimates of the Minister of 

Advanced Education because he will be paying 10, 15, 20, 25, 

$30 million to the universities to cover interest on money 

borrowed by the Crown to finance hospitals. And so that we 

will have, therefore, very, very large amounts of interest. 

 

And will he not agree that this is a very substantial change in 

policy. The policy heretofore has been that organizations which 

were essentially self-financing in the sense that they acquired 

money other than from tax sources — borrowed; people that 

acquired money primarily from tax sources were financed by 

grants; and that you propose to change that policy. You propose 

to make the university something like the power corporation, in 

the belief that it can collect money separate and apart from 

taxes when you and I know it can’t. Mr. Minister, will you not 

acknowledge that this will mean that massive extra amounts of 

interest are going to be paid by the next generation of 

Saskatchewan people if this policy is continued for any 

appreciable period of time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I freely acknowledge that perhaps on  

many of the capital projects that future generations should, in 

fact, help pay for the cost of those projects. If we have a 

hospital that has a life of 50 years, it’s going to be used by the 

people for the next 50 years, that it’s fair for them to make 

some contribution towards the cost of the project. Yes, that is a 

change of policy. 

 

The more broad debate as to what once includes in capital or 

capital budgeting is one that I suppose we could get into, but 

certainly it is predicated on the basis that future generations will 

help pay the cost of projects that they will use. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — But, Mr. Minister, let me take the 

university, for example. Past generations paid for the current 

buildings; you say that future buildings should be paid for by 

future generations, and this generation shouldn’t pay for any of 

it. That is essentially your argument, and it is your argument 

because your government is so profligate that it cannot provide 

its fair share of the capital cost. 

 

We inherited a university campus that was paid for by past 

generations. It seems perfectly . . . And we are not . . . Boy, oh 

boy, I am having some comments from members opposite about 

private business. Can one imagine a business conducting itself 

on the basis that it was given a very substantial equity and that 

one generation of management does not charge to current 

account any depreciation on all that substantial equity — not 

charging that against current — it is not providing for any 

future capital out of current it is therefore not providing for any 

past capital out of current earnings or any future capital out of 

current earnings, and that is recommended as a business 

proposition — that is recommended as a business proposition. 

 

Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, if in fact we were charging 

depreciation against current expenses, depreciation on all the 

assets which we had acquired, then an argument which says that 

future generations should pay for their future assets because we 

would be charging against our current expenses some of the 

past assets, that would be an argument. But you want to take 

everything that was handed to you, use it for free — not add 

your share in your period of time at the helm — and then say to 

future generations, you go ahead and pay for what you use. We 

are using what was passed to us and we’re using it free. 

 

I suspect you may even go farther. You may even go farther and 

sell off something that your received from the past generation, 

and you will be in the happy position of having some of the 

assets you use paid for by the last generation and some of it by 

the next generation, and none of it by this generation, because 

you have so mismanaged the financial shares of this province, 

that even taking from generations past and future you can’t 

manage to balance the books. 

 

That seems to be the sad state in which we’re in, but it seems 

very, very clear, Mr. Minister, that you do not intend to use the 

business approach of charging depreciation on assets which are 

here, and borrowing for future assets — that’s a defensible 

position — or for paying as you go, which has been rule in this 

province  

  



 

April 7, 1986 

398 

 

since World War II. You have decided that you are gong to take 

what you got for the past generations, make no contribution to 

it, not add anything in this year and in this generation, but force 

the next generation to pay for the assets that they use, even 

though we’re not paying for the assets that we use. 

 

Now that, Mr. Minister, is financing which is not in the best 

interests of Saskatchewan people; it’s not in keeping with the 

long tradition of “pay as you go” in these areas of highways and 

university buildings and hospitals, where we have not burdened 

future generations with debt, and we have welcomed what past 

generations have passed on to us. 

 

You want to say, yes indeed, we welcome what that past 

generation has passed on to us, a fully paid-for university 

campus, but we’re not going to pass on to the next generation 

any fully paid-for university campus — no way. We are going 

to say, if you use it in the future, you pay for it. That’s what 

future generations shall do, but not us. We are going to use 

what was passed onto us free and clear. 

 

And that is the proposal you’re putting forward in this budget, 

and I say, Mr. Minister, that it is either unfair to the past 

generations for not . . . and we can’t remedy that, obviously . . . 

they have given it to us, and we have the same obligation, Mr. 

Minister, to add our share to the pot and hand it on to the next 

generation, and it is that which you’re refusing to do. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — If anybody thinks that the present 

generation is getting off scot-free to pay for things like the 

Sturdy Stone Building in the province of Saskatchewan, it paid 

through the nose for that particular building, and it paid through 

the nose for many other projects implemented. 

 

Let me tell you . . . Oh, don’t tell us there was no deficit. 

Nobody out there believes it. Nobody else believes it out there 

that those things were financed without a deficit. They were 

financed by the present generation and paid through the nose by 

the present generation. 

 

(1545) 

 

And let me tell you, in terms of the need for a property 

management corporation, the Sturdy Stone Building is a prime 

example; that there’s a supposed commercial building — 

primarily a parkade never been utilized to 50 per cent; not 

necessary in terms of the size. Government offices had to be put 

in there. I’m referring to the liquor board, that we listened to 

debate here for one year one time, and the government denying 

that the liquor board store was going . . . the previous 

government going into the Sturdy Stone Building to try and bail 

it out and make it, allow it to generate some income 

 

Certainly there’s a change in policy. We’ve made that 

abundantly clear. We also acknowledge that in many cases there 

are assets that have already been paid for, but to say that the 

present generation made no contribution is terribly wrong. The 

present generation has made a significant contribution to capital 

projects throughout the province of Saskatchewan, and they 

have paid, as I say, in  

many cases, very much through the nose. 

 

We believe that over the long haul the property management 

corporation will lead to savings for the people of Saskatchewan. 

It will lead to savings in different ways. One, in terms of 

consolidation of design and building activities within 

government. Secondly, it will lead to — at least based on the 

past experience of other property management corporations — a 

better allocation of program expenditures, that now the costs of 

space and some of those are now integrated into the cost of 

programs. We get a far better valuation of the cost of programs. 

The very fact that in many cases managers now have to take 

into account the cost of calculating space costs in their 

budgetary proposals has led to some savings in other 

jurisdictions. 

 

The advantages of using the property management corporation 

for things like capital leasing of some assets, some major 

acquisitions that may be leased over a period of time — there 

have been savings and substantial savings in other jurisdictions 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I’ve never denied, and I’ve 

freely admitted that this is a change in policy. But the very fact 

that it’s a change in policy should not make the concept wrong. 

 

I believe the concept has merit. The concept has merit in other 

jurisdictions. It has worked in other jurisdictions. It’s been more 

broadly applied in other jurisdictions. It’s had the support and a 

more broad application in the province of British Columbia by 

the New Democratic Party. So this is not something new. As I 

say, the concept has merit; the approach has merit. But to argue 

that the present generation is not making any contribution is 

wrong. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, as the 

minister well knows, when I talk about the present generation, I 

mean starting with the change of policy. Obviously since we 

have a continuous policy since World War II of paying for 

hospitals, nursing homes, and highways, and university 

buildings out of current revenue, this generation up to now has 

paid its fair share. 

 

It is this year where we’re changing, and it’s that which I am 

saying needs to be explained. Dealing only with the theory of 

the thing, how is beneficial to have St. Paul’s Hospital financed 

by a loan rather than a grant? Just take that as an example. How 

will it improve the efficiency — after all, the project is under 

way — how will it change the design? How will it improve the 

efficiency? How will it in any way assist you in ascertaining the 

cost of delivery of the program? 

 

I will ask you those questions because those are the arguments 

you put forward for financing St. Paul’s on the basis of a loan 

rather than a grant. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, we simply had to make the arbitrary 

decisions when the decision was made to proceed with the 

property management corporation of what is included. We 

started somewhere; we’ve made the decision. We can debate 

that from some considerable period of time. But there is an 

argument, for example, on schools that if the property 

management corporations is able to borrow on the strengths of 

he province, an  

  



 

April 7, 1986 

399 

 

immediate saving is the small premium that school boards are 

paying to the local municipal financing commission, or the 

Local Government Financing Commission, for what funds they 

did get. So there are arguments for some savings already in 

some of the public buildings that perhaps a third party does 

some borrowing already. 

 

We made the decision to go with the property management 

corporation. We can debate if we did it two years ago. It would 

have had the same effect, and the debate would have been then; 

we’ve done it now. If we had have left it for another two years, 

it would still have the same merits, in my view. And I will 

predict that in the not too distant future you will see virtually 

every province go with the property management corporation. I 

believe you will see the federal government go with it. I believe 

that you will see capital budgeting, as an initiative, be very, 

very well debated in the next month of two in the U.S. 

Congress. We may disagree with it. We may agree to disagree. 

But we’ve made the decision with the property management 

corporation to proceed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, we 

seem to be unable to conduct a discussion here without 

discussing the merits of the property management corporation, 

and that is not at issue. We can debate that in another forum. 

 

What I’m asking is: what are the merits of financing hospitals, 

the hospital construction, through a property management 

corporation? That is the question I ask, the St. Paul’s project. 

Now what is the merit of saying to St. Paul’s: no more grants, 

you’ve got to borrow the money. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — We may have some management benefits. 

The hon. members knows full well from time to time, 

historically, in the province, there have been differences 

between the Department of Supply and Services and the 

Department of Health and what should or shouldn’t be. We 

hope that with some consolidation of activities that we get a 

more concerted approach to design and use and benefits. 

 

You can make an argument, why did you put St. Paul’s in when 

you’re starting out now — fair debate. We chose to put all or 

most, if not all, the buildings under construction in to get the 

corporation established. You obviously disagree with that, but 

we see some, if nothing else in the future, certainly some 

management benefits. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, you 

could have achieved those management benefits very, very 

simply by simply taking this $158 million, putting it in your 

estimates, having the property management corporation then 

make grants. 

 

I’m not recommending this, but you could have got all of the 

benefits which you purport to want to achieve — virtually all of 

them — and still had your books represent the true costs of 

providing services in Saskatchewan, rather than disguising 158 

million of budgetary costs and saying that it is somehow a 

corporation and is not budgetary costs. There is no reason for 

saying that you have to have a property management 

corporation, that  

you have to force it to borrow, to achieve all those benefits 

which you seek to achieve. 

 

But I want to ask one other question, and it is this. Am I then to 

believe that the property management corporation is going to be 

the one which will, by and large, supervise the construction 

projects of virtually all the hospitals and all the university 

buildings and all the government buildings and all the parks 

buildings in this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — To respond first. You take a single project. 

And I may agree with your argument, but the property 

management corporation is broader than one project. So I don’t 

accept that singling one out is fair to the concept of a property 

management corporation. Obviously, on a project like a 

hospital, there are many players, and a property management 

corporation continues to bring all those players into design and 

the building of a facility. So there’s no exclusion of the players 

by virtue of the corporation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — We’re reasonably satisfied to ask a few 

questions here. Am I right then in my assumption that . . . Since 

you say that economies are going to be achieved by 

standardizing construction and other like economies, am I right 

in believing that all the major Health projects, all the major 

Advanced Education projects, a significant number of the 

Department of Education projects, and all the Parks and 

Renewable Resources capital projects of a significant nature 

will be organized by the property management corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — As the corporation develops and assumes 

its expertise, and I assume as well that it gets the confidence of 

those involved, that yes, we would see that evolving. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And you say . . . I’m not quite sure 

why the confidence of those involved is too important if the 

property management corporation is putting up all the money. 

It’s relatively easy to get the confidence of the people who need 

your money. It seems to me, therefore, that the property 

management corporation will in effect be making all the major 

construction management decisions for that range of projects. 

It’s inevitable from what you say. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — If I can respond to that part . . . I’m sure the 

hon. member knows of many situations where perhaps the 

government has put up the money in the past and the very fact 

of putting up the money does not automatically obtain the 

confidence of the third party involved; that they may have some 

differences of opinion — so that’s what I was referring to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I 

want to review what I think is an easier set of questions, and it 

has to do with Parks and Renewable Resources capital. Where 

the asset is to be owned by the Crown it seems to me a 

relatively easier question as to whether or not the role of the 

property management corporation is likely to be intrusive. 

 

Is it understood — and I see the minister in charge of the 

property management corporation is about so he can  

  



 

April 7, 1986 

400 

 

doubtless assist us in the committee here — is it thought that, 

for example, if a ski-lift is going to be constructed in a 

provincial park that the property management corporation 

would do that sort of work? Is that the type of things that will 

be done? I say this because I look at page 73 of the Estimates 

and there is not money in there for park construction at all. And 

since I am sure that there are many park projects that have been 

announced, and there are many more that will be announced of 

all kinds and shapes, and which I’m sure is true of many other 

public projects — I’m not suggesting for a moment that the 

public will anticipate that they will be built, but some of them 

may be built and they may well be interested in knowing since 

. . . I speak with respect to the parks project — there’s no 

money in the budget. What was it you had in mind? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I don’t have the details of what parks 

facility and resource development . . . The total amount direct is 

somewhere in the range of $3.2 million allocated to the property 

management corporation. I don’t know what those projects are. 

I can attempt to obtain them, but I don’t have them. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: —  

 

Resolved, that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 

service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1987, the sum 

of $292,309,960 be granted out of the consolidated fund. 

 

Motion agree to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Chairman, I move the following 

resolution: 

 

Resolved, that a sum not exceeding $71,915,580 be 

granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 

ending March 31, 1987. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I don’t 

have my Estimates here exactly but that’s one-twelfth of the 

heritage fund, is it, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes. 

 

Motion agree to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Chairman, I move the following 

resolution: 

 

Resolved, that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 

service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1987, the sum 

of $71,915,580 be granted out of the Saskatchewan 

Heritage Fund. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — The next item is special projects fund,  

for the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I move the following resolution: 

 

Resolved, that a sum not exceeding $78,460 be granted to 

Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 

31, 1987. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Chairman, I move the following 

resolution: 

 

Resolved, that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 

service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1987, the sum 

of $78,460 be granted out of the special projects fund. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I move the resolutions be now read the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to the resolutions read a first time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, I move that the 

resolutions be now read a second time and agreed to. 

 

By leave of the Assembly, the said resolutions were read a 

second time and agreed to. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, I move: 

 

That Bill No. 19, An Act for the Granting to her Majesty 

Certain Sums of Money for the Public Service for the 

Fiscal year Ending on March 31, 1987, be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly, I move that the 

Bill be now read a second and third time. 

 

Motion agreed, the Bill read a second and third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister like to introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’d 

like to take this opportunity to introduce the officials that will 

be assisting me in this set of estimates. Seated beside me to my 

left is Walter Podiluk,  

  



 

April 7, 1986 

401 

 

deputy minister of Health. Across from Walter is Don 

Philippon, assistant deputy minister of Health. To my right here 

is George Loewen, associate deputy minister of Health. Directly 

behind me is Dick Bailey, assistant deputy minister of Health, 

and beside Dick is Lawrence Krahn, the director of 

administrative services. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I’d like to make a few brief introductory 

remarks before we get into the estimates in themselves. I think 

also at this time I would like to indicate there are a number of 

other branch heads at the back of the Chamber that will be 

assisting us as we go through the estimates. Mr. Chairman, I 

think it’s appropriate that Health should be the first of the 

departments on the estimates of this session of the legislature, 

because I think being number one and being the first one 

reflects the position of Saskatchewan health care on the 

Canadian scene. And, Mr. Chairman, I don’t intend, as I said 

earlier, to make a long opening statement. During the throne 

speech debate, and the budget debate over the past couple of 

weeks, my colleagues on this side of the House have certainly 

enunciated very articulately this government’s commitment to 

health care, and I think it has been described and documented 

very well. 

 

However, Mr. Chairman, I want to mention just a few 

highlights of the 1986-87 Health budget. First of all, Mr. 

Chairman, in the 1986-87 budget, for operating and capital, the 

total budget is $1.2 billion. And that’s an increase, Mr. 

Chairman, I should say an increase over last year of 11.6 per 

cent. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, we are providing $75 million for the 

largest construction, capital construction, in hospital and special 

care homes. We’ve heard some discussion of this a little 

between the Leader of the Opposition and the Finance minister. 

That’s for capital for special care homes, hospitals, and other 

health care facilities, and this certainly reflects a continuation of 

our five-year plan towards capital construction. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we are continuing our efforts to administer 

health care programs and services as efficiently as possible, so 

that the new dollars can go where they belong, and that is 

directly into services for the public. 

 

Mr. Chairman, in 1986-87, the Health budget reflects our 

government’s continuing priority on health care for the people 

of Saskatchewan, and I welcome this opportunity to discuss the 

1986-87 Health estimates with the members of the Chamber. 

 

So therefore, without any further discussion, Mr. Chairman, I 

would certainly be willing to enter into a complete and 

thorough description of this year’s health care budget. I say, as I 

take my seat, an improvement, and addition of 11.6 per cent 

over last year — I think substantial in any constituency, in any 

part of this country. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — My colleague from Athabasca just now 

referred to the spirited government caucus. I’ll tell you, it 

reminds me of a bunch of basset hounds that have been 

drugged. You not only look sad; you look dead, as well. 

 

I say to the minister that if you welcome the opportunity to 

discuss your record in Health, I wonder why you have 

consistently avoided appearing at the debates which have been 

organized by the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. The latest 

display of courage on your part was in Prince Albert, where I 

gather no one — not you, not the member from P.A.-Duck 

Lake, and not the member from Prince Albert, nobody . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Sleazy wouldn’t even turn up. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Sleazy did not apparently have the courage 

to go and face the music. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have never seen . . . I know of no parallel for the 

rapid decline in the quality of health care that this province has 

seen over the last four years, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I will 

admit, as critical as I am of your effectiveness as a government, 

I will admit the effectiveness of your last campaign in ’82. 

Anything which had any shadow of substance became a major 

crisis for which the former administration was personally 

responsible. But I don’t recall you campaigning on the issue of 

health care. 

 

(1615) 

 

And I suggest therefore, Mr. Minister, that that may well 

confirm what we say, and that is that we had a health care 

system in 1982 which met the needs and the expectations of 

Saskatchewan people. And they aren’t always the same. 

Clearly, Mr. Minister, the health care system which we have 

today meets neither their needs nor their expectations. 

 

Mr. Minister, there are any number of stories which illustrate 

the depth of concern with respect to health care, Mr. Minister. 

You can stand — as I gather one report did, from one Regina 

television station — you can stand in the doorway and simply 

ask people as they’re coming in or going out, are these hospitals 

adequately staffed? And the answer, in eight cases out of 10 for 

the reporter who did it, was no — in eight cases out of 10. 

 

Well, you may think that to be another vicious attack on the 

Conservative Party. All I can say is, you people are suffering 

from a bewildering variety of enemies. It used to be just the 

trade unions. Now you have added to that the nurses . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — The teachers. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — The teachers. I gather from comments of 

the Minister of Social Services the other day, you’ve added to 

the list of vicious, unfair enemies, the Ombudsman. And I think 

when we get to the Provincial Auditor’s report, we’re going to 

find once again — because I have never seen a report quite like 

that — we are going to find yet another vicious, unfair enemy. 

 

Well one of the enemies, Mr. Minister, which you apparently 

seem to feel is vicious and unfair, are the Saskatchewan Union 

of Nurses. Mr. Minister, they are not creating this issue out of 

thin air. They are having such success with their campaign 

because their comments fall  

  



 

April 7, 1986 

402 

 

on fertile ground. 

 

When the nurses say our health care system and our hospitals 

aren’t adequately staffed, their campaign is so phenomenally 

successful because they hear everyone saying, that’s right, 

they’re not adequately staffed. You can talk to virtually anyone 

who’s been in a hospital recently — you can talk to virtually 

anyone — and they’ll tell you that they haven’t adequate staff. 

 

I just read a letter in the newspaper. I didn’t recognize the name, 

and I’ve been in politics long enough in Regina that most active 

supporters for the NDP, I recognize their names. I didn’t 

recognize this name. This person wrote that . . .  

 

An Hon. Member: — A new one every week. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — There are so many new ones, that’s 

probably true. The member from Canora asked if that’s not a 

new supporter. There are so many new supporters and converts 

to the NDP that I’m probably being presumptuous to suggest 

that anyone could remember all their names. 

 

In any event, this person, I thought, made a valid point. The 

person said, my child was in the hospital. There were 30 

children in that wing and two nurse. I sat with my child and 

read government ad after government ad after government ad. 

And as I sat there giving my child the care that ought to have 

come from a trained professional, I wonder about this 

government’s sense of priorities. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Minister, about this government’s sense of 

priorities. I wonder if it really appropriate to be underfunding 

our hospitals and lavishing money on other things. 

 

Mr. Minister, we just completed a discussion with . . . It wasn’t 

a discussion; it was an ill-fated attempt to get some information 

out of the Minister of Finance. He believes in open government 

about as much as the rest of you do. We attempted to get some 

information out of him with respect to some spectacular 

development products — spectacular in the cost and spectacular 

in the looseness of the financial arrangements. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, you appear to be giving about $20 million to 

Peter Pocklington, a man who, as I say, his financial affairs are 

well chronicled. I recall in question period, when it was 

announced with him sitting in the press gallery, reading an 

article from the Maclean’s magazine which suggest his Royal 

Bank was foreclosing on his house. You’ve got $20 million for 

him. You have vast sums of money for Weyerhaeuser under the 

most elastic of arrangements with respect to paying it back. 

You’ve got 700 million for Estevan. 

 

Mr. Minister, the list goes on and on and on and on. Why have 

you not some money for hospitals? Mr. Minister, why can you 

not do something meaningful with respect to hospitals? Why 

can’t you get the staffing level up to the point where those who 

are professionals in the hospital . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

Well why don’t you people call an election? If you think  

your health program is so great, then call an election. Call an 

election. If you haven’t got the nerve to call an election, then at 

least show up at some of the debates put on by SUN. 

 

I say, Mr. Minister, that you haven’t got the courage. It may 

well be that you have the good sense not to show up. It may 

well be that your record in health care is absolutely 

indefensible. I think that’s probably the case. I think your 

record is indefensible, Mr. Minister, and I want to congratulate 

you on having the good sense not to go out in public and try and 

defend it, as you haven’t. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Again, Mr. Chairman, if you listen to the 

consistency and the logic of the member opposite, he stood on 

his feet at first and said, why don’t you go? When he sat down 

he said, I’m glad you’re not going. So I don’t know just what 

logic he is using. 

 

But before I begin discussing the hospitals, I’d just like to make 

it very abundantly clear to everyone here the credibility of the 

person that was on his feet previously. I have a little newsletter 

he sends out to the people of Regina Centre. He happened to 

send this out on March 25, 1986. And he happens to say this 

about health care. 

 

He says the PCs have allowed our health care system to 

deteriorate. As he says now, we need more nurses, we need 

much better home care — although we put more money into 

home care than his party ever did — and we need more nursing 

home beds. He puts this in brackets. He says: 

 

Did you know that the PCs are planning only 30 beds for 

all of Regina over the coming three years? 

 

Mr. Chairman, that is simply unadulterated . . . untrue. What is 

coming in Regina on special care homes is 118 beds — 30 at 

the Salvation Army, 48 at Santa Maria, and 29 extra ones in the 

new rehab centre. So, Mr. Minister, before you ever stand in the 

legislature, one of the basic rules of politics that you have never 

learned, my friend, is get your facts right before you stand up 

and shoot off your mouth. 

 

So certainly I think . . . And that’s what you’re saying — 30 

beds. It’s 118. He speaks as if he was the big advocate of 

nursing care in Saskatchewan. I went to the Regina meeting, 

right in his seat, in the Regina Inn, right in the middle of Regina 

Centre, but I didn’t see the member opposite anywhere there. I 

didn’t see him there are all. No. He’s the big man. He says, well 

I’m concerned about nursing care. He wouldn’t show up at the 

meeting in his own seat. That’s his concern. That’s his 

hypocrisy. 

 

I can tell you, when there was a meeting in . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Yes, they were there. They tried. But he wasn’t 

there. He wasn’t there. He’s the big advocate. He’s standing up 

saying the great concern he has. He hasn’t got the decency to 

the nurses of Saskatchewan to show up in his own seat . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Or the guts. That’s right. 

 

But I want to say to you, if you think 11.6 per cent increase is 

declining health care, I don’t know what you would expect to 

be an adequate amount of people’s funds and  

  



 

April 7, 1986 

403 

 

taxation to be put into health care. If you believe one-third of 

the expenditure of the budget of Saskatchewan is not for the 

provision of adequate health care then I question where you’re 

coming from also. 

 

And we’ll go back to the nursing positions. We have put in over 

430 nursing positions in the last four years. And that, let me 

remind you of something that I know isn’t music to your ears, 

but that comes because of a cut-back of 5 per cent in nursing 

staff to July 1st, 1976, by the NDP government, because they 

felt it was in better interest to the people of Saskatchewan to 

buy more potash mines with their money rather than to keep 

nurses at the bedside. That’s the scenario. So I question where 

you’re coming from, and your facts. 

 

And also, while I’m on my feet, I’ll give you a few other ideas 

that you can listen to. Did you know that we lead Canada, and 

we are 36 per cent above the Canadian average in the number of 

approved general beds per capita? Were you aware of that? 

Thirty-six per cent above. And we’re building more beds in the 

hospitals. University Hospital is getting two new floors. And 

also that we lead Canada and are 21 per cent above the 

Canadian average in its number of general hospital nursing staff 

per capita — 21 per cent above the Canadian average. And you 

have the audacity to stand up and say things are declining. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, perhaps the reason why I have such 

audacity is because I am in such numerous company. Virtually 

everybody in this province who has ever given a thought to our 

health care system has said that this system is collapsing, and 

that is not an exaggeration. That is not an exaggeration. I 

commended the minister on his good sense in not going out n 

public and defending what is an indefensible record. 

 

I also want to congratulate the minister on his good sense in his 

reading material. Mr. Minister, I will send all newsletters that I 

send out, I’ll send them to you, and no doubt as time goes on, 

you will do a better job of defending your department in the 

legislature. So I want to congratulate you on reading a very find 

piece of written material, Mr. Minister. I want to congratulate 

you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, the member from 

Moosomin ought to recognize looking pretty silly and stupid, as 

you have over the last four years as well. You ought to 

recognize that condition. 

 

Mr. Minister . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — You know, I think we can set the tone of 

this discussion if we keep it with the member whom  

you are questioning, and not talk to other members in the 

House. So let us keep the discussion going back and forth 

between you and the minister and we’ll make progress. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I agree that any contribution made by the 

member from Moosomin in this debate is bound to lower the 

quality of the debate. I well agree, Mr. Chairman. I thank you 

for what is a common sense ruling. 

 

Mr. Minister, one of the problems we unquestionably have, and 

I’ll ask you to comment on this, is that the nursing homes 

appear to be full of — not full, I’m sorry . . . the hospitals 

appear to have a large number of people in them who don’t 

really require hospital care in the normal sense. They are people 

who require nursing home care, perhaps a level of home care. 

Mr. Minister, I wonder when you’re going to get around to 

dealing with that problem, as distinct from talking about it. 

 

We have heard an endless amount of talk about nursing home 

beds and very, very little action, to the point where the problem 

has got to be acute. I don’t know, Mr. Minister . . . if we got the 

nursing home patients out of the hospital, I don’t know whether 

or not we’d have enough hospital beds, Mr. Minister. We might 

or might not. But that is so theoretical at the moment, the 

question is not worth discussing. The point is . . . 

 

(1630) 

 

An Hon. Member: — Do they hate you guys out there! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, the member thinks they hate us. I 

say, if you think they hate us, then give them a chance to get 

even with us. Call an election. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you not admit . . . Will you (a) save us the 

malarkey about the NDP having a freeze on nursing home 

beds? Will you save us the speech? I tell you, Mr. Minister, it’s 

not relevant to the solution of the problem. I know that your 

fantasies and your myths with respect to the failing of the 

former government may be the only cheer you people get these 

days, but I ask you, Mr. Minister, to deal with some solutions. I 

ask you to comment on the problem and tell us what you think 

the solution to the critical shortage of nursing home beds is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I know he doesn’t 

like to hear this, but one more time I’ll tell him. You were the 

people, you were the people opposite that said in ’76: there 

shall be a moratorium on nursing home beds.  

 

Well anyone would understand if you put a moratorium on 

something then, certainly there’s going to be problem that 

develops from that. And when we came in — and you’ve heard 

me say this before, but I’ll tell you again — one of the first 

needs I saw was care for the elderly. And we came with a five-

year plan of nursing home construction — 1,600 beds in 60 

communities cross Saskatchewan. And that program is going 

into its third year now. And I can tell you it’s very well 

received. Also, it is providing more nursing homes for a year 

than any other place in Saskatchewan — more nursing home  

  



 

April 7, 1986 

404 

 

beds. 

 

So for you to stand there and complain and be concerned about 

people in the acute care hospitals that are blocking beds because 

of a lack of nursing homes, I can tell you I have that same 

concern. I had it. But the difference is that we’ve done 

something about it, and you put on a moratorium. That’s the 

difference. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I know that this government, unable to deal 

with the problems of the present, delights in living in the past. 

But I ask you, Mr. Minister, to give us some description of what 

you are gong to do with the problem. I gather that we may at 

least deduce from that last comment that you admit the problem 

is serious. I ask you what you’re going to do about it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Just to indicate — and I’ll just run 

through a few of them. This isn’t in any way the entirety of the 

program, but in 1982-83 there were 30 new beds in Birch Hills: 

there were 12 in Biggar: there were 49 replacement ones in 

Weyburn; 12 replacement ones in Biggar; 16 replacement in 

Wakaw; 36 replacement in Middle lake - -that’s 1982-83. 

 

In 1983-84, 30 new beds in Central Butte; 30 new beds in 

Whitewood; 15 new beds in Spiritwood; 21 replacement beds in 

Spiritwood; 19 replacement beds in Herbert. 

 

In 1984-85, 10 new replacement beds in Davidson; 15 in Indian 

Head; 10 in Kelvington; 80 replacement in Kindersley; 14 new 

beds in Kinistino; 50 replacement beds in Lloydminster; 60 new 

beds in Outlook; 11 new beds at the Regina Lutheran; 50 new 

beds at Circle Drive Alliance in Saskatoon; six new beds and 24 

replacements in Stoughton. 

 

So for totals: new beds in ’82-83, 43 of them; replacement, 113. 

In ’83-84: 75 new beds, 40 replacements. In ’84-85: 162 new 

beds, 166 replacements. 

 

So that’s just some of the activity that’s been taking part, and as 

I say, that’s only for the first three years of the program. 

There’s much more to come yet. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you’d be kind 

enough to send us that document. Those figures are hard to get 

when you’re speaking them. Would you send us the document? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — And I gather you’ll send it right now, will 

you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’m not going to send you my copy, but I 

will provide another one for you. You might lose this one. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well I wonder if you’d trust the pages to 

make a copy of it and bring you back your copy. It is germane 

to the discussion now and I’d ask for the information now. For 

this government to say we’ll send it to you is absolutely 

pointless. Years go by without you people even answering a 

question. I frankly don’t trust  

you. I frankly don’t trust you when you say you will give it to 

us. I ask you, Mr. Minister: give us the list now, which you just 

read off. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, I’ll be providing it to the pages and 

they’ll get it to you. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would tell us 

. . . I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you would list the years in which 

there were no nursing home beds built. You spoke of this never-

ending freeze of nursing home beds. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if 

you’d give us the years in which there were no nursing home 

beds built in Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I can tell you I’d have to look back 

through your record, which is dismal reading. I thought maybe 

you having been a minister of the Crown at that time might 

know, but obviously you don’t. I know when the moratorium 

was put on. We will go back through that dismal research and 

we’ll provide that for you. It might be available in your files 

somewhere, though. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I say to you that no such 

freeze exists. Ask the gentlemen sitting beside you and I think 

they’ll confirm that. There was no such freeze. There were 

nursing home beds built every year, Mr. Minister. So I ask you, 

Mr. Minister, to consult some of the people you have with you 

and give us the years in which there were no nursing home beds 

built. I want to hear those years. I think they know. I think 

they’ve got the information right in front of them. I ask you to 

get it from them and give it to us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Most certainly. We will give you the 

information of your dismal record of nursing home beds being 

built. We will also send you a copy of the letter of the 

moratorium, and we will also send you a copy of the reduction 

letter in 1976 of 5 per cent for the hospitals — just so you’re up 

to date and know exactly what took place. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Nothing of the sort took place, and the 

minister very well knows it, Mr. Minister. If in fact there had 

been such a freeze in effect, I can’t believe that you would be 

careless and incompetent enough to come to your estimates and 

not have the detail of such a freeze. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Minister, it didn’t exist. You and your fellow 

ministers have made that up. It has got to the point where you 

are the victims of your own propaganda. But there was no such 

freeze, and I know I’m never going to get those years because 

they don’t exist. 

 

Mr. Minister, I ask you again to deal with the present. You 

stated . . . Mr. Minister, I’ll ask you to be a little more specific, 

since I haven’t yet got the copy of that document. How many 

nursing home beds have been built in the city of Regina since 

April 26, 1982? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The member opposite wonders why I 

don’t come to estimates to defend the activities of his 

government. There is no way that I would stand here and  

  



 

April 7, 1986 

405 

 

defend the dismal health record of the government opposite. 

But if he doesn’t have any files or any records we will send 

some to him. 

 

I have one here that I’ll be glad to send over. I’ll be pleased to 

send this over to you too. And it says here January 4, 1976. It’s 

from W. Smishek. He was the chairman of treasury board, and 

it was to the Hon. H. Rolfes, minister of Social Services. It 

says: 

 

Construction grants for special care homes. On December 

1, 1975, treasury board reviewed the Department of Social 

Services 1976-77 budgetary request for construction grants 

to special care homes. Treasury board is seriously 

concerned about the level of construction occurring in 

special care homes. The level of activity proposed in the 

1976-77 budgetary request will result in a surplus of beds 

without considering the impact upon home care. The 

treasury board deferred a decision on the level of funding 

to be approved for its activity pending the review of more 

detailed information on all committed projects. 

 

Until such time as the need for additional beds can be 

clearly identified (until such time as the need can clearly 

be identified) and a suitable construction policy defined 

(they didn’t even have a policy), a moratorium (spelled m-

o-r-a-t-o-r-i-u-m) on further commitments should be 

enforced. Signed by Walter Smishek. 

 

That’s as plain, my friend, as the nose on your face. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, if that is your evidence 

that there is a freeze on nursing homes, Mr. Minister, I accuse 

you of either misleading the Assembly or being unable to read 

the English language. The letter says no such thing . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Probably both. 

 

Mr. Minister, that letter is from the minister of Finance at that 

time to the minister of Health, asking him to justify his request 

for additional nursing home beds. I know this is going to come 

as a shocking surprise to you, but there was a day when the role 

of the minister of Finance was to try to keep some control over 

government expenditures and to ask minister to justify their 

expenditures. And that is all the letter is doing, is asking the 

minister to justify the request. It is nothing other than that. 

 

I say, Mr. Minister, if that’s your proof, then I regret that your 

education was neglected, because you don’t appear to be able to 

read the English language. That’s not what the letter says. That 

is clearly not what the letter says. 

 

I take it, Mr. Minister, from that, that there is no evidence or 

any freeze when the former government was in office. Or do 

you have some real evidence as distinction from that bit of 

nonsense, Mr. Minister? 

 

I wonder as well, Mr. Minister, while you’re attempting to 

defend that comment, if you can tell us whether or not you’re 

going to get around to telling us what you have been able to do 

in the city of Regina. It’s the area I’m  

familiar with. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I mentioned about the city of Regina 

when I was indicating the untruth that you put in your letter to 

your constituents. But I have another letter here. This is July 

13th, ’78. This happens to be to Theodore, little town out in 

north-east Saskatchewan there. They were wanting a nursing 

home. I don’t know how many years they asked for it. They’re 

getting one now, by the way. But here was the letter on the 13th 

of July in 1978. It says that: 

 

. . . the policy has prompted the government to place a 

moratorium on the development of any additional special 

care beds. 

 

That was signed by Mr. Ross, the senior standards consultant. 

 

I have another letter here, the same year as the potash take-over, 

April 27, ’76, to Dr. Morely Smith-Windsor, the executive 

director of St. Paul’s Hospital. It says here: 

 

. . . that the reduction in approved in-patient days has 

required a reassessment of your approved staff component 

for 1976. 

 

A reassessment of the approved staff component. It says: 

 

. . . for your hospital the following staffing reductions will 

become effective July 1, ’76. You will lose at St. Paul’s, 

six registered nurses; you will lose three certified nursing 

assistants; you will lose 2.5 nurse’s aids; you will lose two 

dietary aides I; one lab technician, and 0.5 laundry aides. 

 

Those were reductions right in the year when the government 

opposite went on their potash binge. Let’s go a little further to 

see the other threatening things that they put in the letter to St. 

Paul’s Hospital. They say this: 

 

In addition, adjustments may occur in nursing supplies, in 

pharmacy supplies and radiology supplies, and laboratory 

supplies, and printing, stationery and in office supplies. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No CAT scan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — They never had heard of the CAT scan at 

St. Paul’s at that time, because they knew there was no hope to 

get one. When you were being cut back on stationery and 

printing supplies, what hope did you have getting a CAT scan? 

Zip. So there’s another letter that you may be interested in 

putting in your little file. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I don’t know if the minister is going to get 

around to reading the Eaton’s catalogue, but I’ll tell you those 

letters have about as much relevance to a freeze on nursing 

homes as the Eaton’s catalogue. Those letters are nothing other 

than an attempt to maintain some modicum of financial control, 

something I know you people don’t believe in. And the deficit 

is obvious. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to get back, if I may, to the question of the 

nursing homes beds in Regina. I gather you . . . In the list that 

you read out, I did not hear — you may  

  



 

April 7, 1986 

406 

 

have overlooked them — but I did not hear a list of the nursing 

home beds built in Regina. So I ask you again, Mr. Minister, if 

you’ll give us that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Back over this statement that you’ve put 

out where you say in your newsletter of the 25th of ’86: 

 

Ned Shillington, MLA, Regina Centre, who says this: “and 

we need more nursing home beds.” 

 

Then in brackets he said: 

 

Did you know that the PCs are planning only 30 beds for 

all of Regina over the coming three years? We need 

hundreds of nursing home beds for our seniors. 

 

Then . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you said the last three 

and here’s . . . I’m giving you the answer. There are 11 at the 

Lutheran Home in Regina. The Salvation Army are presently 

going to . . . are making plans and they’ll be turning sod very 

quickly . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well in three years . . . 

you’ve turned sod over three years, my friends. I know you 

wouldn’t know anything about it because you didn’t build any. 

 

(1645) 

 

But let me tell you, when you build a nursing home, the first 

thing is you have an agreement; secondly, you get an architect; 

thirdly, you dig a hole; fourthly, you build it; fifthly, you put 

people in it. Now that’s what you do. I know you don’t 

understand that, having not built any. 

 

Going further, Regina Santa Maria, just located right down here 

on . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, right on Regina Avenue, 

that’s where the Regina Santa Maria is, 48-bed addition within 

the three-year period. There will be . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . That’s what he asked for. He asked for three years — three 

years, my little friend, is what he asked for, and that’s what I’m 

telling you — within three years even you will be able to see 

them. And 29 extra beds at Wascana centre. Over the three 

years that’s what you will have. That adds up to 118 and not 30. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, you 

attempt to create the impression that there was a serious 

shortage of nursing home beds in Regina in 1982. Now I want 

to ask you: how many beds have opened? How many beds with 

patients in them have opened in four years? Now don’t tell me 

what’s going to be built; don’t tell me what sod is going to be 

turned. Tell me how beds have opened. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I said to you that there was a severe 

shortage of nursing home beds in Saskatchewan, the province 

of Saskatchewan, because you wouldn’t build them. That’s 

why. Because you were more inclined to take people’s money 

and put it into potash. That was your priority. 

 

You were the premier of this province. You sure were. And 

that’s what you did. Now I’ll tell you that there have been 11 

beds at the Lutheran Home, and you know it; that also there is a 

commitment and sod will be turned in the  

near future for another 78. And there’ll be an addition, there 

will be an addition on the Regina rehab centre. 

 

And let me tell you about the rehab centre because you’ll 

remember this very well. You will remember, Mr. Ex-premier 

— and I say ex-premier because that’s what you’re going to 

stay — and you will remember that 24 hours before you called 

the election in ’82, that you phoned the Health department and 

said, design a rehab centre. You will remember that. And I’ll 

take you out here over supper and show you one that’s being 

built. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well a couple of comments, Mr. 

Chairman. It is very, very obvious that the minister is ill-

informed. There’s no point in hashing out what happened in ’82 

but I will say this: I saw the model of the rehab centre before 

the election was called. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, in four years what have you achieved, other 

than a hole in the ground, with respect to the rehab centre? In 

four years you have not built one rehab bed, in Regina or 

elsewhere. Is that not true, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Chairman, surely you realize . . . If 

you’ve been to Saskatoon, and I’m sure you have, if you would 

look at the children’s rehab centre — and you cannot be critical 

of this — the children’s rehab centre, built in conjunction with 

Brunskill School, with the Kinsmen of this province, with the 

University Hospital, and with the Health department, is 

probably the leading rehab centre of its type in Canada. I’m 

sure you would admit that. So to be critical and say, what have 

you built in rehab beds, we have built one of the best. 

 

Also, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, there’s a hole in the 

ground, but you have to start with a hole in the ground, and 

there will soon be — there will soon be — one of the greatest 

rehab centres built in conjunction with workers’ compensation, 

with DVA, with the Department of Health, which will supply 

outreach services to southern Saskatchewan. 

 

So for you to stand here and to say we haven’t done anything in 

the way of rehab centres, I think that’s grossly unfair. Because I 

think you know how deep in your heart that that’s a fine centre 

in Saskatoon and this will be a fine centre too, and we’re well 

into the construction of it. 

 

We have a board. We have an executive director. Just the other 

day, I’m sure you’re aware, that we formed a board to look after 

the building and the administration of the Wascana Rehab 

Centre. And within a short period of time that will be up and 

functioning, and that will be a fine addition to health care here 

in Regina and southern Saskatchewan. 

 

So I think it is a rather cheap shot when you would sit, stand in 

your place and say we haven’t done anything in rehab, because 

certainly we have in Saskatoon, and this will be something that 

both you and I are proud of when it’s finished. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister,  

  



 

April 7, 1986 

407 

 

I’m obviously having a little difficulty making myself 

understood to the minister, and I’m going to ask him very 

calmly so he won’t get upset: how many nursing home beds 

have been opened in Regina? Do you say that 11 have been 

opened, or a lesser number? Please, I’m not asking how many 

are projected, how many are planned. But it’s four years, sir — 

four years, four years this month since the election — and I’m 

simply asking: how many nursing home beds have been 

opened? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — But I will tell you that, but I think it’s 

only fair, if you were only going to . . . If you’re really 

concerned about nursing homes, if you were, you would ask me 

that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I think your leader would 

like to have a discussion. If you want to chirp and holler . . . 

 

Really, if you wanted to know the impact on nursing homes, if 

you looked across Saskatchewan, there’s been a considerable 

number. And I sent that over. You have that material and I’d 

refer you to it. In Regina there were 11 at the Lutheran Home. 

That is the number. But across Saskatchewan there has been a 

considerable number that have been built and there are many of 

them that are going to be open in the not too distant future. 

 

So I think it’s . . . You know, one just can’t — if you look at 

health care for the whole province — one just can’t take a bit 

here and a chunk here and so on and say, what did you do here. 

I think to be fair you look at it in its entirety. And I think the 

record of the last four years in nursing home construction — 

and you must admit that — the record over the last four years 

has been very admirable. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, if, as 

the mister suggests, there has been a good deal of activity 

elsewhere, one would have thought that the waiting lists in 

Regina would have declined. That s the natural effect of taking 

the pressure off from homes that were, as he says, constructed 

elsewhere. 

 

That is not what the people operating nursing homes in Regina 

tell me. I keep in touch from time to time with Pioneer Village 

and they tell me that their waiting lists are up. We all know that 

waiting lists are not totally reliable, but they are no more or less 

reliable now than they were before. In fact, I think they may be 

a little more reliable now because of some central assessing. 

And certainly my impression is that waiting lists have not 

declined. Are you asserting that waiting lists have declined? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — What I’m saying to you, Mr. Member, is 

that . . . And I’m glad to see that you support the assessment 

and placement type of facility of function that we have put in 

here in Regina and in Saskatoon and in many other areas of the 

province. I think this is very commendable, and I’m glad you’re 

supportive of it because through that type of a system those who 

are needing to get in are the ones that get in rather than how it 

was in the past — maybe who you knew or how long your 

name was on the list and so on. That isn’t the best way to get in; 

it’s those who are best needing to get in. 

 

I have a statistic here of the 1st of April that I would share with 

you, and that is in Regina — and this comes from RAPS 

(Regina Assessment and Placement Service) that  

there are approximately 1,073 people listed there. Those are 

listed. Now let’s just get this in context. But of those, they say 

115 are priority. That’s what they call priority. The thing that I 

think is very nice about this is what they tell us is that it usually 

takes only two months until they get in. Those 115 on the 

priority should be in, in two months . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . 

 

Well if you want to question the Regina assessment and 

placement and call those people who are doing yeoman’s 

service out there, if you want to talk down to them, you go right 

ahead. And I’ll only tell them that too. If you question how 

authentic they are, that’s their figures . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well, I don’t want to give you short change. I 

want to give you everything that you need to know. I told you 

there’s 115 on priority and within two months they should be 

in, and I think that is quite a commendable record. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 

would the minister give the next down priority? You have three 

or four listings and you’re suggesting with your choice of 

words, “priority,” that these are the relatively serious ones. 

Would you give me the wording for the next category? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Two hundred and two are in hospital at 

this point in time. There is a priority of 115 that they feel should 

be getting into the nursing homes and I say within two months 

they should be in. And I don’t think that is a bad record. You 

know, I don’t think you can . . . When you look back at a 

moratorium, I mean, you look back at your record . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I know you don’t want to look 

back, but in fairness, let’s be fair. You were the premier of the 

province, man . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You can ask me 

any question you want and you know that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — All right, Mr. Minister. I don’t want to 

precipitate a great speech. I’m trying to get some facts about my 

constituency. Now that is legitimate. All right. You give me the 

categories that that board places potential patients in — the 

various categories — that add up to 1,019, did you say? With 

the names of the categories, not of the patients. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes. I have this here now. I’ll provide it 

for you if you wish. Level 4C, 9; level $B, 90; level 4A, 30 (10 

non-ambulatory); level 3, 377; level 2, 305; and level 1, 262. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 

would you not agree that leaving aside the level 1’s and 2’s 

where there may be some alternative services which would 

meet the needs of a high proportion of that number — although 

not all of them, because of social needs primarily — we still 

have 500 people in level 3 or 4, A, B, or C who . . . Are you 

telling us that you’re building how many beds? A very, very 

small number of beds over a period of some three years. 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly you’re correct in that the 

level 1’s and 2’s are remaining in their homes and I think that’s 

where they want to be. Also we’ve put more money into home 

care so that, in fact, some of the level 3’s . . . I was meeting 

with the Saskatoon home care group  

  



 

April 7, 1986 

408 

 

today just discussing that and they are able to look after people 

with very high needs in the home care because of enriched 

funding, changes we’ve made in the funding for home care 

services. But certainly, the figures of the Regina assessment and 

placement group indicate to me that there’s 115 people that are 

on the priority list and they say within two months they should 

be into the homes. I think that is quite an acceptable figure. I 

think it’s much better than it was previously. 

 

And as I say — and I’m not saying you are — but some of your 

colleagues want to question the Regina assessment and 

placement. But I think they’re doing a commendable job for us, 

as they are in Saskatoon and in other parts of the province. 

There are a lot of volunteer people, a lot of people helping a 

great deal to see that our elderly are getting the service that they 

best need. I congratulate those people out there that are doing 

this type of yeoman’s service. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’m 

sure we congratulate them too. But turning to the issue at hand, 

will you concede the fact on or about November 18 your 

waiting list had 1,011 people on it and now you tell me the 

number is . . . 1,073, did you say? So indicating an increase of 

about 60 since November of ’85, in the last four or five months. 

Would you agree with that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, I don’t have the figure that you’re 

stating from of 1,011 and I’ve long since learned, not so much 

with you but with other members of your caucus, to doubt any 

figure that they bring forward. 

 

But be that as it many, I think it’s reasonable to assume that 

there will be more people waiting. The population . . . We all 

know the demographics. The population is ageing. We in 

Saskatchewan lead the nation in the elderly population. And to 

that end . . . And I think you might be interested in knowing 

that, when you mention home care, to that end in this most 

recent budget we have added $30 for anyone that’s over 75 

years of age, to increase the home care budget. 

 

We are taking those things into consideration so that with a 

combination of services — be they special care homes, be they 

home care services, and in some cases, acute care hospitals as 

well as some private care homes — we have to, and I think you 

understand this, that we have to look at all possible facilities, all 

possible arrangements to meet the needs of our ever increasing 

elderly population. And I will stand on the record that what we 

have done in the province of Saskatchewan since taking office 

in 1982 has made one monumental step towards that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, 

we can argue the sterling qualities of the policies which you 

have introduced at another time when we get a few more facts 

on the table. 

 

And I say this to you, Mr. Minister: it is my impression when I 

walk through the Wascana Hospital — correction, the Pasqua 

Hospital — that I see far more people who I would class as 

level 4 A, B, and C, in the older parts of that hospital than I saw 

short years ago. And I ask you whether or not the number of 

people who should be in nursing  

homes but are now in our acute care hospitals has not sharply 

increased over the last four years. Would you agree with that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I couldn’t say whether it’s sharply 

increased or not. I can tell you that there are level 4 people in 

the hospitals. I don’t deny that. There have been level 4 people 

in the hospitals for some time. In fact, I believe it was your 

government that designated certain hospital beds for level 4 

beds. If I remember correctly, that’s what you did. So certainly 

that has taken place. It isn’t a phenomenon that came in the last 

three or four years. It has been there. 

 

Certainly in all aspects — in home care, in special care homes, 

in acute care facilities, through the drug plan, through SHA 

(Saskatchewan Health-Care Association), through all the health 

care services — the elderly population are consuming each year 

more of these services. But that only seems right when you see 

that the proportion of the population, the elderly, are increasing 

each year. They’re living longer; they’re living better lives. I’m 

glad they are. But certainly there’s no denial that they do 

consume a greater proportion of the health care services of this 

province. And, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, you know as I 

know as the years go ahead — the years to the year 2000 — and 

some of us will be the elderly population with the Lord willing 

— we’ll need more and more of these services. I think forward-

looking health planning has to address that and I believe that’s 

what we’ve been doing. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


